

JUDICIAL REVIEW
NATURAL JUSTICE: HEARINGS
SECTION 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.
Historical Development
If an individual is aggrieved by the actions of government, a public body, or certain domestic tribunals or associations, he may claim that there has been a breach of natural justice.
The phrase natural justice encapsulates two ideas: that the individual be given adequate notice of the charge and an adequate hearing (audi alteram partem), and that the adjudicator be unbiased (nemo judex in causa sua).
The former will be dealt with in this chapter; the latter in that which follows.
The development of the audi alteram partem principle has, like many other legal concepts, been eclectic.
An early group of cases was concerned with deprivation of offices, requiring notice and a hearing prior to the deprivation.
Another somewhat later group involved the clergy: penalties or disciplinary measures to which the clergy were subjected had to be preceded by notice and a hearing.
In the nineteenth century the audi alteram partem principle was applied to a wide variety of bodies, private as well as public.
Clubs, associations and trade unions were included within its ambit.
The increase in the regulatory role of public authorities provided further opportunity for the generalised application of the maxim.
Thus in Cooper v. Wandsworth Board of Works it was held that demolition powers vested in the defendant Board were to be subject to notice and hearing requirements.
The omission of positive words in the statute requiring a hearing was held to be no bar since the justice of the common law would supply the omission of the legislature.
The generality of application or the audi alteram partem  maxim, and its flexibility in operation, were brought out by Lord Loreburn L.C., who stated that the maxim applied to ‘everyone who decides anything,’ while recognising also that the manner in which a person's case was heard did not necessarily have to be the same as an ordinary trial.
2. the Rationale for Procedural Rights
Before examining the subsequent development of natural justice, some examination of the background theory which justifies procedural rights is warranted.
Justifications for process rights in adjudication vary.
One rationale emphasises the connection between procedural due process and the substantive justice of the final outcome.
All rules are designed to achieve a particular goal, for example that liquor licences should only be granted to those of good character.
Giving a person a hearing before deciding to refuse such a licence application can help to ensure that this goal is correctly applied in a particular instance.
Procedural rights perform an instrumental role in the sense of helping to attain an accurate decision on the substance of the case.
Other rationales focus upon non-instrumental justifications for procedural rights.
Formal justice and the rule of law are enhanced, in the sense that the principles of natural justice help to guarantee objectivity and impartiality.
Procedural rights are also seem as protecting human dignity by ensuring that the individual is told why he is being treated unfavourably, and by enabling him to take part in that decision.
In reading the material which follows an important point should be borne in mind.
The traditional approach has been to model procedural rights by analogy to ordinary court procedure; the principles of natural justice reflect an adversarial-adjudicative conception of process rights.
Process rights can however, as we shall see, be fashioned in other ways which may be both better suited to the needs of particular areas, and ago better attain the instrumental and non-instrumental values which process rights are designed to serve.
SECTION 2.
LIMITATION OF THE PRINCIPLE
The breadth of the audi alteram partem principle was limited in the first half of this century.
This occurred in a number of ways, some of which overlap.
Administrative v. Judicial
It is evident from the nineteenth century cases on the right to a hearing that the principle was invoked in a number of areas which could properly be called administrative.
In so far as the term judicial was used it was automatically implied whenever a decision was made which affected a person's rights in a broad sense.
Despite this the courts began to draw a dichotomy between administrative and judicial decisions, to take a narrow view of what constituted a judicial or quasi-judicial decision and to require this as a condition precedent for the application of a right to a hearing.
For example in Errington v. Minister of Health it was argued that the Minister was in breach of natural justice by conferring with the local authority and receiving further evidence from it after the dose of a public inquiry.
The Court of Appeal found that there had been a breach but the phrasing of the judgment is nonetheless restrictive.
Maugham L.J.
stated that if the Minister were acting administratively natural justice would not apply, that the Minister was in fact acting quasi-judicially but only because the situation was ‘triangular’ in that the Minister was deciding a lis inter partes between the local authority and objectors.
In cases where the lis had not yet been joined the applicant was less successful.
2.
Rights and Remedies
The detailed study waits to be written on the way in which developments in the law of certiorati affected the law on natural justice.
The problem can be briefly stated as follows; it was thought that for certiorari to be available there would have to be not just a determination affecting the rights of individuals, but also a superadded duty to act judicially.
This view has now been overturned.
However, while it held sway it was interpreted on occasion to mean not just that there had been a breach of natural justice with no remedy available.
The courts went further and said that natural  justice itself was not applicable.
Indeed one of the reasons given in Ridge v. Baldwin by Lord Reid for the demise of natural justice was the misunderstanding over the scope of certiorari.
3.
Right v. Privileges
Closely allied to the previous reasons for the limitation of natural justice was the distinction drawn between rights and privileges.
In Nakkuda Ali one of the reasons why the Privy Council denied the application of natural justice was because the cancellation of a licence was characterised as the withdrawal of a privilege and not the determination of a right, and in ex p.
Parler the cab licence which was withdrawn was just a ‘permission.’
How far the distinction does still exist, and how far it should do so, will be considered below.
4.
Statutory hearings and Inquiries
The application of natural justice in the context of inquiries has already been touched upon in discussing the administrative-judicial dichotomy.
A further example of the limited application of natural justice in this area may be given.
In Local Government Board v. Arlidge the House of Lords considered whether an individual should have an oral hearing before the Board itself and whether he should be entitled to see the report of the hearing inspector in the context of a statutory scheme to determine whether a closing order on a house should be rescinded.
Lord Haldane L. C. upheld the general principles in the Rice case but refused access to the housing inspector's report or to the Board itself: when a matter is entrusted to a department of state or similar body, Parliament should be taken, subject to contrary intent, to have meant that it could follow its own procedure which would enable it to work with efficiency.
When, therefore, the Board was entrusted with appeals this did not mean that any particular official should undertake the task, nor was the Board bound to disclose the report any more than minutes made on the paper before a decision was arrived at.
Much of this is uncontroversial in principle, but the failure to disclose the report was a severe setback in the evolution of inquiry procedures which has taken long to heal.
SECTION 3.
THE PRINCIPLE REVIVED
1.
Ridge v. Baldwin
While the combined effect of a number of cases had been to limit the audi alteram partem principle, it would be misleading to say that it had been wholly forgotten.
There were indications in England, Australia, Canada and New Zealand of a less rigid application of the principle.
However it would be correct to say that the application of natural justice was at a low ebb prior to the decision of the House of Lords in Ridge v. Baldwin.
Their Lordships held that a chief constable who was dismissable only for cause was entitled to notice of the charge and an opportunity to be heard before being dismissed.
The importance of the case lies in the general discussion of the principles of natural justice, especially that given by Lord Reid.
His Lordship reviewed the nineteenth century case law which evidenced the broad application of natural justice and then proceeded to consider why, given these authorities, the law had become confused.
Three reasons are ascribed.
The first was that natural justice could have only a limited application in the context of the wider duties or discretion imposed upon a minister; unfortunately the courts had applied those limited notions of natural justice to other areas where the constraints were unnecessary.
The second reason was that the principle had received only limited application during the war.
Again, special considerations which might be pertinent during wartime should not affect the ambit of natural justice now.
The third was the confusion between rights and remedies evident in the alleged requirement of a superadded duty to act judicially as a requirement of certiorari, and the way that this had stilted the development of natural justice.
The judicial element should be inferred from the nature of the power and its effect on the individual.
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest also based his judgment on the nineteenth century jurisprudence.
For Lord Hodson the absence of a lis inter partes  was not decisive, nor was the characterisation of the act as judicial, administrative or executive.
2.
The Importance of Ridge v. Baldwin
It is necessary to place Ridge in its context to understand its importance.
Their Lordships revived the principles of natural justice in two connected ways.
On the one hand they rediscovered the nineteenth century jurisprudence which had applied the principle to a broad spectrum of interests and a wide variety of decision-makers.
On the other they disapproved of some of the impediments which had been erected in the twentieth century: the requirements of a lis inter partes and a superadded duty to act judicially were said to be false constraints.
However little positive guidance is to be found in the case as to when natural justice should apply.
The closest to any general formulation emerges in the idea that the applicability of natural justice will be dependent on the nature of the power exercised and its effect upon the individual concerned.
This is not a criticism of the decision.
As well be seen, it is notoriously difficult to lay down what the boundaries of natural justice should be.
It is rather by way of explanation for what followed Ridge.
The subsequent years were characterised by a host of cases on natural justice in which the courts were concerned not just with the content of those rules but with the criterion for their applicability.
The following two sections will deal with these two issues respectively.
SECTION 4.
APPLICABILITY OF PROCEDURAL PROTECTION
The case law subsequent to Ridge v. Baldwin has used a variety of criteria to determine whether natural justice should be applied.
1.
Categorisation: Administrative v. Judicial v. Legislature
Legal history has a tendency to repeat itself.
Put more accurately, conceptual doctrines thought to have expired often have a vitality which can surprise.
Nothing provides a better demonstration of this than the continued usage of the administrative-judicial dichotomy as a basis for determining the applicability of natural justice.
In Pearlberg v. Varty the House of Lords considered whether a taxpayer should have the right to  make written representations or have a hearing before a single commissioner prior to his granting leave to raise assessments for years beyond the normal time limit.
Their Lordships rejected the claim saying that the statutory scheme showed that leave was to be ex parte.
Viscount Dilhorne would also have dismissed the case because the function of granting leave was administrative and not judicial.
Categorisation of this type has been disapproved of explicitly, and has not been adopted by the majority of cases which have eschewed such pigeonholing.
The nature of the decision may well be taken into account in determining what the content of natural justice should be in a particular instance, but the utility of the administrative, judicial, executive, legislative distinctions over and beyond this is difficult to perceive.
Since such divisions held sway prior to Ridge, and have on occasion reappeared, it is worthwhile examining the value of such criteria.
To render the applicability of natural justice dependent upon a prior classification of the above type would have its utility in greater certainty and predictability: if a case fell within one category certain results would follow; if it fell in a different category differing results would ensue.
There are however two difficulties which render this advantage hypothetical rather than real.
First, there is the notorious difficulty of deciding whether a case should be categorised as judicial, administrative, executive, etc.
Secondly, the presumption behind such an approach is that once the characterisation has been made the content of natural justice is fixed and certain: all administrative matters would be subject to the same rules, as would all judicial or quasi-judicial.
If they were not the point behind the initial categorisation is nullified or at least seriously qualified; the certainty and predictability would be minimal.
Yet the variety of matters comprehended within the terms ‘administrative,’‘quasi-judicial,’ or ‘executive’is vast, however sensitively they are defined.
To presuppose, for example, that all ‘quasi-judicial’ matters could be dealt with in the same way is to risk forcing cases into a straightjacket that will be too big for some and too small for others.
The above discussion has concentrated upon the distinction drawn between administrative and judicial decisions.
The courts have also addressed themselves to the question of whether natural justice or fairness applies to matters of a legislative nature.
Whether such protection should apply raises broader questions concerning the way in which delegated legislation and rules of a legislative nature are made, and also the type of remedy which should be available.
At present rules of a legislative nature are not generally subject to natural justice.
2.
Categorisation: Rights, Privileges and Legitimate Expectations
Resurrected legal doctrine does not always assume the same form that it possessed before.
This should not however blind us to its reappearance.
The dichotomy between rights and privileges provides a clear example of this.
We have already seen how that distinction was used to limit the ambit of natural justice prior to Ridge v. Baldwin.
Lord Denning M.R. has subsequently held that licences are subject to natural justice and that Nakkuda Ali and ex p.
Parker are no longer authorities to the contrary.
It was, however, Lord Denning M.R. himself in Schmit v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs, who stated that while natural justice could apply to an administrative act, it would depend upon whether the individual had some right, interest, or legitimate expectation such that it would not be fair to deprive him of it, without a hearing.
More recently in Cinnamond v. British Airports Authority his Lordship has invoked the same type of reasoning, stating that operators of cabs at an airport had no legitimate expectation which would warrant granting them a hearing.
It seems clear on principle that the technical distinction between rights and privileges should not be determinative of the applicability of procedural protection.
Many interests may be extremely important to an individual even though they would not warrant the label ‘Hohfeldian right.’
The absence of a substantive right to a particular benefit should not lead to the conclusion that procedural rights are inapplicable, and the term legitimate expectation should not be manipulated to reach this end.
It is however also clear that the concept of legitimate expectations, like many legal concepts, can be used in more than one way; it does not have to be given a restrictive interpretation.
Thus more recent cases have, in principle at least, given a broader meaning to that term, utilising it as the foundation for procedural consultation rights to be given to immigrants, workers and local authorities.
Thus if an individual is to be deprived of a benefit which was enjoyed in the past, and which he could legitimately expect to continue, or he has received assurances from the decision-maker that such a benefit will not be withdrawn without giving him some opportunity to argue the contrary, then in either instance an opportunity for the individual to make representations will be accorded.
3. natural Justice and Fairness
The years since Ridge v. Baldwin have not however been wholly marked by atavistic reasoning.
Those years have also witnessed the development of new terminology.
The case law is replete with mention of ‘fairness’ or a ‘duty to act fairly.’
These terms make their initial appearance in Lord Parker C.J.'s judgment in Re HK.
Since then their use has varied.
Some courts treat these terms in an omnibus fashion; natural justice is said to be but a manifestation of a broader concept of fairness.
In other cases the courts will apply natural justice to judicial decisions, and reserve a duty to act fairly for administrative or executive determinations.
It is not uncommon for different members of the same court to be in agreement as to the contents of the procedural duty, but to differ as to whether they describe this as resulting from natural justice or fairness.
How significant is the development of fairness, whether it be seen as synonymous with natural justice or in juxtaposition thereto?
One view sees the development of fairness as a correlative of the expansion of procedural rights post Ridge v. Baldwin.
The judgment of Megarry V.C.
in McInnes v. Onslow-Fane is illuminating in this respect.
He states that natural justice, being a flexible term which imposes distinct requirements in different cases, is capable of applying to the whole range of situations encapsulated by the terms ‘judicial,’‘quasi-judicial,’‘administrative’ or ‘executive’.
However, the further that one moves away from anything resembling a ‘judicial’ or ‘quasi-judicial’situation, the more appropriate it becomes to use the term fairness rather than natural justice.
On this view the distinction between the application of the terms natural justice and fairness is linguistic rather than substantive.
The former could cover all cases but it is felt to be more appropriate to use fairness in the context of, for example, company inspectors, or immigration officers.
The significant point about this first view is that whichever label is used the expansion in procedural rights is not regarded as involving any fundamental change in the nature of natural justice.
As discredited limitations have been generally discarded, and natural justice has expanded to new fields, fairness is seen by some as a more appropriate tag.
Some commentators take a different view, seeing a broader significance in the shift from natural justice to fairness.
It is argued that the basis of  natural justice was the desire of the ordinary courts to maintain control over adjudication, and to impose their own types of procedures on those subject to judicial control.
The necessity for the function to be characterised as ‘judicial’ before procedural constraints would be imposed was integral to this approach, because only bodies exercising such functions would be suited to adjudicative procedures.
A corollary of this view was that the content of the rules of natural justice could be relatively fired and certain.
The shift to a broader notion of fairness is said to alter fundamentally the basis of procedural intervention: it can no longer be restricted to adjudicative settings, and there can no longer be fixed standards for determining whether there has been a breach of procedural fairness.
The courts are forced to engage in a difficult balancing operation, taking into account the nature of the individuals' interest and the effect of increased procedural protection upon the administration.
That the development of procedural fairness does involve the court in a balancing function is undeniable.
How significant are the changes brought about by the introduction of this concept is more contentious.
The starkness of the contrast drawn between the premises and application of traditional natural justice and those of fairness are open to a number of objections.
First, the premise is that natural justice stemmed from a judicial desire to maintain control over adjudication and to impose its own procedures on those subject to its control.
While this may have formed part of the rationale for the application of natural justice, the major reason for the development of the doctrine was the protection of property rights and interests akin thereto.
Secondly, the argument that the term ‘judicial’ was used to ensure that only those bodies suited to adjudicative procedures should be subjected to natural justice is not generally sound.
That term was automatically held to be satisfied when the effects on the interests of the individual were felt to be serious enough to warrant procedural protection, and this was so whether the context was deprivation of an office, expulsion from a trade association, the destruction of one's property, or the loss of something which would juridically be called a privilege.
Indeed, in cases where the remedy sought was not certiorari there was often no mention of the ‘judicial’ requirement at all.
It is moreover mistaken to view the twentieth century cases which limited natural justice through manipulation of the administrative-judicial dichotomy as doing so primarily because of a feeling that those categorised as administrative would be unsuited to adjudicative procedures.
This may have been a factor, but the authorities dealing with licensing, aliens and discipline reflect much more a judicial conclusion that the substantive interests at stake were not worthy of procedural protection.
Thirdly, the application of the rules of natural justice, prior to the introduction of fairness, was not and never has been uniform in its operation.
Courts have often explicitly or implicitly balanced the interests of the individual with the effects on the administration in deciding where the line should be drawn on many of the issues which comprise the content of natural justice.
What is undoubtedly true is that the imposition of natural justice has resulted in adjudicative types of procedural constraints.
Process rights are modelled closely upon those of ordinary courts, and any balancing is undertaken within this context.
Whether the introduction of the term fairness causes any modification of this stance depends upon which of the following two meanings is ascribed to that term.
One interpretation would see fairness as simply fitting into an adjudicative framework and not necessitating the development of non-adjudicative procedures.
On this view the courts would determine what adjudicative procedures are required in particular areas.
In some it may approximate to the full panoply of procedural safeguards including notice, oral hearing, representation, discovery, right to cross examine and reasoned decisions, etc.; in others it may connote considerably less.
There will be a broad spectrum in between.
This is indeed how in general terms our system works at present.
The term natural justice is used for that part of the spectrum which requires a relatively wide range of procedural checks, while fairness is used in those areas either where the nature of the decision-maker renders the term natural justice inappropriate or the set of safeguards tends towards the lower end of the spectrum.
In so far as fairness is used within the traditional adjudicative framework the balancing involved therein may be different in degree but not in kind to that which has always gone on within natural justice itself.
Lord Loreburn L.C. might well question whether there is really a difference in degree.
The other interpretation would see the emergence of fairness as having a broader implication.
Adjudication is only one form of procedure.
Mediation, managerial direction, and procedural controls internal to the institution itself are but some of the other forms which decision-making could take.
A general concept of procedural fairness could therefore lead the courts into using and developing procedural forms other than classical adjudication.
If this transpires then the emergence of fairness really will have a substantial effect on the whole area of procedural due process.
Whether this should take place and its implications will be considered below.
The following parts will be concerned with these two ways in which natural justice and fairness could operate.
We will consider how the term  fairness is used in an adjudicative context.
This will be followed by a look at some of the broader possible implications of fairness, and the way in which that term might aid in the development of procedural forms other than classical adjudication.
4.
Fairness: Balancing in an Adjudicative Context
(1) General
One of the most oft-cited statements in cases after 1964 has in fact been a dictum of Tucker L.J.
given some years earlier,
‘The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject-matter that is being dealt with, and so forth’
Although, as seen above, some courts have persisted in a form of prior categorisation to decide whether natural justice should be applicable, many courts have eschewed such labels.
They have exercised control over procedural rights not by rigid prior categorisation, but rather by admitting that natural justice or fairness applies and varying the content of those rules according to the facts of the case.
In a number of cases the courts have, as said, simply treated natural justice and fairness as synonymous; the former is regarded as the latter writ large, the content of which will vary in different areas.
But how more precisely will the court fix the procedural requirements and what concept of fairness is thereby entailed?
The court will take account of a wide variety of factors: the type of decision being given; whether it is final or preliminary; the nature of the individual's interest; the type of subject-matter; and how far it is felt necessary to supplement the statutory procedures, to name but a few.
None of these elements will be determinative alone.
The result is arrived at after balancing three different types of factor: the individual interest at issue; the benefits to be derived from added procedural safeguards; and the costs to the administration, both direct and indirect, of complying with those procedural requirements.
An example of this is to be found in Re Pergamon Press Ltd.
Inspectors had been appointed to investigate two companies under the control of Robert Maxwell.
The directors were unwilling to respond to questions unless given a number of assurances and on condition that a judicial type of inquiry was conducted.
When the  inspectors refused to give all the desired assurances the directors claimed a breach of natural justice.
The Court of Appeal found for the inspectors.
Although they were under a duty to act fairly, they had not broken this duty.
While the potentially serious effect of the report required some procedural protection, this was weighed against that of the administration in ensuring confidentiality, added to which were the factors of speed and the preliminary nature of the proceedings.
The G. C. H. Q. case exemplifies judicial ‘balancing’ within a very different context.
Their Lordships decided that past practice in the operation of G.C.H.O. generated a legitimate expectation that those who worked there would be consulted before any important changes were made in the terms and conditions of their employment.
The government decision that workers at G.C.H.O. could no longer belong to national trade unions which was reached without any such prior consultation was prima facie in breach of natural justice.
Considerations of national security were however held to outweigh those of procedural fairness.
The court accepted the view of the executive that to give advance notice of their intentions would run the risk of action which would disrupt the operation of the intelligence services.
Whether this approach to considerations of national security was too deferential will be considered in more detail below.
Two comments on the courts' approach are warranted here.
First, it is clear that balancing necessitates some judgment as to how much we value a particular interest, and that people may well disagree as to the weight accorded to it in any particular instance.
Some such judgment is however necessary in order to proceed at all.
For example, to take some position as to whether the renewal of a licence is a ‘higher’ interest than an initial application is not to indulge in rigid conceptualism, but is rather a necessary step in reaching any decision at all .
Provided that we do not assume that all renewal cases warrant more procedural protection than all initial application cases, irrespective of the nature of the substantive area under scrutiny, then such ranking is both necessary and helpful.
The clearer articulation of the broader conception of legitimate expectation which is evident in recent cases is to be welcomed for the same reason.
Valuing the social benefits and costs of procedural safeguards may be equally problematic.
This is not simply a ‘mathematical’ calculus.
Resolving the question as to what are to be perceived as such costs and benefits is itself a hard task.
The second comment flows directly from this last point.
The existence of judicial balancing should not lead us to conclude that all such balancing is necessarily premised on the same assumptions.
The premises which underpin an essentially utilitarian approach to process rights, may be far removed from those which  underlie a dignitarian approach to process.
A proponent of the latter philosophy may well accept the need for some balancing, but the reasoning process involved therein, and the results achieved, can be very different.
(2) Form or substance
Does fairness relate to form or substance?
Can the applicability of procedural protection be affected by the likelihood that the hearing would make a difference to the result that the tribunal has reached in this particular instance?
There are a number of authorities holding that this should be irrelevant.
This is surely correct.
The path of the law is, as Megarry J. stated, strewn with examples of unanswerable charges which were completely answered.
The objections to assessing whether the hearing would have made a difference are not confined to those expressed by Megarry J. A superior court in the context of review is not in a good position to calculate whether a hearing would have made a difference, and to do so could well leave the individual with the feeling that he has not been afforded any opportunity of controverting the public body's view.
Some courts have however looked to the causal link between the existence of a hearing and the final outcome.
This has manifested itself in three ways.
A court may regard the likelihood of the hearing making a difference as a reason for denying the necessity of natural justice or fairness, or it may influence the exercise of the discretionary power to grant a remedy.
In Cinnamond v. British Airports-Authority a number of minicab drivers had been repeatedly prosecuted by the B.A.A. for touting for passengers at the airport.
The B.A.A. prohibited the drivers from entering the airport except as bona fide airline passengers.
The drivers sought a declaration that the ban was invalid arguing, inter alia, that the ban was in breach of natural justice, since they had not been given an opportunity to make representations before the ban was imposed.
Lord Denning M.R. stated that where there was no legitimate expectation of being heard there was no requirement for a hearing.
Because the drivers had a long record of bad behaviour and convictions no such expectation  existed here.
In Glynn v. Keele University the court found that there had been a breach of natural justice by the failure to give a hearing to a student who had been disciplined.
A remedy was refused, the court holding that nothing the student could have said could have affected the decision reached.
A third way in which the courts have moved from considerations of procedural form to substance, is by interpreting the concept of fairness as allowing them to consider, in a general sense, whether the decision reached was fair and reasonable.
This issue arose indirectly in Chief Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans.
The decision is discussed more fully below, but it is of importance in the present context because the House of Lords explicitly disapproved of statements made in the Court of Appeal that a court could exercise a general power to consider whether the decision reached was fair and reasonable.
It was firmly stated that where review was based upon breach of natural justice, the court should only be concerned with the manner in which the decision was reached and not with the correctness of the decision itself.
Where review is based upon procedural grounds the applicability of such procedural protection should not be placed in jeopardy by the court second guessing whether a hearing would have made a difference.
The weight of authority is against such an approach and arguments of principle firmly support this view.
5.
Fairness: Non-Adjudicative Procedures
‘This whole analysis will derive from one simple proposition, namely that the distinguishing characteristic of adjudication lies in the fact that it confers on the affected party a peculiar form of participation in the decision, that of presenting proofs and reasoned arguments for a decision in his favour.
Whatever heightens the significance of this participation lifts adjudication towards its optimum expression.
Whatever destroys the meaning of that participation destroys the integrity of adjudication itself.’
Thus wrote Fuller in a paper published after his death, on which he had worked for over 20 years.
Fuller proceeds to lay down what he conceives the forms and limits of adjudication to be.
The precise nature of these need  not be rehearsed here, although they will be touched upon in the course of discussion.
What is of immediate importance is the realisation, often lost sight of when discussing procedure, that adjudication is but one form of decision-making.
As has been evident, our procedural rules are sown in an adjudicative framework.
All those rules which constitute natural justice are related directly or indirectly to the idea of presenting proofs and reasoned argument.
Thus, to give an obvious example drawn from Fuller, participation through reasoned argument loses its meaning if the arbiter of the dispute is insane or is hopelessly prejudiced.
Similar connections clearly exist in relation to matters such as notice.
The development of fairness within our jurisprudence has not as yet caused us to depart from the adjudicative framework within which we operate.
While attention has been paid to the modification of adjudicative procedures to meet the requirements of a particular area, there has been little thought directed to the broader question of whether adjudication is the correct decision-making process on which to be fashioning procedures.
The vital point, brought out forcefully by Fuller, is that just as adjudication is distinguished by the form of participation that it confers so are other types of decision-making, and just as the nature of adjudication shapes the procedures relevant to its decisional form so do other species of decision-making.
Nine categories are listed by Fuller: mediation; property; voting; custom; law officially declared; adjudication; contract; managerial direction; and resort to chance.
What relevance has all of this?
The answer, at least in outline, is simple.
There may well be situations when the procedures modelled on adjudication are not the most effective or appropriate.
Areas where safeguards developed against the backdrop of a different type of decision-making may be more efficacious and apposite.
The emergence of fairness may help us towards a realisation of this.
The point is well put by Macdonald,
‘Rather than ask what aspects of adjudicative procedures can be grafted onto this decisional process reviewing tribunals must ask: what is the nature of the process here undertaken, what mode of participation by affected parties is envisioned by such a decisional process, and what specific procedural guidelines are necessary to ensure the efficacy of that participation and the integrity of the process under review?’
It may well be the case that the very concept of adjudication as applied to disputes between private individuals will have to be modified in its application to litigation involving public bodies.
It can be argued that the types of participation involved in the latter will not necessarily be the same as the former.
This does not negate the point being made by Fuller and MacDonald: it may still be the case that a different decisional form is more  appropriate in a particular area.
Two brief examples of this idea may be given.
Let us take first statutory inquiries.
They have always presented a problem for the application of natural justice.
The courts have been troubled by the very nature of the decision-making process, bifurcated as it is between the inspector and the minister.
By their nature such inquiries do not fit one of the requisites of classical adjudication, which has been termed strong responsiveness.
This expresses nothing more than the notion that the decision should proceed from the proofs and arguments advanced by the parties.
The position of the minister, and the broad range of policy considerations that he must take into account, precludes this.
This same fact prevents the minister from being an impartial adjudicator.
Despite this lack of harmony between the facts and the ideal, the courts have traditionally seen the procedures for such inquiries against an adjudicative backdrop.
It is true that they have recognised that the minister cannot be impartial in the way that a judge would be.
It is true also that the most recent judicial statements afford considerable latitude to the public authority in devising its own procedures.
Nevertheless, these are seen as modifications within the traditional adjudicatory framework.
What these modifications indicate however is that this decisional paradigm may not be the most appropriate.
As the quotation from Fuller makes clear, whatever destroys the meaning of participation which characterises adjudication destroys the integrity of adjudication itself.
The modifications which adjudication has been subjected to in the realm of statutory inquiries come close to doing just this.
Moreover, it is arguable that classical adjudication is in general unsuited to the resolution of what are termed polycentric problems, which may form the subject-matter of statutory inquiries.
Judicial realisation that the full implications of the adjudicative model cannot be applied in this area is of course beneficial.
A broad notion of procedural fairness may however demand more.
It may require us to rethink the type of decision-making process from which we are deriving our procedures.
Statutory inquiries may be better seen as a form of  mediation or consultation.
Some of the legislation in the planning sphere reflects such an approach.
If inquiries, or some of them, were to be viewed in this light then the courts could help to devise procedural rules to fit this type of decision-making.
What those rules are would be derived from the type of participation demanded by that decisional process.
Some of these may overlap with characteristics found in adjudication, others may not.
The field of social welfare provides a second example of the theme under discussion.
Claimants for social welfare provisions have not always been in a good position so far as procedural protection is concerned.
There has been a tendency to regard such provisions as government largesse to be dispensed at the unfettered will of the public body.
This view has been more manifest in the United States than in this country, although we have not entirely escaped the same phenomenon.
The response has been to bolster up the procedural checks attendant upon the disbursement of such benefits.
These safeguards are framed in an adjudicative fashion, albeit one which is significantly modified to take account of the circumstances.
It may however be that this type of procedural check is not the most effective in this area.
A number of reasons contribute towards this.
First, giving claimants appeal rights with a hearing before a higher tribunal ignores the factual background from which such cases spring.
There will often be a continuing relationship between the claimant and the original officer which the former is unlikely to want to sully by taking appellate action.
To this must be added the nature of the claimants themselves who may not fully comprehend the mechanics of such an appeal process.
Secondly, the adversary nature of the adjudicative process may not be well suited to this area.
The idea of ‘opponents’ and the ‘winner take-all’attitude inherent in it is not necessarily the best form of decision-making for social welfare cases.
What this suggests is that a different type of decision-making with correspondingly different procedures may be more relevant.
A mixture of consultation and internal management control might well prove a better starting point.
One of the most important questions facing us in the field of procedural protection is whether we are prepared to think more broadly about what  procedural protection connotes.
Procedures developed against a backdrop of adjudication may well be the most appropriate in certain areas.
They may not however be equally suited to all the institutions that comprise administrative law.
For the present we must return to the adjudicative context within which natural justice and fairness operate.
SECTION 5.
CONTENT OF NATURAL JUSTICE: GENERAL
1.
Notice
As Lord Denning has said,
‘If the right to be heard is to be a real right which is worth anything, it must carry with it a right in the accused man to know the case which is made against him.’
The right to notice manifests itself in a number of ways.
Thus, it is contrary to natural justice to inform an individual of only one complaint against him if there are two, or to find him guilty of a different offence from the one he was actually charged with.
Similarly, it was held to be contrary to natural justice to confirm an order on facts which the individual had no opportunity to show to be erroneous.
The right to notice extends also to giving the individual a reasonable amount of time in which to prepare his case.
While the courts have jealously protected an individual's right to notice, they have imposed limitations upon it.
In the Gaming Boards case B and K had applied for a certificate of consent from the Gaming Board to entitle them to apply for a gaming licence.
The Board asked the applicants questions arising from information possessed by the Board, but did not disclose the source of the information.
B and K claimed that the Board should give them sufficient information to enable them to answer the case against them.
The Board declined to reveal their source claiming that it  would be contrary to the public interest.
The Court of Appeal stated that the Board did have a duty to act fairly which entailed granting B and K the opportunity to satisfy them of matters in the statute, and to let B and K know the impressions of the Board so that they might be dispelled; but the Board did not have to quote ‘chapter and verse,’ nor did it have to disclose the source of its information if it would be contrary to the public interest, nor did the reasons for the refusal have to be given.
An even more limited approach has been adopted in some other cases.
In Breen v. Amalgamated Engineering Union a majority of the Court of Appeal held that a disciplinary committee of a trade union did not have to tell a shop steward why they had refused to endorse his election, and in McInnes v. Onslow-Fane it was held that the council of the Boxing Board of Control did not have to give an applicant for a manager's licence an outline of their objections to him.
The test adopted in both cases was that the decision-maker should not capriciously withhold approval.
Underlying these decisions is a tension between two principles operating within this area, the right to notice and the absence of any general duty to give reasons.
In the context of, for example, an application for a licence, there is no ‘charge.’
Where the applicant has made repeated unsuccessful requests he may wish to know why he is not obtaining the licence.
This is however tantamount to requiring the giving of reasons, a point made explicitly by Megarry V.C.
in McInnes.
Whether reasons should be given will be considered below.
2.
The Hearing
Two of the most important aspects of the hearing are the type of hearing required and the rules of evidence that will apply.
While hearings will normally be oral, there is no fixed rule that this must be so.
The courts will, however, avoid constraining a statute so as to dispense with a hearing completely.
A statute empowering a public body to dispense with a hearing will, for example, be interpreted to allow oral hearings to be omitted; courts will lean against allowing a tribunal to decide a matter without giving the individual a chance to see the opposing  case and have his own considered.
Furthermore, while an individual can waive his right to a hearing, it will not always be an option open to him.
Thus, in Hanson v. Church Commissioners it was held that where the matter was one in which there was a wider public interest it may not be possible for one party to withdraw without the assent of the other once the proceedings were begun.
Even if both agreed the issue might not be withdrawn if the tribunal objected.
There are some cases which appear to hold that natural justice may not require a hearing.
These statements must be treated with great reserve.
While the type of hearing may differ within different areas, and while it might vary depending upon, for example, the stage which the proceedings have reached or the nature of the interest being asserted, to go further than this would be contrary to principle.
To assert that, quite apart from the above factors, natural justice could be satisfied even though there was nothing in the nature of a hearing at all would be to denude the concept of all content.
The strict rules of evidence do not have to be followed.
Diplock L.J.
(as he then was) set out the following general principles.
The tribunal is not restricted to evidence acceptable in a court of law; provided that it has some probative value the court will not reassess its weight.
Where there is an oral hearing, written evidence submitted by the applicant must be considered but the tribunal may take account of any evidence of probative value from another source provided that the applicant is informed and allowed to comment on it.
An applicant must also be allowed to address argument on the whole of the case.
These general principles are however subject to the following reservation.
The overriding obligation is to provide the applicant with a fair hearing and a fair opportunity to controvert the charge.
This may in certain cases require not only that the applicant be  informed of the evidence, but that he should be given a sufficient opportunity to deal with it.
This may involve the cross-examination of the witnesses whose evidence is before the hearing authority in the form of hearsay.
Where there are insuperable difficulties in arranging for that evidence to be questioned it should not be admitted in evidence, or the hearing authority should exclude it from their consideration.
3.
Representation
The position as to whether an individual can be represented by a person of his choice, including a lawyer, is as follows.
First, there appears to be no absolute right to such representation.
Legal representation may be counterproductive, unnecessary or overcumbersome in cases where a matter must be speedily resolved, and hence the courts have resisted claims that there should be a right to such representation.
Secondly, the courts have however emphasised that tribunals possess a discretion as to whether to allow such representation, and are willing to review the manner in which the discretion is exercised.
A tribunal is master of its own procedure, and this provides the foundation from which it can permit such representation.
Consideration of the statutory scheme within a particular area may convince the court that representation by a lawyer should on construction be excluded.
However the courts are in general reluctant to exclude the possibility of such legal representation in toto within a particular area.
In exercising their discretion whether to permit such representation, tribunals should take the following facts into account: the seriousness of the charge or penalty; whether any points of law are likely to arise; the capacity of a person to present his own case; procedural difficulties; the need for speed in reaching a decision; and the need for fairness as between the individual and the officers concerned.
Thirdly, there does not appear to be any general right to attend a hearing as the friend or adviser of the individual directly concerned; whether such a right exists depends on the nature of the tribunal in question.
Any such tribunal does however possess the discretion to allow the individual to be assisted by such an adviser.
4.
Reasons
The general importance of reasoned decisions has been considered above, and the topic will be returned to below.
The present discussion will focus on reasons and natural justice.
There are a number of advantages to be secured by insisting upon reasons for decisions.
Reasons can assist the courts in performing their supervisory function, can help to ensure that the decision has been thought through, and can aid in the control of administrative discretion.
A duty to give reasons can also perform a more general function.
As Rabin has stated, the ‘very essence of arbitrariness is to have one's status redefined by the state without an adequate explanation of its reasons for doing so.’
Disadvantages said to be attendant upon a duty to provide reasons are that it can stifle the exercise of discretion and overburden the administration.
How cogent these arguments are is questionable.
While English law has gone some way to providing a reasons requirement there are still significant gaps.
The Franks Committee recommended the giving of reasons.
This has been enacted in the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958 which required those tribunals listed in the Act to give a statement, written or oral, of the reasons for a decision, if requested by the individual.
The statute also applies to ministerial decisions subsequent to statutory inquiries.
In addition, legislation both primary and secondary, has imposed a duty to give reasons in specific situations.
The common law has however failed to develop any general duty to provide a reasoned decision.
There are a number of exceptions.
One method of indirectly requiring reasons is illustrated by Minister of National Revenue v. Wrights' Canadian Ropes Ltd.
Wrights' Canadian Ropes  Limited complained that the Minister should have allowed claims for expenses to be set off against tax.
The privy Council held that although the Minister was not bound to disclose his reasons, he could not thereby render the company's right of appeal nugatory.
The Court could look at the facts before the Minister and if those were insufficient in law to support his determination then the Court would deem that it must have been arbitrary.
The same approach has been adopted in later cases.
It will be of interest to see whether the reasoning is applied to the courts' powers of review; if this took place a general right to reasoned decisions would have evolved.
The exception would have devoured the principle.
A second way in which the courts have indirectly imposed a requirement to state reasons is by labelling the result reached in their absence as arbitrary.
A third way in which the courts can indirectly inquire into the reasoning process is by examining the evidence which the decision-maker used to arrive it his jurisdictional findings; the court can then assess whether that evidence justified the findings which were made.
While the statutory and common law rules referred to do impose a duty to provide reasons in certain circumstances, the absence of any general duty is still a most significant gap in our procedural protection.
The historical origins of the rule that there is no general duty to provide reasons are obscure.
In so far as they are based upon analogy with the position of courts of law which are not under any such general duty, this reasoning is being undermined as the judiciary increasingly require some statement of reasons within judgments.
5. appeals and Rehearing
How far can a defect of natural justice be cured by an appeal within the administrative hierarchy or by a rehearing by the original body?
The authorities have been reviewed by the Privy Council in Calvin v. Carr.
It was argued that a breach of natural justice at the original hearing conducted by racing stewards could not be cured by an appeal to a committee of the Australian Jockey Club since there would be nothing to appeal against, the first decision being a nullity.
Lord Wilberforce reviewed the authorities and adopted a tripartite distinction.
First, where the rehearing was by the same body or some more complete form of it the general rule was that defects at the original hearing could be cured.
Secondly, there were cases where after considering the whole hearing structure in its particular context a fair hearing might be required at the original stage and on appeal.
This second proposition was not however an absolute one.
His Lordship posited a third situation where looking again at the whole context it could be seen whether the end result was fair despite some initial defect.
This would depend inter alia on the type of appeal process: for example, if the appeal body was only entitled to a transcript from the original decision then the later hearing would probably be inadequate.
The facts of Calvin itself were said to fall into category three.
The stewards inquiry had to make a quick decision; any defect in natural justice at that stage would be cured by the hearing before the full committee of the Jockey Club.
6.
Deciding Without Hearing
How far is the decision-maker allowed to determine a matter without a hearing?
The answer depends upon the enabling legislation, the type of function being performed, and the nature of the decision-maker.
Thus, it is accepted that if a minister is made the deciding authority he will often have to act through officers to collect the material and the officer may even make the decision in the minister's name.
In other areas the general principle is that the greater the judicial element involved the more likely it is that the decision-maker must also hear.
Investigation may well be done by a sub-committee but the deciding authority must then be apprised of that material.
Whether the material thus collected can be summarised, and whether all those on the deciding authority must possess all the papers will depend on the nature of the function being performed and the language of the enabling statute.
The  decision in Chief Constable of North Wales Police v. Evans provides an example of what may be required.
A probationer constable sought, inter alia, an order of certiorari to quash the decision of the Chief Constable that he should resign or be discharged.
The Chief Constable had decided to dispense with his services because of a report made on the probationer constable which led the Chief Constable to believe that he was not fitted to be a member of the police force.
The investigation had been conducted by the deputy Chief Constable.
Delegation of the inquiry was a flowed provided that a number of conditions were met.
The ultimate decision must be made by the Chief Constable himself.
The delegate must tell the constable the nature of the complaint against him and allow him an opportunity to comment upon it before the final decision is taken by the Chief Constable.
It seems that the Chief Constable must also show the report to the constable and invite his comments before reaching his final decision.
On the facts of the case the rules of natural justice had been broken because the constable had had no opportunity to comment upon the allegations made against him.
SECTION 6.
CONTENT OF NATURAL JUSTICE: SPECIFIC AREAS
Given that the content of procedural protection will vary from area to area it is important to look at specific topics.
Only by doing so can one judge whether the amount of procedural protection is being pitched at the correct level.
1.
Employment
The availability of natural justice in the area of employment depends upon the nature of the employment relationship.
If there is what is regarded by the law as an office then public law remedies are available to protect its holder who is entitled to natural justice; he can thus regain his office if he is dismissed without a hearing.
The position of the office-holder should be juxtaposed both to ordinary master-servant relationships and offices held at pleasure.
The courts will not, in general, specifically enforce an ordinary master-servant relationship.
From this the courts have inferred that, except where the employer is under a statutory duty or there is some other  restriction as to the type of contract that it can make with its servants or the grounds on which it can dismiss them, the servant has no procedural protection.
Where an office-holder can be removed at pleasure, as opposed to for cause, the same connection is forged between the absence of substantive rights and the lack of procedural protection; the latter is treated as a natural corollary of the former.
The incidence of procedural protection in this area is less than satisfactory.
Distinctions are drawn which when examined have little to recommend them.
First, the line between what is regarded as an office and what is construed as a pure master-servant relationship can be very fine, thereby rendering the applicability of natural justice difficult to predict and producing divisions which are capricious.
Secondly, the line between officers dismissable for cause and those dismissable at pleasure can also be hard to draw.
For example, an office held at pleasure might nevertheless be subject to procedural fairness where the statutory scheme would be less effective if the right to be heard were not implied.
Thirdly, and perhaps most important, the logic of the equation, no substantive rights therefore no procedural protection, which permeates the jurisprudence on both master-servant and offices held at pleasure is false.
The absence of substantive protection renders the presence of procedural rights even more important, a point made cogently by Lord Wilberforce in Malloch v. Aberdeen Corporation.
His Lordship would confine the absence of procedural protection in the pure master-servant area to cases where there was no element of public employment, no service, no statutory support, and nothing in the nature of an office.
Moreover, as Woolf J. has observed, the enactment of employment protection legislation has blurred the line between office holders and ordinary servants.
Finally, the existence of the preceding distinctions between differing types of employment relationship has caused considerable difficulty in determining whether an employee can use the new procedures for remedies.
The common law rules have now been overlaid by statute.
The statutory protection covers both public and private employees (subject to exceptions).
A dismissal may be unfair either because it was procedurally arbitrary or because it lacked good cause.
The remedies are compensation and recommendations for reinstatement, although the latter are not specifically enforceable.
While this legislative protection is beneficial, a reform of the common law position would be most welcome.
2.
Students
Students are regarded as having contracts with their institution, one of the implied terms of which will be that the institution will act in accordance with natural justice.
Thus, natural justice has been held to be applicable to cases of disciplinary action within a university and to expulsion for failure in examinations, although in the latter case the examiners had based their decision on the personal attributes of the candidate as well as exam marks.
In both cases however the remedy was withheld.
In other cases where the matter has arisen the court has found either that natural justice has been complied with or that the matter was within the jurisdiction of the Visitor.
The jurisdiction of the Visitor is exclusive, and covers all matters relating to the internal or domestic laws of the foundation, irrespective of whether a particular claim could, for example, be formulated as one involving a breach of contract.
3.
Licensing
The number of activities for which a person requires a licence are legion.
Prior to Ridge v. Baldwin the combined effect of the administrative-judicial dichotomy and that drawn between rights and privileges, resulted in the rules of procedural fairness having only a limited application in this area.
The liberalisation of those rules since Ridge has affected procedures  attendant upon the grant of a licence.
Some elements of natural justice or fairness will normally be required, although precisely which will be dependent upon the nature of the issuing authority and whether the case is concerned with the application, renewal, or revocation of the licence.
In McInnes v. Onslow-Fane, Megarry V.C.
held that in the case of forfeiture the individual was entitled to an unbiased tribunal, notice and a hearing, whereas in the case of an application less was required.
Since nothing had been taken away the duty in such a case was to reach an honest conclusion without bias and not in pursuance of a capricious policy.
Renewal of a licence fell into an intermediate category.
Here the individual might have a legitimate expectation that the licence would be renewed.
These were, said Megarry V.C., to be treated as closer to forfeiture than to those of initial application.
The distinctions drawn by Megarry V.C.
should not be allowed to become over-rigid.
There may well be an area where the interest at stake in an application for a licence is considerably more important than that involved in a forfeiture or failure to renew in a different context.
Moreover, the duty owed to the applicant may well be higher in certain areas than that indicated by Megarry V.C.
While the application of procedural checks to licensing activities has therefore increased it would be mistaken to say that it is now accepted that any licensing function should be subjected to such safeguards.
We have already seen how the courts still, on occasion, manipulate the notion of privilege (in its new garb of legitimate expectation) to deny or curtail procedural rights.
In addition, there are for example licensing functions performed by the executive in respect of which the traditional view has been that procedural safeguards do not apply.
There are probably also many minor licensing decisions where no element of fairness is accorded, particularly with respect to licences granted by local authorities.
The last 20 years have witnessed the increase in procedural rights for licence holders or applicants, but the disbursement of such benefits is still subject to irrational distinctions.
It is not that varying degrees of procedural protection should not exist: the range of licences demands this diversity.
It is rather that little rationality is evident in the decision whether to accord any procedural protection at all and as to how much protection should be given.
4.
Discipline
The application of natural justice in the context of discipline suffered, like the case of licensing, from the administrative-judicial distinction; disciplinary measures were deemed not to be judicial with the correlative inapplicability of natural justice.
As with licensing, the position has now altered, though the content and indeed application of natural justice or fairness will vary as between areas.
It has been seen that academic institutions have to abide by procedural fairness when applying disciplinary measures, as do trade unions, and it has now been held that prison Visitors and governors exercising their disciplinary functions are subject to certiorari for breach of natural justice.
An example of the application of the principles of natural justice in this area is provided by R. v. Board of Visitors of Hull Prison, ex p.
St. Germain (No. 2).
After a riot in a prison, offences against prison discipline were alleged against a number of prisoners, including the applicants.
The charges were heard by the prison's board of visitors.
The chairman of the board ruled that certain witnesses which a prisoner had requested to attend should not be called.
It was held that, while the chairman possessed a discretion to disallow witnesses to be called, that discretion had to be exercised reasonably and in good faith.
To exclude witnesses because there was ample evidence against a prisoner, or on a mistaken understanding of the prisoner's defence, or on the basis of administrative inconvenience, would be an improper exercise of that discretion.
This was particularly so where, as here, the applicant had been charged with serious disciplinary offences which would result in a loss of liberty.
Recent authority, extending natural justice to prison governors, has emphasised that natural justice ought to apply when the rights or legitimate expectations of an individual are affected.
5.
Preliminary Hearings
The application of natural justice to preliminary hearings or investigations has tended to produce polarised arguments: the public body arguing that procedural rules have no place in the context of such hearings or investigations, and the individual asserting that they should apply in their full vigour.
The courts, not surprisingly, have eschewed both such philosophies preferring an intermediate ground where some element of fairness is required but not the full vigour of natural justice.
As Lord  Wilberforce stated, there are many types of prima facie or preliminary determination and the requirements of fairness in one area may be unsuited to another.
The actual content given to natural justice or fairness will depend upon a range of factors: the proximity between the initial investigation and the final decision; the construction of the statute; the importance of the subject matter for the individual; and the need for administrative efficiency.
Thus, in Wiseman v. Borneman the Inland Revenue Commissioners believed that part of the Finance Act concerning share transactions was applicable to the case before them; the taxpayer objected and entered a statutory declaration setting out his reasons.
The Commissioners still believed that the Act applied and referred the statutory declaration, a certificate and counter-statement setting out their views on the taxpayer's statutory declaration, to a tribunal which would decide whether there was a prima facie case for proceeding.
The taxpayer claimed that he should be entitled to see the counter-statement.
The House of Lords, while accepting that some elements of natural justice could apply to investigations and preliminary determinations, held that an opportunity to see the counter-statement was not required: no final decision was being made and if the taxpayer could comment on the counter-statement the Commissioners would wish to comment on those comments, thereby producing an endless succession of exchanges, bringing the administration to a standstill.
6.
Aliens
The common law has not proved a great source of procedural protection for aliens.
Most of the conceptual distinctions which have been used to narrow the scope of such protection have been applied to them.
Thus in R. v. Leman Street Police Station Inspector, ex p.
Venicoff it was held that when the Secretary of State was deporting a person where he deemed it to be conducive to the public good, he was acting in an executive and not in a judicial capacity.
He was therefore not bound to hold an inquiry or grant a hearing prior to making the deportation order.
Nearly 50 years later the language has altered but the substance looks strikingly familiar.
In Schmidt  v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs the plaintiffs were Scientology students who had been given a limited leave to enter the country.
Lord Denning M. R. held that whether a hearing was required before the request that their stay be extended was rejected depended on whether the individual had a right, interest or legitimate expectation.
Applied here the plaintiffs had no right to stay one day beyond their allowed period, and therefore they had no right to a hearing.
While the nature of the plaintiff's interest may as argued above affect the content of natural justice or fairness, the argument from Schmidt, which equates the absence of procedural protection with the absence of a right to stay, is subject to all the criticism of such reasoning outlined in the discussion of employment relationships.
It may well be accepted that a person who is deported should have greater protection than one who is refused entry, or that a person whose permit has expired has a lesser interest than one whose permit is revoked.
These are relevant factors to take into account.
The language of rights, legitimate expectations or privileges should not be elevated to any higher status.
It should not be determinative in itself.
Aliens are not entirely without protection.
Statute provides an appeals procedure against deportation, the non renewal of residence permits and other types of restrictions.
Appeals are excluded however where the Secretary of State certifies that the refusal of leave to enter or a refusal of entry clearance is conducive to the public good.
Similar provisions exclude appeals in relation to deportation.
Conducive to the public good covers the interests of national security, reasons of a political nature, and the relations between the United Kingdom and any other country.
A practice developed of allowing the individual to make representations and call witnesses before a panel of three people who would advise the Secretary of State.
While the panel is under a duty to act fairly the content of that duty will be limited by the nature of the case.
Thus requests for further particulars of allegations against an individual may be denied where the  information received by the Secretary of State is of a highly confidential nature and relates to national security.
SECTION 7.
CONCLUSION
The courts have not been idle since the landmark decision in Ridge v. Baldwin.
While many of the subsequent developments are to be welcomed, certain cautionary notes should be sounded.
First, while the courts have generally avoided rigid classifications in deciding on the applicability of natural justice, they have not discarded such tools altogether.
Decisions still emerge which are redolent of the pre-1964 era, such as those which manipulate the distinction between rights and legitimate expectations.
Objections to such forms of pigeon-holing have been given above.
Secondly, continuing analysis is required to determine whether the content of the rules in general, and their application to particular areas, is being pitched at the ‘right’ level.
Recognition of a general duty to provide reasons furnishes an example of a central aspect of natural justice which could well be improved, while the application of procedural rights in the context of employment relationships and aliens exemplifies particular areas where significant change should be made.
Thirdly, more thought should be given to understanding the general nature of the balancing process which operates within fairness.
The extent to which this should be viewed as a utilitarian calculus of some kind, or whether a more dignitarian approach should be pursued is of considerable importance.
The concluding comments thus far have been directed towards the application and content of natural justice and fairness seeing both of these terms against an adjudicative framework.
This is how they operate at present.
Procedures derived from a backdrop of adjudication may not however be the most appropriate or effective in particular areas.
Other decisional forms, whether they be mediation or managerial direction, may be better in certain contexts.
The recognition and development of other types of decision-making, with the procedures necessarily consequent upon them, is one of the important tasks for the administrative lawyer, just as important as the workings of fairness within the traditional adjudicative context.
NATURAL JUSTICE: BIAS
The second limb of natural justice is that decisions should be made free from bias or impartiality.
The issue can arise in two main contexts.
First, the decision-maker might have some interest of a pecuniary or personal nature in the outcome of the proceedings.
Secondly, there are problems where the decision-maker is interested in the result of an inquiry or investigation, not in any personal sense, but because the institution which he represents is desirous of attaining a certain objective.
Discussion of these two types of problems will be followed by consideration of what the test for establishing bias actually is.
SECTION 1.
PERSONAL INTEREST
1.
Pecuniary Interest
The courts have long insisted that any pecuniary interest disqualifies the decision-maker be he high or low.
Thus, in Dimes v. Grand Junction Canal Co.
Proprietors the House of Lords reversed a decision made by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Cottenham, when the latter had affirmed decrees by the Vice-Chancellor in relation to a company in which the Lord Chancellor held some shares.
No imputation of any actual bias was made against Lord Cottenham, but their Lordships held that the principle that no man can be a judge in his own cause must be sacred.
The courts have consistently held that if a pecuniary interest exists it is not necessary to go on to consider reasonable suspicion or real likelihood of bias.
It is therefore of importance to establish what will constitute a pecuniary interest.
Blackburn J. has held that any pecuniary interest, however small, will be sufficient.
Some qualification is however required to the breadth of these statements.
If the pecuniary interest is not personal to the decision-maker then the matter will fall to be considered as a challenge on the grounds of favour.
Moreover, if the alleged pecuniary interest is extremely remote or  based upon contingencies which are unlikely to materialise, then the matter will similarly be treated as a challenge on the grounds of favour.
Subject to these qualifications, the prohibition of pecuniary interest seems to be an absolute one and is not further qualified by any requirement that the interest be substantial.
2.
Other Personal Interests
Other types of personal interest may disqualify the decision-maker if the courts find that the interest gave rise to a reasonable suspicion or real likelihood of bias.
In this area much will be dependent upon the factual nexus between the decision-maker and one of the other parties involved in the dispute.
Family relationship, business connections, and commercial ties, are examples of the interests which can disqualify the decision-maker, as is membership of an organisation interested in the dispute.
On occasion it may be someone other than the actual adjudicator who has been involved.
Nevertheless, provided that he has, or may appear to have an influence on the decision given, then that will be sufficient to render the determination invalid.
SECTION 2.
INSTITUTIONAL
1.
Prosecutor and Judge
A somewhat different way in which the issue of bias can manifest itself is when the prosecutor of an offence is also the judge.
This may happen directly as in R. v. Lee, ex p.
Shaw where the sanitary committee of a town council instructed the town clerk to prosecute a person and one of the  justices before whom he was prosecuted was a member of that committee.
The court held that the decision could not stand.
The matter may also arise indirectly in situations in which the decision-maker belongs to an organisation which initiated the proceeding, but where he himself has taken no part in the decision to prosecute.
In Leeson's case the General Medical Council had disqualified a doctor for infamous misconduct in a prosecution brought by the Medical Defence Union, an organisation designed to uphold the character of doctors and to suppress unauthorised practitioners.
Two of the 29 who held the inquiry were members of the Medical Defence Union but not of its managing body.
The court found that, looked at in substance and fact, the two Medical Defence Union members on the General Council were not accusers as well as judges and that they could not reasonably be suspected of bias.
The difficulty presented here is more acute in the context of governmental agencies who have responsibility both for adjudication and prosecution, a combination more normal in the United States than in this country.
In response to this problem the 1946 Federal Administrative Procedure Act section 5(c) established an internal separation of function between decider and prosecutor.
2.
Institutional Opinion
Overlapping with, but nevertheless separate from the mixture of function between prosecutor and judge, is the difficulty that administrators of a particular scheme may well have ‘strong views’ or ‘preconceived ideas’concerning the subject-matter before them.
The subject-matter may be of a discretionary or regulatory nature and while these elements should not exclude proscriptions against bias they are likely to modify their application.
Administrators may have guidelines to help them to interpret a broadly worded statute, the application of which should not in itself constitute bias.
Clear prejudgment of a case is to be disapproved of, but the success of a piece of legislation may well be dependent upon the administrators enforcing the institution's policies with some rigour; indifference to the end in view, even if it were possible, might well be undesirable.
Seen against this background the decision in Franklin v. Minister of Town and Country Planning, although undoubtedly influenced by the judicial conservatism of the time, would probably not be decided differently today.
In that case the House of Lords stated that the Minister had a duty to give genuine consideration to a report of an inspector concerning the siting of a new town at Stevenage and to consider objections to that position.
It was held that reference to bias was out of place in this context.
However, while the result might well be the same, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal is to be preferred; complete impartiality could not be expected and the term impartiality when used in the context of a minister making a decision such as the siting of a new town, would not necessarily be the same as when applied to a magistrate deciding a case of nuisance.
While complete impartiality cannot always be expected in such a case, the obligations of natural justice or fairness may still require that a minister hear representations.
In R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment, ex p.
Brent London Borough Council the applicant local authorities claimed that they should be entitled to make representations to the minister as to the way in which he should exercise his powers concerning local authority grants.
Representations had been made prior to the passage of the legislation, but the court held that the minister was still under a duty to act fairly in the way in which he exercised his discretion under the legislation.
He should therefore have listened to representations made after the Act received the Royal Assent but before he actually exercised his discretion.
The court accepted that the minister would not be expected to hear such representations as if he were a judge.
The minister would not be expected to approach the matter with an empty mind, but his mind should, in the words, of the court, at least be ajar.
SECTION 3.
THE TEST FOR BIAS
1.
General
The test for determining bias in cases other than those concerning pecuniary interest is, in short, in a state of confusion.
Two tests have been espoused by the courts, that of ‘real likelihood of bias,’ and that of ‘reasonable suspicion of bias.’
In the nineteenth century cases the former test held sway: if there was no pecuniary interest the court inquired whether there was a real likelihood of bias.
However in R. v. Sussex Justices, ex p.
McCarthy, Lord Hewart C.J. said that a reasonable suspicion of bias was sufficient to quash the determination.
Later cases witnessed the ‘competitive invocation’ of the two tests, the authority whose decision was to be impugned claiming that the applicant still had to satisfy the higher hurdle of real likelihood of bias.
The tide appeared to be shifting back to this higher test for in two cases (at least) the courts expressly adopted that criteria and disapproved of Lord Hewart C.J.'s formulation.
Certainty was not however to last for in Metropolitan Properties (F. G. C.) Ltd. v. Lannon Lord Denning M.R. ‘rescued’ Lord Hewart's reasonable suspicion test.
Later cases have not thrown much light on these muddied waters.
To understand why the confusion has been generated it is necessary to separate two different issues, the first of which is particularly important.
2.
Bias for Whom?
From which or whose perspective is the court viewing the issue of bias?
There are in logic four possibilities: the mind of the justice (or other challenged individual); the reasonable man; the individual affected; or ex post by the reviewing court.
It is clear from the judgments in the Camborne and Barnsley cases that the disapproval of the reasonable suspicion test is because the court believes that it will have to view the answer from the perspective of the applicant himself or the public generally.
Both Slade J. and Devlin J., respectively, feel that this would be setting the hurdle too low, and certainly Devlin J. in the Barnsley case wants the court ex post to be the yardstick by which to determine whether bias was likely to arise.
What Lord Denning M.R. does in the Lannon case is not simply to reject Camborne and Barnsley.
His Lordship is clear that the bias issue is not to be considered from the perspective of the justice impugned himself, who is unlikely to be biased.
The criterion is our ever-present reasonable man.
If a reasonable man would believe that there was a real likelihood of bias then the decision is overturned; surmise or conjecture is insufficient.
The root of the confusion for later cases is that Lord Denning M.R. begins by approving of the Lord Hewart C.J. test and ends by talking of real likelihood.
There is however no inconsistency here.
Thus far we have seen that the perspective from which to view bias is to be that of the reasonable man; it is not to be the individual affected himself (because he may be perverse, oversensitive, etc.), nor is it to be the ex post detachment of a reviewing court,(which is the disagreement with the Barnsley formulation).
The next step is what degree of possibility of bias must exist?
3.
The Question of Degree
What must the reasonable man be perceiving?
Is it sufficient that he perceives a suspicion of bias, or must he perceive the higher hurdle of likelihood?
For Lord Denning M.R. in Lannon it is clearly the latter.
Similarly in Hannan although the court is unclear which of the tests is the ‘law,’ they actually apply the Denning version of the likelihood test: would a reasonable man say that a real danger of bias exists.
4.
Do We Have the Correct Test?
This is of course a matter of judgment.
It would be possible to have any of the following varieties: the individual affected merely suspecting bias; the court ex post suspecting bias; the reasonable man suspecting bias; the justice suspecting bias; or any of these four ‘viewing points’ coupled with the higher hurdle of likelihood.
Lord Hewart C.J. would have chosen it seems reasonable man and reasonable suspicion, while Lord Denning M.R. chooses reasonable man and likelihood.
The safe and consistent reasonable man would appear to be the most appropriate perspective for the reasons given above.
The individual himself may be perverse or oversensitive; the reviewing court itself is capable of an Olympian detachment and impartiality, and it thus may find it difficult to believe that others are ever tempted and swayed.
How high the second part of the hurdle should be pitched, suspicion or likelihood, will depend again on value judgments.
It is unlikely that the presence of the higher hurdle will prevent reviewing courts from quashing a decision should they feel that this is warranted.
The tendency within more recent authority is to pitch the second part of the hurdle at varying levels depending upon the nature of the decision-maker in question.
Thus where the body is judicial in nature the lower test of reasonable suspicion should suffice, reflecting the importance of the idea that justice should be seen to be done.
Administrative decisions should only be overturned if the higher hurdle of real likelihood of bias could be overcome, and there are suggestions that the test should be further modified when the administrative body, such as a local authority, necessarily has an interest in the outcome of a decision.
In such situations its decision should only be overturned for bias when it acted in such a way prior to its decision that it could not properly have exercised its discretion, taking due account of its interest in the proceedings.
more reluctant to so infer, particularly where the applicant did not know of his right to object at that stage.
This restriction on waiver is to be welcomed; such a surrender of rights should not be inferred lightly.
It is in fact open to question whether it should be allowed at all, at least in certain types of cases.
The premise behind the ability to waive is that it is only the individual who is concerned, and thus if he ‘chooses’ to ignore the interest then so much the worse for him.
However there may well be a wider interest at issue, in that it may be contrary to the public interest for decisions to be made where there may be a likelihood of favour to another influencing the determination.
SECTION 5.
CONCLUSION
The rules against bias work reasonably well apart from confusion over the test for establishing bias, and happily there are few reported cases upon the subject and most of these are not ‘heinous.’
The wider issue of the extent to which the judiciary may naturally favour certain types of values is outside the scope of this book.
JURISDICTION
SECTION 1.
INTRODUCTION
The problem that concerns us now can be expressed as follows.
A tribunal is given authority to decide upon a particular issue.
If a furnished tenancy exists the tribunal may adjudicate on the rent.
If a person is unfairly dismissed he may be awarded compensation.
All such grants of authority may be expressed in the following manner: if X exists the tribunal may or shall do Y. X may consist of a number of different elements, factual, legal and discretionary.
An individual wishes to complain of the tribunal's findings.
In what circumstances should the court say that the tribunal has exceeded the power given to it?
It should be made clear that judicial review has traditionally dealt not with the correctness of the findings as such but with their legality.
For a full rehearing of the merits, appeal, a creature of statute, is required.
The inherent power of the courts to review the findings of a tribunal has by way of contrast been concerned with ensuring that the decision-maker remains within the jurisdiction granted to him.
In resolving the question of what matters will be held to go to jurisdiction it is necessary to steer a course between Scylla and Charybdis.
If review is drawn too narrowly then the spectre is raised of the tribunal becoming a power unto itself, of it adjudicating upon matters widely different from those that the legislature intended, and yet being free from control.
The Albert Hall is deemed to be a furnished tenancy and a rent set for it.
However, if review is drawn too broadly it will approximate to appeal on the merits.
Almost every finding made by the tribunal would be reassessed in the superior courts and be binding if right, but would not be binding if judged by the superior court to be wrong.
The grant of jurisdiction to a tribunal or other decision-maker must involve a power to come to a decision which in the opinion of a reviewing court may well be wrong.
If the scope of review becomes too broad this is effectively destroyed.
The conceptual basis for judicial review over the conditions of jurisdiction has already been examined, and reference should be made to that discussion when reading what follows.
In essence the courts' control over the conditions of jurisdiction is premised upon the assumption that they are thereby effectuating the will of Parliament; they are ensuring that the tribunal or authority remains within the boundaries of what Parliament intended it to examine by ensuring that those conditions are present.
However while this may provide the conceptual basis for judicial intervention, it furnishes little in the way of guidance as to the extent of control over the conditions of jurisdiction.
The dilemma is evident from the  example given in the preceding paragraph.
On the one hand, in a certain sense, all the elements which comprise X condition the tribunal's power to decide upon Y. The statute says, explicitly or implicitly, if X you may or shall do Y. On the other hand, to accept that the reviewing courts should be the ultimate arbiters of the meaning of all the elements comprising the X factor would cause review to become very like appeal.
Such an approach is, moreover, open to a more potent objection.
It presumes that the meaning to be ascribed to any of the elements which comprise the X factor is to be that determined by the reviewing court in preference to that decided on by the tribunal.
As we shall see there are fundamental objections to accepting that this should always be so.
This dilemma has led both courts and academics to search for a test to determine which parts of the X factor should, and which parts should not, be held to go to jurisdiction.
The problem of jurisdiction will be approached in the following way.
At the outset the theories which purport to provide an answer to the question of which issues go to jurisdiction will be examined.
I should make clear that this analysis is not predicated upon the assumption that the courts have always attempted to apply the jurisdictional/non-jurisdictional distinction according to some logical criteria.
It is readily apparent that some courts, and some judges, have used the very ambiguity inherent in that dichotomy in an instrumental fashion; the decision whether to label a part of the X factor as jurisdictional or non-jurisdictional is influenced by a judicial desire to intervene or not as the case may be.
Examination of the theories which purport to provide an answer to this question is nonetheless important for a number of reasons.
One is that it would be wrong to assume that all or even most judges have viewed the distinction in a purely instrumental fashion.
It is manifestly clear from a reading of the case law that many believe that a real division can be drawn in analytical terms.
A second reason is that the very language we use affects the conclusions which we think ought to be reached.
Thus statements are made, both judicially and extra judicially, concerning the scope of review which reflect certain theoretical premises.
These premises are often unstated and hence untested.
They have nevertheless exercised considerable influence over judicial and academic thought.
It is only by bringing them into the light of day that we can assess their cogency.
After a consideration of the theories, the case law from both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries will be examined.
The final part of the chapter will consider some of the broader policy arguments concerning the scope of review.
SECTION 2.
THEORIES OF JURISDICTION
Four theories of jurisdiction will be analysed which adopt differing views as to which matters should be held to go to jurisdiction.
A general word concerning these theories will be helpful in understanding what follows.
Although the theories reach radically differing conclusions a common thread permeates their reasoning.
Each theory in effect attempts to draw the following distinction.
Errors which relate to the type or kind or scope of case into which a tribunal can inquire are regarded as jurisdictional; errors which relate to the truth or detail of the findings that it makes are categorised as non-jurisdictional.
The line between the two is said to provide the justification for judicial review.
The court only intervenes when the tribunal is outside the ‘scope’ which has been assigned to it by the legislature; the judiciary will not intervene if the tribunal has simply made an error within its assigned area since this would eradicate the distinction between review of legality and appeal.
Each theory draws this distinction in different ways, and, as we shall see, the dichotomy may not be capable of being drawn satisfactorily at all.
1.
Collateral Fact Doctrine
The most widely accepted theoretical explanation of which issues should be held to go to jurisdiction has been the collateral or preliminary or jurisdictional fact doctrine.
It has a long historical lineage but the most sophisticated explanation is that given by Diplock L.J., as he then was.
The exposition is more easily understood if broken down into a number of stages.
(1) Preliminary questions and merits
A decision is ‘correct’ if it is made by that person within the legal system to whose opinion on the existence of fact or law effect will be given by the executive.
A tribunal is given power on the existence of certain conditions; there are certain preliminary questions that it must decide before it can proceed to the merits.
These include matters such as whether the tribunal was properly constituted and whether the case was of a kind referred to in the statute.
The tribunal must make an initial determination on such matters but its decision is not conclusive.
If the court on review believes that the requisite situation spoken of in the statute did not exist then the conclusion reached by the tribunal will be a nullity.
Such preliminary questions can involve fact, law or discretion.
(2) The ambit of the preliminary question
The crucial point is therefore the ambit of the preliminary or collateral question.
The nature of this dilemma can best be described as follows.
Let us revert to the example used before of a tribunal having power to decide  whether a furnished tenancy exists.
The existence of a furnished tenancy may be expressed as follows.
f (a, b, c, d…n) = furnished tenancy.
Do not be alarmed by the equation.
Its form is merely a useful shorthand.
The elements within the bracket constitute the furnished tenancy; or, conversely, the term furnished tenancy is a shorthand description of the presence of those elements.
Thus, here a would represent the need for time certain in a lease, b the intent of the parties, c the fixtures and fittings required to render the tenancy furnished.
These factors can be law, fact, mixed fact and law or discretion.
The letter f is simply a shorthand for indicating that a furnished tenancy will be determined by the elements within the bracket.
Moreover, the above picture is a simplified one.
The position will often be more complex.
It is very common for a statute to say if X 1 , X 2 , X 3 exist the tribunal may or shall do Y. X 2 and X 3 would, like X 1 , be shorthand descriptions presuming the existence of elements within the bracket.
What the preliminary or collateral fact doctrine seeks to do is to distinguish those elements within the bracket which can be regarded as conditioning the power of the tribunal to go on and consider the merits from the merits themselves.
The word merits requires further explanation.
As used within the collateral fact doctrine this does not and never has meant only what I have termed the Y question, the question of what is, in fact, a fair rent given the existence of a furnished tenancy.
Courts which have employed the doctrine have accepted that there can be matters on the X level which are not jurisdictional and the term merits includes these items.
The fundamental problem faced by the preliminary fact doctrine is that in an everyday sense all the elements relating to X, or, to X 1 , X 2 , X 3 , could be said to condition jurisdiction.
The enabling statute always, explicitly or implicitly, states,if X 1 , X 2 , X 3 exist you may or shall do Y. Yet, if X 1 , X 2 , and X 3 , and all the elements constituting them, were always held to be jurisdictional in a legal sense, the dividing line between review and appeal would be emasculated: the tribunal would have power to give only the right answer, this meaning the answer which accords with the view of the reviewing court.
Diplock L.J.
attempts to solve this conundrum by drawing the following distinction: a misconstruction of the enabling statute describing the kind of case into which the tribunal is meant to inquire will go to jurisdiction, but misconstruing a statutory description of the situation that the tribunal has to determine will, at most, be an error within jurisdiction.
The problem is that this line is impossible to draw with any certainty or accuracy, because the definition of kind or type is inevitably comprised of descriptions within the statute of the situation which the tribunal has to determine.
The former represents the sum, the latter the parts.
This is simply demonstrated.
If one was asked to produce a summary of the kind of case into which the tribunal was intended to inquire one would do so by looking at the situations which the tribunal has to determine which are  mentioned in the statute.
These situations are composed of the statutory terms in the enabling legislation.
Thus in a case such as Anisminic one would say, inter alia, that if there is property in Egypt, which belongs to a British national or successor in title at the relevant dates, which has been seized, the FCC shall award compensation.
The kind of case is comprised of the situations described in the statute which the tribunal has to determine.
One can make the distinction between kind or type on the one hand, and truth or detail or situation on the other, and one can apportion cases to one category or another.
However, not only is there no predictability as to how a case will be categorised, there is also no ex post rationality that can be achieved by juxtaposing a series of cases and asking why one case went one way and another was decided differently.
2.
Limited Review
With these difficulties in mind let us approach a second theory of review put forward by Gordon.
Again, for didactic ease, the argument is best broken down into its component parts.
(1) Relative rather than absolute facts
If a tribunal is given jurisdiction over a certain topic the question is whether the facts relating to that topic exist in the opinion of the tribunal.
Thus, if a tribunal is given jurisdiction over assault the question is whether an assault exists in the opinion of that tribunal.
Any tribunal might err in a finding that it makes: no tribunal is infallible.
But so long as the tribunal decides the question assigned to it by the law, its relative opinion will bind, subject to appeal.
Jurisdiction must involve the power to make a wrong as well as a correct decision.
(2) The limits
There must be a limit to a tribunal's jurisdiction, but that limit is determined not by the truth or falsehood of its findings but by their scope  or nature.
Provided that the charge is laid in the correct form, that is sufficient.
Thus, jurisdiction is determined at the commencement not at the conclusion of the inquiry.
Gordon is scathing of the collateral fact doctrine for three reasons.
First, every Act of Parliament, in effect, says that if a certain state of facts exists the tribunal may do a certain thing; those facts are always for the relative decision of the tribunal.
Secondly, it is unrealistic to divide the matters which a tribunal has to decide into preliminary and essential: all elements within the statement, ‘if X,’ in some way condition the jurisdiction to proceed to do Y. Thirdly, it is impossible to reconcile the cases which have used the collateral fact doctrine.
No rhyme or reason can be found as to why the courts have called a fact preliminary in one case but not in another.
(3) Criticism of the Gordon theory
There are a number of difficulties with the Gordon theory.
It may, for example, be hard to decide when an inquiry commences, particularly when it is the less formal variety of administrative action which is in question.
It may also be that the limited review which the theory allows is unacceptable on policy grounds.
The policy issues will be discussed in detail later.
For the present, I would like to focus attention on the most crucial part of the theory, the distinction between scope and truth.
For Gordon it is fallacious to say that if a tribunal blunders in its estimation of the factors involved in a subject-matter properly before it and thereby misconceives the questions that it should consider, that it thereby exceeds its jurisdiction.
The subject-matter of the tribunal's inquiry may involve decisions on a number of issues, but each of these is not a subject-matter by itself.
Any error is only an error within jurisdiction.
This can best be understood by reverting to our previous example concerning a furnished tenancy.
It was argued then that the term furnished tenancy could be expressed as, f (a, b, c, d…n) = furnished tenancy.
The elements in the bracket represent the need for time certain, intent of the parties, amount of fixture and fittings, etc.
The premise underlying Gordon's argument is that scope or subject-matter means simply the assertion of the existence of a furnished tenancy by the tribunal.
Any blunder concerning a, b, c, etc., would, at most, be an error within jurisdiction.
What Gordon seeks to do therefore is to avoid the pitfalls of the collateral fact doctrine by, in effect, erecting a brick wall between the words furnished tenancy and the bracket.
The court is not allowed to peer inside at the meanings assigned to those elements, except to find a non-jurisdictional error.
Does this work?
There is clearly an element of circularity in the argument in that it presumes that the subject-matter is properly before the tribunal, a presumption which can only be made if subject-matter is defined purely in terms of furnished tenancy itself.
Whether this assumption is properly made depends ultimately upon one's conception of meaning and on questionable premises concerning legislative intent.
The conception of meaning is raised in that the Gordon argument envisages a formal separation between the term furnished tenancy, which goes to scope, and the elements within the bracket which constitute it.
An error relating to scope will be jurisdictional and thus, if the wrong term is used instead of furnished tenancy, a court should intervene.
Mistakes concerning elements within the bracket are however regarded differently, being non-jurisdictional at most.
Since however the words furnished tenancy are only a shorthand description of the presence of the elements, factual and legal, within the bracket, to regard an error relating to these words as jurisdictional, but mistakes concerning a, b, c or d as not, appears devoid of sense.
Gordon might well reply in two different ways.
First, he could argue that because opinions are relative not absolute, therefore the equation drawn between the term furnished tenancy and the elements within the bracket is flawed.
This proves too much.
People may well disagree as to whether, for example, an assault has in fact occurred.
But to argue from this that we can divorce the term furnished tenancy or assault from the elements within the bracket is a non sequitur.
It would mean accepting that an assault could exist without any of the elements which comprise that term; no one would, for example, have to be placed in fear for their bodily safety.
One cannot, in other words, argue from the premise that people may disagree as to whether a person was in fact placed in fear for their bodily safety, to the conclusion that a decision-maker can have  untrammelled power to decide whether such an apprehension is indeed a constituent part of the offence at all.
To do so would have quite fundamental consequences for the way in which we use language.
The words furnished tenancy would be empty vessels into which anything could be poured.
The formal incantation of such words would suffice for the tribunal to remain within the scope of its authority.
They could be applied to anything regardless of whether it was an Oxford College, or for that matter an oak tree or my dog.
A second argument which Gordon might use would be to say that the content of the bracket constituting the term furnished tenancy or employee or assault should, itself, be for the relative opinion of the tribunal.
This goes one stage further than the contention considered above.
The argument is flawed in two respects.
One is that it is doubtful in the extreme whether one can assume that the legislature always intended the tribunal to be the arbiter as to what the contents of the bracket ought to be.
This, of course, could happen in a particular area.
There is nothing to prevent the legislature preferring a tribunal's interpretation of the term, for example, employee, to that of the reviewing court.
Greater recognition of this  would be valuable.
The argument postulated above is, however, dependent upon showing not just that this may happen, but that it must happen.
There is no reason why this should be so.
But even if it were the case, the formal separation of the term furnished tenancy from the contents of the bracket would still be unwarranted.
Imagine that the content of such a term is assigned to the tribunal.
Once the tribunal has decided that the bracket should contain certain elements, then everything said earlier would still apply.
If the tribunal had, for example, decided that it should be comprised of, inter alia , the need for certain fixtures and fittings, and then later ignored this but still invoked the phrase furnished tenancy, all the objections expressed to the separation of the sum from the parts would still apply.
The only way out of this conundrum would be to argue, not only that the contents of the bracket are for the tribunal, but that it can alter these at will, and put any other contents in their place at any time.
We are however in danger of losing all touch with reality by postulating such a scenario.
3.
Extensive Review
(1) Preliminary questions and substance
A theory of extensive review has been advanced by Gould.
The argument is as follows.
Any tribunal will have two questions which it has to answer.
First, it will have a preliminary question to decide which is whether the question it is asked to answer is a question it is empowered to answer.
This cannot be decided finally by the tribunal itself.
A decision that jurisdiction exists is always a logically necessary precondition to the exercise of jurisdiction: because it is logically prior to the exercise of jurisdiction, it cannot in itself be part of the exercise of jurisdiction.
It is not therefore a question on which the tribunal may go right or wrong.
Secondly, the substance of the matter or the merits will be for the tribunal itself.
Using our terminology, that would mean the remainder of the ‘if X’ section as well as the consideration of the Y question.
Thus far, Gould has provided a restatement of the collateral or preliminary fact doctrine.
The contribution made by his analysis is that he seeks to provide a logical answer to the question which had previously been unsolved: what matters are collateral or preliminary?
(2) The content of the preliminary question
The factors which come within the first category are those which must exist independently of the substance to be decided.
These factors are given: their meaning cannot be altered by the tribunal itself.
It is not that  they are facts in the absolute.
Gould, like Gordon, agrees that they are relative.
However, they are for the relative opinion of the reviewing courts, not the tribunal.
But what are these factors?
They are all legal rules and concepts because such rules must have a given meaning which is established by the courts.
A coherent theory of jurisdiction is produced.
The basis for judicial intervention becomes clear and worrisome problems of jurisdictional versus non jurisdictional errors of law are left behind.
All legal terms within our bracket would go to jurisdiction.
(3) Criticisms of the Gould theory
The key to the theory is obviously the cogency of the argument that all issues of law are ‘given,’ to be determined by the courts.
Why is this so?
Three reasons can be extracted.
(a) Parliamentary intent
Legal issues are ‘given’ Gould argues because Parliament intends them to be decided by the ordinary courts.
This argument could be regarded as a rebuttable presumption, but then the inexorable logic of the theory breaks down; it could not be said that legal rules were always to be determined by the ordinary courts.
The argument must therefore be based upon an irrebuttable presumption as to parliamentary intent.
Is there warrant for this in constitutional theory or judicial practice?
Constitutional theory would indicate the opposite conclusion.
Parliament is sovereign and in theory it can give the task of determining the legal meaning of whatsoever it chooses to whomsoever it likes.
It manifests an explicit intent to do so when it places a privative clause in a statute empowering a tribunal.
The courts, it is true, will interpret these clauses and have construed them to mean that jurisdictional errors are not protected.
It is equally true that Lord Diplock has stated that the normal presumption is that Parliament intends questions of law to be decided by the courts, but his Lordship did not state that this was an irrebuttable presumption.
If constitutional theory does not provide positive support for the Gould thesis, what of judicial practice?
It could be argued that Gould's irrebuttable presumption finds its support in the fact that the judiciary has arrogated to itself the ultimate decision on all questions of law.
However the facts are that the courts have not for the last 300 years recognised, nor have they acted upon, a logic which renders all questions of law jurisdictional.
Quite the contrary, degrees of review may have differed over time but it is indisputable that the judiciary accepted that non-jurisdictional  errors of law could exist.
A number of courts gave substantial latitude to the decision-maker.
The attitudes of the courts have altered, becoming more activist in recent years thereby demonstrating an increased desire to be the determinants of legal questions; but to build an irrebuttable presumption upon less than 25 years highly equivocal judicial practice is not meaningful.
As noted above, there is some indication of the development of a rebuttable presumption that all questions of law should be for the ordinary courts.
The authority supporting this view will be examined below.
Whether that view should be sustained will however be dependent upon a value judgment as to whose opinion on the meaning of a term should be preferred.
It is not to be derived from an allegedly logical a priori argument that all legal questions are ‘given.’
(b) The impossibility argument
It would not be possible to talk of error of law at all unless such elements did have a ‘given’ meaning because, says Gould, such language implies a departure from a criterion laid down by the courts.
This is to confuse cause and effect.
When the legal meaning of a term is given to, or arrogated by the courts, then of course the phrase error of law implies a deviation from that standard.
It cannot provide the reason why all matters of law should have an interpretation provided by the ordinary courts.
If the interpretation of the point is not given to the ordinary courts then the error will not be an error of law at all; the criterion laid down by the tribunal will be the accepted standard.
The possibility of the latter occurring is neither absurd nor contrary to the rule of law.
Many legal terms could have one of a number of possible meanings, each of which is reasonable.
Words or phrases such as‘furnished tenancy,’‘successor in title,’‘course of employment,’‘trade dispute,’‘boat’ and ‘resources,’all words appearing in various statutes, are clearly open to a spectrum of possible meanings, a number of which may be reasonable.
The statement that the tribunal has made an ‘error of law’ means no more or less than that the construction placed upon the term by the court is preferred to that of the tribunal.
It would not be absurd, nor contrary to the rule of law, for Parliament to prefer the precise construction adopted by the tribunal to that given by the courts.
Furthermore, it is quite possible to maintain control in such situations without the judiciary substituting their view for that of the tribunal.
This point will be returned to.
(c) The uniformity argument
A third argument which has been put is as follows.
It is only by giving the legal meaning of a term to the courts that uniformity can be achieved, as opposed to a number of inferior bodies giving diverse interpretations of the same term.
The limits of this argument should be noted.
It will not apply to tribunals which have an internal hierarchy, the top of which can impose a uniform meaning, nor will it necessarily apply where there is only one tribunal in an area.
The need for uniformity is greatest where there are a number of parallel tribunals deciding the same Point.
Uniformity should be achieved by providing an appeal rather than by distorting review to become appeal.
4.
Want v. Excess: a Separate Theory?
Anyone who has read a selection of cases concerned with jurisdiction will have come across the distinction drawn between want of jurisdiction and excess of jurisdiction.
The precise meaning attached to these terms has varied depending upon the setting in which they were used.
Properly understood these terms do not describe a theory of review in themselves.
Rather, they express the result arrived at by one of the approaches considered above.
To understand why this is so we need to look more closely at the ways in which they have been used.
The decision of the House of Lords in Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission, the facts of which are set out below, can be used by way of example.
Lord Reid drew a distinction between jurisdiction in a narrow sense, meaning entitlement to enter upon the inquiry, and jurisdiction in a broader sense.
The latter covered a case where a tribunal is entitled to enter upon the inquiry but in the course of its investigation it does something which takes it outside of its powers and renders its decision a nullity.
The catalogue of errors which can produce this effect is broad, encompassing taking account of irrelevant considerations, failing to take account of relevant considerations, acting for improper purposes, asking itself the wrong question, and acting in breach of natural justice.
Thus the F.C.C. was held to have surmounted the first hurdle of entitlement to enter the inquiry, but fell at the second because it had misconstrued the meaning of successor in title.
It had asked itself the wrong question when interpreting one of the ‘X’ questions in the empowering statute.
Lord Reid's interpretation of want and excess of jurisdiction is in fact reflective of the theory of extensive review considered above.
‘Asking the wrong question’ or ‘irrelevancy’tell one that an error has been made, but they do not tell one whether the error is jurisdictional.
The implicit  assumption as to why this should be so is that questions of law are for the ordinary courts.
Hence the tribunal must give what the reviewing court regards as the correct meaning to the statutory terms, before the tribunal can be properly within the sphere of its jurisdiction; mistakes as to the meaning of these terms become jurisdictional errors.
Concepts such as‘asking the wrong question’ then simply function as the vehicle through which the court can substitute its views on the meaning of such phrases for that of the tribunal.
The premise behind regarding both want and excess as jurisdictional defects, and the breadth of meaning given to excess, are therefore implicitly based upon a Gould type theory.
5.
The Distinction between Law and Fact
The case law on judicial review provides little in the way of guidance on the question of whether a certain issue is one of law or fact.
The reasons for this are not hard to find.
First, as we shall see the judicial attitude towards the scope of review was, until recently, premised upon either the collateral fact doctrine or the theory of limited review.
Neither of these approaches necessitate the drawing of precise lines between legal and factual questions.
Both theories apply equally to issues of law and fact.
Thus, provided that the court categorises the issue as a collateral question it will substitute judgment on the point, whether that be one of fact or law.
It may well be the case that the courts feel less inclined to intervene in relation to matters which are purely factual, but the juridical basis of intervention was never premised upon the need to distinguish between law and fact.
Provided that the court felt that the issue was collateral, then intervention was justified.
A second and related reason why there is little discussion of the law/fact distinction is because the characteristic type of question which is the subject-matter of jurisdictional disputes is the construction or interpretation of one of the constituent elements of the ‘if X’ question.
The cases are commonly concerned with the interpretation and application of terms such as boat, resources, employee, successor in title, furnished tenancy, structural alteration, and the like.
As we shall see, the decision whether to categorise such questions as ones of law or fact is a matter on which opinion, both judicial and academic, differs.
More recent developments do however render it necessary to consider the law/fact dichotomy.
If the theory which states that all errors of law are jurisdictional really does gain general acceptance then the distinction between law and fact will be vital.
How is the line between law and fact to  be drawn for these purposes?
Much of the literature on this topic has been generated by cases concerned with appeal and not review.
Appeal will often only be allowed on questions of law, and not on questions of fact.
The case law upon this point has already been examined and should be referred to for the purposes of the discussion which follows.
A useful starting point is to realise that there are three themes which run through the literature upon the law/fact distinction, which are often not distinguished.
The first is that there may well be disagreement as to whether, on analytical grounds, a question should be deemed to be one of law or fact.
Thus both the case law and the academic commentary displays considerable diversity of opinion on whether, for example, the application of statutory terms to facts always involves a question of law or not.
Should the meaning to be ascribed to a statutory term such as employee, trade, boat or successor in title always be regarded, in analytical terms, as a question of law?
On analytical grounds the answer is probably in the affirmative.
Secondly, it is however quite clear that the courts have not always adopted this approach.
The labels law and fact have been attached depending upon whether the courts wish to intervene or not.
They have not therefore always reached their conclusion on analytical grounds; often these conclusions are expressive of a pragmatic desire not to intervene in a particular case.
Thirdly, in deciding which label to attach the courts have often been acting upon questionable assumptions as to the conclusions which follow from the attachment of one label or the other.
Thus some courts have reasoned on the hypothesis that if an issue is deemed to be one of law then this must inevitably involve substitution of judgment on their part.
Conversely where a statutory term is open to a spectrum of reasonable interpretations then it must be a question of fact.
This conclusion is controversial; a legal issue does not cease to be such simply because the term in question is open to a range of possible meanings.
The effect of the general adoption of the thesis that all errors of law are jurisdictional will therefore be crucially dependent upon which approach the courts adopt.
If they pursue a rigid analytical approach then it is likely to result in many, if not all, of the constituent elements which comprise the ‘if X’ question being labelled as questions of law.
If, in addition, the judiciary then substitute their opinion as to the precise meaning that each of these terms should bear for that of the initial decision-maker, the result will be a very extensive form of review.
This is not the only possible approach for the courts to adopt.
They could interpret the word law in a more pragmatic or policy oriented sense.
This could manifest itself in two ways.
The application of certain statutory terms might be deemed questions of fact.
Or the courts could call the application of a statutory term a question of law, but accept that it does not have to have only one meaning.
Provided that the authority adopts a meaning which is reasonable or has a rational basis the courts could accept that interpretation, even if it did not accord with the precise meaning which they would have ascribed.
We will return to this matter after considering the case law on the scope of review.
6.
Conclusion
What conclusions can be drawn from all this apart from the obvious one that simple questions do not always have straightforward answers?
Two points should be emphasised.
The first is that the line between scope and truth or detail is not capable of furnishing a satisfactory guide as to what should, and what should not, be regarded as jurisdictional.
The second point is equally important.
What the ‘correct’ line should be between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error is not self-defining.
It is not capable of being answered by linguistic or textual analysis of the statute alone however assiduously that is performed.
The critical question, the answer to which underlies any statement concerning jurisdictional limits, is whose relative opinion on which matters should be held to be authoritative?
All of the theories have a view upon this although it is often not openly expressed.
The answer to this decisive question resides not in a logic which compels, for example, all questions of law always to be for the courts or the tribunal.
Such logic is flawed.
A response must ultimately be based upon a value judgment, the precise content of which will not necessarily always be the same.
My own views as to the proper limits of jurisdictional control will be spelt out after a consideration of the case law.
SECTION 3.
CASE LAW HISTORY
The present attitude of the courts towards judicial review cannot be adequately understood unless some idea is conveyed of eighteenth and nineteenth century case law.
There are two reasons for this.
First, it demonstrates the continuity of approach in terms of the concepts being used: much of the language and many of the ideas utilised in modern cases stem directly from such nineteenth century antecedents.
Secondly, it shows the diversity of approach taken by the courts.
While, as stated, some of the concepts used now have their origins in the nineteenth century and earlier, there were nevertheless different views taken of how far the courts ought to be reviewing tribunals and other inferior bodies.
This debate conducted in the case law is instructive when viewing the present position of the courts.
A division will be made between those authorities advocating  limited and those advocating more extensive review.
What follows does not pretend to be an exhaustive summary.
The myriad of cast law precludes this.
It is intended to convey an impression of the main themes at work.
1.
Limited Intervention
A number of leading authorities support only limited review.
To revert to our example of the equation, they are saying that if the subject-matter lies within the tribunal's jurisdiction, the factors within the bracket constituting that subject-matter will not be reassessed.
In R. v. Bolton magistrates having found that the plaintiff had occupied a parish house as a pauper and that a formal notice to quit had been served on him, directed constables to enforce the notice.
The applicant sought certiorari.
He wished to be able to show by affidavit evidence that he had not occupied the house qua pauper but had paid rates and carried out repairs, and that he had not therefore been chargeable on the parish during the period of his occupation; the magistrate could not give himself jurisdiction by his own affirmation of it.
Lord Denman C.J. made the following distinction.
Where the charge laid before the magistrate did not constitute the offence over which the statute gave him jurisdiction, affidavit evidence could be introduced.
So too could it where the charge was insufficient but had been misstated.
In both cases, extrinsic evidence could be introduced to show a want of jurisdiction.
However, where the charge had been well laid before the magistrate, on its face bringing itself within his jurisdiction, any error would be only an error within jurisdiction.
The question of jurisdiction depended not on the truth or falsehood of the charge but upon its nature and was determinable at the commencement not at the conclusion of the inquiry.
The limit of the inquiry must be whether the magistrates have jurisdiction, supposing the facts alleged in the information to be true.
The magistrates' return contained all that was needed to give them jurisdiction over the subject-matter: occupation of a parish house belonging to the hamlet and service of a notice to quit.
The application for certiorari was therefore rejected.
Examples of the same approach could be multiplied.
2.
Collateral or Preliminary Fact Cases
There were also a number of cases which advocated more extensive review through the mechanism, explicitly or implicitly, of the collateral fact  doctrine.
Certain facts were required to be proven to the satisfaction of the reviewing court before the magistrate or tribunal could go right or wrong.
An early example of this can be seen in Nichols v. Walker.
The plaintiff lived in Totteridge and was evaluated for the poor rates by the assessors for Hatfield.
In a trespass action the plaintiff's case was upheld.
Hatfield and Totteridge were separate places and the one could not levy rates for the other.
A number of similar cases concerned with the Poor Laws followed.
What had been implicit in the above cases was made explicit in Bunbury v. Fuller.
The plaintiff brought an action in debt against the defendant owner of the land, claiming the amount due as being for tithes.
The defendant had argued that part of the land was exempt from tithes but an assistant tithe commissioner had denied this; the defendant now asserted that the determination was an excess of jurisdiction.
Coleridge J. found for the defendant, his reasoning being as follows,
‘Now it is a general rule, that no court of limited jurisdiction can give itself jurisdiction by a wrong decision on a point collateral to the merits of the case upon which the limit to its jurisdiction depends; and however its decision may be final on all particulars, making up together that subject-matter which, if true, is within its jurisdiction, and, however necessary in many cases it may be for it to make a preliminary inquiry, whether some collateral matter be or be not within the limits, yet, upon this preliminary question, its decision must always be open to inquiry in the superior Court.’
The existence of land subject to a tithe was a point collateral to the decision of the assistant tithe commissioner.
A number of similar cases could be cited.
3.
Reconciliation?
How can the cases discussed above be reconciled?
One matter is clear.
Any reconciliation cannot be achieved upon the basis that some judges preferred more limited and some more extensive review.
The most popular  way to regard the cases is to say that both groups are equally valid and that differences turn on the legislative instrument.
In R. v. Commissioners for Special Purposes of Income Tax Lord Esher M.R. distinguished between two types of tribunal.
There were tribunals which had jurisdiction if a certain state of facts existed but not otherwise; it was not then for the inferior tribunal to determine conclusively upon the existence of such facts.
There could however be a tribunal which had jurisdiction to determine whether the preliminary state of facts existed; here it would be for the inferior tribunal to decide upon all the facts.
The reconciliation is, with respect, not so straightforward.
It is one of form rather than substance.
It is impossible by juxtaposing the legislative instruments in these cases to determine why one case should fall within one category rather than the other.
All statutes giving power in effect say if X exists, you may or shall do Y. The answer as to who is to determine X (and the factors constituting X) is dependent upon which theory of jurisdiction is accepted.
The two groups of cases discussed above reflect different answers to that question, and Lord Esher's analysis simply reiterates ex post that divergence; the analysis does not provide us with an ex ante tool with which to determine which group a case should fall into.
This is not to say that a statute might not assign the relative meaning of ‘if X,’ as between courts and tribunals, differently in diverse areas.
It is to say that whether it has done so cannot be determined by asking whether the statute requires a certain state of facts to exist before a decision is reached: all statutes always do this.
4.
The Current Case Law
(1) The Impact of Anisminic
The passing of the Victorian age, significant in so many spheres, brought no great change in this area; there is no magic in the divide between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries so far as the scope of judicial review is concerned.
There were still cases advocating only limited review.
These were the heirs of Brittain and Bolton.
There were also decisions which adopted a more interventionist attitude.
The collateral or preliminary fact doctrine was used as their mechanism.
These were the descendants of  Bunbury.
The nature of matters which would be characterised as collateral or preliminary was still difficult to determine and it was admitted that there could be errors of law within jurisdiction which, if they appeared on the face of the record, would be quashed.
The scope of review must now be seen in the light of the decision in Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission.
The plaintiff was an English company which owned property in Egypt prior to 1956.
In November 1956 the property was sequestrated by the Egyptian authorities and in April 1957 the sequestrator sold the property to TEDO, an Egyptian organisation.
Anisminic Ltd. put pressure on their customers not to buy ore from TEDO, as a result of which an agreement was reached in November 1957 whereby the plaintiff sold the mining business to TEDO for £500,000.
In February 1959 a treaty was made between the United Kingdom and the United Arab Republic which provided for the return of sequestrated property, except property sold between October 1956 and August 1958.
A sum of £27,500,000 was paid by the United Arab Republic in final settlement of claims to property which was not being returned.
Orders in Council were then passed setting out the conditions for participation in the fund.
The Foreign Compensation Commission (hereafter the F.C.C.) found that Anisminic Ltd. did not qualify.
The Foreign Compensation (Egypt)(Determination and Registration of Claims) Order 1962 stated in article 4(1) (b)(ii) that the applicant and his successor in title should be British nationals on October 31, 1956 and February 28, 1959.
The F.C.C. interpreted this to mean that they had to inquire whether there was a successor in title and, if so, whether he qualified under article 4(1) (b)(ii).
TEDO was a successor in title according to the F.C.C. and was not a British national at the relevant dates, therefore the plaintiff failed.
The plaintiff claimed that the nationality of the successor in title was irrelevant where the claimant was the original owner.
Anisminic Ltd. therefore sought a declaration that the determination was a nullity.
The House of Lords found for the plaintiffs.
Lord Reid stated that jurisdiction in a narrow sense meant only that the tribunal be entitled to enter upon the inquiry.
There were however a number of ways in which, having correctly begun the inquiry, the tribunal could do something which rendered its decision a nullity.
Misconstruction of the enabling statute so that the tribunal fails to deal with the question remitted to it, failure to take account of relevant considerations, and asking the wrong question were, said Lord Reid, examples of this.
The appellant's construction of successor in title was the correct one and the decision by the F.C.C. was a nullity.
Lord Reid's judgment significantly broadens the potential scope of review.
A court, if it wishes to interfere, can always characterise an alleged  error as having resulted from asking the wrong question, or having taken account of irrelevant considerations.
Two observations are warranted.
The first is a reiteration of a point made above.
‘Asking the wrong question’ or ‘irrelevancy’tells one that an error has been made but it does not tell one whether the error is jurisdictional.
The step from ‘asking the wrong question’ to the error being regarded as jurisdictional is only made by the assumption that any matter which is in any sense a ‘condition’to the exercise of jurisdiction becomes jurisdictional.
The premises which underpin the cogency of such an assumption have already been considered.
Applying such reasoning in its full rigour would reduce the division between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error to vanishing point.
To revert to our earlier terminology: given that all tribunals are delegated power in the form of if X 1 , X 2 , X 3 , you may or shall do Y, everything relating to X becomes potentially jurisdictional.
Where the enabling legislation is complex this means that a large number of matters must be ‘got right’ in the opinion of the reviewing court before the tribunal can go right or wrong.
The second point involves us in a difficulty.
Notwithstanding the broad potential for jurisdictional error, Lord Reid reaffirmed the continued existence of errors of law within jurisdiction.
For example, if the existence of successor in title had been relevant, the F.C.C.'s determination would, said Lord Reid, have been binding whether right or wrong.
This is difficult to understand.
Let us take an example.
On the actual facts of the case, the term ‘British national’ clearly was relevant.
Who is a British national is a complex issue involving questions of law and fact.
Does his Lordship mean that the court would not have inquired into any alleged misconstruction of that term?
This seems extremely unlikely.
Such a mistake could certainly come within Lord Reid's list of errors going to jurisdiction, and the cases cited by his Lordship and the other Law Lords support such a view.
If this is so, why would a misconstruction over the term successor in title, where that term is relevant, not also be a jurisdictional error?
Lord Pearce and Lord Wilberforce both reach their conclusions in similar ways.
The tribunal has a limited authority, the correlative of which is the power of the court, on review, to keep that tribunal within the area or field given to it.
It is for the court to determine the true construction of a statute delineating that area.
Lack of jurisdiction could arise in various ways, inter alia, absence of a condition precedent to the tribunal's jurisdiction, irrelevancy, and asking the wrong question.
Lord Pearson  agreed that if there had been an error it would have been jurisdictional but found no such mistake.
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest dissented.
His Lordship realised the implications of the majority judgments and pointed out that the Order bristled with words requiring statutory construction.
It could not be the case that any misconstruction of any of these terms would involve a jurisdictional error.
The decision of the House of Lords in Anisminic provides a broad armoury for any later court.
If a court wishes to categorise an error as jurisdictional it can do so by using the ‘wrong question’ or ‘irrelevant consideration’formula.
However, the courts possess considerable discretion as to whether to utilise this armoury.
If the court does not wish to intervene it can achieve this result by saying that there was no error at all, by characterising the error as one within jurisdiction, or by defining jurisdiction itself more narrowly than in Anisminic.
Two cases may be contrasted by way of example.
In R. v. Preston Supplementary Benefits Appeal Tribunal, ex p.
Moore, Moore had applied for supplementary benefits during the university vacation.
In working out Moore's resources for the purpose of calculating his benefit, the Commission took into account £1.90 per week which was the weekly equivalent of that part of the grant made to Moore as his vacation allowance.
Moore sought certiorari on the basis that resources in the legislation meant actual resources and that, as he had spent his grant, the sum should not have been subtracted.
Lord Denning M.R. found that the interpretation of the Supplementary Benefits Commission was correct.
He went on to enunciate the principles for review of the supplementary benefits system.
On the one hand, the legislation should not become a hunting ground for lawyers whereby the court, on review, would have to interpret every minute point of law.
On the other, like cases should be treated alike and there should be control over important points of principle.
Further, the court would interfere if the tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction.
Despite this last reference to excess of jurisdiction, it seems that Lord Denning M.R. is anxious to prevent every point of construction in the statute from becoming jurisdictional.
Lord Denning M.R.'s decision in Pearlman v. Keepers and Governors of Harrow School may be contrasted with this.
The question was whether the installation of central heating was ‘an improvement made by the execution of works amounting to a structural alteration….’ within the Housing Act 1974.
The county court said that it was not, this interpretation being opposite to that reached by a different county court.
The Court of Appeal said that there had been a jurisdictional error.
The Master of the Rolls held that the words in the statute should receive a uniform interpretation.
The error was an error of law.
The line between  such errors which went to jurisdiction and those within jurisdiction was a fine one, and the characterisation would often be dependent upon whether the court wished to intervene.
Distinctions between errors within and errors going to jurisdiction should be discarded; any error of law should be held to be jurisdictional if the case depended upon it.
Eveleigh L.J.
was more conventional in the form of his approach.
The meaning of the statutory term was a collateral matter within the principle in Bunbury v. Fuller.
Geoffrey Lane L.J.
dissented.
He also purported to apply the conventional collateral fact doctrine but reached a different conclusion from that of his brethren.
The error was at most an error within jurisdiction.
(2) The uncertainty of Racal
Despite the observations of the Master of the Rolls, it is too early yet to build a pyre on which to consign conventional doctrine to its timely or untimely end.
The courts continue to equivocate as to whether the traditional approach should be maintained.
Put more accurately, individual judges may be clear as to their preferences but those preferences do not always coincide.
The decision in Pearlman must now be seen in the light of Re Racal Communications Ltd.
The Director of Public Prosecutions had made an application to a judge in chambers under section 411 of the Companies Act 1948 in order to obtain books and papers relevant to showing that an offence in connection with the management of the company had taken place.
The application was refused, Vinelott J. holding that the alleged offence was not one in connection with the management of the company's affairs.
The D.P.P.
appealed and this appeal was allowed despite the express words of section 441(3) which provided that the decision of the judge in chambers should not be appealable.
Lord Denning M.R. circumvented section 441(3) by finding that the judge had misconstrued the words in section 411, had thereby made a jurisdictional error, and therefore, relying on Anisminic and Pearlman, the ‘no appeal’ clause was ineffective.
This decision was overturned by the House of Lords but the reasoning of their Lordships is not uniform.
Lord Diplock, with whom Lord Keith of Kinkel agreed, reasoned as follows.
The decision of the Court of Appeal overturning that of Vinelott J. could be seen as appeal or review.
It could not however be appeal since section 441(3) precluded appeal and such a limit was expressly authorised.
His Lordship then considered whether the  decision of the Court of Appeal could be justified as an exercise of review rather than appeal.
A tripartite distinction was drawn as to the scope of review.
First, administrative tribunals or authorities were subject to the full rigours of the Anisminic judgment: the parliamentary intent was presumed, subject to a clear contrary indication, to be that questions of law were to be decided by the courts; the distinction between errors within jurisdiction and errors going to jurisdiction was, for practical purposes, abolished, and any error of law would automatically result in the tribunal having asked itself the wrong question.
The resultant decision would be a nullity.
Secondly, inferior courts were however subject to a different test.
It would depend upon the construction of the statute whether Parliament intended questions of law to be left to an inferior court.
There was no presumption that it did not so intend.
Pearlman was wrong because in that case the county court did have the ability to determine conclusively interrelated questions of law and fact.
The third category for the purposes of review was the High Court.
These courts were not subject to judicial review at all which only applied to administrative authorities and inferior courts.
Appeal was the only corrective for a mistake by a High Court judge and that had been removed by statute.
The cogency of this distinction will be considered later.
Suffice it to say for now that the premises underlying Anisminic are made explicit, at least for those institutions within Lord Diplock's first category.
Lord Salmon, Lord Edmund-Davies and Lord Scarman reach the same conclusion as Lord Diplock on the effect of section 441(3).
Appeal was excluded.
No such uniformity exists in relation to review.
To put the matter more precisely, there is little support in the judgments either for Lord Diplock's tripartite standard of review, or for as extensive a review as his Lordship advocates for administrative institutions.
Lord Salmon confined himself to saying that Anisminic was of no relevance to the High Court: it was apposite only for tribunals, commissioners and inferior courts of law.
His Lordship drew no distinction as to the scope of review for inferior courts and administrative institutions.
Nor did Lord Salmon follow through the reasoning from Anisminic to reach the conclusions arrived at by Lord Diplock.
Lord Edmund-Davies similarly arrived at a narrower conclusion than Lord Diplock.
The reasoning of Lord Denning M.R. in Pearlman which had purported to destroy the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error was, said Lord Edmund-Davies, wrong.
The dissenting judgment of Geoffrey Lane L.J., which had applied the traditional collateral fact doctrine, was approved.
Nor did his Lordship draw any demarcation between administrative institutions and inferior courts for the purposes of review.
Lord Scarman disposed of the appeal succinctly.
The cases on ouster clauses and tribunals were irrelevant  to clauses excluding appeal from the High Court.
Judicial review had no place in relation to the High Court.
Nothing more was said about what the scope of review for administrative institutions and inferior courts actually was and no dichotomy was drawn between them.
(3) The uncertainty persists
Decisions since Racal have done little to establish a uniform judicial approach to the scope of review.
Three such approaches can be identified.
First, some decisions, notably that in the South East Asia Fire case, have persisted with the traditional collateral fact doctrine, rejecting arguments that the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error has been discarded.
A second approach is evident in O'Reilly v. Mackman.
The case was primarily concerned with the new procedure for remedies.
However in the course of giving the judgment, with which all their Lordships concurred, Lord Diplock stated once again that the result of the Anisminic decision was to render unnecessary the continued distinction between errors of law going to jurisdiction, and errors of law within jurisdiction.
Any mistake of law would mean that the authority had asked itself the wrong question, which would result in a jurisdictional error.
It is unclear whether his Lordship still believed that there should be a different standard of review for inferior courts and for other administrative institutions, but more recent authority has interpreted the combined effect of Anisminic and O'Reilly to mean that the same broad standard of review should, in principle, apply to both.
A third approach is evident in cases which accept in principle extensive review for error of law which flows from Anisminic and O'Reilly, but which then qualify it in varying ways.
Thus in ex p.
Tal Goff L.J., while accepting that the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error of law was obsolete, did not believe that the Anisminic principle should apply ‘with full force’ to every inferior court, and emphasised that the reviewing court should not intervene ‘merely because some error of law has been committed during an inquest.’
Similarly, in ex p.
Central Bank  of India Slade L.J., while accepting in principle the extensive review propounded by Lord Diplock in Racal, emphasised that Lord Diplock himself had only cast this as a presumption even in relation to administrative institutions.
The language of the statute in the Central Bank case led the court to rebut this presumption and to conclude that the Registrar of Companies could make certain binding decisions on issues of mixed fact and law.
There is little doubt that Anisminic and O'Reilly have provided the courts with the tools to transform review into appeal if they choose to do so.
That choice is what continues to divide the judiciary.
Whether we should discard the traditional framework, and whether review should become akin to appeal, will be considered below.
Before doing so, review for non-jurisdictional error of law and for errors of fact must be considered in more detail.
5.
Error of Law Within Jurisdiction
(1) History and scope
In addition to review for jurisdictional error, the courts have maintained control over errors of law within jurisdiction if they appear on the face of the record.
Indeed certiorari appears to have developed to control this very type of error.
Control over such errors declined during the latter half of the nineteenth century, and was only ‘rediscovered’ 100 years later.
This form of control could only be exercised if the defect existed on the face of the record.
The courts construed this broadly to include the documents which initiated the proceedings, the pleadings and the adjudication.
The reasons for the decision might also be held to be part of the record.
Statute has also played a part in broadening the ambit of the record.
The Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958, s.12 initiated a right to reasoned decisions which were to be treated as part of the record, but only in the sphere covered by the Act.
(2) Does the concept still survive?
There is an increasing air of unreality when talking of errors of law within jurisdiction.
The revival of this head of review was greeted enthusiastically.
Whether it continues to survive is simply another way of asking whether the traditional collateral fact doctrine will continue to be used by the courts.
This question has just been considered.
Although the House of Lords in Anisminic affirmed the continued existence of non-jurisdictional errors of law, we have seen that certain other judges are in favour of pushing the Anisminic reasoning to its limit and discarding the dichotomy.
Given the flexibility of concepts such as‘asking the wrong question’ a court can always categorise an error as jurisdictional if it wishes to intervene.
6.
Statutory Review
A number of statutes contain provisions allowing review only within a limited period, commonly being six weeks.
The effect of the six weeks time limit will be considered within the general context of exclusion of remedies.
What falls to be considered now is the effect of a specific statutory formula which allows challenge within the six week period on certain grounds.
The statute will normally establish two grounds of review.
These are that the order impugned is not within the powers of the Act or that any requirement of the Act has not been complied with.
If the latter is the ground of attack, there is the additional requirement that the interests of the applicant have been substantially prejudiced.
Construction of these clauses has produced considerable differences in judicial opinion.
Part of the difficulty lies in the developments which have taken place in the ordinary common law of judicial review.
If such statutory clauses were ever intended to reflect the common law (and this is not clear), the dichotomy drawn within them between the two heads of review makes little sense in light of the expansion of non-statutory review.
Moreover, the very existence of the two heads of control has, in itself, exacerbated the confusion as judges strive to find a function for each of the terms.
This diversity of view is manifested in Smith v. East Elloe Rural District Council in which their Lordships adopted a variety of views as to the meaning of ‘not within the powers of this Act.’
Lord Reid held that bad faith and unreasonableness were outside the statute completely and therefore could be impugned even after six weeks.
A similar result was reached by Lord Somervell who was of the opinion that fraud did not go  to jurisdiction and could be challenged at any time.
The majority decided that challenge for fraud was precluded after six weeks.
Lord Morton went on to construe the statutory terms extremely narrowly as permitting challenge only if express statutory requirements were violated.
The sensible interpretation would be to read the phrase ‘not within the powers of this Act’ so as to include any of the traditional heads of ultra vires and there is authority for this position.
While the statutory grounds of attack do not specifically mention error of law on the face of the record, later courts have given the formula a broad interpretation.
It has been held to encompass not only traditional forms of jurisdictional error but also no evidence, and any error of law.
The puzzles of East Elloe well therefore probably be quietly forgotten.
Despite this broad formulation, the courts still continue to use the second limb of the formula, that a requirement of the Act has not been complied with.
It may well be best, as Wade suggests, that this limb be confined to the challenge of directory provisions, allowing a court to quash an order if non-compliance with such provisions has caused substantial prejudice to the applicant.
7.
Review of Evidence
(1) Conceptual obstacles
It is necessary to keep distinct two issues which can arise under the general rubric of review over findings of fact.
The first is simply a recapitulation of what we have already discussed.
As we have seen the courts have considerable choice as to whether to categorise an issue as one of law or fact.
Jurisdictional questions can be either.
The current trend is to regard many issues of statutory interpretation as questions of law, or mixed law and fact.
The courts will ascribe what they conceive to be the correct meaning to that term.
However even if the court calls one of the ‘if X’ conditions a question of fact, it will substitute its view as to the meaning of that term if it conceives the fact to be jurisdictional.
In this sense all that review over findings of fact means is that the court will decide what meaning the particular statutory provision should bear.
For example, if a court decides that the meaning of the word ‘repair’ is a question of fact, but that it is, in the context of the particular legislation, a jurisdictional  fact, the court will then lay down the interpretation that should be given to such a term.
The second issue is the one which concerns us here.
This is the extent to which the courts will inquire whether the meaning of a term is satisfied by the evidence before the decision-maker.
The answer to this second question is integrally related to the first.
If the courts regard the allegation as relating to a statutory condition which is itself jurisdictional then they will receive affidavit evidence to show that the condition is not met.
Findings will be reassessed on these grounds but not otherwise.
An understanding of this renders it much easier to comprehend the no evidence doctrine and the reasons for the exceptions made to it in more recent years.
The no evidence doctrine was commonly taken to mean that a decision will not be regarded as outside of the jurisdiction of the decision-maker even if he reached his decision on no evidence.
The leading authority for this proposition has always been R. v. Nat Bell Liquors Ltd.
However it is clear from a reading of the decision that the no evidence principle was itself simply a natural correlative of the limited theory of jurisdiction which was accepted by Lord Sumner.
His Lordship reached the conclusion that no evidence was not a jurisdictional defect because he expressly adopted the limited concept of review adumbrated above.
Bolton, Brittain and Mahony formed the cornerstone of his Lordship's reasoning.
Under the commencement theory of jurisdiction propounded in those cases the reviewing court would not reassess whether the elements within the bracket constituting the statutory conditions were met or not.
The conclusion that no evidence was not a jurisdictional defect was simply a natural result of this reasoning.
Thus, a conviction, regular on its face, was conclusive of all the facts stated in it, including those necessary to give the justices jurisdiction.
On this hypothesis there was clearly no place for review of findings of fact, in the sense of determining whether the evidence justified the application of a statutory term to particular facts.
This too was for the magistrates.
What is more surprising is that the Nat Bell case has exercised such a mesmeric hold over our jurisprudence even though the premises leading to the conclusion have been rejected.
Put simply, once we move away from the commencement theory of jurisdiction then the rationale for saying that absence of evidence does not constitute a jurisdictional defect simply disappears.
Once the courts moved towards applying the collateral fact doctrine, and to that extent redetermining the constituent elements of certain of the conditions of jurisdiction, it became natural also to consider whether the evidence supported the existence of those collateral facts.
Thus in Eshugbayi Eleko v.  Government of Nigeria, Lord Atkin treated the Governor of Nigeria's power to deport E as being dependent upon certain collateral facts, including whether E was a native chief or not.
Evidence was therefore admitted and examined to determine whether the collateral facts existed in the actual case.
What can be concluded from the discussion thus far is that the approach to findings of evidence is integrally related to the view of jurisdiction adopted.
The ratio of Nat Bell, that no evidence does not constitute a jurisdictional error, was simply the natural consequence of a conception of jurisdiction under which the courts would not reassess the meaning ascribed to the constituent elements of jurisdiction.
Not only would the courts leave the meaning of the term to the magistrates; they would also accept the magistrates' view as to whether the evidence justified applying that term to the case.
However once the courts began to be willing to reassess the constituent elements of jurisdiction, under the collateral fact doctrine, then it was natural also to require some proof that the condition was indeed fulfilled on the facts of the particular case.
How much proof should be required will be examined in the next section.
What we have witnessed in recent years is a subtle change whereby the courts, often without alluding to the authorities mentioned, have reviewed decisions to test their evidentiary basis.
The most interesting development pointing in this general direction is to be found in the field of statutory as opposed to common law review.
In Ashbridge Investments Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Governments the Minister had power to modify a clearance order if he was of the opinion that land should not have been included in it.
Lord Denning M.R. stated that the court could intervene if the Minister acted on no evidence, or reached a decision to which on the evidence he could not reasonably have come, equating the case to one where a court interfered with a decision of a tribunal which had erred in law.
The precise status of this case, and those which have followed it, is unclear.
They are concerned with a statutory form of control rather than the common law, and did not mention the House of Lords' decisions which are to the contrary.
A related development is to be seen in Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council.
In that case the Secretary of State was empowered to give directions if he was satisfied that the local education authority was acting unreasonably.
Lord Wilberforce stated that,
‘If a judgment requires, before it can be made, the existence of some facts then, although the evaluation of those facts is for the  Secretary of State alone, the court must inquire whether those facts exist, and have been taken into account, whether the judgment has been made upon a proper self-direction as to those facts, whether the judgment has not been made upon other facts which ought not to have been taken into account.
If those requirements are not met, then the exercise of judgment, however bona fide it may be, becomes capable of challenge.’
These developments are not surprising.
The conceptual basis underlying the Nat Bell decision has been removed as the courts have rejected the limited theory of jurisdiction, and have moved through the collateral fact doctrine towards the theory of extensive review.
Even if the courts do not wholly embrace the theory of extensive review, the way is now open for review of the evidence supporting the decision-maker's findings.
The conceptual block of the Nat Bell case is circumvented by regarding a component of the X question as jurisdictional.
Evidence can thereby be admitted to prove or disprove the existence of the element which has been deemed jurisdictional.
How much evidence should be required will be discussed shortly.
In this sense the increase in judicial review over whether the evidence warrants the application of a certain statutory condition is itself a correlative of the widening of the concept of jurisdiction.
Review over findings of fact has also increased as the judiciary have increased their control over open-textured and subjective conditions of jurisdiction.
If the X question states that a ‘Minister may intervene if he thinks it necessary or desirable,’ then the only way in which the courts can maintain control is to require the minister to provide some evidence to justify his action.
In such cases there is no term, such as successor in title, or resources, which the courts can insist should bear a certain meaning.
All they can do is to ensure that the decision-maker did have some reasonable grounds for his action.
This necessarily leads the courts into reviewing the evidence on which the minister acted.
(2) The scope of review
We have already seen that when the courts deem a statutory term to be jurisdictional, whether it be a question of law or fact, they will substitute their view as to the meaning of the term for that of the decision-maker.
They will decide what the term employee, resources or successor in title should mean.
This approach has been criticised and an alternative will be considered below.
What we are, however, concerned with now is the standard of review which should apply to determine whether the meaning of that term is satisfied by the evidence before the decision-maker.
Given a certain meaning which the courts have ascribed to the term employee, how closely should they supervise the application of that term to the facts of a particular case?
The distinction between the two issues posed above is neatly demonstrated by R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p.
Khawaja.
The House of Lords considered certain provisions of the Immigration Act 1971.
One question which was raised was whether the term illegal entrant could cover a person who had obtained leave to enter by deception or fraud, as well as a person who had entered by clandestine means.
Their Lordships answered this question in the affirmative.
A second question was as to the standard of proof to be required of the immigration officer.
Given that a person could be an illegal entrant through deception, what standard of proof was to be applied when reviewing the immigration officer's decision that a person had entered by deception?
Their Lordships held that it was insufficient for the immigration officer to show that he had some reasonable grounds for his action.
The standard should be higher when a power to affect liberty was in issue.
An immigration officer would have to satisfy a civil standard of proof to a high degree of probability that the entrant had practised such deception.
The court would determine whether that standard of proof had been met.
While one can accept that a high standard of proof is apposite in cases affecting liberty it is very doubtful whether it should apply outside of this area.
The question as to the sufficiency of evidence will normally arise in one of two contexts.
A public body may be applying a statutory term which has been defined by the courts and the question is whether the facts justify the application.
Or it may be a situation in which the conditions of jurisdiction are open-textured or subjective, in the sense described above, and the courts wish to know whether there was evidence to justify the action taken.
In both instances the general test should be whether there was some reasonable or sufficient evidence to justify the action.
To require more runs the risk of the courts substituting their view for that of the authority.
Lord Wilberforce's statement in Tameside, that the decision-maker should properly direct himself to the facts, provides a good example of one aspect of factual review which would allow the courts great latitude for substituting their view for that of the decision-maker.
Moreover, a point to be considered later is particularly relevant here.
We shall see that decision-makers tend to reach decisions on the basis of bounded rationality.
They do not have and cannot have all the possibly relevant materials and evidence before them.
No decisions would ever be made if this were to be demanded.
While this may provide some justification for ensuring that the decision-maker indicates what was the factual basis for his action, we should be extremely wary of developing review of facts upon the premise that all such material could or should be considered.
(3) Conclusion
There is no doubt that we can fit a rule concerning evidentiary findings into our traditional terminology.
The lawyer's talisman, the implied condition, is wheeled out to perform its trusty service: a grant of power to a public body is subject to the implied condition that the findings it makes be supported by some evidence.
If they are not the determination is ultra vires.
The fabric of jurisdiction is infinitely flexible.
While we can thus remain within conventional discourse our very desire to review findings of evidence is indicative of the weakness of the jurisdictional straitjacket in which we operate.
The whole spirit of a no evidence, or reasonable evidence, doctrine is contrary to the split in the ‘if X’ question between those elements which are jurisdictional and those which are not.
SECTION 4.
WHAT SHOULD THE SCOPE OF REVIEW BE?
1.
The Existing Approaches
(1) The collateral fact doctrine
The collateral fact doctrine has two principal flaws.
The first, is the arbitrariness and uncertainty of its application.
The difficulty of distinguishing between the kind of case which a tribunal has to determine and the statutory description of the situation which the tribunal must decide is the root cause of the problem.
We cannot predict in advance the way in which a case will be decided, nor can we find any ex post rationality to explain why cases were categorised in different ways.
The second flaw is that the doctrine simply does not achieve its desired goal.
The object is to steer a middle course by maintaining control over administrative institutions while not making review the same as appeal, which would be the result if the judiciary substituted their views on every contested issue.
What the doctrine actually achieves is a middle way of a rather different type to that which may have originally been conceived.
The median is attained by total control over the topics dubbed collateral; the judiciary substitute their judgment on those aspects of the ‘if X’ question which are deemed jurisdictional.
No control is exercised over other issues, and the line betwixt the two is arbitrary in the sense described above.
(2) Limited review
The Gordon thesis is also beset by two difficulties.
The first is that it is analytically flawed in the sense considered above.
The second is that it  does not appear satisfactory on policy grounds.
While the spectre of the Albert Hall being deemed a furnished tenancy, like that of the vexatious litigant in the law of standing, haunts the annals of legal literature rather than the real world, we do nonetheless require more control than that allowed by Gordon's commencement theory.
It may be extremely difficult to discern when a decision-maker has ‘commenced’ his inquiry, and to prevent the courts from ever looking beyond the formal invocation of the finding ‘furnished tenancy’is too limited.
(3) Extensive review for errors of law
The Gould theory reaches a polar opposite conclusion to that advanced by Gordon, and, as we have seen, certain members of the judiciary appear in favour of extensive review.
It would, in a paradoxical way, be reassuring if we lived in a world of extremes.
If the modern educational system was administered by a Dickensian Squeers constantly flagellating discalced pupils, theory could be neatly shelved and a pragmatic response could be given to the perceived problem.
In the real world things are more complex.
Three comments on extensive review are warranted.
First, the attempt to suggest that this scope of review is logically demanded is not convincing.
There is no a priori reasoning process which indicates that the courts' view on the meaning of one of the ‘if X’ issues should necessarily and always be preferred to that of the agency.
The answer resides not in some logically compelled statement as to whose opinion should count, but in a normative judgment as to whose relative opinion on a particular matter we wish to adopt.
Secondly, there is a real danger that a valuable aspect of administrative autonomy will be eliminated.
The standard problem of judicial review arises over a contested interpretation given to one of the statutory terms which the tribunal has to interpret.
The tendency of the courts, and the thrust of Gould's argument, is to regard misconstruction of many of these terms as errors of law, the effect being that the court well substitute its view of that term for that of the tribunal.
Yet terms such as‘resources’, ‘employee,’ or ‘structural alteration’may be capable of having a spectrum of possible meanings depending upon the overall scope and policy of the legislation.
It is difficult to believe that the ordinary courts' particular interpretation of all of these terms will necessarily be better than that of the tribunal.
The latter is established partly because of the expertise it can develop, and this expertise is not related solely to fact finding.
Whether course of employment in a particular statute should include a tea break or the trip to work may be better decided by a tribunal staffed with a lawyer chairman and ‘wing’ members representing the interests of trade unionists and employers rather than the ordinary courts.
Thirdly, the problems outlined above would be mitigated if the courts were to interpret the term law in a more pragmatic or policy-oriented way, taking into account the desirability of interfering with the agency decision, and the relative abilities of the court and the agency for deciding the question in issue.
Such flexibility would be further enhanced if they were to accept that questions of law could have more than one possible answer.
Whether this path is taken by the courts remains to be seen.
One thing is however clear.
If the courts did give this construction to the term law they would be applying a very different thesis from that originally conceived by Gould.
As Beatson has stated, ‘a system that uses the pragmatic approach is not using the concept of error of law as an organizing principle’ as such, but rather as a facade behind which to weigh the relative competence of court and agency.
They would in fact be applying a test for review not dissimilar to the one about to be examined.
2.
Middle Way
(1) A rational basis test
If the above arguments possess cogency, how can control be achieved without review becoming like appeal and without allowing the tribunal to have unlimited power?
A way forward would be to adopt a test of reasonableness or rational basis.
The role of the court would be to establish the limits to the spectrum of meanings that a term could bear; the awesome visage of the Albert Hall would disappear.
Substitution of judgment would also be avoided because the tribunal would determine which precise meaning should be adopted.
The breadth of the spectrum would be dependent upon the type of tribunal and the content of the enabling legislation.
This approach has been used in the United States and Canada.
While by no means all cases have been decided in this way, the doctrine is nevertheless well established particularly in the United States.
The very demarcation between those types of cases where it has been and where it has not been utilised is, in itself, informative.
A seminal case illustrating the theory in operation is National Labour Relations Board v. Hearst Publications, Inc.
Hearst published a number of newspapers and had refused to bargain collectively with a union representing newsboys who distributed the papers on the streets.
The newspaper proprietors argued that the newsboys were not ‘employees’ within the relevant legislation; the Board claimed that they were.
Justice Rutledge delivered the opinion of the Supreme Court.
Hearst argued that the ordinary common law meaning of the term employee, in contra-distinction to independent contractor, should be used.
The Court disagreed.
The common law standard was itself subject to differing  interpretations in different States and, more important, even within any one particular State a person might be an independent contractor for the purposes of vicarious liability while being an employee for the purposes of unemployment compensation.
Justice Rutledge proceeded to examine the evil which the statute was designed to cure and decided that it encompassed people outside the traditional common law classification of an employee.
Clearly, the precise types of workers who could or should be termed ‘employees’ for the purpose of the statute was a matter on which opinion could differ.
There were ‘myriad forms of service relationship’ within the economy.
The Board's determination would, said the court, be accepted if it had warrant in the record and a reasonable basis in law.
Given the spectrum of possible interpretations to be accorded to the term employee, the Board's choice would be accepted provided that it was an interpretation which the reviewing court believed, in the light of the overall statutory objective, to be one which had a rational basis.
The court did not simply substitute its own view because Congress had assigned the task primarily to the agency which, because of its greater experience, placed it in a better position to resolve the matter than the Court.
Other cases have adopted the same approach.
It would however be misleading to say that the United States courts have always utilised the rational basis test.
As Davis has pointed out, the Supreme Court has in a number of decisions simply substituted judgment without reference to the reasonableness or rational basis test.
Some evidence of a similar development is apparent in the Canadian jurisprudence.
The decision of Reid J. in Re Hughes Boat Works Incorporated and United Automobile Etc.
Workers of America, Local 1620 provides a good example.
The applicant challenged a decision by the Ontario Labour Relations Board that the applicant was a purchaser of a business.
If he was he would be bound by a pre-existing collective agreement that had been made between the union and North Star Yachts Ltd.
The legislation contained a clause rendering the decision of the Board final and conclusive on the question of whether a business had been sold by one person to another.
There was also a no certiorari clause which applied to all decisions of the Board.
The applicant argued, not surprisingly, that the question as to whether he was a purchaser of the business was a collateral question, and that the privative clauses provided no bar to the court investigating such issues.
Reid J. reasoned as follows.
He accepted that the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional issues was difficult, if not impossible, to draw.
It would be more profitable to concentrate on deciding what factors should lead the courts to intervene in any particular case.
Reid J. referred to previous authority in the area of labour relations, and concluded that the court should only intervene if the Board's decision could not be rationally supported on a reasonable construction of the legislation.
The court should use ‘reasonableness’ rather than‘correctness’as the criterion of judicial intervention because the tribunal had acquired expertise and sensitivity to the needs of the particular area.
(2) Rational basis v. rightness
What has influenced the courts in choosing between the rational basis test and that of rightness or substitution of judgment?
Which test ought to be the standard for judicial review?
These are two of the central questions which require consideration.
Although separate, the questions are interrelated.
The United States courts normally do not articulate the reasons why they are using one approach rather than another.
Unspoken premises guide the judicial hand.
Nevertheless, as Davis points out, a number of factors have influenced the judicial choice.
The extent to which the court sympathises with the agency's result will be one factor tending towards use of the rational basis or reasonableness test.
Other considerations will include the type of agency under review and the nature of the invalidity alleged.
If, for example, the alleged error relates to the construction of a term with which the courts are familiar then this will tend towards substitution of judgment, whereas more specific or technical matters will normally lead to a greater degree of discretion being granted to the agency, the legal conclusion being expressed in the form of the rational basis test.
At this stage a cynic might well say that even if we adopted a United States type of approach the courts would simply manipulate the labels.
The label rational basis would simply be reflective of a conclusion already reached that the court does not wish to intervene.
A test of rightness would indicate the opposite conclusion.
How, our cynic might well ask, would this  differ from the present position?
The courts can express the same feeling by the creative choice as to whether a defect should be stamped jurisdictional or non-jurisdictional.
There is undoubtedly some truth in such observations.
However, like many cynical statements, the point can be overplayed.
The crux of the matter is that while one can accept the proposition that judicial labels often express a conclusion already reached, rather than dictate the result which should be arrived at, to infer that therefore the type of labels that we use are irrelevant is a non sequitur.
For example, the extensive theory of review holds that all errors of law are jurisdictional.
Intervention could be limited by defining an issue as one of fact and not law.
Yet, the very thesis that all questions of law should be for the ordinary courts itself fashions the result that the court believes to be correct.
Compare this to the labels used in the United States.
Obviously the courts can and will choose as between rational basis and rightness depending, inter alia, on whether they are in accord with the interpretation reached by the agency.
However, the labels used in the United States also react with and influence the result which the court believes to be correct.
The premise underlying them expresses an unwillingness to be drawn into any alleged dichotomy between jurisdictional and non jurisdictional fact.
The labels also tell us that the United States courts see nothing absurd in admitting the multiplicity of meanings that a statutory term can have, nor in accepting that the agency's choice as to the precise meaning should govern.
They also indicate that, despite this, the courts will often just substitute their own opinion.
The American approach will not offer some easy solution, let alone a panacea.
By avoiding the insoluble problems surrounding jurisdictional terminology it does however focus on the relevant issues directly: whose opinion on the existence and meaning of a statutory term should be accepted, that of the agency or that of the courts?
Once we can rid ourselves of the dual notions that some magic divides jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional questions and that all matters of law have one inexorably correct meaning which must always be supplied by the courts, we are in a position to make a reasoned choice.
This choice allows us to accord primacy to the authority's interpretation, while still preserving judicial control.
Given the diversity of tribunals, commissions, authorities, ministers and inquiries which constitute our administrative system, it would be surprising if we did not conclude that in some instances the rational basis test was the correct stance and in others a test of substitution of judgment.
Should the nature of the decision-maker be conclusive as to the scope of review that we should adopt?
Lord Diplock in the Racal case drew a distinction between the scope of review for tribunals and inferior courts, though not the one being advocated here.
The latter would be subject to less extensive review than would tribunals and other administrative institutions.
I would, with respect, oppose any such rigid dichotomy.
It is often fortuitous whether a new institution is called a ‘court’ or a ‘tribunal.’
The types of functions allocated between them may be equally haphazard.
Moreover, while it is possible to give undue weight to expertise, it is also possible to underrate its significance.
Many administrative institutions possess qualifications which render them just as capable of giving conclusive judgments on legal issues as are the inferior courts.
Whether the diversity depicted above is reflected in the presence of two tests, rational basis and rightness, or whether we should simply work through the former is largely a matter of semantics.
If we preserve both standards of review we then have to assign different subject-matter areas to each test.
If we work through the former alone the range of choice or the breadth of the spectrum will vary from area to area.
Not only will it alter but the spectrum might be reduced to one; a court could say that although hypothetically varying interpretations of a term are possible, they are convinced that their view is the correct one.
(3) Objections
(a) Certainty
One objection is that the proposed approach would produce uncertainty.
The objection based upon uncertainty can be raised in a number of different forms, and it is important to distinguish between them.
First, it might be argued that to adopt a rational basis/rightness approach would create more uncertainty than if we proceeded on the hypothesis that all errors of law are jurisdictional.
Uncertainty as used here relates to the difficulty which an applicant might have of predicting which test for review, rational basis or rightness, would be adopted in any particular case.
This objection can, in one sense, be conceded.
If the courts were to develop the idea that all errors of law are jurisdictional, defined the word law in a purely analytical way so that it embraced any, or almost any application of a statutory term and substituted judgment on the meaning of that term, then a prospective applicant would be clear that the courts would intervene using that standard.
But this is to say no more than that the presence of only one arbiter on the meaning of any of the conditions of jurisdiction produces more certainty than a division of responsibility.
The courts would decide all questions of law using that word in the sense described above.
Yet the price of certainty in this sense would be to reduce the competence of the initial decision-maker to a mere factfinder, to deny any weight to its opinion on the interpretation of the constituent parts of the X question, and to embroil the courts in the minutiae of all the elements which comprise the conditions of jurisdiction.
This is extremely difficult to justify either in terms of legislative intent, or in terms of the relative competence of the two institutions.
A second meaning of the term certainty relates to the probability that the court would uphold the finding of the initial decision-maker.
This, after all, is the question of most practical concern to the applicant.
In this respect the proposed test is, if anything, clearer than the two rivals.
It will be extremely difficult for even the most experienced adviser to predict whether the reviewing court will accept that the interpretation of a term adopted by the initial decision-maker was right, in the sense of what the reviewing court believes to be the correct interpretation.
Contrast this with the position under the proposed test.
Within those areas covered by the rational basis part of the test there would be greater certainty.
A criterion of reasonableness or rational basis is obviously a narrower standard of review.
Other things being equal, there is a greater chance that the original decision will be upheld as having a rational basis, even if the interpretation is not the precise one which the court itself would have chosen.
If objections based on uncertainty have any validity, then that word must be being used in a third sense.
It could mean that a claimant would be uncertain as to whether, on a rational basis test, an authority would apply the same meaning to a term that it had used previously, or whether it would adopt a different interpretation.
This is a problem from which the ordinary courts are not immune, but it is true that this type of uncertainty is absent from the rival schemes because there the courts lay down the precise meaning which a term should bear.
To what extent this represents a significant quantitative problem is unclear.
In any event, it is not insoluble.
Principles of consistency could be developed under which an authority should not change the interpretation accorded to a term, even if the second interpretation is reasonable, without due notice.
Indeed, this represents part of the larger problem of ensuring that administrative authorities accord due facilities for representation before the promulgation of rules.
(b) Constitutional principle
A second possible objection to the rational basis/rightness approach is that it would be somehow inconsistent with the juridical basis on which judicial review has been built in this country.
The inherent power of the courts to ensure that inferior jurisdictions remain within their assigned ambit has always, it may be argued, related to the legality of the findings that can be made and not their correctness.
To adopt an approach akin to that used in the United States would be fundamentally to alter the rationale for judicial review.
There is undoubtedly truth in this argument but it must be placed in perspective.
The original conception of review is indeed that set out above.
It has however always been fraught with difficulty; the line between legality and correctness has always been hard to define.
The distinction appeared to be maintainable while the courts applied a very limited form of review.
Once they moved towards the collateral fact doctrine the line became hazy at best.
Any attempt at continued demarcation is impossible once the courts move to a theory of extensive review.
We can of course continue to talk in jurisdictional terminology; we can say that a tribunal's jurisdiction is conditional on it making no errors of law.
It is however this very flexibility of the jurisdiction concept which, if pushed too far, contains the seeds of its own destruction, or at least redundancy.
To regard the jurisdictional cloak as a vital precondition justifying judicial intervention, while allowing the categories of jurisdictional error to multiply, simply conceals reality.
It provides a fragile mask for avoiding awkward questions.
The conceptual basis of judicial review, that the courts are thereby enforcing the legislative will by ensuring that the authority remains within the limits of its assigned area, has never provided any sure guide as to the appropriate scope for review.
Almost any answer that we give to this question can, if we so wish, be formally accommodated within the language of jurisdiction.
It is high time that we assessed the desirability of judicial intervention in its own terms.
(c) Which types of error?
A third objection which could be raised is that it would be undesirable if the suggested approach were to be applied to certain types of jurisdictional error.
The twin foundations for the standard advocated were that statutory terms do not necessarily possess only one inevitably correct meaning and that, in choosing between a range of possible reasonable interpretations, the precise meaning attached by the tribunal may be preferable to that of the court.
This has no application when the type of substantive error is that the tribunal was improperly constituted, or that it made an order which it was not empowered to make.
Where the statute simply states that a fine of £50 is the maximum that can be imposed, arguments concerning rational basis are irrelevant.
DISCRETION
SECTION 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.
Chapters 9 and 10: Their Relationship
At the inception of the previous chapter it was said that all grants of power to public bodies could be broken down into two parts: if X exists, you may or shall do Y.
This chapter will be principally concerned with the judicial constraints imposed upon the Y level.
We will however also be addressing certain cases which are concerned with the X level.
They are characterised by the X factor being phrased in terms such as‘if the Minister thinks fit he may…,’ and are cases involving subjective discretion.
These latter cases are dealt with here rather than in the previous chapter for two related reasons.
First, in what may be termed classic jurisdictional fact cases such as‘if a furnished tenancy, or resources, etc., exist, you may…’ the courts well presume that the term, if it is classified as a jurisdictional fact, has a meaning which will be determined by the judiciary and not by the public body.
By way of contrast, where the grant of power is phrased in overtly subjective terms such as‘if the Minister thinks fit he may…’ that assumption is not possible.
Secondly, in the classic jurisdictional fact cases the courts proceed on the assumption that they will supply the one correct answer to the disputed term.
Where the jurisdictional fact is framed in open textured subjective terms, as in the above example, that is not possible; the court cannot say openly ‘we think the circumstances were fit even though you, the Minister, did not.’
Control is maintained by requiring, e.g. reasonable grounds for the ministerial belief, and not by the presumption that there is a right answer to the jurisdictional issue posed.
2.
Discretion: The Rationale for Intervention
This is not the place for a jurisprudential exegesis on the nature of discretion.
Discretion for the purposes of this chapter will be defined as  existing where there is power to make choices between courses of action or where, even though the end is specified, a choice exists as to how that end
The conceptual rationale for judicial intervention has already been examined.
When the courts intervene to control the X factor they do so in purported fulfilment of the legislative will, by delineating the boundaries of one institution's powers from that of another: a public body adjudicating on furnished tenancies cannot trespass on the territory of a different body dealing with unfurnished tenancies.
The rationale for judicial intervention on the Y level is more indirect.
The authority is within its assigned area, it is for example properly adjudicating on furnished premises, and the question before us now concerns the rationale for judicial control over the fair rent which should be charged for such premises.
The link with sovereignty and with the ultra vires doctrine is provided by implication: parliament only intended that such discretion should be exercised on relevant and not irrelevant considerations, or to achieve proper and not improper purposes.
Any exercise of discretion which contravenes these limits is ultra vires.
The ease with which the judicial approach can be reconciled with sovereignty demonstrates the limits of that concept as an organising principle for administrative law.
Almost any such controls can be formally squared with legislative intent.
As we shall see, the controls which the courts have developed are as much concerned with supplementing legislative intent as with implementing it.
This may well be defensible, but the nature of the arguments required to sustain such a defence are themselves controversial.
3.
Discretion: Types of Constraint
There are three principal ways in which discretion can be controlled.
First, constraints can be placed upon what ends an authority can pursue through the exercise of its discretion.
The concepts of relevancy, purpose and reasonableness provide the main mechanisms through which this type of control is expressed.
Substantive limits are placed on the power of the public body, and the appropriate test for such limits is a topic of much contention.
The case law will be examined, followed by consideration of the varying tests for substantive control which are at our disposal.
Secondly, the judiciary can impose limits on whose views should be taken into account when discretion is exercised.
Such constraints are in principle related to the process by which the discretion is exercised.
However, as we shall see, the line between substantive and procedural oversight of discretion is difficult to maintain.
Thirdly, the courts can impose controls on how the discretion is exercised.
Limitations on delegation, and on the extent to which an authority can proceed through policies or rules, provide the two main limbs of this type of constraint.
SECTION 2.
WHAT ENDS: THE NATURE OF SUBSTANTIVE CONTROL
1.
Reasonableness: the Two Meanings
The courts' control over the exercise of administrative discretion is not new.
In Rooke's Case' commissioners of sewers had repaired a river bank and taxed R for the whole amount despite the fact that other landowners had benefited from the work.
The Commissioners had a discretion as to the levying of the money, but the court struck their decision down: the discretion was to be exercised according to reason and law and it was unreasonable for R to bear the whole burden.
It is however easy simply to become swamped under a myriad of examples about discretion.
In order to gain some perspective and order on the way that the courts approach the matter the judgment of Lord Greene M.R. in the Wednesbury Corporation case will be considered.
The corporation was empowered to grant licences for Sunday entertainment subject to such conditions as it thought fit.
A picture house was licensed subject to the condition that no children under 15 be admitted; it was this condition which was challenged as unreasonable and ultra vires.
Lord Greene M.R. stressed that the court should not substitute its view for that of the corporation, and then proceeded to examine what the term unreasonableness meant in this context.
What emerges from his judgment is two meanings for the term unreasonable.
The first can be called the ‘umbrella sense:’ unreasonable is used here simply as a synonym for a host of more specific grounds of attack, such as taking account of irrelevant considerations, acting for improper purposes and acting malai fide, which, as Lord Greene M.R. himself said, tend to run into one another.
The second meaning may be termed the ‘substantive sense’ of unreasonableness: a decision may be attacked if it is so unreasonable that no reasonable public body could have made it.
To prove this would require something quite extreme; Lord Greene M.R. gave the example of a teacher being dismissed because of red hair.
The precise relationship between these two meanings of unreasonable is not absolutely clear.
At one stage it appears as if the substantive meaning of unreasonable is simply one strand of the umbrella to be juxtaposed to irrelevancy, mala fide, etc.
However, that this is not so is made apparent at the end of the judgment.
The role of unreasonableness in its substantive sense is conceived of as a safety net to be used after tests such as relevancy or purpose.
One looks firstly to see whether irrelevant considerations have been taken into account; if they have not the decision may still be struck down if it is unreasonable in the substantive sense.
Whether this sense of  unreasonableness is needed at all, and the way in which the courts have manipulated it, well be one of the matters discussed.
It is evident that neither of Lord Greene M.R.'s constructions of the term reasonable accord with the dictionary meaning of that word.
The special interpretation of the term reasonableness is decided by the constitutional position of the courts.
They cannot intervene simply because they believe that a different way of exercising discretionary power would be more reasonable than that chosen by the Public body.
This would be to substitute a judicial view as to, for example , the most appropriate way in which to allocate aid, or to disburse licences, for that of the public body.
Hence the controls over the substantive ends which can be pursued by an administrative authority are expressed in terms of relevancy, purpose or unreasonableness in its substantive sense.
By phrasing control in these terms, the courts can preserve the impression that they are thereby only fulfilling the legislative will.
They will not dictate which result should be reached, but they will impose limits on which ends cannot be pursued.
However what are relevant considerations or proper purposes will often not be self evident.
Decisions about these factors will themselves involve social and political value judgments.
Moreover the boundary line between intervention in this way, and a more direct substitution of opinion by the judiciary may well become blurred.
The way in which the courts have interpreted improper purposes, relevancy and unreasonableness must now be examined in more detail.
(1) Improper purposes
The law reports abound with examples of the courts striking down or challenging exercises of discretion for improper purposes.
A public body which has power to construct lavatories cannot use that power in order to build a subway under a street.
Deportation cannot be used to achieve extradition, and the Home Secretary could not use his powers to revoke television licences where people had bought a new licence early in order to avoid a price increase.
What the purpose of a particular statute is will normally be determined by the courts as a matter of construction, and it is interesting what influences judicial thinking in this respect.
While the courts continue to insist that they are only keeping the authority within the boundaries of its power and not substituting their view, the dividing line can be a thin one.
For example, planning authorities may grant planning permission unconditionally or subject to such conditions as they think fit.
A number of cases  have turned on the legality of such conditions.
The general position adopted has been that the conditions must fairly and reasonably relate to the permitted development.
In applying this test the courts have upheld fairly broad conditions, but they have also struck down a number by using concepts which are open to debate.
Thus, the court struck down conditions attached to the grant of a caravan site licence which required, inter alia, site rents to be agreed with the council and security of tenure to be provided for caravan owners.
The House of Lords found that the legislation only allowed terms to be attached which related to the use of the site and not to the types of contract the site owner could make with the caravan owners.
In reaching this conclusion the court argued that freedom of contract was a fundamental right, and that if parliament intended to empower a third party to make conditions which affected the provisions of a contract between others then this should be expressed in clear terms.
In other cases the courts have relied on the principle that private rights of property should not be taken without compensation unless there exists clear authority in the statute.
This is not to say that either of the above decisions was necessarily wrong.
The balance between, on the one hand, presumptions as to freedom of contract and the protection of private property rights unless due compensation is paid, and the overall direction of the planning system is a complex one on which opinions may differ.
There is however no doubt that the denomination of a purpose as proper or improper in such circumstances raises issues of political and social choice which do not cease to be so by being expressed in the language of vires.
More recent authority has however expressed the view that planning law is of a ‘public character,’ and that the courts should not introduce private law principles unless these are expressly authorised by parliament or are necessary to give effect to the legislative purpose.
Cases raising such issues are not restricted to the planning field.
In Roberts v. Hopwood Poplar Council had decided to pay their low grade workers £4 per week.
The relevant statute empowered the council to pay such wages as it thought fit.
Despite this the House of Lords found that the  payment was excessive: the statute was to be read subject to an implied condition that the wages be reasonable, which was to be judged by the current rates payable in the industry.
Anything above this was a gratuity, and a social purpose, such as payment of a minimum wage, was unlawful
It would of course be a simple world in which an authority always acted for one purpose only.
Complex problems can arise where one of the purposes is lawful and one is regarded as unlawful.
De Smith has adumbrated four different tests which the courts have at one time or another used.
First, what was the true purpose for which the power was exercised?
Provided that the legitimate statutory purpose was achieved it is irrelevant that a subsidiary object was also attained.
Secondly, what was the dominant purpose for which the power was exercised?
Thirdly, were any of the purposes authorised?
This has less support in the case law than the previous two tests.
Fourthly, if any of the purposes was unauthorised and this had an effect upon the decision taken, that decision will be overturned as being one based upon irrelevant considerations.
(2) Relevancy
The second main method of controlling the exercise of discretion is relevancy: a decision will be declared ultra vires if it is based upon irrelevant considerations or if relevant considerations are not taken into account.
Relevancy overlaps with control maintained through improper purposes and a number of the cases could be classified under one section or the other.
In exercising control based upon relevancy, the courts have, for example, defined the types of considerations which licensing justices could take into account.
These might include the character and needs of an area, but could not encapsulate the terms on which an applicant would conduct his business if those terms did not affect his fitness to hold the licence.
Control of a like kind is maintained over other areas such as education, housing, the police, the mentally disordered, and aspects of nationalised industry.
The stringency with which the courts have applied the criteria of relevancy has varied in different areas and there has been an unwillingness to declare invalid administrative decisions simply because the applicant could point to one ‘relevant’ factor which the authority did not take into account.
This is particularly so where it is felt that the consideration did not have a causative effect upon the authority's determination and where the decision being impugned is not determinative of rights, such as a decision by a local authority to refer a landlord to a rent tribunal.
As in the context of improper purposes, the denomination of a consideration as relevant or irrelevant may involve the court in substituting its own views for those of the administration, a danger appreciated by Diplock L.J.
(as he then was) in Luby v. Newcastle-under-Lyme Corporation.
The Housing Act 1957 vested the management of local authority houses in the Corporation and gave it power to charge reasonable rents.
The policy of the defendant was to fix rents for the houses as a whole at an aggregate sum necessary to balance the cost of the loan capital and repairs; there was no differential applied whereby tenants paid rent according to their means.
After a series of rent increases L complained that the basis of assessment was invalid as it did not take account of his personal circumstances, thereby imposing an unreasonable rent on him.
Diplock L.J.
rejected the claim.
The court should not, he said, substitute its view for that of the Corporation.
The latter was applying a social policy on which reasonable men could differ; it had decided against differential rating and this was not a decision so unreasonable that no reasonable corporation could come to it.
Any deficit in housing revenue would have to be made good from the general rate fund.
The choice of rent structures involved therefore a weighing of the interests of tenants as a whole (including impoverished tenants) with those of the general body of ratepayers.
(3) Unreasonableness: the substantive meaning
As seen, Lord Greene M.R. in the Wednesbury case conceived of unreasonableness in its substantive sense, as a long stop and a fairly extreme one at that: if an exercise of discretion successfully negotiated the hurdles of improper purpose and relevancy it could still be invalidated on the altar of substantive unreasonableness if it was so unreasonable that no reasonable body could reach such a decision.
It may well be that arguments could be made that this sense of unreasonableness should be the only mechanism for controlling discretion.
Such arguments will be considered later.
Our concern here is to understand how the concept is used by the courts now, in conjunction with purpose and relevancy.
Analytically this substantive meaning is redundant, a fifth wheel on the coach.
The simple reason is that the safety net function it performs is only rendered necessary by a semantic sleight of hand: we think we need the net because our original conceptions of propriety of purpose or relevancy are drawn unrealistically wide, thus allowing cases to ‘tumble through.’
Let us take the classic example of the unreasonable decision, dismissal of a teacher because of the colour of her hair.
If the considerations relevant to dismissal of a teacher are broadly defined as ‘any physical characteristic’ then of course dismissal on the above ground is relevant.
However, common sense dictates that this is not the way that we would approach the matter.
The question would be posed more specifically, distinguishing between the types of physical characteristics that were felt to be relevant to teaching and those, such as hair colour, which were not.
Other decisions which are said to be examples of the substantive meaning of unreasonable could equally be resolved through the more traditional conceptions of purpose and relevancy.
A sacrifice of analytical rigour may not be that important if the concept which has been thereby given life is never used, and it is clear from Lord Greene M.R's judgment in the Wednesbury case that he conceived of it being utilised only in the extreme (and hypothetical) instance of ‘dismissal for red hair type of case.’
However, in the same way that nature abhors a vacuum, so also concepts demand a function and the concept of unreasonableness in its substantive sense is no exception to this.
It has developed in two ways.
First, it has been applied to discretionary decisions which could not, whether right or wrong, be classified as of the ‘red hair type.’
In the planning sphere it has been used to invalidate conditions attached to planning permission such as that the developer should construct an ancillary road over the frontage of the site at his own expense to which rights of passage should be given to others, and that a property developer  should allow those on a council housing list to occupy the houses with security of tenure for 10 years.u The test has also been adopted in the context of industrial relations, though in this instance the decision attacked was upheld.
As stated, these cases may have been correctly decided.
The point is that it is hard to see the subject-matter under attack as determinations which are so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could come to them, at least not when viewed as Lord Greene M.R. visualised the notion.
The criterion moves closer to asking whether the courts believe that the exercise of discretion was reasonable.
This latter formulation would give the courts a greater scope for substitution of judgment, with the additional risk that they would not have to articulate their rationale as clearly as under the heads of purpose and relevancy.
The second development has been the assumption that the meaning of the term unreasonable used by Lord Greene M.R. should govern whenever that word appears within a statute.
It will be argued below that there are strong reasons why this should not be so.
(4) Bad faith
If unreasonableness in its substantive sense is unnecessary as a separate head through which to control the exercise of administrative discretion, it finds company in the notion of bad faith.
The concept of bad faith has remained either largely in the region of hypothetical cases or has been treated as synonymous with improper purposes or relevancy.
It is indeed difficult to conceive of bad faith which would not automatically render applicable one of the two traditional control mechanisms.
This is not to say that spite, malice or dishonesty may not exist; they clearly can.
It is to question the necessity of its being a separate method of control.
95) Fairness
While it may be argued that unreasonableness and bad faith do not require separate treatment, the present category of fairness is a relatively new addition to the control devices used by the courts.
We have already seen the role played by fairness within natural justice, imposing procedural obligations on the decision-maker.
Fairness also appears to have a  more substantive role manifesting itself in the prohibition of discrimination, in the case law on estoppel, in the proportionality of the punishment to the offence committed, in cases where delay has been held prejudicial to important rights, and in the development of the idea of legitimate expectations.
The possible implications of this development are best considered when looking at the more general direction which the control on discretion is, and should be, taking.
2.
Jurisdictional Fact and Discretion
In a number of cases the jurisdictional facts will be expressed in terms of a subjective open textured discretion: the if X element will be ‘if the Minister thinks fit, necessary, etc., he may do….’
The reasons for not dealing with these cases in the previous chapter have already been given.
Having seen how the courts control discretion when it is found on the Y level, it is necessary also to examine the control methods when discretion appears within, or is, the jurisdictional fact.
A distinction must be drawn between cases where a criterion of reasonableness is contained in the statute and those where it is not.
(1) An express requirement of reasonableness
An empowering statute will often frame the jurisdictional requirement in the following terms: if the Secretary of State has reasonable cause to believe, for example, a person to be of hostile origin, he may imprison him.
In general such areas give rise to little difficulty.
The jurisdictional fact contains the requirement of reasonable cause to believe and this would be a condition precedent to the exercise of a power to imprison.
A court would interpret such words in their natural manner which is objective, i.e. the Secretary of State could not simply rely upon his own subjective beliefs, but would have to point to some evidence from which it could reasonably be inferred that, for example, Napoleon was a person of hostile origin.
Provided that the inference could reasonably be drawn from the evidence, the fact that the court itself might not have done so would be irrelevant.
Despite the seemingly uncontroversial nature of the above, statutes expressed in such terms have occasionally been the subject of a cause célèbre.
The best known example of this is Liversidge v. Anderson in  which the majority of the House of Lords found that the phrase ‘reasonable cause to believe’ in wartime emergency legislation would be complied with provided that the Secretary of State acted on what he thought to be such a reasonable cause, and that it was not necessary for there to be objective facts to support this.
Lord Atkin, in one of the century's most powerful dissents, adopted the opposing view.
The case produced a significant impact at the time, and has been restrictively construed.
It has been confined to an interpretation of the specific regulations.
The House of Lords has stated that Liversidge need no longer haunt the law, and it can be confidently predicted that the more natural objective meaning will henceforth be ascribed to such words.
(2) No express requirement as to reasonableness
More difficulty has been encountered when the jurisdictional requirements are phrased subjectively, with no requirement as to reasonableness, such as‘if the Minister thinks fit, necessary, he may….’
Viewed historically, the courts' attitude towards such grants of power has varied.
There are instances in both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in which the courts have, despite such subjective wording, overturned decisions by finding that the power was being used for an improper purpose, or that the public body had applied the wrong test when construing legislative criteria.
Control in such instances was facilitated by the statute containing criteria which the courts felt capable of construing.
The war years were however characterised by a period of judicial restraint.
Subjectively worded regulations were treated literally, and the courts eschewed any attempt to persuade them to judge the necessity or reasonableness of such regulations.
This was undoubtedly due partly to the war and partly because the statutes contained criteria which were felt to be less justiciable: if the minister stated that a regulation concerning trademarks was necessary for securing the safety of the realm the court would not adjudicate upon this.
Judicial restraint or inactivity continued after hostilities had ceased.
However, in a number of cases the courts began to indicate that some control over subjective discretion might be attained.
The methods varied.
In some instances constraints would be imposed indirectly through the imposition of a duty to provide reasons; in other cases the courts hinted at the limits they would set, such as if the decision was perverse or made in bad faith.
Indirect limitations gave way to direct in Commissioners of Customs and Excise v. Cure and Deeley Ltd. in which Sachs J. found that legislation empowering tax commissioners to make regulations as they deemed necessary did not always make the commissioners the sole judge of the extent of their powers.
The nature and object of the statute had to be considered to determine the area of power possessed.
This approach was adopted in the important case of Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture.
The Minister was empowered to direct a committee to investigate the operation of a milk marketing scheme; if the committee reported to the Minister that the scheme was having an effect contrary to the interest of consumers and was not in the public interest, the Minister could, if he thought fit, amend the scheme.
The Minister refused to refer a complaint to the committee and the complainant sought mandamus.
It was argued on behalf of the Minister that the legislation gave him an unfettered discretion as to whether to refer or not.
This was firmly rejected by the House of Lords: discretion was vested in the Minister to further the policy of the legislation and could not be thwarted by ministerial misconstruction of the legislation.
The form of control was to be through the concepts of purpose and relevancy, and each of the alleged reasons put forward by the Minister for not referring was subjected to them.
Short shrift was given to the argument that the Minister could escape control by not giving reasons.
Their Lordships accepted that there was no general duty to provide reasons but attached a caveat, that if the preponderance of reasons pointed in favour of taking action and the Minister gave no explanation for taking a different course, the court would infer that he had no good reason and that he was misusing his authority.
The general approach now is for the courts to require that a minister produce reasonable grounds for his action, even where the jurisdictional fact is subjectively framed.
3.
Prerogative
The traditional position was that the courts would control the existence and extent of prerogative power, but not the manner of exercise thereof.
There were however some dicta supporting a wider review power.
The traditional position has however now been modified by the decision in the G.C.H, Q. case.
Their Lordships emphasised that the reviewability of discretionary power should be dependent upon the subject-matter thereof, and not whether its source was statute or the prerogative.
Certain exercises of prerogative power would, because of their subject-matter, be less justiciable, with Lord Roskill compiling the broadest list of such forbidden territory.
Thus, in the actual case their Lordships held that although the Minister had to adduce evidence that the decision to ban national unions at G.C.H.Q. was based on considerations of national security, the question of whether such considerations outweighed the prima facie duty of fairness was for the Minister himself to decide.
Subject to this important caveat, their Lordships were willing, albeit in varying degrees, to consider the manner of exercise of prerogative power as well as adjudicating on its existence and extent.
The success of such a challenge could however turn on the ground of attack, as well as the nature of the subject-matter.
4.
The Appropriate Test for Substantive Review
The substantive limits which the courts ought to be imposing on the exercise of discretion is a complex question which cannot be answered merely by dwelling upon individual cases.
The differing options at our disposal must be examined and evaluated in order that some coherent answer can be provided.
(1) Option one: substitution of judgement
The courts could systematically substitute their choice as to how the discretion ought to be exercised for that of the administrative authority; they would in other words reassess the matter afresh and decide, for example, whether funds ought to be allocated in one way rather than another.
Our basic conceptions of political theory are against this approach.
Decisions as to political and social choice are made by the legislature, or by a person assigned the task by the legislature.
To sanction general judicial intervention simply because the court would prefer a different choice to that of the administrator runs counter to this fundamental assumption, and would entail a re-allocation of power from the legislature and bureaucracy to the courts.
(2) option two: ‘drawing the boundaries’ through techniques
A less extreme form of control would be one in which the courts draw the boundaries for the legitimate exercise of discretion.
They would decide what ends the authority should not be entitled to pursue, or what considerations must be taken into account, rather than actually imposing a particular conclusion by way of substitution for that of the administrative authority.
This is the approach manifest in the Wednesbury case; the concepts of purpose, relevancy and reasonableness provide the principal judicial tools through which option two is attained.
While the courts have refrained from explicit substitution of judgment (option one), the line between this mode of control and the second can be perilously thin.
The underlying reason for this is that statutes do not really have ‘corners’ in the neat way postulated by theory.
The language is often elliptical, ambiguous and inherently open-textured.
What the legitimate ambit of a certain power actually is will necessarily be a value judgment.
It is relatively easy for a court using the formal language of keeping a body within the four corners of its powers to impose its own view as to what the authority should have done.
It is only by examining particular cases closely that we can determine whether this has occurred.
The decision in Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council.
is worthy of such consideration.
A local authority scheme which included plans for the abolition of certain grammar schools was altered following a local election at which the party in power changed from Labour to Conservative.
The Secretary of State, acting under section 68 of the Education Act 1944, purported to give directions to the council for the implementation of the original Labour scheme.
Section 68 states, in essence, that if the Secretary of State is satisfied that any local education authority is acting unreasonably in relation to any power conferred on it, the Secretary may give directions as to the exercise of that power.
The Secretary of State argued, inter alia, that the selection process  necessary now that the grammar schools were to be retained could not be adequately organised within the available time, and that this was unreasonable behaviour within section 68.
The House of Lords disagreed; the judgment can be analysed in stages.
First, the subjective formulation of section 68 is made objective so as to read, ‘if the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds to believe.’
This is most apparent from the judgment of Lord Wilberforce who makes clearer than their remaining Lordships that the case is one about  jurisdictional fact.
All however concur in this alteration.
The standard meaning to be attributed to ‘reasonable grounds for belief’ is that if the decision-maker has some such grounds his decision will be upheld even though a court might differ.
However, the objectivity infused into section 68 is found by their Lordships to connote more than this.
Thus, we find that if certain facts must exist before the exercise of judgment then the court will examine whether those facts exist, whether a decision was made upon a proper self direction as to those facts, and whether irrelevant facts were taken into account.
The novel concept of ‘proper self direction’ as to the facts which was mentioned by Lord Wilberforce is particularly open-ended.
Thus, the Secretary of State has to show reasonable grounds for believing (in this broadened sense) that the local authority was acting unreasonably.
The second question therefore is, what is meant by the term unreasonable?
With the exception of Lord Wilberforce, their Lordships adopt the Wednesbury meaning.
Applied here the Secretary of State would have to show some reasonable grounds in the above sense, that the local authority was proposing action so unreasonable that no reasonable authority would countenance it.
Not surprisingly he failed.
Little if any consideration is given as to whether unreasonable in the statute should bear this very narrow meaning.
Good reasons can be given why it should not.
As we have seen, Lord Greene M.R.'s meaning of unreasonable was developed for the judicial review of discretionary power.
It was not the construction of a statutory term, but a judicially imposed limit on discretion.
It was drawn narrowly because of the constitutional position of the courts.
They cannot intervene unless the decision-maker steps outside the boundaries of what the legislature was believed to have allowed.
The artificial meaning of unreasonable developed by Lord Greene M.R. must be seen in this light.
That construction is intended to ensure that the courts do not substitute their view for that of the administrator just because they believe that a different conclusion would be more reasonable.
Compare this to the position of the Secretary of State.
He does not have review powers because he is not a court.
He possesses one form of statutory control, i.e. unreasonableness.
None of the legitimate reasons for the artificial Wednesbury sense of the term apply here.
The Minister does not sit over the local authority, in the way that a court supervises  administrative authorities, including the executive.
His constitutional position is entirely different.
Parliament has expressly given him power to intervene when the local authority is acting unreasonably.
The natural meaning of that term is ‘not acting as a reasonable local authority would act,’ as opposed to‘behaviour so unreasonable that no reasonable authority would countenance it’.
There is no reason why the natural meaning should not apply.
None of the constitutional reasons which are the basis for the artificial Wednesbury meaning are relevant.
If the interpretation given to the term unreasonable in Tameside is to mean that the Secretary of State must find behaviour akin to the ‘red haired school teacher case,’ then this emasculates the one control mechanism which he possesses.
Now all of this may well have made no difference to the final result; the courts reading of the facts may have led them to the same conclusion whatever the meanings given to reasonable and unreasonable.
Yet those meanings matter: given the breadth of what the courts required of the Secretary of State as reasonable grounds for his action, and the narrowness of what would be regarded as unreasonable local authority action, it is hard to visualise a different result.
A second case which is worthy of analysis is the decision in Bromley London Borough Council v. Greater London Council.
Section 1 of the Transport (London) Act 1969, imposed upon the G.L.C. a duty to develop policies which promoted the provision of integrated, efficient and economic transport facilities for Greater London.
The London Transport Executive (L.T.E.) was to implement these policies.
Under the Act the L.T.E. was required, so far as was practicable, to make up any deficit incurred in one accounting period within the next such period.
The legislation empowered the G.L.C. to take such action as was necessary and appropriate in order to enable the L.T.E. to comply with this obligation; the G.L.C. also had power to make grants to the L.T.E. for any purpose.
The G.L.C. decided to implement a resolution, which had been included by the majority group in their manifesto, to reduce fares by 25 per cent.
To this end, the G.L.C. issued a supplementary precept for rates to all London boroughs.
The money thereby obtained would be paid by the G.L.C. to the L.T.E. as a grant, in order to enable the latter to balance its accounts.
An indirect result of the reduction of the fares was that the G.L.C. would lose approximately £50 million of the rate support grant.
Bromley London Borough Council sought certiorari to quash the supplementary rate, arguing that it was either beyond the powers of the G.L.C. under the 1969 Act, or that it was an invalid exercise of discretion under that legislation.
The House of Lords upheld their claim.
Their Lordships recognised that the power to make grants contained within section 3 conferred a wide discretion, and that such grants could be made to supplement the revenue  received by the L.T.E. from fares.
This discretion was however limited.
The L.T.E.'s basic obligation was to run its operations on ordinary business principles, which the fare reduction contravened.
The G.L.C. could not use its grant making powers to achieve a social policy which was inconsistent with these obligations.
Reduction of the fares was also invalid because it involved a breach of the fiduciary duty owed by the G.L.C. to the ratepayers.
The effect of the 25 per cent reduction in fares would be to place an inordinate burden on the ratepayers, particularly because this would be accompanied by a known loss of rate support grant.
Nor could the G.L.C. defend its policy on the basis that it possessed a mandate to lower fares.
The people elected were elected as representatives and not delegates.
They could not regard themselves as irrevocably bound by their manifesto.
The case is interesting in many respects.
As Lord Diplock said, the statutory language was sometimes opaque and elliptical, and this is reflected in the fact that although the House of Lords reached a unanimous conclusion, their Lordships differed in their interpretation of the legislation.
Because of the intricacy and ambiguity of the statute, all of their Lordships, explicitly or implicitly, adopted a purposive approach in construing the legislation.
Two aspects of that approach will be examined here, the fiduciary duty owed to the ratepayers, and the argument based upon the election manifesto.
The idea that a local authority owes a fiduciary duty to its ratepayers is by no means new, but it has never been subjected to a thorough judicial investigation.
The idea seems self-evident: a local authority occupies a position of trust, or a fiduciary duty, in relation to the ratepayers whose money it is using, and who are the beneficiaries of the services being provided.
Closer analysis reveals a shakier foundation.
First, ratepayers do not provide all, or even the major proportion of, local authority revenue.
Central government grants furnish the main source of such funds.
Secondly, control through the imposition of this fiduciary duty operates in an asymmetrical fashion.
It quashes expenditure which is deemed to be in breach of this duty, but does not impose any obligation to spend money which is being unreasonably withheld.
This is a reflection of a more general characteristic of review, which is that it is geared towards the avoidance of mistakes.
Effectiveness and mistake avoidance are treated as synonymous, which is often overly simplistic.
Thirdly, the invocation of the fiduciary duty concept does not, of itself, provide the courts with the answer, but rather forces them to answer an extremely difficult question.
Given that ratepayers are, as their Lordships admitted, only one part of those to whom the local authority owes duties, how does one determine  where the correct balance lies between their interests and those of other sections of local society?
The answer must lie ultimately in the perceptions of those making the decisions, in this instance the court.
It is arguable that such determinations are best left to the elected representatives.
How one balances the interests of property, in the guise of ratepayers, and other interests is a classic political choice.
If that choice is not to the liking of those with voting power, many of whom will be ratepayers, they can make their views evident through the ballot box.
This leads us directly onto the argument based on the manifesto.
The response of the House of Lords to the argument based upon the election manifesto is, in many ways, incontrovertible.
A person who is elected is not a delegate of those who voted for him.
He is a representative who must act in the best interests of all his constituents.
He cannot be irrevocably bound to fulfil election promises.
This is unexceptionable in itself, but it does not sit easily with the views expressed by the House of Lords in the Tameside case.
In that case their Lordships placed much emphasis upon the fact that the local authority had a virtual mandate to retain certain grammar schools in the area.
It was a significant factor to be taken into account when assessing the reasonableness of the local authority's conduct in attempting to allocate children to the correct school.
It seems clear that if we pursue the present forms of control the judiciary will inevitably continue to be embroiled in decision-making which is of a broadly political nature in a double sense.
First, the discernment of what are legitimate purposes, and what are relevant considerations, within particular cases can never be value-free.
This is evident from the preceding discussion.
Secondly, and of equal importance, is the fact that the courts possess creative choice as to the general intensity of review which should operate within a particular area.
The concepts of purpose, relevancy and reasonableness can be used in an intensive or less intensive fashion.
Thus the courts have, for example, limited their intervention in cases concerning homeless persons, using arguments concerning the subjectivity of administrative discretion which found little favour in cases such as Tameside considered above; and they have counselled restraint in circumstances where propositions of law are interwoven with issues of social and ethical controversy concerning the scope of parental rights, while being more willing to intervene where legal issues are intertwined with questions of social and economic choice, as in the Bromley case.
(3) Option three: new labels and principles of substantive review
A third form of constraint would be one in which the courts subject the exercise of administrative discretion to a set of more specific substantive  principles.
This would have the benefit of forcing the courts to articulate more openly the premises on which they are reasoning.
An argument along these lines has been developed, drawing upon the reasoning used by Lord Diplock in the G. C. H. Q. case.
His Lordship articulated three grounds for judicial review: illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety.
Illegality meant that the decision-maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his power and must give effect to it; irrationality connoted Wednesbury unreasonableness; and procedural impropriety covered a breach of natural justice or failure to comply with the procedural rules in the enabling legislation.
Two different arguments should be distinguished.
First, does Lord Diplock's taxonomy provide a ‘better’ set of labels than those of Lord Greene M.R. which have traditionally been employed by the courts?
Secondly, should more specific principles be articulated to guide the exercise of substantive review?
(a) New labels for old?
The argument is that Lord Diplock's terminology distinguishes more clearly between keeping agencies within the scope of their power (illegality), and ensuring that the agency does not offend substantive principles which are independent of those in the statute, even if the decision is ‘technically’ within the scope of the legislative scheme (irrationality).
Lord Greene M.R.'s distinction between purpose and relevancy both of which went to the scope of the discretionary power, and his substantive sense of unreasonableness, are said to be less clear and useful expressions of the same idea.
This argument is questionable for two reasons.
First, illegality in Lord Diplock's sense makes the process of statutory construction to determine the scope of discretionary power appear ‘objective’ or ‘self-executing’in a way which it manifestly is not.
Statutes conferring broad discretionary powers do not have neat corners.
Whether a particular exercise of discretion is within the scope intended by the legislation can only be determined by consideration of purpose and relevancy, and this interpretive process is masked by usage of the omnibus phrase illegality.
Secondly, the idea that a clear division can be sustained between illegality and an idea of irrationality which serves as the basis for substantive principles is suspect.
A similar distinction was in fact proposed in argument in the Bromley case; the difficulty of maintaining the division led Lord Diplock himself and Lord Scarman to forego reliance upon it.
The reason for this  difficulty is immediately apparent.
Given that the process of determining the scope of the legislation (illegality) is not self-executing, the courts will often rely on certain substantive principles (fiduciary duty, etc.) in determining the ambit of the legitimate statutory purposes.
(b) Substantive principles
There is however much to be said in favour of the dearer and more specific articulation of substantive principles to guide the exercise of administrative discretion.
We have already seen how the courts have used the Wednesbury sense of unreasonableness to invalidate exercises of discretionary power which could not realistically be regarded as absurd, or manifestly irrational.
As Jowell and Lester argue, ‘intellectual honesty requires a further and better explanation as to why the act is unreasonable.’
The justification for the clearer articulation of substantive principles can be reinforced by the type of thesis advanced by Reich.
He argues that the role of government in distributing ‘largesse’(in the form of licences, social welfare, subsidies, government contracts and the like), has increased government power over the individual.
Benefits are withheld for reasons indirectly related at best to the activity in question.
The judiciary should employ substantive review as one method of ensuring that the grant of such largesse does not become a mechanism for illegitimately regulating a large number of peripherally related activities.
The development of substantive principles supplements and not merely implements legislative intent, by furnishing more specific criteria for ‘good administration.’
Some such criteria are already apparent underlying the broadened judicial usage of unreasonableness and fairness.
Proportionality between the alleged offence and the penalty imposed is one such principle; and consistency, in the sense that an individual should be entitled to rely upon a declared policy, or on a specific representation made to him, appears to be another.
Authority also exists for the prohibition of discriminatory treatment, and for the right not to be subject to cruel and unusual punishment derived from the Bill of Rights.
Three problems with this approach can be identified.
First, the existence and application of such principles can be contentious.
They can be used to mask more controversial issues in the same way as usage of the labels  purpose or reasonableness.
An example will demonstrate this.
In Wheeler it was held that while section 71 of the Race Relations Act 1976 allowed the council to consider the best interests of race relations when exercising its discretion in the management of a recreation ground, it could not, in the absence of any infringement of the law or improper conduct penalise a rugby club for failure to support the council's policy of condemning a tour of South Africa.
The council had acted unfairly.
It has been suggested that the decision would have been more convincing had the court focused directly upon the principles of proportionality and legal certainty: the withdrawal of the licence was a disproportionate method of achieving the council's aims, coupled with the idea that there should be no punishment without breach of an established law.
However to state that the council's response was disproportionate is to state a conclusion, without furnishing any explanatory reasoning.
Such reasoning would have to explore, inter alia, the nature of the council's duties and powers in relation to race, the conduct of the club, and the possible clash between policies concerned with racial harmony and speech rights.
The analysis might lead to the conclusion that the council was in the wrong; this reasoning process must however be explored not presumed.
The argument from a principle of legal certainty is equally problematic.
It appears to be that an agency which has an explicit power or duty to achieve a certain end,(e.g. good race relations), cannot exercise it in such a way as to disadvantage a person, unless that person has committed an independent breach of the common law or statute.
Such a conclusion could emasculate the exercise of many discretionary powers.
If an agency has the power or duty to foster ties with Europe pursuant to 1992, and has the power to award licences or grants, would a refusal to renew such a licence or award a grant to a firm with anti-European sympathies be an infringement of the principle of legal certainty?
Secondly, there is no doubt, as we have seen, that a number of existing cases can be regarded as examples of proportionality.
However in seeking to prove the existence of ‘authority’ for such an idea, care should be taken not to dilute the concept and hence to reduce its utility.
The argument has been made that proportionality underlies decisions as diverse as those relating to the legitimacy of planning conditions or local transport policy, disciplinary actions or sex discrimination.
The effect of such an argument is however to view proportionality as a more general concept of fairness.
If the concept is viewed in this broad way, then its application to any of the diverse areas mentioned above is scarcely more self-executing or clearcut than usage of terms, such as reasonableness, which it seeks to replace.
For example to categorise the Bromley decision as one which has a ‘hidden notion of proportionality,’ requiring a balance between the benefits to transport users against the burdens to ratepayers, does not resolve any of the crucially difficult issues in the case.
Any answer requires evaluation of  the purpose of the legislation; a normative judgment on the strength of property interests and user interests; and some criterion as to what balance between them ‘means.’
The term proportionality does moreover not resolve in and of itself the actual standard of review.
When the above questions concerning the Bromley case have been answered there is still the further crucial question as to how far the authority can deviate from what the court believes to be the correct proportionate balance between the respective interests.
If the answer is ‘not at all’ then we are in reality close to option one and substitution of judgment.
The third problem is in a sense the most important, albeit a corollary of the two preceding points: the application of substantive principles will require the proper articulation of a background political theory which will serve to explain why a particular principle is said to produce or demand a particular result in a given case.
This point requires brief exposition.
Intellectual honesty may well require a better explanation as to why an act is unreasonable than that which has been provided by the courts using traditional techniques of review.
Concepts such as proportionality or legal certainty may be able to provide a more finely tuned approach.
These concepts are not however self-executing; that much is readily apparent from the previous analysis.
If the call for the development of substantive principles is to be pursued, then the scale of the undertaking must be fully appreciated.
It requires, in all but the most self-evident cases, the recognition that the content which is given to concepts such as proportionality will be dependent upon the identification of the particular political theory which is said to warrant the conclusion which is being drawn.
Those who have differing political philosophies may readily accept and utilise a concept of proportionality.
Its content may however differ radically depending on the way in which the precise subject matter is viewed by those political theories.
For example, assuming for the present that some notion of proportionality does underlie discrimination cases, the content that should be given to this notion will differ depending on whether the commentator is a utilitarian, a Rawlsian liberal, or a modern communitarian.
Legal labels will not in this instance provide a ready-made answer; they can only serve as the repository for the conclusion reached from a particular system of political thought.
The task will not therefore be an easy one, but intellectual honesty will not be served by assuming that there is any easier route.
(4) Option four: hard look
A fourth option which has been advocated is that we should draw upon American experience and adopt a ‘hard look’ standard of review for discretionary decisions.
The difficulties and defects of other attempts to ensure the rational consideration of policy alternatives within government are considered.
The hard look doctrine is espoused as a corrective, albeit partial, for these difficulties, and as a method of reinforcing governmental accountability.
The objective would be to ensure that policy alternatives  are adequately considered, that reasons are  proffered for agency decisions, and that differing interests can present their views to the agency and have those views adequately discussed.
There is much force in the general direction of this suggestion.
How far we require a new ‘doctrine’ to achieve such ends is more questionable.
Three comments on this suggestion are warranted.
First, the ‘hard look’ test is contrasted with the ‘kid glove’standard of review within the United Kingdom under the Wednesbury test which is said to demand no more than that a decision be not so unreasonable that no reasonable body could make it.
This characterisation of review would come as a surprise to many commentators in this country.
Lord Greene M.R.'s substantive sense of unreasonableness was only ever one aspect of review.
Purpose and relevancy furnished the other two aspects, and all three have been and can be used in an expansive fashion which renders the label ‘kid glove’ inappropriate.
Secondly, the difference between the standard of review under hard look and that presently employed by our own courts can only be assessed by understanding the evolution and meaning of hard look in the United States.
The term hard look evolved by way of contrast with the previous standard of review generally employed by United States' courts which was narrow.
Agency findings could be set aside if they were found to be ‘arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion.’
This criterion was strictly interpreted: litigants would have to persuade the court that the decision had ‘no rational basis whatsoever,’ and not surprisingly few managed to do so.
In short, the United States standard of review was akin to having Lord Greene M.R.'s narrow sense of unreasonableness as the only basis for attack; it was the United States' courts who adopted a ‘kid glove’ approach compared to their United Kingdom counterparts.
The label ‘hard look’ developed in essence because the United States' courts began to desire more control than allowed by this limited test.
Has this development now led to the United Staffs having more intensive review than the United Kingdom?
This can only be assessed by examining the meaning of hard look more closely.
A leading United States authority describes the newer test as the ‘adequate consideration or hard look’ approach to the review of discretion.
This nomenclature is revealing, as is the meaning ascribed to such review in a leading decision.
In the State Farm case the Supreme Court founded its intervention on the arbitrary and capricious test, but then gave  a broader reading to that phrase than that provided in earlier cases.
The court accepted that it should not substitute its judgment for that of the agency.
It could however intervene if any of the following defects were present: if the agency relied on factors which Congress had not intended it to consider; failed to consider an important aspect of the problem; offered an explanation which ran counter to the evidence before the agency; was so implausible that it could not be sustained; or failed to provide a record which substantiated their findings.
Commentators in the United Kingdom will no doubt perceive the doctrinal analogy with the fluid Wednesbury principle.
The hard look doctrine therefore represents a shift from a previously more minimal standard of review, where judicial intervention would occur only if there was irrationality, to one where the courts will interfere where the broader list of defects set out above are present.
That list is clearly analogous to the totality of Lord Greene M.R.'s own list (purpose, relevancy and reasonableness).
Viewed in this light hard look appears as a movement away from the earlier ‘kid glove’ approach of the American courts to the tougher standard which we have had in the United Kingdom for over 100 years.
Moreover, in the same way that the United Kingdom tests can be used more or less intensively, similar flexibility resides in the analogous American doctrines.
Recent indications are that hard look is being applied less intensively than hitherto.
The American doctrine may however possess more rigour for certain related reasons.
On the one hand, the United States' courts can put more teeth into the State Farm ‘list’ through their greater concern for the provision of reasons and a filly developed record as compared to the United Kingdom.
This is a point of importance.
However the United Kingdom courts have recently insisted upon more evidentiary support for discretionary decisions, and exhibited a greater willingness to assess the cogency of the reasoning therein.
On the other hand, administrative law in the United States has generally evinced a greater concern for allowing interested parties to express their views, than has United Kingdom doctrine.
Expanded review under the hard look doctrine can serve to reinforce such ideas, by ensuring that adequate consideration is accorded to the differing views presented to the agency.
There is much to be said for such increased participatory rights.
Should we decide to develop our law more filly in this direction this can be accommodated within the idea that all relevant considerations should be taken into account by the decision-maker.
Thirdly, it has been suggested that by focusing upon the hard look doctrine issues concerning the merits can be more readily avoided.
This is suspect for precisely the same reasons we considered when discussing option two.
On the one hand, it may well be true that neither option two nor option four entail direct substitution of judgment by the court.
However, deciding whether a particular consideration is relevant, whether a particular object is within the allowable range, whether an adequate hearing has been given to interested parties, and whether the reasons ultimately provided are sufficient, are all factors which can encroach indirectly on the merits.
The court may not be stipulating a particular substantive conclusion; it may however be explicitly or implicitly ruling out certain options by the way in which it addresses and answers the preceding issues.
If a particular interest group challenges an agency decision, claiming that the rights of property owners were not adequately considered, or that the interests of the environment were improperly excluded, the subsequent judicial review will inevitably entail some vision concerning the nature of such interests within the overall constitutional structure, the relevance of such interests in this statutory scheme, and their relationship with other statutory goals.
Such issues which touch upon the merits can no more be avoided under option four than under option two; both options address many of the same issues, and face the same problems.
On the other hand, the assumption underlying this third argument is that by concentrating in so far as the court can, upon ‘process’ rather than the ‘merits,’judicial review will be less controversial.
It has however been convincingly demonstrated that complex substantive value judgments underlie the determination of many ostensibly process-related issues.
Whose views should be taken into account, and what type of process rights an individual should be given, both entail substantive judgments of considerable complexity.
(5) Option five: limited review for arbitrariness
The preceding discussion may lead some to believe that the appropriate standard of review should be more limited than that advanced by advocates of options two, three or four.
The test under option five would therefore be that the court should intervene only if there is unreasonableness in Lord Greene M.R.'s narrow sense of that term, or only if there is manifest irrationality in the sense that preceded the development of the hard look doctrine in the United States.
Two comments on this proposal are warranted, one of which is obvious, the other less so.
First, the very fact that this standard of review is so limited means that it will only serve as a long stop to catch extreme examples of aberrant administrative behaviour.
Secondly, one cannot, in practical terms, advocate option five if one believes in the expansion of participatory rights before the agency.
More intense review than that provided by a test of arbitrariness will be necessary in order to ensure that the agency does not just go through the motions of listening to people.
If we wish seriously to enhance such process rights, then we must be prepared to listen to claims that the agency did not give adequate consideration to certain views.
Judicial intervention which occurs only when the resultant agency decision is substantively arbitrary will be insufficient, because there may be many instances when it falls short of this, but still wholly or partially ignores the views of interested parties.
(6) Decision-making, discretion and substantive review
Many of the preceding options are based implicitly or explicitly upon ideas as to how administrators make decisions.
Some understanding of the literature upon decision-making may therefore facilitate evaluation of the options considered above.
Two well known ‘models’ can be identified.
One of the best known approaches as to how decisions ought to be made is that of Simon, who developed the behaviour alternative model.
An administrator faced with a problem should, initially, examine all possible courses of action, consider the consequences of pursuing each of these strategies and then comparatively evaluate these consequences.
The difficulties of pursuing such a methodology are immediately evident.
No administrator possesses the material, time or vision to operate in the way postulated by Simon.
There is moreover a further difficulty with the thesis which is that it is based upon a dichotomy between fact and value which is hard to sustain.
In contrast to Simon's conception of rationality is the view of Lindblom.
The thesis has both descriptive and prescriptive connotations.
In descriptive terms the argument is that decision-making is always incremental.
Officials never have or can have the full range of choices displayed before them.
Policy choices will always be made within a relatively narrow spectrum of possible options.
Marginal alteration in policy is the norm, reflecting the limited information which is available, the cost of extensive analysis, the interdependence of fact and value, and the diversity of forms in which policy problems actually arise.
In prescriptive terms this method of decision-making is viewed as desirable.
‘Better’ results will ensue from a ‘contest’between partisan advocates, than would follow if the decision were to be reached by an allegedly unbiased administrator completing a comprehensive survey.
The cogency of this prescriptive analysis is highly questionable.
The descriptive aspect of the analysis does however appear to reflect administrative practice more accurately than the ideal of rational decision-making.
Subsequent study, while not necessarily endorsing all of the ‘incremental thesis,’ has been directed towards understanding which factors an official will take into account.
Thus March and Simon accept that bureaucrats will not necessarily seek the optimal solution, but that which satisfies.
Rationality will be bounded.
The administrator will have certain material to hand; if this is felt to be inadequate he will search further.
How much further will depend upon pressures of time and cost.
Two immediate points of contact can be perceived between the differing options for substantive review, and the literature on decision-making.
On the one hand, it reinforces the argument that officials should have a general duty to provide reasons for decisions.
Since they will not be viewing the whole picture comprehensively, since they will perforce be selectively choosing values and acting on limited information, it is all the more important that the reasons why they have chosen a particular course of conduct should be articulated.
On the other hand, it serves to place in perspective the idea, found in options two, three and four, that the official must base his decision on all relevant considerations, and exclude all irrelevant considerations.
The literature on decision-making shows that this does not represent actual practice.
Now it could well be argued that the very object of judicial scrutiny is to force the bureaucracy to consider a broader range of policy choices; that the courts' role is precisely to ‘redress’ the tendency of officials to adopt a very narrow bounded rationality which thereby forecloses policy choices.
This may well be a laudable objective.
How effective the judiciary can be in fulfilling such a role is another matter.
The fact that review may occur relatively rarely for any one agency, the fact that the agency may still be subject to pressures of time and cost which incline it towards a narrow bounded rationality, the relative strength of different interest groups pressing upon the agency, and the competence of the court to assess whether such an authority has improperly excluded a particular policy option, can all combine to limit the effectiveness of this aspect of judicial scrutiny.