

FROM CARNO TO KENSINGTON
In any success story the threads of luck entangle with time to form part of the ‘Greater Myth’.
Was it mere luck or superior judgement that enabled Laura and Bernard to recruit some local staff of exceptional talent, dedication and above all the will to succeed?
As a result of living within the rigours of a farming calendar these people understood the imperatives of the seasons; they knew instinctively that the day did not stop just because it was dark, that work might be slack one day but fraught for the next three.
They carried weight in the community.
If they were on the side of the English couple with weird habits, then the whole village would be.
Meirion Rowlands, one of the Ashleys' most key appointments of this time, was well known as the local prizewinning sheep shearer; he met Bernard over a pint in the pub.
Meirion desperately needed more remunerative work and was on the point of leaving his home town.
What imaginative job search agency would have foreseen that a champion sheepshearer could become a master garment cutter (and, later, much more besides) but Bernard and Laura did.
When Ashley Mountney work was slack, he could be released to help on the farm for a few days sheep shearing again.
When the Ashleys needed help with construction work he could borrow farm tractors for them.
For, as Emlyn Hooson described Meirion, ‘he was a whole hogger — either wholly for you or wholly against you.’
Luckily he was wholly for the Ashleys.
Among the Welsh core of the ‘Laura Ashley’ business was not only  Meirion but, shortly to join them, his sister Carol (now Jones), as well as his brother Alan, Phil Morris, Dai Jones, the Hughes family and others.
These people cared deeply about the success of the venture because they cared about their own livelihoods, the future of their children and the very breath of their dying community.
‘Until you've lived in Wales you don't know what cheerfulness is,’ Laura often commented.
Both she and Bernard were continually taken aback by the way their staff threw themselves into the Ashley enterprise — although they expected nothing less and, in different ways it was they who inspired their employees to rise above whatever talents they thought they could offer.
‘Laura Ashley’ was the village pride and joy.
Because so many people so badly wanted it to succeed when it did they almost believed it was because they had willed it to.
Thus was ‘The Myth’ born.
But the success owed more to hard work and drive than simple luck or faith.
Each day held a different challenge or, as one long-standing employee put it: ‘We all lived to go to work.’
Many of them will reappear throughout the story, for this Welsh heart of the business always retained a special place in Laura's affections.
When mistakes arose, the original Welsh workforce was never blamed; when success registered, Laura appreciated how much she owed to them.
From now on‘Laura Ashley’ was Welsh or it was nothing.
Bernard had now taken the decision to stay in the area.
He approached the county councillor and poet, Francis Thomas, and told him he would not be renewing the lease on Tybrith as they had now outgrown it.
‘He gave me twelve months to find him a bigger place,’ recalled Thomas.
‘I was doing everything I could to keep him because of the jobs in the area.’
Thomas's first proposal was a field in Carno, near the Post Office, for sale at £12,000, twelve miles from Tybrith but closer to their new home, Clogau.
However, when Bernard applied for planning permission to build a factory on the site he was turned down by the local highways department.
Then Thomas remembered an existing, highly original property, minutes away from the field.
Carno Station, a Victorian granite relic of an earlier railway age, had been closed to passengers on 4 June 1965, a little more than 100 years after it opened, and was now for sale.
‘Much too small,’ said Bernard when he first saw it.
But he soon changed his mind when he realized the scope for expansion and the  magnificent setting of the building.
With a backdrop of endless hills and valleys, a gentle stream flowing across granite boulders in the wings and at the front, facing the road, the Victorian village school, the dramatic possibilities for a major reconstruction quickly took shape in his mind.
In his hands the existing contrast between the building's industrial past and the immutability of the landscape would be sharpened into a creative expression of striking proportions.
It was, in short, a perfect location for the myth to be enacted.
The railway building (600 sq.
ft.), shunting shed (1,500 sq.
ft.) and slightly more than one acre of land were for sale very cheaply at £ 1,200.
Although the track behind the station was still used for freight, trains no longer stopped at Carno.
Negotiations with the Railways Board at Swindon were complicated by the existence of a private property on the site.
In addition Bernard was bothered by a rumour that a turkey farm was due to open opposite.
Turkeys, he feared, would encourage rats and rats would eat his cloth.
But the turkey farm developed elsewhere and Councillor Thomas worked arduously to Iron out most of the bureaucratic formalities which Bernard hated or ignored.
Bernard immediately renewed a contact he had made with the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation ltd (ICFC) to secure a loan, the company's first major borrowing.
After more than ten years of approaching various banks, the company had finally proved its staying power.
ICFC lent a total of £14,000; £7,400 for the land and buildings, £4,600 for the plant and £2,000 working capital (increased in October 1967 by a further £4,000).
On 23 February 1967, the station was bought and Bernard, having already planned a 3,000 foot extension, immediately embarked on it.
It was, much to Francis Thomas' consternation, a question of building first, seeking permission later.
‘Laura never got involved in these sorts of negotiations,’ he said ruefully, ‘but if you ever asked her to help sort out a problem involving Bernard it was always ‘my husband right or wrong’.’
Thomas was not the first to learn that criticism of Bernard, to Laura, was foolhardy.
Yet Bernard himself shied away from any contact with officialdom.
‘He left it all to me to sort out with the planning department and I had to plead that we'd lose him altogether if we made a problem.’
Some councillors, who saw Bernard only as a source of irritation, might have welcomed that.
Not Thomas, who liked them too much.
In the event Bernard was allowed his extensions and the only stipulation was that the wall facing the road must be in stone to match the adjacent stone-built bridge, rather than in brick, which would have been cheaper.
Carno was a predominantly Welsh-speaking village with a declining population when the Ashleys moved there.
Agriculture was the mainstay of the community, although most other rural crafts had disappeared.
In 1949, according to a survey by the local branch of the WI, there had been five carpenters and wheelwrights, one blacksmith, two masons, two cobblers, one tailor, one dressmaker and three butchers.
By 1967 only one butcher, of all these craftsmen, remained.
Up to 1939, the local flour mill was in operation and the last iron-rimmed wooden cartwheel was made the following year.
According to age-old local legends, the meaning of the word Carno comes from a hill in the centre of the Parish called ‘clorin’ because it is shaped like the back of a horse; the Welsh farmers’word for the tail of a foal is ‘torir clorin’.
The old part of the village, where the church stands, is down by the heel, or hoof of clorin.
As the Welsh for hoof is carn, folklorists insist that Ein Carn O or Carno, by the hoof of the horse, must be the meaning of the village name.
There are other, less complicated, explanations; for example Carno is surrounded by cairns and the word may be a derivative of this.
At all events, the mediaeval part of the village developed at the junction of the rivers Cerniog and Carno, before the latter reached the Severn, and is grouped around the church and the site of a Roman camp.
Markets, held free of toll by privilege of the Lord of the Manor, and the ‘Goose Fairs’, where poultry and pigs were sold, died out only at the turn of the century.
The village and surrounding farms have changed little over the centuries; the Aleppo Merchants Inn, standing on the route of the old Roman road, was first licensed in 1632.
Although post-war plans for the village included a community centre, new school, village hall, playing fields and houses, these never fully materialized.
With the advent of ‘Laura Ashley’, this sleepy village was to see more changes in a decade than it had in centuries.
Shortly after moving to Wales, Bernard, who was continually having trouble with the finely tuned engine of his Lotus Elite, had discovered a motor club.
Antony Sheppard, a fellow enthusiast, persuaded Bernard  to let them recondition the engine.
The man who did the job, thereby impressing Bernard greatly, was Dai Jones, working at the time as a service engineer for domestic appliances.
‘Bernard gave me four new tyres for my own car as payment but kept saying, ‘I'm going to open a big factory one day and have you as works' manager’.’
As soon as the railway station at Carno was theirs, Bernard wrote to Dai offering him the promised job.
‘We met one Saturday morning and he asked me what I was currently getting paid.
I told him, about seventeen pounds a week, and he offered me a pound a week less with no payment, but free petrol.’
What was the attraction?
‘I could see something was there; Bernard had the persistence to obtain the site, he was doing something positive — already he'd got a steel frame constructed for a building where the freight was formerly loaded — he was practical and a great motivator at the same time.’
Dai joined and was immediately given more challenging work than he had ever known.
Second-hand machinery was scattered around the yard with new parts and modifications arriving daily.
The cutters and machinists were to remain at the club house for another twelve and eighteen months respectively but the plan was for the printers to move immediately into the new premises.
Dai's initial role was to install the 3,000 lb boiler, with dyeing and washing machines, in the former railway shunting shed.
He was horrified.
‘I'd worked with steam but nothing like this.
Often Bernard would say ‘Okay, you're in charge, I'm off,’ and leave me to it.
It wasn't that he wouldn't help, often he did, but he believed that by delegating he brought out the best in people, that they would rise to the challenge, and he had other things to be done.’
Once Dai succeeded in getting Bernard's semi-automatic printer in full working order it could produce 5,000 metres of cloth per week.
One of the most important advances, made possible by the move to bigger premises, was the use of reactive, instead of pigment, dyes.
Reactive dyestuffs, developed in the Fifties, chemically react with the cotton fibre, under the influence of alkali and heat.
Generally they give a good wash-fastness and provide a much wider and brighter spectrum of colours.
However, they require a complex treatment for finishing and so a ‘wet processing’ area had to be set up.
This ‘wet end’ became ever more necessary as the company began to prepare the raw materials itself.
The cloth which ‘Laura Ashley’ bought in 1967 came from India  and Pakistan in loomstate and was not of high quality.
It required sewing together, then cropping, scouring with just enough caustic soda so that the fabric would not tear, and bleaching with peroxide, which then had to be well washed out.
These were all new processes which required space, machinery, an increasing range of chemicals and personnel.
But the more procedures which eliminated middlemen ensured that the price of the finished product could be reduced.
This increasing vertical expansion of the business also enabled the Ashleys to keep a much tighter control on their product's image.
For the next three years there was a constant struggle to buy better second-hand machinery for each stage of the manufacture; sewing, printing, curing, dyeing and mixing.
Somehow, Dai, goaded on by a blend of Bernard's impatience and supervision, got them working.
From the start there was no such thing as clocking in; Bernard would usually arrive at 7.30 am, sometimes earlier, and everyone else would be there by 8 am.
Although Laura had a demanding toddler at her heels, she broadened her horizons from researching prints and quality control to overseeing the total production process.
‘She'd give you a hand with anything that needed doing, from packing, invoicing, cutting and laying to choosing and mixing colours; she wasn't keen on the administration side but she did that too,’ Meirion recalled.
Still, she never lost sight of the smaller details that made the operation run smoothly.
She kept a record of everyone's birthday at the factory and, until the company grew too big, always brought in a cake on the appropriate day.
It was now that she started a canteen, run by a mother of eight, Gwenny Hughes.
This was a small enclave at first where homemade soup, fruit and a few other wholesome products were not only provided free, but all staff were expected to partake of them at midday.
No fried foods were allowed.
Those who lived any distance from the factory were collected in the morning and taken home at night.
There were never to be any night shifts at a ‘Laura Ashley’ factory.
If Laura noticed any of her staff wearing clothes in a poor state of repair she would look into that person's wages and family circumstances and see if there was a way of paying them more without upsetting the hierarchy.
All her staff believed she genuinely cared for their welfare for no other reason than her deeply-felt need to be surrounded by a contented workforce.
LAURA AGED SIX, IN FANCY DRESS AS A PIERROT.
ALTHOUGH LIVING IN WALLINGTON SHE ALREADY HAD A SENSE OF HER ROOTS IN WALES.
LAURA AGED FOURTEEN, A YEAR AFTER THE WAR HAD BEGUN, NOW LIVING IN WALES.
HER FORMAL SCHOOLING HAD ENDED AND SHE WAS ATTENDING SECRETARIAL COLLEGE.
A FAMILY GROUPS AT HOME.
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: MRS MOUNTNEY (BESS) TREVOR (ON HER LAP), FRANCIS, LAURA, MR MOUNTNEY (STAN) AND MARY.
LAURA JOINED THE WRNS IN 1944 FROM MERTHYR TYDFIL AND SPENT MOST OF THE NEXT TWO YEARS IN PARIS AND BRUSSELS.
THIS PHOTOGRAPH WAS ONE OF BERNARD'S FAVOURITES AND ALWAYS SAT ON HIS DESK.
LAURA AT THE WHEEL OF A CAPTURED GERMAN LORRY IN NORMANDY.
LAURA ON HER WEDDING DAY — A BITTERLY COLD AFTERNOON IN FEBRUARY 1949.
LAURA AND BERNARD IN CAREFREE MOOD ON ONE OF THEIR FIRST HOLIDAYS ABROAD, STAYING WITH CLUB MEDITERRANÉE PIAMBO IN NORTHERN ITALY, 1952.
LAURA WITH HER FIRST CHILD, JANE, BORN IN 1953, OUTSIDE THE FRONT ENTRANCE'S TO THEIR FLAT IN ST GEORGE'S SQUARE, GATHERING ENERGY BEFORE MOUNTING THE NINETY-NINE STEPS TO THE TOP.
LAURA AT THE OLD BURLINGTON STREET OFFICES OF THE ASHLEY MOUNTNEY COMPANY.
THE BOLTS OF CLOTH IN THE BACKGROUND WERE BERNARD ASHLEY FABRICS READY FOR DELIVERY TO CLIENTS, WHO INCLUDED TERENCE CONRAN.
WALKING IN THE FIELDS BEHIND TREVEREUX, WITH JANE, DAVID, NICK AND A FRIEND.
LAURA'S YOUNGER SISTER, MARY, IS IN THE FOREGROUND.
LAURA DISCOVERED HER LOVE OF NATURE HERE AND ALWAYS RETAINED THE HAPPIEST MEMORIES OF HER YEARS IN KENT.
LAURA ON A SUNDAY SCHOOL OUTING WITH FATHER REG FLETCHER, JANE AND DAVID AND OTHER LOCAL CHILDREN.
SPRING 1957, THE ASHLEY FAMILY SITTING JUST OUTSIDE THE FRONT DOOR AT EAST COTTAGE.
LAURA IS HOLDING NICK, DAVID IS ON BERNARD'S LAP WITH JANE AND A FRIEND BETWEEN THEM.
THIS WAS ON OF BERNARD'S EARLY ATTEMPTS AT SELF-TIMING SHOTS.
BERNARD'S FIRST DYE LAB IN THE BASEMENT PREMISES AT 83 CAMBRIDGE STREET, PIMLICO.
BERNARD'S FIRST PRINTING MACHINE, BUILT FROM DEXION, AT CAMBRIDGE STREET, WHERE THERE WAS BARELY ROOM TO SQUEEZE AROUND THE TABLE.
THE GEOMETRIC DESIGNS WERE BERNARD'S.
CHRISTMAS WITH THE CHILDREN AT EAST COTTAGE.
FRIENDS WERE WORRIED ABOUT HOW POOR THE ASHLEYS WERE AT THIS TIME BUT THE CHILDREN ARE WEARING MATCHING SWEATERS.
A MORE PROSPEROUS CHRISTMAS IN WALES AT GWALIA HOUSE, ABOVE THE SHOP IN MACHYNLLETH.
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: BERNARD, NICK, EMMA, DAVID AND JANE.
THE FIRST SEMI-AUTOMATIC PRINTER AT CARNO IN THE OLD SHED (1967).
THE DESIGN SHOWN IS BY BERNARD, IN THREE SHADES OF BROWN.
THE FIRST AUTOMATIC (HYDRAULIC SQUEEGEE) MACHINE HOUSED IN THE ‘NEW SHED’ AT CARNO (1970).
THE OLD RAILWAY SHUNTING SHED CAN BE SEEN IN THE BACKGROUND.
LAURA WORKING AT HOME IN THE LIVING ROOM AT CLOGAU WITH AN ASSISTANT FROM LONDON.
THE BARE STONE WALLS OBVIATED THE NEED FOR WALLCOVERING AND IT WAS NOT UNTIL THE ASHLEYS MOVED TO THEIR NEXT HOUSE THAT THEY PRESSED AHEAD WITH THE INTRODUCTION OF WALLPAPER.
(ABOVE LEFT) LAURA'S STRIKING BLACK AND WHITE OUTFIT IS SET OFF PERFECTLY AGAINST BERNARD'S LOTUS ELITE.
THE STRIPED SHIFT, MADE OUT OF WELSH FLANNEL, WAS ONE OF LAURA'S DESIGNS.
ALTHOUGH SHE HATE POSING FOR PRESS PHOTOGRAPHS SHE NEVER MINDED WHEN BERNARD WANTED TO USE HER AS A MODEL.
(ABOVE RIGHT) LAURA WALKING ON THE TOP OF THE RUGGED WELSH HILLS ABOVE CLOGAU.
ALTHOUGH OFTEN ACCOMPANIED BY BERNARD, AS ON THIS OCCASION TO DISCUSS BUSINESS PLANS, HER SOLITARY WALKS WERE ONE OF HER MOST REPLENISHING ACTIVITIES AND A VALUABLE SOURCE OF CREATIVE INSPIRATION.
LAURA ON THE BEACH NEAR ABERYSTWYTH WITH EMMA IN 1969.
Every able-bodied man employed by the new company was eager to  lend a hand with the new buildings.
Spurred on by Bernard's example, Edgar Hughes, Gwenny's son, was often to be seen with pick or shovel in hand, mixing cement, laying concrete floors, building walls or fitting windows.
Dai and Meirion were two other company stalwarts who regularly pitched in with building work in their spare time, or else organized a shift system with the other printers, almost all of whom were happy to volunteer for manual labour.
So devoted was Meirion that when he came in at dawn once, to get the boilers going, he tripped on a pipe in the shunting shed and broke his forearm.
‘The bone was sticking out of my arm but I knew I had to carry on.
I was bleeding but I just tried to hide it because it was a terribly busy time.’
Today he laughs about the accident.
He carried on for two days but finally, in excruciating pain, had to go to hospital when a splint was put on his damaged limb.
He never breathed a word to Laura because he knew her concern would force him to stop work immediately.
Interestingly, when Laura was told about this incident years later by a researcher preparing an internal history of the company, she could not accept it.
The very suggestion pained her so much because the company appeared uncaring and tough; she therefore denied that such a thing could possibly have occurred.
It damaged the myth.
Meirion was much in awe of Laura and Bernard.
‘You could see there was something special about them.
They told you everything about the company, what their plans were, how much they earned and so you felt part of the team.
Sometimes Bernard would work all through the night and there was not a day in winter even in snowy, freezing weather when they wouldn't turn up and bring sandwiches and bottles to keep us all going.’
He was impressed, too, by the way Laura dealt with disasters, of which there were plenty at that time.
‘Once I cut the neckline wrong on three hundred dresses and I thought at first I'd just keep quiet and fill the gap with lace.
But, of course, she would have noticed so I told her and we turned the scoop to our advantage.
In future that style always carried the ‘wrong’ neckline.
All she said to me, very calmly, was, ‘Remember, you can always learn by your mistakes’.’
Meirion was not alone in seeing Laura and Bernard as ‘a spare set of parents to us all.’
The nucleus of workers who helped transform Carno Railway Station into one of the world's most efficient textile printing plants considered themselves from the beginning as part of an  extended family.
As the business grew sons and daughters might be working alongside parents, brothers and sisters.
It was a local concern, employing whole families, and everyone knew that in order to flourish they must give it their all.
It was their family.
The new factory made it possible for the company to produce increasingly elaborate garments.
A third building included a single-storey office which incorporated a design studio and dark room for the first time and enabled Laura to organize her print and pattern research.
Liz Matson had been very impressed at how much Laura had taught herself from books; using cardboard patterns she could manage basic grading.
But for several years it remained extremely basic, with only small, medium and large sizes remotely possible so long as the styles were kept simple.
At the time they moved to Carno, Meirion and Tony were still cutting, with scissors, a mere four lays at a time.
Now, however, spurred on by the popularity of the Victorian nightdress, she decided it was time to produce a modified version as a day dress.
No market research informed Laura that women were thirsting for long dresses which they could not find.
But she believed that the more a woman covered up, the more she was attractive to the opposite sex, while Bernard grasped the idea as a way of using up more fabric.
In addition, the finished cloth had a natural, peasanty look, often full of flaws and slubs, that gave it a charm and character which coincided perfectly with the image Laura sought.
She was absolutely convinced that what she liked other people wanted too; a canny instinct which she used always as her guiding principle and from which no one could shake her.
Dai Jones remembers her single-mindedness being focused for one brief period on the need for stainless steel buttons on blouses.
‘She was so hell-bent on them that when I told her I couldn't get them anywhere she said ‘Well, we'd better make them.’
I made a few as samples and then she could see that they weren't right so we didn't use them in the end.
But if she wanted something she'd have it.’
At other times she could be flexible.
Increasingly the dresses were full of lace inserts and pin-tucks, which were intricate to sew.
Sometimes she would try to reduce the detailed work in her original design simply to facilitate the process for the machinists.
This also had the effect of keeping prices down, thereby benefiting the customer.
Each machinist was given virtually an entire garment to produce as a more satisfying method of working than ‘production line’ techniques.
Laura would  often send memos to Meirion asking him to let her know if anything in the design was causing problems in making up; if so, she would alter it.
Within the year it was evident that the Carno factory was revolutionizing the company's ability to produce cheap, original clothes without any of the problems faced by so many other British industries in the late Sixties.
The basic long dress took only fourteen minutes to make, yet none among this motivated workforce considered they were overworked, nor in any way exploited.
In spite of the growing success, there was still never any spare cash as profits were endlessly ploughed back in the unremitting quest for newer, more powerful machinery.
While money was usually found for the larger items, there was a continual shortage for other equipment.
Dai Jones remembered when he had to go to his cousin in Llandidloes for a bucket to mix the dyes, ‘because there was no money to buy one, and money was owed everywhere.’
Also the only vehicle was a small van suitable for local deliveries, and so goods were despatched each day throughout the world from Carno's small sub-post office.
All items had to be packed so that they weighed less than twenty-two pounds and sometimes there were so many parcels filling the room that it was impossible for other customers to pass through the door; the postmaster would then telephone the Newtown depot to request a special van to come and collect them.
Eventually the post office built an extension simply to cope with Ashley Mountney work.
The company was engaged in a delicate balancing act; it could not afford first-rate machinery or transport until it had expanded, but it could not expand (as a wholesaler at least) until it improved quality through more sophisticated machinery.
Bernard and Laura nearly became victims of their own success at this point; with the great increase in turnover (sales were by this time around £100,000 a year), the company was falling into the near inevitable trap of a young, fast-growing business.
It was forever seeking longer credit from its suppliers, it was never able to  be paid quickly enough by its customers and did not boast adequate assets to borrow permanent capital.
They had had accountants to help them in the past but, as a group, Laura never trusted them.
One, she felt, was taking advantage of Bernard and her by knowing about the business — he had requested some shares in the company, which she considered an outrageous request; another had called her by her Christian name which was equally unacceptable.
She  preferred Bernard to work out whatever financial disciplines were necessary ‘on the back of an envelope’ and Carol Jones, who was ‘one of the family’to balance the books.
Laura maintained, pointedly, that she could manage quite well with a traditional abacus, which she asked Dai to make her.
it was a good example of Laura's humour; no one was expected to laugh.
Finally the Ashleys decided to combat the problem of non-paying wholesale customers by themselves buying a London shop.
For a long time Laura had nurtured this dream, but Bernard well knew that selling products in your own shop at the same time as supplying other retailers was a risky undertaking; the latter regarded it as unfair competition.
However, he was increasingly irritated by having goods returned, even if complaints were occasionally justified.
Without adequate infra-structure it was difficult to ensure that, for example, two small purple dresses went to Harrods and four large green smocks to Liberty's.
Rectifying such errors was costly.
As Ashley Mountney could not become entirely independent of the wholesalers overnight it was decided to start a subsidiary company expressly for the retailing operation and in 1968, little more than one year after the move to Carno, Ashley Shops ltd was formed.
The first ‘Laura Ashley’ shop in London no longer exists.
It was swallowed up by London Transport, who owned the site, and became part of South Kensington underground station.
Previously, 23, Pelham Street had been a boutique with a mezzanine floor, two changing rooms and an office.
The Ashleys decorated it plainly in white and left it as bare as possible, apart from two rails which could hold up to 500 garments.
The name ‘Laura Ashley’ was attached to the glass in modern, bold, white letters.
There was never any doubt that the shops would take their name from the labels in the clothes, which, it was hoped, loyal customers would recognize.
‘Made in Wales’ was also printed on the labels, which further reinforced the authentic country air.
On the first day takings were twenty-seven pounds, seventeen shillings and sixpence and for six months many potential customers walked past assuming it was a wholesale showroom.
Then Bernard made two critical decisions; for the first time he organized some advertising and he hired a new shop manageress.
Moira Braybrooke was one of Bernard's most imaginative appointments since she had neither retail nor fashion trade experience; she had worked as  a secretary in Monte Carlo, had style, good looks and an exotic family background.
Looking for a change, she answered a newspaper advertisement.
Bernard spotted a dynamic personality and sent Moira plunging into her new job.
Perhaps because she had not previously been living in London, Moira observed precisely what it was that dozens of well-bred young ladies were enthusing over; the long pin-tucked nightdresses, which no one else was making, to wear as day or evening dresses.
She knew that although the shop stocked a few overalls and smocks and even some children's clothes and sheepskin jackets, it was the long dresses with their wonderfully romantic feel and yards of material in the skirts, that the cognoscenti came to buy.
No other manufacturer would be so profligate in their use of fabric but the Ashleys behaved as if they had fabric to spare.
Often they did.
Buoyed by Moira's immediate report, Bernard spent £200 on some photographs and had posters printed of a model wearing a corduroy maxi dress with a high neck, belt, tucks along the bodice and a full skirt with a wide frill; excellent value at six guineas.
He placed the posters around London's underground, giving the little shop as a stockist.
The effect was electrifying.
Suddenly queues formed around the block with girls keen to grab armfuls of the dresses.
The two beleaguered shop assistants were on their feet serving, wrapping and operating the till non-stop for days; they became exhausted.
If the changing rooms were full, girls would undress in the middle of the shop leaving piles of clothes all over the floor, such was their desperation to find the print and the style of their choice.
Sometimes Moira had to lock customers out in the middle of the day in order to control the numbers inside.
When both the Observer and the Daily Express wrote flattering editorials on the new shop, sales soared to over £3,000 a week.
From now on‘Laura Ashley’ was always considered good material for hungry fashion editors eager to spot a wayward trend and Moira cultivated close relationships with all the fashion editors of the day.
‘The press was always very kind to us, giving us so many free editorials that we never had to pay a penny for advertising.
Often we would design something specially; if someone rang and asked if we had a Mexican outfit for a feature on Mexican clothes we'd say ‘yes’ and within a day have a sample made up which fitted in with a Mexican look.’
The ability to produce garments at speed and on demand in this way was obviously a vital factor in the early success.
No marketing and  no forecasting ensured huge flexibility.
‘It meant we never had to say ‘no’ to anything a fashion editor asked of us,’Moira joked.
Her relationship with Meirion was crucial, too, for ensuring the steady flow of garments from Carno to London.
Both would shout at the other down the telephone so much that Laura, fascinated by the interaction of her staff, used to worry on occasion that they were not ‘getting on’.
To an extent, the stormy exterior mirrored the relationship of their employers, Bernard and Laura; but underneath everyone was shooting for the same goal.
Moira knew exactly what designs she needed in the shop and would tell Meirion to have two dozen of a particular style ready for delivery to the shop within two days at most.
But she never dared instruct on colours.
‘We just let him use whatever dyes he liked and send us whatever he ended up with.’
Dye mixing was still being done by hand, often using the same bucket, without cleaning the dregs in between, for startlingly different shades, so that colour matching was virtually impossible.
Thus there could be no economies of scale in case a sleeve cut from one lay of medium blue had to go with a dress cut from another lay of so-called medium blue.
Not surprisingly, the ‘Laura Ashley’ palette was always highly distinctive; from the moment the shop opened it was clear that their prints, either monochrome or two tone, were being produced in colours nowhere else available.
These had now moved away from the bright primaries of the early Sixties and included many rustic shades such as mushroom brown, sage green and sludgy blue; colours, which were more reminiscent of the old-fashioned vegetable dyes and perfectly complemented the style of the dresses.
The sudden and dramatic success of the London shop might have caused uproar and panic among the thirty-strong team in Carno.
Instead, it generated excitement and renewed vigour.
Deliveries to London were mostly undertaken by Meirion or Dai Jones, and occasionally, Bernard.
At first they managed with an old Hillman Minx estate, but they soon traded up to a Ford Transit van.
They would load it for Pelham Street after a day's work in the factory, drive there and back in a night, and report for work as usual the next morning.
There were certain weeks when a driver went every night, others when they could get by with three deliveries a week.
‘But we didn't mind a bit, a job here was so much more than just a means to an end, it was never a  case of them and us.
We're not exactly country yokels, but all the same selling garments in London, yes, to be honest, it was very exciting,’ Dai Jones admitted twenty years later.
Seeing what ‘Laura Ashley’ has become today, such remarks do not seem out of place.
But in the context of the mid-Sixties, when Britain's chaotic labour relations were deemed to be among the world's worst, such good-natured willingness to work long hours, doing all kinds of jobs, for sums of money that were not vast, are extraordinary.
I here was hardly a corner of British industry in the Sixties which did not suffer strike action of one sort; much of it lengthy, acrimonious and ultimately futile.
Yet there never was,— and still is not, a trade union at ‘Laura Ashley’.
Bernard and Laura maintained that their door was always open and while the company remained small, it always was.
Nobody ever felt the heavy hand of management versus employees.
The couple worked at the same tasks as their staff, they dressed in the same way, educated their children at the same schools and ate in the same canteen.
Not surprisingly, they were rewarded by deep loyalty and an overriding will to succeed.
It is largely this ability of the entire enterprise to pull together which gave rise to, and strengthened the myth: somehow, ‘Laura Ashley’ represented all that was best in traditional Britain.
In those early years Laura believed that the prints were more important than the styles.
They had chanced upon a look which was popular and yet could be varied in dozens of different ways; the neck could be scooped, V-shaped or square, the sleeves could be full, tight or removed altogether (so that it became a pinafore), and the waistline could be moved up or down.
Only the length was a non-variable and so every style retained the same ‘look’.
The pinafore version naturally needed a blouse and items in unbleached white cotton were the cheapest of all to produce.
This realization led to several white calico garments; fulsome petticoats, frilled blouses and fancy nightdresses being the most obvious, all of them generous with material.
Moira is convinced that ‘at this stage there was no conscious effort to recreate the past in the styles — one thing just led to another — but there was in terms of the prints; with old reference books proving far and away the best place to find ideas.’
By 1969 Laura was spending much of her time poring over old books — the endpapers of novels were a rich source of small prints as were old plates, teapots, and patchwork quilts, in fact anything that caught her eye in a variety of odd shops.
And she had begun to form a unique  library of prints she liked.
One of the most popular motifs at the time the shop opened was of swans and lions, which came from an old, heraldic design; another was a Persian print showing a fantastical dog in a jungle of giant thistles.
There were also several prints of buds and flowers in the range, but these were by no means predominant, nor, yet, was their ultimate significance to the company glaringly apparent.
Laura was never one to swim with every fashionable cross-current that came her way.
If a woman found a style she liked, why should she not keep it for ever, as long as it was practical and comfortable?
For herself, she had by now evolved a working wardrobe of a plain skirt, in navy or beige with matching cardigan (usually well worn and full of holes in the elbows) and a toning plain shirt.
This, in essence, remained her favourite outfit until she died.
But she did keep abreast of fashion eddies, for example by subscribing to the fashion trends and information service, Infovogue, and by reading as many magazines as she could discover.
In this way she developed her instinctive talent as a fashion editor; she could instantly take a detail from this and an idea from that, while keeping well within her overall style.
The year the shop opened she hired a new dress designer, Jacqui Smale, fresh from the Royal College of Art, and told her how sensible she thought it was to wear uniform because this removed the agonies of planning what to wear each day as well as the decisions about accessories to go with the clothes.
Perhaps she was attracted to Jacqui's work because she had just won a prize for designing a new uniform.
Laura gave Jacqui a clear brief about the sort of dresses and blouses she wanted and sent her to the Victoria and Albert Museum to research styles.
‘I had to adjust my ideas because my previous designs were sharp little miniskirts…rather severe.’
Although Laura would phone Jacqui every day she would usually ask for another dress ‘along the same lines’.
With her sewing machine on the half-landing of the Pelham Street shop, she worked mostly at making up samples to send to Wales.
Although Jacqui went to Carno periodically and helped teach Meirion and others how to grade, a skill she had learnt at college, Laura wanted Jacqui to be based in Carno as one of her growing design team.
This included Phil Morris, who had been apprenticed to a graphics printer for four years when he joined the company and who was immediately sent by Bernard on a further course in fabric processing.
Then he was  drafted into Laura's studio where his technical expertise was critical in strengthening the developing team.
Phil soon became one of Laura's closest associates but even he recognized that ‘she wasn't an easy person to work with, I think anyone will tell you that.
But I learned how to, over the years.
You could never impress yourself or your own ideas and feelings on to her.
You had to make her feel she was coming up with the original idea.
She had this absolute conviction that what she liked, other people would too.
Amazingly, her touch was almost always right.’
Phil's discovery of Laura's need to believe she had decided whether or not a new idea would be successful was an essential prerequisite for anyone who wanted a good working relationship with her.
Those who understood this might leave a swatch of fabric lying around so that Laura could pick it up and believe she had discovered it herself, even if they had been trying to persuade her to use it for months.
She would never be coerced into something that was not wholly hers because she was deeply concerned lest the image of the company would be irreparably diluted.
Since the product bore her name, it became of paramount importance to her to maintain an image of which she approved.
With the London shop flourishing the Ashleys could afford to worry less about oppilative buyers.
However, one unexpected new problem emerged.
For months they had had difficulty in reconciling the accounts until they realized the extent of shoplifting.
The Ashleys, determined to stamp it out, adopted an active watching policy.
Surapee (Su) Karnasuta, a young Thai who helped Moira run the shop, had several Thai friends who were happy to train their eyes on potential shoplifters and were not afraid of speaking authoritatively to anyone they suspected of helping themselves.
Another unforeseen dilemma which now surfaced was how to satisfy the demands of the new customers for winter-weight, or seasonal clothes.
Until now it had been enough to produce smocks, nightdresses and long dresses in cotton for stores which would carry supplementary ranges by other manufacturers in different departments.
But a shop selling only summer-weight clothes in November looked mildly ridiculous.
Miss Griffiths remembers costly experiments with machining wool at Tybrith which ended in disaster as the fabric had stretched and shrunk in all the wrong places.
A heavy investment in new machinery was needed before Ashley Mountney could offer wool garments.
Bernard ingeniously proposed a range of dresses in ‘double  cotton’, or a double layer of fabric.
Although somewhat bulky and unflattering, it was not unsuccessful as it blended with the current trend for layered clothes and endorsed the rustic air of a bygone age that other ‘Laura Ashley’ clothes were now describing, As they would not consider offering anything that was not made of 100 per cent natural fibres, they managed to complete the range by producing dresses in brushed cotton and cotton corduroy.
Part of the attraction of shopping at ‘Laura Ashley’ was finding uniquely eccentric clothes.
The peasant look was a potent image, but there were others.
The magic was being able to step into a ‘Laura Ashley’ dress and imagine you had found something out of a dressing-up box.
You had put on much more than a dress, there was such a vivid aura of theatre and drama surrounding it.
And all of this for just a few pounds.
But personally, the decade did not end well for Laura.
The phenomenal success of Pelham Street pulled both her and Bernard increasingly into the capital.
Bernard was happy to drive up and down several times in a week, but Laura felt the need for a base.
At first, they took a flat in Chelsea, opposite the Royal Hospital, but in 1969 they bought a beautiful nineteenth-century house in Paulton's Square, originally built for army personnel.
It was but a short hop from their first rooms in St George's Square but represented an enormous leap in lifestyle.
Laura's frequent absences in London meant that her baby, Emma, was often left behind with Gwenny Hughes.
Although Laura had great faith in Gwenny, she never doubted that it was a mother's place to be with her child.
For one who was convinced of the merits of control, both control of self and regulation of one's environment, she was discovering something beyond her range of command; her children.
Inevitably, as the older three grew up and away from her, Laura suffered.
David, feeling that he was learning nothing at Newtown Comprehensive and that his parents' lives were increasingly centred on London, took a unilateral decision; he left Clogau, moved into the family flat in Chelsea and enrolled at Holland Park Comprehensive, the most renowned, free-thinking state school of the day.
When he wrote home to Jane telling her how wonderful was his new independent life style, she followed.
Laura's two oldest children thus fled the nest while still in their teens, and she was powerless to respond.
Meanwhile Laura and Bernard underwent a change of heart over educational  priorities and wanted to send Nick to the nearby, old-established public school, Shrewsbury.
To bring him up to the required standard he had to go to a boarding preparatory school, which he loathed so much he escaped over the wall and hitchhiked home.
Laura could not force him back and, in a desultory fashion, he was allowed to follow in his siblings' tracks.
It was as if , because she bore them so much love, the actions of her children had the power to anaesthetize some of her most cherished convictions.
At the same time as running two homes, Laura was still combining many roles in the factory.
In the autumn of 1969, aged forty-four, she found herself pregnant yet again and, utterly exhausted, went into hospital for an examination which resulted in a miscarriage.
The experience left her physically and emotionally drained and a few months later she returned to hospital for a hysterectomy.
In the event, the operation went smoothly, but factory staff say they saw a new uncertain side to Bernard during those tense, waiting days.
She slowly regained her strength in the latter part of the year, just in time to cope with a winter season and no designer.
Jacqui Smale had left before Christmas as she had recently married and could not, as Laura wished, move to Wales.
Laura was not in a great hurry to find a new designer if only because it was dawning on her that the company needed more of a skilled copier than an original artist.
Some of Jacqui's clothes bore the label ‘Designed by Jacqui Smale for Laura Ashley’ and Veronica Papworth, fashion editor of the Sunday Express, had written flatteringly about Jacqui's work.
In future, all designers at ‘Laura Ashley’ were to remain anonymous and the company Image was kept under close control and scrutiny by Laura.
The Ashleys were already highly conscious that they were selling a brand, which happened to bear Laura's name.
They knew that designers would come and go but the real strength of the company was the creation of one brand with which the public could readily identify.
To get them through the Christmas crisis, staff in London were instructed to send down a variety of commercial patterns and magazines which Laura adapted herself.
Somehow a collection for the next few months was cobbled together and gobbled up by the hungry customers.
INTERNATIONALIZATION
‘If you went to a summer party in 1970,’ said Joanne Brogden, Professor of Fashion at the Royal College of Art, ‘you could guarantee that most women would be wearing a long ‘Laura Ashley’skirt or dress.
Perhaps Mrs Ashley understood best what English women want, which is to feel not too conspicuous but, rather, pretty and comfortable.
And if they have a lot of money they probably don't want to show it.
If she is unique, it's in the way she introduced fashion for wearing and for the houses we live in.’
The Seventies was truly Laura Ashley's decade.
Not because she was a clairvoyant forecasting trends which suddenly came true, but because this was the moment when her consistently held belief that clothes were part of an overall way of living was now applauded by the market.
She had always devoted considerable time to patient observation of her surroundings, her staff and humanity in general and, now, her assessment of women's needs and desires precisely matched the throwback mood of the Seventies.
That she achieved it just when the company was set for major expansion, was an accident of timing that Bernard was determined to exploit to the full.
The publicity given to the company in the Seventies was out of all proportion to its size; but magazine and newspaper editors recognized that Ashley shops and their products offered something quite new.
The bold geometrics of Courrèges, the pink plastic and psychedelic horrors  of Parisian and other designers, had had their day.
Seventies' youth was full of uncertainties and tenderness which was reflected in the trend for romance and nostalgia, fabrics that swayed and moved; women wanted to dress up.
The film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid further reinforced the nostalgia boom.
‘I can't imagine any girl not wanting to look like Katharine Ross,’ wrote one fashion editor early in 1971.
The way to do so, she recommended, was to wear long ‘Laura Ashley’ dresses with wide sashes and lace-up fringed boots.
‘At an unbelievable five guineas,’ the mass circulation She magazine told its readers, ‘you can't afford to miss this full value summer dance dress to add enchantment to your evenings.
‘Laura Ashley’ prints are not only inexpensive, they are exclusive and in fine natural cotton (takes beautifully to starching) strewn with pale and perfect posies.’
Such was the power of the press that it quickly became apparent that 23 Pelham Street could no longer cope with the demand.
The Ashleys annexed Number 25, to be used only for selling fabric (at thirty-five pence per yard) as the factory was still producing far more than could be made up into garments, while Number 23 was used just for children's clothes.
New premises, around the corner at the top end of Fulham Road, were acquired to serve as the outlet for adult clothes.
At 1,760 sq.
ft., this new shop was the largest and smartest yet.
It was in a row of green marble facades, but although the elegant exterior had to be maintained, inside the Ashleys continued their policy of minimal decoration with maximum stock.
Again the shop looked more like a warehouse ‘with only the clothes to make…a forest of colour’, wrote Veronica Papworth in the Sunday Express.
The stone-floored basement was converted into a huge, communal changing room, one of the first of its kind, and Bernard thoughtfully provided a large leather armchair for bored husbands or partners.
A long queue of customers greeted the shop's opening on 4 May 1970.
That year, total sales for the company were in the region of £300,000, of which £250,000 came from the shops.
At the same time Gwalia House was closed down and replaced by a quaint shop in the historic market town of Shrewsbury.
Originally intended as an outlet for the excessive number of seconds that were still being produced (both flawed material and finished items), it was selected mostly because of its convenient location for Bernard on his route from London to Clogau.
It cost a mere eight pounds a week to  rent.
But neither he nor Laura had time to oversee it properly and the first few months were disastrous.
One day Bernard arrived to find crisp wrappers littering the floor and the assistants sitting around smoking.
Furious, he immediately closed the shop, fired the staff and the entire provincial retail spread of ‘Laura Ashley’ might have ended there.
But Laura herself quietly went in the next day, spent hours cleaning up the mess and advertised for a new manageress.
Bernard agreed to give the shop a second chance and hired Jean Revers.
Not quite knowing what to expect other than that she wanted a new job, Jean turned up for work promptly on a cold, wet, Monday morning but found no one to let her in.
Finally Carol Jones, arriving in a great hurry, apologized but could not stay as she was doing the payroll.
‘See you next Saturday,’ she called out as she handed Jean the night-safe wallet and left.
That, however, was exactly what attracted Jean to the company.
‘No one ever checked up on you, they just trusted you so you felt you had to prove yourself.’
She immediately set to and tried to establish some order.
‘The shop was in an awful muddle,’ Jean recalls.
‘There was no system at all in the company, they would just offload whatever they felt like whenever they wanted.
You dreaded anyone coming in for fabric because you knew you wouldn't be able to get more than three yards without a fault.’
Jean so enjoyed the challenge of her new job that she asked her husband, Peter, then a watch salesman, to help her move the heavy rolls of fabric, put up shelves and pictures and generally bring some order to the store.
‘We were busy smartening things up one night when BA knocked on the door.
He was driving past, saw a light on in the shop and demanded to know what was going on.’
Bernard could not fail to have been impressed by such spontaneous enthusiasm; equally, Peter felt Bernard was ‘obviously a man of excitement heading a most intriguing company, I could see that he needed someone to deal with the administration leaving him free to run his company.’
Within a few months Peter, too, was offered a job, initially to help Bernard market home furnishing fabrics on a wholesale basis.
Bernard was keen to re-enter the contract market with the country furnishing cotton and a decorator cotton, which was half-way between cotton and sateen.
He had, still, many contacts in this field and it was yet another approach to coping with the surplus capacity produced by the Carno factory.
But, increasingly, their own shops were also a highly successful  means of serving this end; many young couples were buying the lightweight fabrics, because they were so cheap, and using them for furnishing.
In 1971 the Pelham Street premises were threatened with demolition as London Transport wanted to re-develop the underground station.
To replace them a lease was taken on 71 Lower Sloane Street.
At the same time, an exceptionally pretty ‘Laura Ashley’ shop opened outside the capital, in Bath, one of the most popular tourist centres in the country, particularly for Americans.
Buying a ‘Laura Ashley’ dress was like buying a small piece of old England to take home.
Jean Revers, who had dramatically improved sales figures at Shrewsbury, was invited to run the Bath shop, a beautiful old narrow, timbered building on three floors with a small flat on top which the Ashleys were converting, tempted by the possibility of staying there themselves.
The shop was well-located, close to the ancient Abbey and Roman Baths.
But there was a further appeal; the City boasts two excellent museums with a wealth of textile resources; the American Museum and the Museum of Costume.
Laura found enormous fulfilment in discovering old print references and Brian Jones, a soft-spoken, young artist who had recently joined her design team in Carno, proved adept at transferring them on to fabric.
Virtually self-taught, Brian Jones was to become a mainstay of Laura's design team, always having an instinctive feel for what Would appeal, or not, to Laura.
She always felt unnerved when she researched at the august Victoria and Albert Museum and became only too conscious of her lack of formal training.
Junk shops and smaller museums became a more satisfactory hunting ground for her.
In the event, however, the Revers moved into the half-converted premises at 12 New Bond Street, Bath.
It was they who oversaw the Ashleys' first venture into environmental selling, whereby the country charm and old-world air of the house perfectly complemented the products on sale within.
The shop's three glass doors and old-fashioned set of windows were all adorned with window boxes and hanging baskets and for several years it won a Bath Festival award for the best floral shop facade in the City.
The Bath shop became an important centre for all Ashley operations as the second floor was used as an office as well as a workroom for two machinists.
Here samples were made which would be sent to the London shop for testing.
If they proved successful, they would be despatched to Carno for mass  production.
On the ground and first floors, products were displayed in a more domesticated, less austere atmosphere than in London with a deliberate attempt to make customers feel that they were shopping in a private house from an earlier century.
The basement, again with its original flagstones, became a large communal changing room similar to the one in Fulham Road.
As the retail side of the operation was now increasing in importance, one of Peter Revers' principal tasks was to find new store locations and Jean's was to hire staff for them.
In 1972 another fabric store opened at 40 Sloane Street, and, more importantly, the first shop in Europe was taken in Geneva; Bernard's idea.
There were no marketing plans nor sales projections.
It was just an adventurous, yet instinctive choice of base from which to plan an international assault.
As he had always maintained good relations with a number of Swiss wholesalers, the products were well known and well received there.
He recognized that the strength of the Swiss franc would be an important factor in developing other European stores, and he knew that Geneva, although not in the forefront of the fashion world, attracted a number of the internationally rich and famous.
So he set off one day with Moira, as she spoke French, and they stayed in Geneva until they had organized the shop.
It was an instant success and the staff took great pleasure in reporting back when the actresses Audrey Hepburn and Sophia Loren both travelled from Italy to patronize the establishment.
Both Bernard and Laura developed an accurate profile of their London customers.
Although Laura always prided herself that her clothes suited any woman from fourteen to forty (plus), there was a distinct ‘Laura Ashley’ girl emerging.
Sixteen-year-old Sara Freeman liked to spend Saturday afternoon shopping and had just discovered the new shop in Fulham Road.
After a long session trying on clothes, she was walking out with her purchases when a man tapped her on the shoulder and asked her to go back into the shop.
‘It was Bernard, who had been watching me from his office and asked me if I had ever thought of a career in modelling.’
Sara was slim and pretty with long, straight hair, good bone structure and no make-up.
Epitomizing the natural English girl Laura had in mind for her clothes, Sara became the first ‘Laura Ashley’ model, a prelude to a highly successful modelling career.
She was soon invited back to the house at Paulton's Square, where she found Laura ‘motherly, warm, interested in what you were  doing and a marvellous person to chat to.
There was no fuss, you just became part of the family immediately and did everything together.’
Sara often stayed with the Ashleys in Wales and, at first, Bernard took all the photographs.
Bernard had always been intrigued by the possibilities of photography — Cartier-Bresson being an early idol as much as Hemingway now he had an opportunity to indulge his aspirations.
Laura was always around, but in the background.
Sara recalls, ‘She was there as a mother.
I never saw Laura working at the business.
I feel it was an enormous privilege to have known them because they made work such fun.
I never enjoyed any later professional modelling jobs as much.’
One day another unusual customer was spotted; a man buying a selection of dresses.
Tom Trevaskis, an Australian manufacturer looking for ideas in Europe, made no secret of his intention to copy certain features of the dresses he thought would be popular in Australia.
He returned a few days later to meet the proprietors and Bernard, recognizing there was a limit to their own international expansion at this stage, and ever keen to find outlets for the masses of cloth being printed, immediately proposed to Trevaskis that they worked together, not in competition.
The two men struck a deal and subsequently Trevaskis took a 50 per cent partnership in a new company to import ‘Laura Ashley’ fabrics and make them up locally according to agreed patterns and styles.
Shortly after, a similar deal was negotiated with a Canadian businessman, Joe Yanow, and ‘Laura Ashley’ shops were soon dotted around the major towns of Canada and Australia.
Laura herself took no part in these business arrangements.
Perhaps she was not interested.
Probably she was, but she knew this side of the company belonged to her husband and any involvement on her part would seem to him an interference.
She never encroached on anything that she (and he) deemed his territory, although he was not so circumspect in offering his opinion on design and colour.
One of the more experienced printers remembers Laura asking him at this time to ‘have a go’ at producing a pattern she liked.
When she saw a test of it she was extremely pleased and told him to run off a few hundred yards.
‘Well, just as we finished the boss came past in a hell of a state.
We three all went rigid.
We knew he didn't like it.
He just took out a knife and slashed the silk screen and that was that.’
Laura, who watched this scene with the faintest flicker of a smile, said nothing.
‘We felt sorry for  her but he just didn't want that pattern,’ recalled the printers.
The employees were occasionally terrified of Bernard ‘as if he had one over him,’ as they described it, but they all knew that however much he might stamp and shout while the anger lasted, he could go for a walk and come back as if nothing had happened.
Laura, however, was much less straightforward.
If she were annoyed she would say nothing but her anger might last for weeks, sometimes months, becoming more intractable for its lack of outlet.
Jane believes that her mother was often stressed to the point of despair at this time, ‘…that she suffered all the torments and tribulations of every working mother without anything in her background, education or make-up having prepared her for such an emotional wrenching.’
Although by now she had had twenty years in which to accustom herself to Bernard's outbursts in private, and, in a curious way this display of his male aggression was also a powerful magnetic force for her, she was nonetheless acutely embarrassed by any public display of his temper.
‘I never intended to belittle or humiliate her in public.
My impatience and intolerance were always directed against things outside the company and Laura knew that.
But she was always there, with me, to protect me and sometimes she'd get caught in the blast,’ Bernard explains.
Laura tolerated his tirades because she loved him, and she forgave him everything as one forgives a child.
But the same level of tolerance did not always extend to her staff, who may have fallen short of her high standards or overstepped the bounds of power.
It is important to see her occasional contretemps with staff within the context of her relationship with Bernard; almost everyone who worked with her was aware that she had two, sometimes quite distinct, sides.
She was, unquestionably, a mother figure, full of care, concern and interest, and this is how her friends saw her.
But as an employer, she could be demandingly difficult, with an unyielding, steely core, possessed only by those with utter conviction in the rightness of what they are doing.
Overall, she inspired great loyalty, respect and love, but her home life was often fraught and it is impossible to appreciate the extent of her achievement in commercial terms if unaware of the friction in her domestic life.
The sudden and massive expansion of the company's market in the early Seventies had several repercussions.
At the beginning of the decade the Welsh staff had already swollen to 90, but within eighteen  months had reached 130.
After Jackie Smale's departure, most of the new clothes were created by Tim Gardner, a freelance designer who subsequently won an award as Romantic Designer of the Year.
The company's next full-time designer was an unusually talented Thai women, Sonny Vipatasilpin, a friend of Su, the first manageress of the Pelham Street shop.
Sonny had been Thailand's foremost classical dancing teacher, with a school of her own and a television programme.
She had some peripheral experience of design through the theatre but her appointment as ‘Laura Ashley's principal designer was typical of Bernard and Laura's preference for those without formal vocational training who, they believed, would approach the job with unblinkered vision.
‘In any case,’ Su explains, ‘all women in Thailand knew how to sew.’
Sonny, it turned out, knew more than that: many of her ideas arose from her exotic background and, dovetailing neatly with Laura's romantic vision, these designs remained top sellers for years.
From now on the media began to talk about a ‘Laura Ashley look’, which sometimes meant a milkmaid style and at others a Victorian nursery maid, but the appeal was predominantly pastoral.
Laura had learned, from the antique dress in the window of Gwalia House, the pulling power of a loss leader and she was not above producing one sample dress, never intended for general distribution, for the press, always hungry for a fashion article around which they could build a story.
This helped enormously to develop in the public mind the idea that ‘Laura Ashley’ was a place where idealized longings for rural relics could be indulged, where clothes with bustles, tiers, smock aprons, frills and puffed sleeves could be found.
Not only was there plain cotton but now lace, lawn, twill, corduroy, crepe, velvet, silk and some wool were all being used in the fabrication of these follies of fashion.
In the early part of the decade ‘Laura Ashley’ was selling a bustle-backed wedding dress in cotton seersucker for a mere ten pounds fifty, A famous designer was charging £600 for a comparable design.
Laura often went for long walks on her own into the hills behind Carno railway station.
Sometimes she would come back with a posy of flowers, other times she would just spend an hour deep in meditation.
When Bernard was there, they walked together, and discussed every aspect of the business but, more often, she walked alone in the Welsh hills refining and reiterating silently her philosophy of life.
Fashions are forever fickle; but to Laura they contained many constants.
She believed women should have a sensible working wardrobe and, abhorring idleness, wanted to sell clothes for the working woman.
The ideal working dress would, therefore, be one in which you could reach up high to bring down the best china, bend down low to pick up the dropped toy, feel comfortable in for walking around the park and pushing a pram or playing ball, not worry about if baby food was deposited on it, move around in easily with a baby on your hip and cover up totally for rolling out pastry or helping with painting.
In other words, Laura's idea of the working woman was one who worked at home, and her needs should be catered for so that she could look attractive in the environment in which she naturally flourished.
Laura wanted her shops to stock a complete wardrobe for this working woman,(the ‘capsule wardrobe’ of her Wren youth) rather like lists sent out by boarding schools before term.
She wanted one pinafore, one skirt, one dress, perhaps two blouses, one nightdress, an apron, a swimming costume, a coat and a jacket.
‘Many of our customers could not understand why we might have only one style of nightdress or long-sleeved blouse, but it was because Laura was trying to evolve the most perfect example of that particular item and believed it was more important to have one good example of each than several skirts and dresses,’ Moira explains.
During her walks, she doubtless ripened her belief in the moral purpose of clothing.
Although compromises, inevitably, were made, Laura was, almost instinctively, anti-fashion and anti-design; ‘more is less’ being a long-standing Ashley maxim.
Being poor, she knew from experience, did not necessarily mean being without taste.
Interestingly, her attempt to impose, however gently, a universal level of good taste made her clothes unacceptable to many art students, who perceived a ‘Laura Ashley’ outfit as death to individualism.
Conversely, most other students, as well as former ‘women's libbers’, with whom Laura might have thought she had nothing in common, warmly welcomed her clothes.
In their eyes, a ‘Laura Ashley’ dress, with its known emphasis on 100 per cent natural fibres, together with its cheap price and universality combined a soundness both ecological and ideological.
The women's movement was maturing too, as it slowly swung back to the acceptability of some women choosing not to work outside the home.
This was tolerated as long as they did so out of a sense of liberation at  being at home, i.e. through choice not force.
The non-radical and less aggressive values of the women's movement, second phase, fitted well with the ‘Laura Ashley’ style.
Furthermore a ‘Laura Ashley’ dress was not made according to a man's stereotype of how a woman should look, although Laura believed that the covered-up, ‘floaty’look was what men liked.
Many of the dresses looked as pretty and attractive on fatter or pregnant women as on their taller and slimmer sisters.
Laura was not the first English designer with a puritanical streak.
From Ruskin, to Morris and even Terence Conran, there is a discernible tradition which mixed design with ethics and social theory.
Laura certainly brought a missionary zeal to her work; it was yet another stepping stone which enabled her to cross the gulf from working at home to working outside without associated guilt.
The roots for such zeal can be traced to the many dress reform movements of the nineteenth century of which the shared goal was to alleviate the pressure of fashion on dress, both for men and women.
Many of the reformers of the 1870s and 1880s believed that women would earn both a new respect, if they could eschew the frivolities of fashion, and a new freedom which would liberate them to perform a useful role in society.
Mrs Amelia Bloomer, an American, whose eponymous, bifurcated undergarment was considered revolutionary in the early part of the last century, was passionately concerned with showing women that they could combine beauty with utility.
Although later reformers in England were concerned with the weight of fabric for maintaining body temperature, most were appalled by the emphasis on spider waists achieved through tight lacing and corsets.
The result was restricted movement, fainting fits and even curvature of the spine.
Not long after Mrs Bloomer's crusade, the women favoured by pre-Raphaelite painters also took up the cudgels on behalf of dress reformers and wore loose-fitting dresses with low-set sleeves and dropped shoulder lines for maximum movement and comfort.
Probably the loudest voice raised in favour of dress reform in the last century was that of the German, Dr Gustav Jaeger, who for sanitary and hygienic reasons, wanted men and women to wear natural, undyed wool next to their skin.
Women were permitted corsets only if they used no force to preserve the shape.
Dr Jaeger may have been considered an eccentric, but the Rational Dress Society, which won so many adherents at the International Health Exhibition in 1884, continued the battle on broader lines.
Laura  would have approved of their aims, which almost a century later, stood as a beacon for her own philosophy; they were ‘to protest against the introduction of any fashion in dress that either deforms the body, impedes movement or injures health…and to promote the adoption according to individual taste and convenience of a style of dress based upon considerations of health, comfort and beauty and to deprecate the constant changes of fashion that cannot be recommended on any of these grounds.’
But the greatest blow to the dictates of fashion on women's dress came with the World War I. Although Laura Ashley had, unconsciously, much in common with the nineteenth-century dress reformers it is ironic that their efforts towards change were entangled inextricably with the organized struggles for the rights of women; women, to be taken seriously, had to dress in a more robust, sensible manner, they stated — an argument amply demonstrated by their usefulness in wartime.
Towards the end of the twentieth century, Laura believed that the pendulum had swung too far and that women were far more likely to achieve their ends if they showed more feminine charm, prettiness and selflessness, as she herself practised.
But her belief that all women, regardless of wealth, should be offered clothes that were artistic and beautiful, not brash, sexually offensive or uncomfortable, would have made her a worthy member of most of the nineteenth-century dress reform movements.
In spite of her preference for high necks and concealment, Laura once allowed a bikini to be added to the ‘shopping list’ of essential items.
It was only when The Sun newspaper displayed it on a girl in a highly provocative pose that she realized how easily the purity of the image could be sullied.
Another magazine featured her popular lace insert blouse on a well-endowed model who wore no bra underneath, with quite a different effect from that intended.
She decided therefore that The Sun was never again to be offered ‘Laura Ashley’ publicity material and reinforced as tight a hold as possible on the Image.
Only a family member could be trusted to do this.
It was in this spirit that Bernard gave Jane, at eighteen, a professional's Hasselblad camera and appointed her company photographer, the first of their children to work for the company.
‘It was typical of his deep-end philosophy,’ says Jane, fondly.
‘He threw you in and you either sank or swam.’
Jane, who had a natural feel for mood and background which complemented  the clothes, swam more than competently and her black and white images of windswept models against bleak moors or stark beaches created for many who saw them on the white shop walls their indelible image of ‘Laura Ashley’.
Today, most high street shops use photographs of their clothes to win over customers but in the early Seventies, the concept was startlingly new and original and Jane's work was highly acclaimed by other professionals.
Behind, or perhaps in front of, all the ideals and theories there was a sound technical base which, under Bernard's tutelage, was also entering a phase of significant growth.
Almost as soon as they moved into the Carno premises they had outgrown them.
Between 1968 and 1972 seven major extensions were added to the original railway station buildings.
The most dramatic breakthrough came in 1970 as Courtaulds, the textile giant, was upgrading its machinery and selling off cheaply equipment which had been built to last for years.
Over a two-year period, ‘Laura Ashley’ bought from Courtaulds two Stork flat bed printers, one Buser printer, ‘the Rolls Royce of them all’, two pad mangles, a step and repeat machine and a 15,000 lb. boiler.
‘We bought it, dismantled it, brought it back and re-erected it,’ Dai Jones vividly recounts.
‘Bernard had always wanted a Swiss Buser and as we only had to pay £1,500 for it he was very impatient to see it work, like a small boy with a new toy.
Laura was very excited too because until then we could only produce two colours but now, suddenly, we could print eight; it was revolutionary.
But of course, we still didn't have all the machines we wanted.’
The new machinery prompted a reshuffling of existing facilities at Carno.
A 13,000 sq.
ft. building was erected for the machinists and cutters as well as for garment distribution.
The big second-hand machines and new boiler were stored in the vacated building and a two-storey building was put up with a canteen at the front and offices at the rear.
However, even all this was not enough.
In April the first offshoot factory opened in Machynlleth.
This time the company converted a disused cinema to house twelve machinists.
One further purchase was a source of great pride to Bernard; a thirty-two ton Scania articulated lorry which cost £6,000.
It was painted purple with the company name in white and made the journey to London twice weekly.
Laura, knowing how much this vehicle meant to Bernard, had a miniature of it made for her husband, which he kept in his office.
The  driver would begin his 220-mile journey from Carno at 4am and would arrive punctually at 10 am, often blocking the whole of Sloane Street.
A crowd of eager customers would be awaiting his arrival outside the shops and attack him for the particular colour, size or style of dress they had been waiting for.
One day when the driver arrived at ten minutes past ten an angry customer berated him: ‘You're late, you should have been here ten minutes ago!’
With such dramatic (for them) technological advances, it was inevitable that furnishing fabrics would soon be on sale in the shops alongside the dress weights.
Bernard had been told this was a confusing mixture reminiscent of the old drapers' shops — and would never work as the products would attract different customers.
He proved them wrong.
However tentative these beginnings, it was instantly clear that furnishing fabrics would be a growing market; customers had almost demanded them by making do with narrower width, lighter-weight dress fabrics.
Bernard, acutely aware of the volatility of the fashion market, was convinced the company must diversify into the more stable home furnishing sector as soon as possible.
Now, not satisfied with the immediate success of the furnishing fabrics, Bernard revived his twenty-year-old plan to produce wallpaper, using designs taken directly from fabrics, and sent Meirion and Dai Jones to Holland to buy a paper printing machine.
‘This is like printing money,’ Bernard told them.
For Dai Jones, it seemed more like printing headaches.
‘We knew nothing about what sort of paper to buy, we just tried to learn from books.
At first the 100 gsm paper we bought from Norway and Finland was much too weak and we got hundreds of complaints from all the shops.
Then the machine started printing lines all over the paper and we had to send someone into the shops to remove all the faulty rolls.’
But in spite of the problems, there was never any question of giving up.
Dai knew only too well that the company mentality was to persevere until they got it right.
Quality finally improved with the purchase in 1974 of a wallpaper-coating machine.
By 1973 there were eleven shops to supply in Oxford, Edinburgh, London, Bath, Shrewsbury, Geneva, Amsterdam and Paris.
Of these, Paris was the most significant as both Laura and Bernard had always loved France, yet were terrified of it.
They feared that if their products were not welcomed in the French capital, everything they had built up might be lost.
Yet they could wait no longer to tackle Paris.
They took  a small boutique on the Left Bank, where hitherto there had been only antique shops, correctly recognizing that the little street, Rue des Saints Pères, was full of ‘Laura Ashley spirit’.
To run it they chose a nineteen-year-old English girl who spoke French, had been at school with Jane and a Saturday assistant In Pelham Street for the past three years.
Pat Yot had never been entrusted with such responsibility before but she had become a friend of the family; to Bernard and Laura loyalty and energy mattered far more than experience.
‘It was incredible, it was like a bomb going off,’ was how Pat described the opening; just as in England at the beginning, there were days when customers had to be locked out and long queues formed.
Suddenly, ‘Le Style Anglais’ was what every young Parisienne girl wanted.
As a result of the burgeoning international network, many of the European staff came frequently to Wales to see the centre of operations.
The farmhouse at Clogau became too small and too isolated.
Not only did they need somewhere to put up visiting employees (and, increasingly, the necessary but not always welcome journalists) they now needed a showcase for their home furnishing ideas.
‘Like everything else Bernard does, he suddenly decided he needed a large Welsh farmhouse TODAY and so they bought Rhydoldog,’ a friend recalls.
Aesthetically not a beautiful house, Rhydoldog is a large, predominantly Victorian, rambling mansion with some Edwardian additions, grafted on to a seventeenth-century farmhouse base.
Its beauty lies not in its architecture, but in the magnificence of its views as it sits in splendid isolation on top of a steep hill looking down the unencumbered views across fields, moors and woodland to the river valleys of the Wye and Elan.
Laura once said she hated the thirty-roomed house, which she considered ugly, and then felt guilty about hating it.
Her more considered view was that it was ‘the sort of house you become fond rather than proud of.
Its mellow character is compounded of its age, its comfortable lack of pretension and the various roles it has to play as farm, design studio and home.’
But at first it seemed to them magnificent.
It offered Laura and Bernard endless possibilities for decoration inside and, after more than twenty years of marriage, it was the first large house they could plan together, yet another incentive towards developing the home furnishing side of the business.
The opportunities for walks and picnics outside in the grouse-filled hills were equally limitless.
The name of the house means, literally, water running over stones, and a moment's quietude brings to life the sound of many waterfalls tumbling all around the 800-acre property.
There was plenty of silence for Laura and Bernard at Rhydoldog, marred only occasionally by David and Nick motorbiking their way through the sheep.
It became more than a family home but a working farm and, they hoped, an inspirational headquarters for their international design empire.
‘Our inspiration is totally with rural life as it can be lived,’ Laura wrote some years later.
‘We expect that women will want to cook and sew and launder even if they are also reading Homer or studying Italian painters.’
In a rare discussion of her design philosophy, Laura wrote; ‘You could equate the company with a first-class nanny in a fin de siécle nursery.
Innocence, discipline, high standards and above all a kind of scrubbed, simple beauty.
Or you could visualize the farmhouse kitchen towards midday.
The morning's cream is quietly clotting on the stove, the gleaming copper pans are being put to use and the farmworkers are filing in to a meal which is pure poetry; vegetables plucked from the soil within the hour, fresh baked bread, farm butter, eggs, game and fruit.
The farmer's wife will be wearing cotton, freshly starched.’
One of the first changes Laura made to Rhydoldog was to set up a telex room and offices at the end of the corridor on the ground floor.
But, apart from that nod to twentieth-century technology, she tried an experiment of a different sort; to see whether it would be possible to live here, as in some undefined time-gone-by-period, the life she was ruminating over.
To this end, she hired two young graduates as her personal assistants, who were to live at Rhydoldog.
‘But it was an impossible position,’ one of them pointed out, ‘and very stifling because she felt you had to be part of the greater family and do everything with them.
For example, we would often go on expeditions to Hay-on-Wye looking for French, nineteenth-century pattern books but if you found any yourself you could not possibly claim originality.
That would definitely not be popular with Mrs Ashley.’
One of the first tasks of the day was for the girls to prepare freshly squeezed orange juice.
Laura asked the farm manager, Dai Davies, to find her a good Jersey milker and taught herself how to milk the cow.
Soon, however, she did not have enough time to do this although someone had to relieve the poor beast, and the fresh creamy milk often sat in a gleaming churn in the corner of the kitchen untouched  until it went rancid and had to be thrown away.
Bernard liked the milk, and that for Laura was sufficient justification for doing anything.
But nobody else really liked the rich, unpasteurized taste.
‘Laura took life very seriously — not in the sense of discussing world politics but just her own life.
She expected everyone to live up to her own high moral standards and there was an overwhelming feeling that if you did not, you had somehow failed.’
By the end of the year both girls concluded that the nineteenth-century atmosphere of Rhydoldog was not for them, and left.
Soon after Dai sold the cow.
Dai's family had been working on the farmlands around Rhydoldog for generations.
But Laura Ashley was of a breed he had not met before.
‘She was so determined and so curious about things.
She liked to think she could do it all.
She had to conquer everything to satisfy herself.’
He did not object to fulfilling her ‘romantic notions about this and that’ if it meant searching for a butter churn and separator but he drew the line at finding her a hacking pony.
‘Apart from the damage it would do to the ground I knew it would have to be ridden every day and then if it bolted or got stuck in the mud it would be my responsibility.’
She listened to his advice and bought instead a Welsh pony with the vague idea of attaching it to a trap and doing the shopping in it.
That, too, proved impractical but Dai was impressed by the way Laura managed, without any fuss, to get most things done the way she wanted.
‘She would often come and have an afternoon cup of tea with me and then pick my brain as to what BA had asked me to do that morning.
If she didn't like it she'd just tell me to say to him, ‘I didn't have time.’
She would never have a confrontation but she would get things done her way.
Of the children, only Emma really grew up at Rhydoldog, although the others came back at weekends.
On moving here Laura had crises of conscience about how best to educate her youngest child.
Emma had a spell at a small, local Welsh school then she had been sent to one of London's most exclusive girls' preparatory schools, off Sloane Square.
When they bought Rhydoldog Laura tried a new experiment.
Using a specially devised PN EU (Parents National Educational Union) course she tried teaching Emma herself at home all morning.
In the afternoons mother and daughter went for long, nature-based rambles when Emma had to identify and discover things.
Both Emma and Laura loved these times; Laura in any case spent hours on her own just sitting in the  garden or fields, thinking.
But it was far too unstructured and anti-social a method to be a total success in educational terms.
Finally, they consulted an educational psychologist who advised the parents that, in view of their constant travelling Emma's needs would best be served by a boarding school to provide her with some stability.
As they were certain about only one thing, their fourth child was not going to Holland Park Comprehensive, they followed the psychologist's advice and Emma, from eight years onwards, had a happy, if conventional education at boarding school, first at Knighton House in Dorset and then, at thirteen, moving to the more traditional Cranborne Chase.
After fifteen years in Wales, the enthusiasm which Bernard generated among his staff showed no signs of diminishing.
Dai Walter Jones (no relation) was given a job at ‘Laura Ashley’ after being hospitalized for five years with a serious illness and with little prospect of finding employment elsewhere as he was approaching retirement age.
Nonetheless, he joined the company in 1970 as a sewing machine mechanic but was soon moved to work on one of the large printers.
From the first he would often stay behind ‘after hours’, telling his mates he ‘just wanted to finish this run’ because he knew the machines were capable of producing more material than they were currently achieving.
Eventually, he built production up to about 3,000 metres a day.
‘I always walked the seven miles home, but that day the Old Man and Peter Revers came past in the car and offered me a lift.
‘What've you been doing, young Dai?’ they asked.
‘Oh, only cleaning up the printer,’ I replied.
‘You think we don't know what's going on?
You've got the machines going to 3,000 a day, we know.
Go to the first pub, Peter,’ Bernard ordered.
When we got to the pub my hands were so swollen and red from picking up the jug and throwing it all day I could barely pick up a pint to drink.’
In spite of the pain in his hands, as he drank with his boss Dai felt only the excitement of having achieved his goal.
‘He always recognized what we've done; there was never any them and us,’ Dai recounted proudly.
The speed with which the Ashleys were opening new shops and the steady expansion of the Carno factory should not mask the continuing difficulties.
Jean Revers was horrified at the sight of huge bonfires in the fields at Carno; there was so much unusable fabric it was just burned.
This wastage offended Laura too, who thought the fabric was quite good enough to be used somehow and decided to try selling  remnants.
These became so popular that on delivery day customers would fight wildly for bags of them.
‘In the end we practically gave them away,’ she said.
From this, the idea was derived of ‘patchwork pieces’, which then led to a demand for specific colours in the bags,’‘and suddenly we realized we had created a bit of a monster.’
The ‘patchwork pieces’ saga was not one that would quietly die.
It represented for Laura thrift, history, craft, usefulness, prevention of idleness and a host of other qualities which her childhood and subsequent work at the WI had encouraged her to prize.
Preparing the ‘patchwork pieces’ from remnants was an ideal occupation for her continuing band of outworkers; Laura considered it an essential part of her duty to keep feeding these women, many of whom lived such isolated lives in the hills that they might go for days without talking to anyone.
This activity was something she was the most proud of, one of the first things she would tell new friends about her work.
Helping women to stay at home yet giving them an occupation, some money and a branch held out towards the wider community were all worthy goals in Laura's eyes.
But the issue also epitomized the emerging dilemma for Laura, caught between the dictates of commerce and social responsibility.
The ‘patchwork pieces’ could never be economically viable because they took time to cut, arrange and bag, yet were never sold for more than a few pence.
They used up space in the vans, required time to unload and ultimately made the shops look messy.
Bernard soon took against the idea and Laura fought doggedly to keep them, believing that her loyal customers were entitled to receive the benefits from any advantage like this.
After all, it was inspiration from the patchwork quilts in 1952 which had proved the original impetus for the whole company.
RATIONALIZATION AND REMAISNIL
In April 1974 an advertisement appeared in The Sunday Times announcing that ‘Laura Ashley’ was seeking a financial controller.
The need for such an appointment was not obvious to Laura.
Bankers, book-keepers and accountants were all beneath contempt, she felt, and as they had managed perfectly well until now without an in-house accountant, she could not fathom the need to change.
Bernard, however, realized that unless someone with a sound financial background took the company's problems in hand, its continued existence was threatened, although he too showed little enthusiasm for the idea.
Like most new companies, they were overtrading alarmingly and expanding so fast that there was never adequate working capital.
But Bernard always believed the lack of cash to be merely temporary.
‘We just need some help to get over this short-term cash crisis, that's all,’ he informed the new financial controller, Welsh-born accountant, John James.
John James joined ‘Laura Ashley’ in August 1974 and took a rather different view of the problem.
During 1973–5, in the wake of the oil crisis and the Middle East War, the company had had a borrowing facility from the Midland Bank of £100,000 yet they were, in fact, overdrawn by some £300,000.
Only Carol Jones' dogged loyalty had staved off creditors for so long.
But now the situation had become critical and the Bank's regional director for Wales called an urgent  meeting of the shareholders.
Laura did not attend; quite possibly because Bernard forbad it.
But she was not interested in any case.
‘She felt the only thing that made the company work was good design and hard work, nothing else.
People like me represented an alien world for her,’ explains James.
It was a heated meeting, and one banker remarked to Bernard: ‘I hope your new financial controller will keep tight reins on you.’
‘If he does that he'll have to go,’ Bernard joked.
James faced such intractable problems that after a few months he nearly quit.
But he found himself in a double bind; the bankers said they would withdraw their support if he left and this would have killed the business instantly.
But also, he was drawn towards Bernard, whose vision and single-mindedness he greatly admired, and a business which he felt had great potential for further growth.
Increasingly, he found himself estranged from Laura, who, in the subsequent eleven years, ‘never once asked me how things were going.
Whenever things went wrong she would blame us and say that we were causing Bernard difficulties.’
Bernard had to act as ‘go-between’ as Laura would only accept bad news or limitations to her independence from him, certainly not from an accountant who was later to describe her designs as ‘itsy-bitsy prints’necessary to camouflage the bad quality of the fabric.
The first summer of John James' control saw the company with neither cloth to make up winter clothes nor money with which to buy it.
Between them they managed to organize £50,000 from ICFC on a three-month note and rapidly tried to straighten out the balance sheet.
Meanwhile Bernard was in London opening the biggest ‘Laura Ashley’ shop yet (4,200 sq.
ft.), in Harriet Street, London, SW1.
It soon became a phenomenal success, and was closely followed by the opening of a major factory in Wijk, Holland, ‘bought with borrowed money that was not available to the company’, James commented.
It was the company's first foreign manufacturing plant, used to make up printed cloth sent over from Wales.
James was in a quandary.
If he tried to slow the pace Bernard would complain at being given ‘no financial options’.
One of his first, and most basic suggestions was that prices must be raised.
But this struck at the very heart of what Laura was hoping to achieve and she quashed the suggestion with ferocity.
‘I can see what you're doing,’ she told him icily.
‘You're trying to make  excessive profit.’
It took him three years before prices were increased adequately to meet the needs of the business.
John James had more than one showdown with Bernard, too, since a crucial part of his role was controlling the cash flow.
This would sometimes draw Laura in and she would spring tigerishly to Bernard's defence, especially if some long dreamed of project of his was under threat through lack of cash.
She was in favour of sacking the accountant; no one had ever stood in her husband's way before.
When Bernard wanted to buy his first boat Laura was faced with an interesting conundrum as she was still frightened of water, could not swim and felt appallingly seasick on any small craft.
Overriding these fears, however, was her maternal instinct to indulge Bernard with whatever it was he wanted and she urged him to buy a boat.
But in 1975 Bernard himself recognized the time was not right to buy a yacht.
And after that, James felt his task easing, slightly.
The following year, he became Group Managing Director for Laura Ashley Ltd.
James recognized that, while Laura's shaping of the product range was crucial, it was up to him to design a corporate structure to support it; otherwise the company could scarcely expand and might even cease operating altogether.
Until 1975 there had never been formal, regular board meetings, merely ad hoc occasions when, for example, they needed to fire someone.
From now on there were regular board meetings and Laura was appointed Deputy Chairman in between Bernard, Chairman, and John James, Managing Director.
She used to attend the general discussion part and make her views known as to where the next shop would be.
For example, she was deeply opposed to opening in Manchester, as she did not think her type of customer lived there, but preferred to be associated with the older university towns or cathedral cities such as Bath or Edinburgh.
At one board meeting she proposed introducing padded coat hangers ‘but that was never going to turn our fortunes’, according to John James.
In his view, maximizing sales was not her highest priority.
She knew other people in the company were responsible for that.
Her most valuable role, especially as the company grew, was maintaining image.
Board meetings were often embarrassing for all concerned.
Sometimes Bernard would make his wife leave the room, telling her, ‘This is boys’ business' and she would meekly obey.
No one else was allowed to overrule her in the boardroom.
But although she accepted a dressing-down  from him in public, and indeed made a point of telling people ‘Oh!
BA takes all the real decisions; I'm just the assistant to the Chairman,’ in reality, they discussed everything together afterwards and she often managed to achieve what she wanted in the privacy of the bedroom.
Confronted by a more formal, corporate approach to the business, Laura retreated to the outer circle only to launch an attack on the inner circle.
She knew that, as long as she applied it with care, she had great power over Bernard.
She once admitted that she would have loved a career in politics and believed she was now being forced to draw upon all her native political skills to ensure that her design ideas and her control over image were not submerged in the drive to reduce the debts.
Laura also took positive steps to boost her designing team and hired a graduate from the Royal College of Art whose brief was imperceptibly to modify the Victorian image.
Lynda Kee-Scott's clothes had to maintain the traditional English country-girl look, but were required to broaden the appeal.
Lynda found working with Laura a great stimulant; ‘She never stopped thinking of the company and would often spot something in a book that attracted her; she would know instantly how it could be adapted.
She was so enthusiastic about what she saw and liked that she could transmit her ideas even if the appeal was not immediately obvious to us.
She knew what was right and wrong in fabrics just the same as she did in life, there were no grey areas.’
Lynda never felt that Laura, however persuasive she might be, encroached on her autonomy as a designer.
But if, somehow, a dress escaped Laura's approval at design stage and slipped into production, then she would spare nothing in her attack.
Once Laura went into the Paris shop and discovered a simple dress with drop waist and wide pleats, which she hated.
She complained that it was not feminine — a woman should show off her waist — and therefore did not convey the right image.
She insisted that she had never seen it at the design stage.
Furious, she walked out of the shop with bundles of the offending garment over her arm and telexed Carno to withdraw the pattern from production immediately.
Lynda always accepted the importance of having someone with a strong concept controlling the design outflow and never found Laura's unspoken guidelines stultifying.
But she admits there was room for rationalization in other areas; ‘at first clothes were never costed properly; in fact we may have been underpricing’, she explained, ‘but for  Laura the most important thing was that everyone was working happily together’.
Laura acknowledged the need for hiring designers with their own ideas but rejected the need to be told by either accountants (‘grey suits’ as she termed them) or shop managers what she could or could not sell.
She held firm because she knew that the road to compromise was without signposts, that the possibilities for getting lost were manifold and that it was paved with flawed imitations of the truth.
Her uncles had taught her well.
The more successful the shops became, the more the branch managers reported back on those lines which sold well, thereby wielding a power which Laura did not at first wish to accept.
Within limits, Laura was prepared to accept their comments, if, for example, they told her that brown sold better than blue.
But when they started to tell her that customers preferred some synthetic mix materials (they creased less, washed better and were cheaper) she considered such input was dangerously overstepping their authority.
Laura was adamant.
Customers must be able to know that a garment with the label ‘Laura Ashley’ was made of 100 per cent natural fibres.
No mixes.
No compromises.
Increasingly, the Ashleys were hiring a new breed of staff; qualified and experienced.
Hitherto they had deliberately promoted internally, which served to reinforce the already strong personal loyalty.
To an extent Laura found the superior knowledge of some of her employees unnerving but she was also prepared to learn from them, her own tastes changing subtly in the process.
The experience of the French shops was particularly important in this context.
On the same day as John James joined the company, Anthony Marangos took control in Paris.
‘I knew nothing about shops or garments but I was an Englishman in France who spoke French and they trusted me,’ recounts Marangos.
‘They had a wonderful pioneering style and pride both in what they had achieved and in what they could teach you.
If they liked you they believed they could teach you to do anything and by God! you'd do, it as well as anyone.
They were a formidable couple with both guts and style.’
But it was clear to Marangos, just as it was to James, that the store openings and continuing publicity were creating a level of business which the financial resources of the company simply could not support.
Two months later the Ashleys hired their most professionally qualified applicant to date in the retail sector, Liza Wanklyn, an American  living in Paris, had graduated from design school and had worked for Jean Muir and Givenchy before applying to join ‘Laura Ashley’.
Because she had been exposed to the luxury end of the market, much of what she found at ‘Laura Ashley’ appalled her.
‘They hadn't tested the French market at all before opening and so everything was just delivered from Wales, hung up and not thought about.
No one arranged it by length or by colour, there was no attempt to market the products,’ Liza Wanklyn remembers vividly.
Of course, the untidiness was part of the English charm.
Nonetheless, France was a very demanding market, as both Laura and Bernard were well aware, and once the freshness and newness of the product had worn off, it was critically important that the merchandise was of the highest quality.
When in January 1975, Liza was appointed Director for European Merchandising, she set about organizing some improvements.
The French shops were the first to use the dark green exterior, which became an instantly recognizable hallmark of ‘country’ quality, and were also the first to have architect-designed wooden interiors.
‘Laura had a very practical eye for what would sell and a very shrewd idea of pricing.
She had a wonderful sense of period and could adapt an idea brilliantly but her lack of formal design training handicapped her in other ways.
Sometimes clothes would arrive with the sleeves backwards or the pocket on the wrong side; someone with formal training would never have allowed garments with such a poor finish,’ Liza maintains.
A harsh criticism, perhaps, since Laura was no longer running the factories on a daily basis.
But, as she was the first to recognize, the products bore her name.
Home furnishings, by their very nature, were subject to fewer of these problems and when they appeared in the French capital, with a big new shop on the Right Bank, in the fashionable seiziéme, it was yet another conquest.
Such shops, offering coordinated fabrics and paper, had never before existed in France; hitherto it had been possible to hire an interior decorator who would go into a home and suggest exclusive fabrics at exorbitant prices.
But for the average home-owner to find good taste cheaply, displayed informally, and feel certain that he or she was not making a mistake because it was already arranged and coordinated, was quite new to Parisians.
In spite of these initial advantages, furnishing fabrics, as clothes, were badly in need of overall direction and it was also in Paris that a young woman who had no formal design training but had worked for the  exclusive Colefax and Fowler, was hired.
Carolyn Warrender, twenty-four when she joined ‘Laura Ashley’, had a very clear idea of what was needed.
‘They had a range that was selling, but with no one actually involved in planning it; it was just a question of whatever anyone thought was pretty going in with no production schedules, no set ranges for satisfactory colour matching.’
Carolyn found her most difficult task was persuading Laura of the necessity for such schedules.
If a particular print was not selling, it would be removed from the range; but then, if Laura especially liked it, she would put it back in.
Carolyn recognized that Laura had excellent taste.
‘I never saw one thing she wanted that did not sell,’ but nonetheless insisted that this undisciplined approach was unacceptable for a customer trying to furnish a house, who might have kept a sample for six weeks only to find she could not reorder the same fabric.
‘Laura found the new formalities extremely annoying.
Sometimes she would say ‘This is my company and if I want it, why can't I have it?’
But Carolyn, backed up by Phil Morris, hammered away at the point that furnishing fabrics were not like clothes, where customers did not expect to come back for more of the same.
Laura had not focused on these difficulties.
Although, ultimately, she accepted the need for pattern books, production schedules, yearly reviews by committee and other organizational disciplines, she disliked intensely the way these formalities intruded into her own sphere of influence and destroyed the spontaneity of her collection, which had always been one of her greatest strengths.
Carolyn became Laura Ashley's personal assistant, a role which necessitated an extremely close relationship.
This enabled her to see Laura both as a warm and caring friend, but also as a difficult businesswoman.
‘In fact, she really wasn't a businesswoman; marketing was such a nasty word to her.
She was, fundamentally, a good person but the side we all saw at work was the side that could not cope with the constant expansion of the business.
All the difficulties were symptoms of her struggle to cope with the development of what the business had become,’ Carolyn believed.
Enjoying their European success, Laura and Bernard were spending an increasing amount of time in France, which they had always loved.
They bought a flat in the capital, Nick attended art school for a while there, and Laura made a very close friend of a woman whose unusual shop had been opposite the Ashley's first boutique on the Left Bank.
Anita Saada had children of similar ages to Laura's and was to become a staunch source of support to her over the years.
One of Laura's favourite meals from this time on was couscous, which Anita taught her how to prepare.
The French open-air markets held great appeal for Laura, as did the Left Bank bouquinistes where she often found appealing old prints among the musty volumes.
Although she never mastered the accent, she was learning to speak quite competent French, teaching herself out of books as ever.
At the same time she was engaged ever more knowledgeably in researching fabrics and starting to build an impressive library of art books and textile samples and references.
She developed some useful contacts in the antique textile field including one dealer whose name she would never divulge, even to her own assistants in the company.
Quite by accident, she had produced a brilliantly simple brainwave for home furnishings; using in the same room the monochrome positive/negative wallpaper and fabric.
She and Phil Morris together had hit upon this virtue out of necessity since the machines could still print only one colour and new machinery for multi-coloured printing was much too expensive.
There was no momentary flash of inspiration; it was typical of Laura's talent to turn a disadvantage into an advantage.
The wispy lines of one of her most popular prints of the mid-Seventies, wild clematis, were ideally suited to this reversing treatment.
When the background was off-white, the pattern was unobtrusive enough to be used as wallpaper in several features advertising other products and ‘Laura Ashley’ gained much incidental publicity in this way.
When the background was, for example, sage, plum or navy however and the flowers off-white, the pattern was transformed.
The slight and subtle variation offered by reversing the colours of background and foreground on ‘Laura Ashley's’ tiny prints became the leitmotif of a generation.
The simple designs burst upon a tired market which offered little else but large floral designs often in rather garish colours.
The cleverness was in using the wealth of old prints lying around ignored and simplifying them to make them fresher and give them a contemporary feel.
For years, ‘Laura Ashley’ had the field to themselves.
Although Laura loved her Parisian existence she was aware that the staff at Carno also needed to see her.
Perhaps she never realized quite how deep-seated was this need, but shop, as well as factory staff, could not fail to be impressed at the way both she and Bernard always knew  their names, asked with interest about their home life and would always try and help if there was a problem by sending taxis, flowers, hot meals or whatever the crisis demanded.
When Josè, the Portuguese housekeeper whom they had promoted to become a shop manager, had nowhere to live, they bought her a house, oversaw the extensive repairs and stocked it with furniture.
Just occasionally staff felt that her concern for their welfare bordered on the intrusive.
She was, for example, appalled to discover from reading a shop diary that one of her unmarried store assistants was visiting a family planning clinic.
But she would often tell friends how keenly she felt a responsibility not just for her employees' jobs, but for their health, their mortgages, their children's educations and the entire survival of the rural community in Carno.
She did not exaggerate.
And yet, Laura found the working environment there increasingly difficult.
While accepting in principle the need to delegate, her inner fury, not always expressed, if something were not carried out to her wishes, was great.
One unfortunate decided to fill the reception area in Carno with tropical plants, a major gaffe as anyone who knew Laura realized; she found their artificiality an affront.
On another occasion, Phil Morris knew that, had Laura been consulted, she would never have agreed to a particular print being produced with a border.
Nevertheless, one of their licencees had requested this and, since it was a lucrative contract, Bernard had told him to go ahead and produce it.
‘Just make sure Laura doesn't see it,’ he warned Phil.
However, when Laura discovered a reference to the border in a telex, she immediately confronted Phil.
He explained that it had been approved by Bernard, which of course, by implying criticism of her husband, compounded his crime.
‘She did not speak to me, at all, for six months after that,’ Phil said.
Bernard never knew of the rift between Phil Morris and Laura.
Her fortitude was such that she did not need to unload on to him her emotional worries.
But, keeping the matter to herself was also a way of protecting her husband: she wanted to believe the incident was all Phil's fault, not Bernard's.
John James, in addition to the financial complications, faced a welter of other unexpected difficulties.
One of the more intractable problems was how to dispose of the effluent in an ecologically acceptable way.
As production at the new factory had accelerated beyond anyone's predictions, no one had stopped to consider effluent.
‘Most textile plants  are built near a big sewerage plant, not in the middle of the countryside like ours,’ explained Dai Jones, whose responsibility it soon became to find a means of solving the problem.
‘No one had ever realized the amount of water we would need,’ he added.
One of the first attempts to treat the effluent involved building a small lagoon, the idea for which Dai discovered in a book.
When that did not work they tried pumping or spraying it on to neighbouring fields, hoping it would filter through the ground by natural causes.
‘But we were producing so much effluent it flooded and we had to rent a small piece of land specifically for effluent disposal,’ explained Dai.
That too proved inadequate and the company then commissioned a disposal plant.
But on 13 January 1975 ‘Laura Ashley’ was convicted and fined at Newtown Magistrates Court for discharging waste matter on to land.
The Severn Trent Water Authority brought the prosecution as the water had run off into a local water course, polluting rivers which boasted some of the finest fishing in the area.
Came the summer of 1976 and the factory was hit by a new problem as the whole of Britain suffered from one of the worst droughts on record.
Just as the company was about to enter a crisis period through shortage of water, Meirion Rowlands, then Production Director, thought to use copper divining rods to search for new sources of water in the hills he knew so well.
Under a dry bank in a nearby field he discovered a spring.
The farmer whose land it was gave ‘Laura Ashley’ rights to transport the water and 20,000 gallons were ferried daily to the plant.
Without this additional source, production in Wales might have stopped entirely.
The drought had aggravated the effluent problem as the company was forced to rent tankers to carry away the effluent which was an even more costly, though temporary, solution.
Laura, although embarrassed by the prosecution and the £90-fine, was never involved in seeking a solution to the effluent disposal problem.
It fell into the business category and was therefore Bernard's province, not to be encroached upon.
She cannot have failed to be aware of the situation as the land reeked of the smells and both water and land were often strikingly coloured.
For Dai, John James and others involved, the problem was one of the most frustrating of the expanding years.
Even when an expensive filtration plant was finally installed it proved inadequate.
In 1978 the company was charged with five further separate offences relating to  effluent and on this occasion Newtown Magistrates imposed fines totalling £450.
Eventually a more effective pump was installed which removed both offensive chemicals and colour.
But the effluent saga had lasted for nearly eight years and although the court appearances were relatively few and Laura herself never became directly involved, the publicity was unwelcome for a company which claimed the Welsh countryside as the key to its philosophy.
Given all the attention the company was attracting it was inevitable that someone, somewhere, would find something to criticize.
An article in the Daily Mail lambasted the attitude of shop staff in the new Harriet Street branch.
Laura was only slightly worried by the adverse publicity but she was bitterly hurt, as if this were an attack on her personally.
She responded with a round-robin letter to all her employees, thanking them for their contributions and enthusiasm and reassuring them how highly she thought of them all.
‘The Daily Mail article was just provocative journalism and our lawyers are in fact dealing with it,’ she consoled them.
But after a further month's reflection she changed her mind and wrote to Moira that it was up to her to do something about ‘the incompetence of your staff at Harriet Street [which]is now causing BA and myself sleepless nights’.
During the mid-Seventies Laura travelled around Europe a great deal, imbibing what she saw and able to take ideas and incorporate them into her collections.
She and Bernard could come and go as they pleased, partly thanks to Ruby and Molly, two local women who kept Rhydoldog clean and checked each day for telexes which might announce the Ashley's return, in which case the beds would be aired and food prepared.
While she was away Laura would send Lynda or Moira detailed written descriptions, as she had never learnt to draw, and expect them to adapt her suggestions.
‘Here in the South of France,’ she told Moira, ‘a lot of baggy blouses are being worn with jeans…which reminds me!
I think we shall need some…cotton and wool mixture for winter with everything going so floppy and baggy.’
In her notes to designers, with accompanying photographs, she would tell them, ‘We definitely need a version of this,’ or ‘This will be the trend for autumn,’or ‘These are the sort I am after.’
Wherever she was the telexes would clatter with instructions for Moira based on either what she had seen or read.
She was already turning against the frills of earlier years, partly because they consumed so much factory time.
‘I do want  to have very simple things,’ she telexed Moira.
‘They look good and take so little making-up time [which]therefore gives us a price advantage on the market.’
But this change was chiefly because her international exposure was making her more sophisticated.
Her own clothes now, although comprising the same plain skirt and toning cardigan with a cream shirt, were bought, more often than not, from Yves St Laurent's Rive Gauche, or Sonia Rykiel.
Everyone who worked with Laura at this time agrees that, as a fashion editor, she had a sure instinct about forecasting trends, a canny feel for coordinating colour and fabric that was invariably right, and knowledge of which of the latest details could be adapted to the ‘Laura Ashley’ look.
It was hardly surprising therefore, that she resented, but grudgingly accepted, being told by those on the shop floor, or in administration, what customers wanted.
From the start the Ashleys took all the decisions (and risks) from design to manufacture and marketing.
Having enjoyed a remarkable degree of freedom for several years it was now hard to relinquish areas of control.
Hers was, and always had been, an autocratic empire where the customer would be presented with what to wear.
Although she embraced the need for each collection to be a little different in order to move forward, she would often be upset that what she considered a beautiful print could not be included in the collection for ever.
However she did not work in isolation of the sales figures and shop reports, which she read avidly and, as she wrote to Moira: ‘I feel that we hit it in many respects but we don't seem to repeat the exciting things fast though.’
The blame, she felt, should be laid at the door of ‘the planners who are playing too safe to the provincial market…’
She pointed out that adding sales from stores outside London ‘could be a killer’, since the provinces were so much slower to react to new trends.
Laura had always been able to identify gaps in the market and fill them.
Yet this could never be done by interpreting yesterday's sales figures, which gave information only about products already in the shops.
The increasing reliance on managers' reports as a means of deciding what the shops should carry infuriated Laura and complicated her ambivalent feelings towards her shop staff.
Although she put them firmly into the category of ‘workers’, rather than‘idlers’, and therefore to be praised, they were not quite on a par with the Welsh factory workers, or designers; nonetheless they stood on a higher plane than  accountants, clerks or corporate planners.
When she discovered, in the summer of 1977, that 5,500 metres of plain cloth was ‘hanging about in Helmond and they don't know what to do with it’, she was appalled and gave orders for it to be made up into suitable garments immediately.
‘I really don't think anyone in this firm understands finance,’ she telexed Moira.
Laura's instruction that shop staff must wear ‘Laura Ashley’ clothes made sound business sense and was, after all, no hardship.
But there were also emotional reasons behind the rule as it was also a way of reasserting her authority.
Thus, the girl in Geneva who continually mixed ‘Laura Ashley’ clothes with her own, and the girl in Paris who agreed to wear a ‘Laura Ashley’shirt, but left off her bra, must have known that their futures with the company were blighted.
That she did not do so herself was beside the point.
‘As I work with the prints all day I would get so bored if I wore them as well,’ she once told an American interviewer, who expressed surprise to find her in such plain clothes.
At the front of Laura's mind constantly was the realization that these shops bore her name and everything in them must therefore reflect what she stood for.
With an empire of such a size, it was a difficult but not impossible task she had set herself.
The outside world could not guess at the disturbing cross-currents.
It saw a company which, by 1975, had a turnover of five million pounds, employed 1,000 men and women worldwide, had forty shops, three factories and which was profitable enough to own its own jet.
Bernard had needed little persuading to buy the first company aeroplane, a twin-engined Piper Navajo for £95,000, which carried six passengers and two pilots.
‘Laura Ashley’ was painted boldly on the side.
Many in the company, not only Laura and Bernard, were required to undertake extensive travelling.
Yet flights were expensive and with company headquarters deep in Wales, connections were difficult.
It was this success story which prompted the Prime Minister's Office to inform Laura that her name was on the forthcoming list of Queen's Birthday Honours; she was to be offered the OBE if this was ‘agreeable’.
David remembers the day the letter arrived, and the ominously quiet discussion which ensued between his parents at Rhydoldog.
He remembers, too, seeing a crumpled letter in his mother's writing in the wastebin later that day.
Laura declined the offer of a public honour, knowing it was the only way to salvage her husband's personal honour, which was  the more important to her.
He was, she felt, as deserving of recognition as she; he was the Chairman of the Company.
But above all, the letter had been sent to Ms Laura Ashley, a form of address she detested.
She wrote back, declining the offer, signing herself, ‘Mrs Bernard Ashley’.
She contented herself by having the official offer letter framed.
In Britain in the mid-Seventies, there was a keen debate as to the merits of remaining in the Common Market, and Laura was invited to take part in a government-sponsored television film proclaiming the benefits of the European community.
The film was intended to show that all the best names in Britain favoured European unity.
Among those who had agreed to take part were Harold Macmillan, Marcus Sieff, Trevor Howard, Henry Cooper, Terence Conran and Marjorie Proops.
One of the production team then proposed Laura Ashley.
‘It was an obvious choice, partly because of all the business they were doing in Europe and also because the public was fed up with the same old faces; here was someone fresh at last,’ recalls Peter Batty, director of the him.
Laura, however, declined on the grounds that she was not nearly important enough to share the limelight with such august people.
She was, Batty believes, genuinely shy and nervous.
Then Bernard suggested taking part himself, an idea which was vetoed however, as his was not the name associated with the company.
Several months later, Batty was asked to make a film about any successful British company to redress criticism that television programme makers were obsessed by those in difficulties, of which there were many in the Seventies.
He remembered the Ashleys, who appeared unstoppable in their ascendancy, and this time Laura, together with Bernard, agreed to have a documentary made solely about them.
Batty found Laura still rather reserved.
‘She was an earth-mother type who couldn't quite believe in all her success.
What she was doing seemed to her all utterly natural.
She was rather embarrassed by the aeroplane and constantly worried about whether or not people had enough to eat.’
Whenever the film crew opened a cupboard in a shop to store some electrical equipment, they found it stocked high with food.
Hot meals, slopping all over car boots, were delivered around to the shops.
Yet Batty noticed that in spite of her reserve she had a way of inspiring people to do things for her.
‘She even got the ‘sparks’ peeling potatoes.
Most film crews want as little to do with their subjects as possible, yet the Ashleys immediately-became involved in our lives and we in theirs.
They took trouble to make sure our rooms in the hotel were the best and the result was that this was a very happy film to make.
Everyone liked her very much,’ said Batty.
Today, Batty admits that perhaps they liked the Ashleys too much.
The documentary showed them in and out of their aeroplane, discussing store openings around the world, managers flying in, telexes flying out and telephone calls from San Francisco.
It showed a family picnic in the Welsh hills with Laura commenting that all her children were still at home; ‘they won't go away like other people's children do’, a part of the myth she believed herself; the background music played cash tills ringing to the rhythm of dresses being folded and packed.
Not surprisingly, reviewers treated the film harshly, complaining of a lack of critical input.
Batty recognises that he could have taken a sharper look at the derivative nature of the designs or examined some of the problems likely to face the company in the future.
It would have made good drama to pit Bernard's projection of mass production against Laura's fears that this would threaten to destroy the ethnic and cottage industry appeal upon which the business was based.
But no producer would ever have succeeded in making Laura disagree with her husband publicly, let alone on a television him.
The filming lasted three and a half weeks and took place in Bath, London, Brussels, Paris and Carno.
‘The Rise and Rise of Laura Ashley’ was screened on 14 December 1976 and marked an important turning point for the company.
Not only a household name, now it was a household face with household heart as well.
But if Laura was, once more, stung by the criticism, Bernard was furious.
‘Sure it was an hour-long commercial,’ he wrote to Batty, commiserating.
‘What else do they think we are running here, a pansy shop?
It is a pity some of those guys do not get up and learn to do commerce in the way that the rest of the world has to and put to advantage their expensive educations which are paid for out of general taxes.’
The film's message — the continuing success of this homespun cottage industry with a modern technological core — seemed borne out a few months later when the company won a Queen's Award for Export; over a three-year period they had increased exports six-fold.
The presentation ceremony was held in Carno, at the factory, with the Lord Lieutenant of the County deputizing for the Queen.
Later in the year, the Queen, as was customary, gave a reception at Buckingham Palace to which three  representatives of the firm were invited as an additional way of marking its achievement.
Neither Laura nor Bernard were able to attend this ceremony as by that time they had exported themselves.
The Ashleys sent their apologies, along with Moira Braybrooke and the oldest and the youngest company employees.
There is a story, apocryphal no doubt, told by his friends that Bernard, having decided it was time for another move, walked into the offices of a prestigious estate agents one Saturday to see what was available.
Disgruntled at not being attended to immediately, especially as he wanted to buy a large country mansion, he stormed out and decided to buy an estate in France instead.
Such restlessness had been a hallmark of Bernard's since infancy and Laura at least shared her husband's ability to make decisions quickly.
They came home, packed their bags, left Wales for good and set up in Brussels until they found a new house.
They consulted a map of France and worked out the ideal point between London, Paris and Helmond in the Netherlands.
Having located the spot, which had to be served by a nearby airstrip, they rang Anthony Marangos in Paris and told him to call back in half an hour with the largest houses closest to the spot.
‘Well he rang back with three; one was too far west; the other had bungalows; the third was the right one.
We didn't even look at the others.
We rang Anthony before lunch and told him to buy it.
Bernard and I always agree,’ Laura later told the journalist, Maureen Cleave.
In the late Seventies the Ashleys were travelling around so much and had so many different houses that it was hard for them to know where home was.
Bernard loved moving, and they had now spent nearly five years at Rhydoldog which was as long as he liked to spend anywhere.
Also, this nomadic existence was bringing them into potential conflict with several different tax jurisdictions.
There was an argument which insisted they should have one commercial base for tax purposes.
It was also weighing on Bernard's mind that they were opening more and more shops in Europe and yet the European commercial scene was not as stable as that in the UK.
The company had opened a record fifteen shops in 1978 bringing its total to over seventy outlets worldwide.
Yet morale in the European shops was never as high as in their UK  counterparts and they often had to beg for a booster visit from their patrons.
In addition, the heavy tax rates of the late-Seventies would have made it virtually impossible, had one or other of the pair died, for the company in its entirety to be passed on to the children, Laura's most cherished ideal.
Given the conventional wisdom that any change in tax affairs should be put into effect before 5 April, allied to Bernard's natural impulsiveness and Laura's love of buying and doing up old houses, the haste with which the Ashleys moved out of Britain in the spring of 1978 is easily understood.
But it was a haste they paid for dearly in emotional terms.
Laura found herself repeatedly hurt by accusations in the press that they had become ‘tax exiles’ and tried to point out how the decision to live abroad had, on the contrary, been forced on them by their peripatetic lifestyle on the one hand and fear of punitive estate duty rates on the other.
It was, she tried tirelessly to explain, not a selfish move but the only way to preserve the business.
Henceforth Laura insisted that home was wherever Bernard was, and she accepted stoically and with cheerfulness the many unpleasant aspects of the move.
But there was no doubt she hated leaving her family behind and being away from Wales.
‘I left Rhydoldog for ever’, Laura was to write later, ‘on an early April day when the wild daffodils were smothering the banks of the old water garden and thousands more nodded to me all the way down the lovely driveway to say farewell.’
It was the only public, albeit circumspect, acknowledgement of her sense of loss.
‘She never said anything, never complained, you just knew how much she hated being away,’ said Trevor Maddocks, who worked closely with her in Carno.
And so they moved, with no master plan in mind, first to their small flat in Brussels.
It was from here that they rang Anthony Marangos, and inspected the house, or rather château, which he had found for them in Picardy, North East France, between the towns of Arras and Amiens.
Remaisnil itself is but a hamlet of five or six cottages, a few alleyways and a simple parish church to serve its sixty-five inhabitants.
Across the road from the church, at the end of an impressive avenue of mature limes, stand the black wrought-iron gates of the Château de Remaisnil.
Only those who know what they are looking for will stumble  upon it and this seclusion exerted a strong appeal on the Ashleys.
It was surrounded by thirty-five acres of flat countryside on the edge of the Somme valley.
Memories of the country's former sadness as a battlefield and burial ground make it depressing for many English; Bernard and Laura, by contrast, conscious that both their fathers had fought in this part of France in World War I, found this link with their native country comforting.
The house was in need of total renovation and would not be habitable for nearly a year, but the Ashleys moved into a hotel in Le Touquet from where they hoped to oversee the extensive repairs to the exterior and interior.
Of course, the builders never worked fast enough for Bernard.
In the beginning, a team of French builders was hired, but when they did not respond to his treatment of them as an army detachment, he fired them and barked orders at Anthony instead.
After this they employed Welsh builders and had everything sent over with them including paint, sandpaper and Polyfilla.
But the Welsh builders were unhappy about staying in a small French village without fried eggs and sausages for breakfast and although the local hotelier was eventually persuaded that this fare was absolutely essential, the Welsh contingent did not see the job through and a third firm, French again, was then brought in.
The eighteenth-century Château de Remaisnil is magnificent by any standards; it was by far the grandest home the Ashleys had yet lived in and it presented them with numerous challenges of a personal and artistic nature, not least of which was learning to speak French.
Laura was often to be seen with a heavyweight nineteenth-century French novel in her hands, but this pursuit held little appeal for Bernard.
Although a château has existed on the site at Remaisnil since 1572, the present brick and limestone edifice dates from around 1760 and was built for Theodore de la Porte and his wife Henriette de Cerf Wintershove of the House of Flanders.
The de la Porte family owned several properties in Picardy and were related by marriage to the noblest and richest families in the area.
By the time the Ashleys bought the twenty-two-room château, it had seen a variety of owners and fortunes, yet although remarkably close to the battlefront in both World Wars, had escaped any major damage.
It comprises three main parts, the central living section with two wings slightly set back, as well as several outbuildings, and the old  kitchen quarters, the ‘commun’ linked by an early twentieth-century underground tunnel.
The white tiles in the tunnel are the same as those used in the Paris Metro, both supplied by a M. Elby, who owned the château from 1909.
The ‘commun’ was used formerly as servants' quarters and kitchens.
The mansard roof and dormer windows were added in the nineteenth century but the predominant style of the château interior was Louis XV rococo, with traditional Picardian emphasis and additions.
Before embarking on any decoration Laura was determined to research the château's history as thoroughly as possible to establish what was original and what should be preserved.
One of the most attractive features for her was the garden, comprising ten hectares of parkland, which they converted to pasture and brought over their own flock of texel sheep.
Around the château itself were neatly laid out formal gardens with mature trees, age-old fountains and sweet smelling bushes as well as a neglected, sunken, walled garden.
This had become a wilderness of weeds and bushes but hidden deep inside was a derelict conservatory demanding to be restored.
Life at the Novotel in Le Touquet was comfortable enough at first.
Bernard and Laura escaped on to their sailing boat for much of the summer, a yacht they had been enjoying for some years now, and they pottered around Mykonos in Greece.
But at the end of the summer, they had to return to Le Touquet.
As the days, weeks and months dragged on and the fine weather turned to biting snow, preventing builders or delivery vans from approaching Remaisnil, the frustrations for Laura and Bernard became at times overwhelming, One of the lowest moments for Laura was an interview she agreed to give to Susan Raven of the The Sunday Times, for ‘A Life in the Day of’ series.
She did not deny having said anything which she was quoted as saying.
She was simply embarrassed at being revealed to the public.
In the article she was at pains to point out why they had to stay out of England until the following April, ‘not because of tax’, she insisted, ‘but in case either of us drops dead, which would mean the company having to be broken up’.
The article described her current routine of constant travelling, discussions with designers flying over to see her, and her concern to exercise more and lose weight.
She disliked the photograph of herself in shorts, which she thought made her look fat; in fact she looked remarkably fit for a fifty-two-year-old.
But what upset her particularly was the last sentence: ‘I should go and work for a week in one of my  shops but — though I could even sleep on the factory floor — I can't understand people working in shops.’
She was still naïve enough not to realize that ideas tossed of the cuff could sound quite different in the cold print of day.
Those who worked for ‘Laura Ashley’ at this time found it a mixed experience.
Overall, the degree of responsibility and independence, the rapid and inexorable growth of the company and the originality of the product, made it a continuously exciting and rewarding place to work.
Yet it was also exhausting and frustrating.
Even within London the operations were spread over a wide area with, for example, designers at Greenford, south-east London, fittings in Battersea and pattern-cutting in Kilburn.
In addition, there was the studio in Carno and Laura herself in France.
This meant many of the staff could be travelling for days on end, racing against deadlines, and, just when they were at their most exhausted, might receive a summons to fly to France the next day, which usually meant leaving at 5.30 am.
‘All the people who worked with Laura in those years experienced the rough edge of her humour at some time or other, usually when you were so run down and exhausted, after four or five days travelling with no proper sleep, that you could not fight back.’
Laura's anger would usually come in an icy blast on the telex for all to see, invariably concerned with a project she had decided she no longer approved of, ‘It was like a burning spear going through you, you felt sick for three days.
She could denigrate one's whole being into nothingness,’ is how a senior member of her design team described it.
‘I would forgive her because I would feel she was really unhappy to behave like that.’
Bernard explains Laura differently.
‘Her authority was so complete, she never had to lose her temper, like I did.
If she said ‘Don't do something’, you didn't do it and you didn't argue.
She always gave orders with a smile, but the more she smiled the more quickly you acted.’
To Bernard alone Laura admitted she was unable to compromise, a talent she rated highly in him but was unable to foster in herself.
In difficult days, her obduracy increased.
Carolyn Warrender noticed a change in Laura and Bernard too.
‘Those were not the same people I had known; they were homeless, with no nest around them and no children.
They were so unhappy that life lost its perspective for them.’
Desperate to have Christmas in their new home, they were at least able to move into the ‘commun’ of the château in November.
They were without hot water and numerous other comforts but they had a base they could call their own.
The Novotel, sorry to lose its famous customers with their constant stream of visitors, threw a huge farewell party for them.
AMERICA
One autumn day towards the end of 1973, Bernard was driving through Oxford and, as was his wont, stopped off to see how things were at the local shop.
He was in an expansive mood, and enjoyed chatting to the sales assistants.
Twenty-three-year-old Jill Yate took the opportunity of telling her boss that, although she had had a wonderful year travelling around Europe, she was beginning to feel homesick and would soon be going back to the United States.
‘Well, let me know when you're off,’ Bernard told her, ‘because we're going to open in the States very shortly.
You could run the shop for us.’
It was typical of the way the company operated in the early Seventies.
Of course, there was no business plan for opening in the US; it was merely a dream, long nurtured by Bernard.
Of course, Laura took no part in such a major business decision; the empire builder was Bernard.
Laura harboured a vague suspicion that America was full of neon nastiness and immoral movies, but she encouraged Bernard's plan.
And then, of course, Jill Yate knew very little about retailing or the fashion industry; until a year before, her main interests had been rock and roll and the Beatles, and she fell upon the job at ‘Laura Ashley’ as representing part of the faded Sixties pop culture she loved.
But what mattered, as Bernard well knew, was that she was young and energetic and would feel charged with enormous responsibility and will to succeed in return for being offered this opportunity to take ‘Laura Ashley’ to  the States.
Finally, of course, there was no market research pointing to where in the entire continent would be the most suitable place to start.
Since Jill was returning to San Francisco that seemed the obvious location for the new shop.
Also, there was a bias against opening immediately in New York as Bernard and Laura wanted to avoid the limelight in case they failed.
Not that anyone in the company seriously questioned whether the new outlet would be successful; they had seen American tourists (although not necessarily Californians) on holiday in England ‘going crazy’ over the designs and assumed people would flock to them in the States.
Peter and Jean Revers were so excited by the project they decided they would try living in America for a while as the new venture would clearly need a business manager.
Jill returned in the spring of 1974 and was told to look around for a suitable site.
A few months later the Revers and their baby daughter set off for San Francisco.
‘We didn't know anything about America, but it felt right.
We were so full of our own importance we thought Americans with bulging pockets would come and find us wherever we were,’ Peter Revers explains.
Jill, charged to find the oldest building in town, located one of the few pre-earthquake buildings in downtown Jackson Square, part of the financial district.
It was a large basement, with no street-level exposure, and although sales for the first two days were excitingly high, the next few months were a disaster.
She sat in the empty shop for days willing people in off the streets.
With Laura still opposed to advertising,(‘too commercial’) their options were few.
After nearly a year, when they were further buffeted by a major recession which affected the entire country, Bernard wanted to close down and cut their losses; but with a ten-year lease on the shop there seemed little point even in doing that.
Having never visited America, the Ashleys had scant grasp of the cultural differences or geographical distances involved; in the UK no two stores were more than 350 miles apart.
Bernard would sometimes call from London and say, ‘Peter, why don't you go down to New York for the day and see all the magazine editors?’
Peter and Jill slowly began to realize the markedly different requirements of their American customers.
And yet the shop was being sent exactly the same merchandise as was being sold in England.
American women, they learned, did not much care for murky colours but wanted bright yellows and apple greens, vibrant colours which were hardly  used at all in Europe.
Even the all-white cotton garments, the mainstay of the inventory, posed an unexpected problem in the U S because these items had to be ironed, starched too if possible; many Americans do not even possess an iron, let alone use one.
Also, they found, American women have different shapes from their English sisters, being less curvaceous around the hips, and therefore they prefer a more tailored line.
Further disparities appeared on the home furnishings front; the standard English width of 21-inch wallpaper rolls was unknown to American decorators, who worked with a 28-inch standard, mostly vinyl, paper.
Vinyl, a man-made composite, was anathema to Laura.
These variations would have been impossible to rectify without buying expensive new printing machines, unthinkable, as home furnishings were still at an experimental stage in England.
How much to vary the product according to the market was a problem which hit at the very heart of the business.
Bernard and Laura's attitudes were still coloured by the historical evolution of the business, manufacturing led, and believed their shops existed only to absorb the manufacturing capacity.
They had invested heavily in their branded products and in the machinery to make them.
The rationale behind Laura's views was that her heart was in Wales, or, more specifically, in the factory in Wales, and this obliged her to do everything within her power to maintain that factory at full capacity.
Six thousand miles away, Jill and Peter felt they too had made an investment of their time and the company's money and pleaded with Bernard for a little longer to educate the American customer.
‘We knew it could work but we needed a better location and a lot of word of mouth.’
Bernard advanced $30,000 ‘to do or die with’ and, early in 1976, Peter bravely used half of this to open a second shop on Union Street, a prime commercial location in the centre of San Francisco.
He went down to the docks to buy a lorryload of timber going cheaply, had the building sandblasted and refitted, and insisted on some adjustment of the merchandise to suit the customer profile.
This time, it was the long-awaited triumph.
In 1975, Laura visited the United States for the first time to see the San Francisco venture for herself.
It was the first time she had travelled beyond Europe and she was captivated by the beautiful city and continually remarked upon the quality of the light and the gentle colours which bathed the buildings.
As a result of this visit, and those  to the South of France, she introduced several brighter and lighter designs in her next collection.
The following year she went to New York, to a large party given by Bloomingdales to show off four rooms decorated in ‘Laura Ashley’ fabrics.
Bernard did not accompany her so she invited David, then studying engineering in Newton, near Carno.
David's apprenticeship with another firm had irked his father who believed the family company could teach his children all they would ever need to know.
The ensuing breach upset Laura, who missed having her eldest son at home and was constantly trying to find ways to retain as much contact with him as possible.
David refused his mother's invitation at first: ‘To a dedicated anti-capitalist, as I then was, New York was everything I didn't approve of.
But when she said we were going by Concorde, that, to an engineering student, was it.’
Thus, at a stroke, Laura cleverly brought her son back into the company and family.
In New York, Laura was fêted as a brilliant female entrepreneur.
However much she might have wanted to remain aloof from publicity the female press corps had already identified her as the ‘Woman Head’ of a multi-million dollar international corporation and, through the same lens, saw her therefore as challenging a man's world.
They compared her, in advance, to similar women in the States who had manifestly succeeded but when they interviewed her, and found how she differed from the stereotype, they were even more intrigued.
What lessons could be learned from this sweet-talking, gentle-faced Englishwoman with so much success behind her?
The party at Bloomingdales was an orgy of mutual congratulation.
By this time Laura was thrilled to meet famous people and be treated as a celebrity among them — a contradiction within herself which she never outgrew as she did not seek the limelight and took pleasure in deflating those whom she considered did.
At this particular party, Gloria Vanderbilt was another guest of honour whom Laura was excited to recognize.
‘David, let me introduce you to Gloria Vanderbilt,’ said Laura, summoning her son to her side.
But when she realized her son did not appreciate who was this doyenne of New York fashion she said out loud: ‘Oh David, I can see you don't know who Gloria Vanderbilt is, do you?’
David well knew that his mother found this sort of joke, at Ms Vanderbilt's expense, irresistible.
But, on other occasions Laura could laugh at herself just as easily  because she was constantly amused by the transience of fame and never took her public for granted.
Bernard, appreciative that Laura in New York would be treated as a queen of design, an extraordinary superwoman who had singlehandedly achieved it all, accordingly decided not to go on this trip.
He insists today, however, that the prominence of his wife's name never worried him.
‘I always found it very funny when I was referred to as Mr Laura Ashley, especially as I hated my own name, Bernard.’
At all events, he was shrewd enough to realize how perfect was the name — timeless, classless and English — and never contemplated changing it.
Eventually, Peter rid them of the first, hapless shop in San Francisco and, in 1981, felt ready to open in New York.
New Yorkers were familiar with the ‘Laura Ashley’ name because the products had long been sold in Bloomingdales and Macy's.
For some years now they had licensing agreements with some major U S companies to produce ‘Laura Ashley’ designs on sheets and other home furnishings.
This arrangement was partly to help overcome a technical problem since Laura Ashley machinery was not capable of producing sheeting to the required width, and coordinated bed linen was a must for American designers.
But it was also an appetiser by way of preparing the American public for the full range of ‘Laura Ashley’ products to come.
But their own store on Madison Avenue at 64th Street, at the epicentre of the city's wealth and elegance, was still a giant leap.
Upon its success might depend the entire future of the company.
Because import duty (35 per cent on ornamented goods) and freight charges, had from the start pushed prices up in the US, Peter now decided to make a virtue of necessity and deliberately aimed for an exclusive designer image with corresponding price tag.
Naturally, this did not please Laura who thought the designer status was a disadvantage ‘because people aren't so likely to think of us as a neighbourhood store; that's what we want to be.
It's rather like knowing your mother is always the same,’ she told reporters.
They opened, from scratch, within seven weeks to see 800 people fight their way through the store on opening day, building up to 1,000 by the first Saturday.
Once the New York store established itself, quickly followed by others, Laura's treatment as a superstar by the US press increased.
When occasionally they asked her what was the marketing strategy or the business plan and she said, openly, that there  never had been one, her patent naturalness and honesty made the whole thing appear even more of a fairy story.
This was self-perpetuating.
Journalists treated her with such awe and respect that she soon thrived on interviews, developed her eccentricities and refined the mythical aspect of the success.
She especially loved any opportunity to contradict those interviewers who assumed that, as the company which bore her name was so successful, she must be an ardent feminist.
‘I only work part-time,’ she told one.
‘I'm just a housewife,’ she laughed to another.
The American press lapped up her homespun philosophy and whimsical reaction to success as an integral part of the ‘Laura Ashley’ empire.
No market advisers could ever have dreamed up a better ploy because Laura was only enunciating theories she had always believed in.
‘Our products can help give people a calmer, more well-ordered existence,’ she told one American interviewer.
Offered such a vast platform on which to air her philosophy of life, she found she warmed to her theme and lost any remaining traces of shyness.
She was described in US newspapers as a tycoon who was quaint, genteel and steeped in the worlds of Beatrix Potter and Jane Austen.
And she responded by telling them she was no tycoon, just a wife and mother with an unusually clear view of the world.
‘Frankly, I make clothes for women to look sweet.
I like sweet women,’ she said in one syndicated interview.
‘I see women's role in life in the light of sweetness.
Men should be the hunters.
Women are keepers of the hunters: it's a straightforward, set philosophy of mine.’
Later, she subtly modified her views so as to accommodate, not alienate, American feminists.
‘A woman sees the home as her base and she dresses to complement that environment almost as part of the decoration.
Of course that doesn't mean that she doesn't leave her home to work, it just means that the home is where she visualizes herself, wherever she is…
Man goes out into the world and brings back what a family needs to survive but he doesn't find a reflection of himself in the home as a woman does.’
The new emphasis, nonetheless, did nut alter the pivotal position.
Women, in Laura Ashley's world, have no existence except in terms of their relationship to men; this was not sacrificial, it was fulfilling.
Thus her choice of the quaint word, ‘sweet’ is no coincidence; sweetness is the quality Victorian men were taught to prize in a woman above all others.
Laura found other themes in Victorian novels to bolster what she already believed; for example the home was viewed as a haven isolated from the trials and tribulations  of the ‘real’ world and women presiding over the home were to make it as attractive as possible to persuade men to stay there rather than, for example , drinking in a pub all evening.
Laura, who had a horror of pubs, dedicated her life to improving home comforts.
Contrary to his expectations, David found the atmosphere in New York stimulating and exciting.
He wanted to stay, and told his father what he thought was needed to capitalize on the enormous potential of the US market.
Bernard, harder on his own son than he might have been on any other twenty-three-year-old in the company was not keen, telling him he had no business experience.
But he relented.
David, involved initially in finding new store locations, decided to stay on the East Coast with the next shops opening in Boston, Mass., Westport, Conn. and Washington DC.
From now on the American venture was not seriously in doubt, but as margins were tighter, there was not, even here, an immediate cash surplus.
John James remembers doing the accounts with Peter Revers on his kitchen table in 1977 to save the company the expense of hiring an outside firm of accountants.
From the first, image was recognized as the vital factor which would decide the future of ‘Laura Ashley’ in America.
Two years after storming New York, Laura and Bernard hired a young girl of impeccably aristocratic background and ‘English rose’ looks as Director of Publicity for the U S company.
The image Sarah Callander projected for ‘Laura Ashley’ over the next few years.
could not have been a more perfect match.
Sarah understood instinctively the romantic feel of the product, coupled with Laura's personal philosophy of being true to oneself as a woman and letting everything revolve around the home.
And yet she subtly steered her boss towards a more sophisticated version of this.
Fuelling the aristocratic Ashley appeal in the U S was the considerable publicity given to the shy, young fiancée of Prince Charles.
The then Lady Diana Spencer, who had shopped at ‘Laura Ashley’ from the age of fourteen, was regularly photographed in frilly, feminine blouses in white cotton or lace, preferably with a high ruffled neck.
Even after her wedding, the Princess of Wales continued to shop at ‘Laura Ashley’, albeit with a bodyguard, and whatever items she brought received wide coverage.
‘Laura Ashley’ sales everywhere were boosted by this royal connection but the effect in America was electric.
Could it be that young girls who wore ‘Laura Ashley’ dresses might become princesses themselves?
But the greatest fillip to ‘Laura Ashley's’ success in the US came from connections with the British Embassy in general and with Lady Henderson, the Ambassador's wife, in particular.
Mary Henderson, Greek by birth, had first come across Laura Ashley in Paris when she and her husband had been posted there in 1975.
As a great admirer of ‘Laura Ashley’ dresses, she often wore the long, British-made cotton dresses to Embassy functions — once she found she was clothed in the same fabric as a sofa — an embarrassment which she carried off with great panache.
Thus, when she was hosting a major fashion show in Paris, featuring the best British designers, she invited Laura to attend, even though she was not showing Ashley clothes.
The two women became immediate friends.
When, in 1979, Sir Nicholas Henderson was posted to Washington and within two weeks of moving was told that the new Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, was to visit, Mary Henderson wasted no time in asking Laura if she could supply certain fabrics at cost price with immediate delivery; Laura naturally obliged.
The Lutyens house in Washington had forty rooms, nine of which are bedrooms.
She wanted, she told Laura, to create the atmosphere of an English country house and chose a blue and white vines fabric.
In return, the Hendersons agreed to open the new ‘Laura Ashley’ shop and Bernard and Laura went to stay at the Embassy for the occasion, sleeping in what had become known as the ‘Laura Ashley’room at the Embassy.
At the end of 1982, Lady Henderson conceived the clever idea of giving the Embassy in Washington a facelift by inviting several top British designers including David Hicks, David Mlinaric, Jean Munro and John Stefanidis, each to decorate one room.
They were to give their advice free as the Government would pay for the work.
Since all materials were to be British it would be a major boost for British products and the finished house would serve as an exhibition showcase, providing excellent publicity for all those involved.
Laura Ashley was one of those invited and was genuinely thrilled to be considered on the same level as these ‘famous names’.
‘She was always quite stunned by her own success,’ recalls Mary Henderson, ‘because to her it was so obvious that people preferred to live in an atmosphere of comfort and tranquillity.
She offered a freshness and uniquely British quality that makes her comparable to William Morris, I believe.’
David, by this time Senior Vice President of ‘Laura Ashley Inc.’, understood the  importance of Mary Henderson's friendship.
‘They were always totally supportive of the company and the publicity from the Embassy could not have given us a better boost or image.’
By the end of the Seventies ‘Laura Ashley’ had sufficiently entered the American consciousness that when a small toy factory in Kentucky was threatened with closure, the Governor, John Y. Brown Jr., immediately contacted Laura Ashley and suggested they took it over.
Laura liked the idea, partly because it was a way of avoiding import duty, but also because the eastern Kentucky women who worked at the factory were similar to the Welsh women she had first hired in the Sixties; rural, with strong ties to family and community and skilful seamstresses by upbringing.
From then on all the white items of clothing sold in the US were made in Kentucky.
With ‘Laura Ashley’ shops opening at about the rate of ten a year and Peter Revers' avowed aim to have one in every state, the new factory was crucial.
In September 1979, the first ‘Laura Ashley’ store in a shopping mall opened in Chicago's Water Tower Place.
Others in shopping malls followed as David managed to persuade his mother that such locations were essential in America because of the long distances from homes to towns.
In 1980, three ‘Laura Ashley’ shops opened in Atlanta, Georgia, Baltimore, Maryland and Costa Mesa, California, and Laura derived great pleasure from travelling to the West Coast to attend the opening of this shop.
She was flattered to be told that she must be an artist from the way she dressed, until David added ‘they tell everyone that’.
She performed with great natural charm in a television interview and marvelled at all the stretch-limousines she rode in.
By the end of 1980 there were thirteen ‘Laura Ashley’ stores in the US, not one of which took less than $400 per square foot annually in sales.
Average sales per customer were running in excess of $100 and the company goal for forty-five to fifty stores within the next five years seemed easily achievable.
David instituted an address book for mailings and comments in the front of the Madison Avenue shop and when the addresses were analysed, the Ashleys learned that their store had one of the highest customer profiles in the City, after Tiffany's.
One aspect of the American success which pleased Laura above all was her eldest son's achievement in creating his own niche within the company.
Several journalists questioned him about whether or not he had found it hard being Laura Ashley's son and his answer told them  more than they had realized.
No, it was not hard being her son and he had no problem answering to his parents, because, in fact, he reported to Peter Revers.
It had, however, been tough being Bernard's son, until he removed himself from his direct sphere of influence.
Able to prove himself on his own ground, his relationship with Bernard improved and deepened and Bernard was the first to respect David's proficiency.
Laura had been perceptive enough to create the means of achieving this.
It was clear from his success that he understood his adopted country extremely well, a fact underlined by his marriage in June 1979 to a wealthy New York Jewess, Susan Adler.
There was, however, no grand wedding for Laura to attend as the couple married quickly and quietly.
David was the first of her children to wed and Laura got on well with her first in-law, welcoming her into the family as well as the company.
Susan often came over to Remaisnil for meetings.
On 30 October 1980, Laura celebrated the birth of her first grandchild, an American baby called Sara Jane.
Bernard announced that he wished to be known as an uncle, not a grandfather.
FRANCE AND FAMILY
Laura's absence from Carno endowed office politics with a new dimension.
Exactly one month before her departure she hired, according to the advertisement, a ‘fashion co-ordinator’.
She explained to Deborah James, chosen from 300 applicants, how she wanted ‘the design system to be as perfect as it could be so that the accountants could not spoil it’—‘accountants’ having now become for Laura a generic term for anyone not on the design team.
She once reported to Robert Landgrebe, marketing manager, in a voice of genuine shock that she had just been on an aeroplane with three accountants ‘and do you know, they tried to talk to me about design’.
Landgrebe, only the second graduate employed by the company, had taken over Peter Revers' job when the latter went to New York and had responsibilities for scheduling and managing shops, but knew better than to express an opinion on artistic matters.
Deborah James had run her own business, a shirtmaker's called Deborah and Clare in Beauchamp Place, and having recently experienced her own troubles with accountants, was extremely sympathetic to Laura's attitudes.
She also found herself naturally in tune with Laura's taste and, although her job specification was to oversee the entire design structure for clothes, Laura advised her that she ‘had been brought in as a flanker to Moira’.
Later, Deborah thought she understood more precisely Laura's vision of company structure while  she was abroad; ‘she had Moira to sell more, Meirion to produce more and me to do it better’.
Deborah was never certain whether it was a case of ‘divide and rule’ or ‘design and rule’.
Deborah told her new boss what she believed the company needed: ‘Principally the clothes were an insult to the country girls they were trying to portray…they weren't suitable for country wear but they were selling very cheaply to secretaries in towns.
‘Laura Ashley’ had a loyal following among country people who, I felt, were being let down.’
In Deborah's view the quality of the clothes had to synchronize with the quality of the image.
She made two other trenchant criticisms; one was that the colours had to be controlled by introducing a system which would not permit a forty to fifty colour range.
The second concerned the shops; ‘They were still like a jumble sale inside with everything crammed on the rails.’
Laura was quite happy to let Deborah set in motion her improvements and chivvied her on.
Yet general strategy, however serious a concern, had to give way before the immediate problem of the winter ‘78 collection.
For Deborah this meant travelling to Remaisnil once every two weeks, often accompanied by Phil Morris from Carno.
In the first year Laura wanted to see everything herself so the colours, prints and designs were all taken regularly to France for inspection.
Mere geographical separation did not lessen her perfectionism; she once asked Phil to reprint a design thirty-eight times until she was satisfied with the colours.
But after a while Deborah and her assistant worked out a system through which everything passed and which was regulated by a strict design timetable; this was sanctioned, but not directed, by Laura.
Deborah maintained that if the company wished to keep hold of its original and still loyal customers, now in the thirty-plus age bracket, and looking for more elegant attire, it had a lot of ground to make up.
In fact, all British fashion retailers were being forced to recognize the ageing of the baby boom generation and at ‘Laura Ashley’ there was already a move towards broadening the appeal of the clothes to an older, more sophisticated market which spent less freely on personal adornment but demanded more in quality and style.
Laura's own experience was also decisive here.
‘Now in her fifties, she found most of the clothes were completely unsuited to her personally and you do lose interest if you cannot wear what you are producing,’ Deborah  commented.
She believed this was a prime factor encouraging Laura's shirt away from garments towards home furnishings.
More significant was the greater scope for historical research offered by the latter; clothes, Laura recognized, could never draw upon their historical antecedents to the same degree.
Whatever the varying demands on her time, Laura was determined not to delegate print research.
Hitherto she had been so tied up in the day-to-day mechanics of the company that she was often forced to consider time for research as a luxury.
In addition it was only very recently that the company had the expensive machinery necessary to translate some of the more sophisticated effects she wished to produce, and even this was being constantly updated.
As her knowledge of European art history increased and now that she had found the Musée des Beaux Arts in Paris where she felt comfortable and was treated with respect, her talent for recognizing saleable patterns, ripe for rediscovery, flourished.
‘I knew she went to a certain museum but I didn't know where else she went, nor any of her sources, nor what she paid for things.
You couldn't possibly ask her anything like that.
You knew it was hers and she guarded it jealously,’ Deborah said.
Her exposure to and enjoyment of French museums and antique shops was a key element which enriched her life in France.
She was collecting many valuable print references and sources, far too many to be used at once, and had special archive cupboards built for her which occupied a tall, cavernous room off the first floor landing at the château where she often worked.
Although Laura's formal education finished prematurely, she showed a remarkable capacity for intellectual growth in the middle years of her life: many of her ideas were changing so fast that her colleagues often found it difficult to keep pace.
Laura thrived on the expanding horizons now before her.
Yet she could not have done so without the help of a young French countess, Sybille de la Borde.
Sybille was the single most important element which eased daily pressure for both her and Bernard in France.
For several months before the Ashleys moved in, the locals of Remaisnil speculated about what to expect of the new English châtelaine.
‘Laura Ashley’ was sufficiently known in France to excite great curiosity and Sybille was tempted to offer her services as a general assistant.
She knew the château well, as her uncle and aunt had formerly owned it.
Within a few weeks of the Ashleys moving in, she drove up, knocked on the door and welcomed  them to the area.
If there was anything she could do to help she would, she said, be only too happy.
‘I had never worked at all in my married life and I'm not a natural businesswoman.
But I loved their products and was dying to work for them.’
Bernard refused her offer at first; he did not think her English was fluent enough.
Then, on 31 December, he rang back in desperation at the slow progress on the house, and told Sybille they would like her to start the next day.
It was largely Sybille who effected the Ashley's smooth transition to an often closed French provincial society.
She introduced them to their neighbours, her own family and friends as well as to the best local craftspeople and services; her husband performed a valuable role in selecting wine for the Ashleys.
‘Laura was more like a friend than an employer, she was so kind to me and did so many thoughtful things.
Bernard's character, quite the reverse of hers, was so magnetic he made life exciting every day.’
The Ashleys fully appreciated how much they owed to Sybille and treated her with great respect and kindness; faux pas, which from other members of staff would have met with icy reproofs, went scarcely noticed.
‘They were so patient with me at the beginning until I understood English better; they would ask one of the secretaries in Wales to type a letter if I couldn't.
If my children were ill Laura would send me home immediately and I was even allowed to smoke in their presence.’
This last was a major concession as smoking in the company was, theoretically, totally forbidden.
Sybille was an exception, but Laura liked to believe that she had persuaded her at least to cut down.
Halfway through 1979 the Ashleys finally moved into the main part of the château; it was not completed for another two years and was to prove a far more major project than anyone had realized.
But even when there were teams of twenty or thirty workmen ‘tripping over each other’, as Laura told a friend, with beds scattered all over the place and no curtains, ‘it still has a very romantic atmosphere’.
She found it less romantic when one of the workmen blundered into the bathroom while she was still in the bath.
‘Luckily it's a very old bath and only my shoulders could be seen,’ she managed to joke.
THE FIRST LAURA ASHLEY ARTICULATED LORRY, WITH ITS BOLD SIXTIES LETTERING, WOULD RUMBLE DOWN THE NARROW LINES FROM CARNO TO LONDON ONLY TO BE ATTACKED BY MARAUDING CUSTOMERS WAITING FOR THEIR FAVOURITE STYLES TO ARRIVE.
LAURA IN THE SORT OF FORMAL POSE, ADVERTISING COMPANY PRODUCTS, THAT SHE HATED.
BUT THIS GYPSY-STYLE OUTFIT SUITED HER WELL AND THE TIERED SHIRT WAS ONE OF THE COMPANY'S MOST SUCCESSFUL STYLES EVER.
LAURA AND BERNARD WITH FRIENDS AT COWES WEEK IN 1976.
THE OPENING OF THE BORDEAUX SHOP IN MAY 1978.
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: LADY HENDERSON, WIFE OF THE BRITISH AMBASSADOR TO FRANCE, MADAME CHABAN DELMAS, WIFE OF THE MAYOR OF BORDEAUX, BERNARD, LAURA, AND MADAME ANDRE MENTZELOPOULOS, OWNER OF CHATEAU MARGAUX.
LAURA AND BERNARD WITH HIS BACK TO THE CAMERA, AT A PARTY TO CELEBRATE THE MILAN SHOP OPENING IN DECEMBER 1978.
SHOP OPENINGS COULD BE TRAUMATIC OCCASIONS BUT LAURA ALWAYS PLAYED DOWN HER OWN ROLE AND MADE SURE THE PRESS KNEW HOW MUCH HER HUSBAND HAD CONTRIBUTED TO THE BUSINESS.
LAURA ON HOLIDAY OFF CORSICA IN 1966.
THE PATCHINESS OF HER NECK RESULTED FROM SEVERE SUNBURN ON HER FIRST HOLIDAY ABROAD WITH BERNARD.
FAR FROM CONSIDERING THIS A DISFIGUREMENT, HOWEVER, LAURA WAS PLEASED TO HAVE A PERMANENT REMINDER OF SUCH A HAPPY TIME.
A RARE SHOT OF LAURA AT THE HELM OF THEIR BOAT, QUAESO, WHILE JANE TRIES TO READ AND THE SEA IS CLAM.
ALWAYS SELF-CONSCIOUS OF HER WISPY HAIR, LAURA INVARIABLY WORE A SCARF OVER IT TIED AT THE BACK IN PEASANT STYLE.
THE VIEW FROM LAURA AND BERNARD'S BOATHOUSE AT PORT GRIMAUD.
EXTRA GUESTS COULD BE PUT UP OVERNIGHT ON THEIR SAILING BOAT, USUALLY MOORED AT THE END OF THE THEIR BALCONY.
THE BRITISH DESIGNERS INVITED BY THE AMBASSADOR'S WIFE, LADY HENDERSON, TO REDECORATE THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON.
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: JOHN STEFANDIS, LAURA, DAVID HICKS, LADY HENDERSON, JOHN BYROM, DAVID MLINARIC.
LAURA OVERCAME HER FEAR OF WATER BECAUSE SHE LOVED TO SHARE BERNARD'S EXCITEMENT WITH BOATS.
ON BOARD QUAESO IN 1983.
BERNARD WITH JOHN JAMES, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF LAURA ASHLEY PLC.
BETWEEN THEM THEY HAVE LANDED THE BIG FISH.
BERNARD AND LAURA, WITH THEIR FRIEND THOMAS DUNNE, WAITING TO BOARD AN ASHLEY AIRCRAFT.
BERNARD OFTEN PILOTED HIMSELF.
LAURA WITH HER FIRST GRANDCHILD, SARA JANE, IN THE CONSERVATORY AT RHYDOLDOG, 1984.
ONE OF THE LAST PHOTOGRAPHS OF LAURA, TAKEN SHORTLY BEFORE HER DEATH, WHILE AT THE HEREFORDSHIRE HOME OF HER FRIENDS, HENRIETTA AND THOMAS DUNNE.
ON THE RIGHT BERNARD DURING THE SAME VISIT.
CLOGAU, MONTGOMERYSHIRE, A WELSH LONGHOUSE; AS WILD AND ISOLATED A HOME AS COULD BE FOUND.
RHYDOLDOG HOUSE, RADNORSHIRE, A VICTORIAN RAMBLING MANSION WITH MAGNIFICENT VIEWS.
CHATEAU DE REMAISNIL, DOULLENS, FRANCE, THE ASHLEY'S FIRST EXPERIMENT IN GRAND LIVING.
LA PERE VERGER, A ROMANTIC FRENCH MANOIR IN THE SOUTH OF FRANCE, HIDDEN AMONG LAVENDER AND OLIVE GROVES.
Laura's natural adaptability enabled her to settle quickly.
Her life at Remaisnil in the first years had no routine; she continued to travel regularly around Europe overseeing shops as well as production in Helmond.
She was constantly at the telex machine, her old wartime  training coming into its own, and was more adept than those the company hired as telex operators.
Every week somebody from Wales or London flew over to discuss aspects of design or production schedules with her as well as the regular, more formal selection meetings, held at least every two months.
Some twenty-four people at least would attend these meetings and all would be put up in the château, or its annexe, and provided with lunch, dinner and breakfast the next day.
Laura had many principles over which she would never compromise, one of which was the importance of giving each guest or employee a room of his or her own; even two women would never be expected to share.
She believed privacy to be a key requisite for a peaceful life.
Thanks to Sybille two local women were hired to do extra cooking and cleaning on these occasions, when it seemed the concept of the extended family had turned the Ashleys into hoteliers.
Regular entertaining of company personnel, as well as occasional friends at weekends, threatened to become a major preoccupation for Laura.
However, the services of a young English professional cook, whose aristocratic connections were almost as important as her culinary skills, rescued her.
Jenny Warburton Lee would fly over in the company ‘plane with all the fresh ingredients she could muster while Sybille gathered the rest locally.
Within an hour of arriving she had dinner for twenty on the table and would spend the rest of the weekend, or week, cooking.
As the kitchen was tiny Laura was quite happy to let Jenny get on with it alone.
‘But she would come in from time to time to inspect the ingredients and make sure everything was fresh, nothing frozen, dried or packeted, especially not the orange juice for breakfast, which had to be freshly squeezed from three kilos of oranges.
She liked to imagine everything had come straight off the land; it was all part of the wholesome image,’ Jenny recalled.
Ashley food was, by common consent, always excellent; unfussy, fresh and healthy.
Laura though, by now extremely conscious of an expanding waistline, tried to eat as little as possible, however wholesome and fresh.
When she was not engaged in company work, she was overseeing the redesigning and restocking of the gardens, which she loved, and, of course, planning the decoration of the house.
But this was, after all, business, as many of the rooms were used for room sets and photographic sessions.
In addition, there was an intermittent stream of international journalists, all lured by the lifestyle of this unlikely Welsh businesswoman, a description she would never have used of herself.
Neither Bernard nor Laura sought publicity from English journalists.
They were an intrusion and, if allowed at all, were usually treated as such.
Occasionally there was a total embargo on any press interviews and Laura never allowed a stock of photographs of her to be held and handed out at will.
However, since 1979 the company had employed Lina Carr Gomm, a friend of Jane's, as a full-time Publicity Officer.
Lina's role was to persuade the Ashleys that journalists were not there to pry, but to promote.
More than once Lina arranged the time and place of an interview, booked the plane, agreed the meals, models, set stylists and hairdressers only to find the whole thing suddenly cancelled.
‘They never really wanted interviews and didn't like being public figures.
It was a nightmare,’ according to Lina.
But occasionally it worked, and many European journalists, unaware of her inhibitions, found her charming, gentle, courteous and easy.
Bettina McNulty, who first met the Ashleys on a business assignment for American House and Garden in the late Seventies, became a good friend, but never took advantage of this by writing anything about Laura's personal life, which she was well positioned to do.
Bettina recognized the Ashleys' need for privacy and was also aware of Laura's ‘deep sense of loss’ by moving to France; a loss, Bettina believed, which derived from an end to close contact with her children who still needed her.
Although she snatched a moment whenever she could to telephone her much missed family, ‘you could feel her disappointments, her lack of freedom.
But she never complained or ever referred to the château as ‘that damned place’…
She had such a capacity for joy that she overcame such negative feelings,’ Bettina explained.
In France, Bernard found himself with more time than he had ever been used to in his working life; after his hour-long morning telephone call to John James the day stretched ahead.
Not exactly lazy — although that is how he describes himself-as a delegator and motivator he had always excelled and now found himself less directly occupied.
He therefore decided to take up flying, a hobby which Laura encouraged.
Interestingly it pointed up one of the fundamental differences between the two of them.
For Bernard, work was a means to an end, be it a fast car a sailing boat or a factory offering large-scale employment.
For Laura, work had now become an end in itself; although some of her colleagues began to describe her as a workaholic it was more that she  found working a pleasurable state.
It formed part of her dream; she had the perfect home, the perfect family, the perfect husband, the perfect life and the perfect job.
In Laura's world dreams did come true.
But of course the dream glossed over the differences between the public, perfected self and the private, often anguished individual.
Remaisnil became the staged version of her perfected life, the culmination of the myth which was such a potent force for customer and company alike and without which the art could not flourish.
Laura was an efficient stage manager, ensuring that the myth remained undisturbed.
If Bernard was busy with flying lessons then she could be left in peace to get on with her work; once he was back, if he wanted her to go somewhere with him, he would just say ‘Come on Laura, we're going,’ and even if she were in the middle of a meeting, she would put away what she was doing and go.
Her ability to remain utterly calm in such circumstances was extraordinary.
Just because she had to leave a meeting suddenly did not mean she would relinquish her authority.
Phil Morris well remembers such an occasion.
‘As she got up to go past she said: ‘Give me a ring and we'll do the Home Furnishing Collection tomorrow.’
Everyone else thought the decisions had been made but in fact we totally re-did that season's collection in a waiting room at Brussels airport, just the two of us.’
1979 signalled a turning point in the Ashley's existence.
To the outside world they had arrived on the international scene as self-made, jet-setting millionaires.
However much they may have disliked such labels they were unavoidable as the dramatic jump in their lifestyle was to have an equally powerful, and highly visible, effect on the company.
The move to the château influenced the types of fabrics and products which from now on bore the ‘Laura Ashley’ name and so the company grew, organically, by producing a more exalted range.
Laura believed, as fervently as ever, in the universality of her own experience.
But this was becoming harder to justify.
During discussions on the type of fabric suitable for ‘Laura Ashley’ sheets she stuck to her insistence on 100 per cent cotton.
When a colleague pointed out how difficult and time consuming these would be to iron, Laura countered: ‘Oh, but surely everyone sends their sheets to a laundry these days?’
However, some fabrics to which Laura now aspired were, she knew, too lavish for her own company to produce.
For example, she decided to decorate the main drawing room of the château in a plain, but  luxurious salmon pink silk, in stark contrast to the small flowers and sprigged cotton in the other rooms, yet absolutely in keeping with the style of the house.
An English interior designer flew out especially to plan and make the curtains for this one room, and the heavy silk drapes with thickly ruched pelmets, magnificent tassels and braid trims cost several thousand pounds, exceeding by far the means of most of her customers.
Laura had always aspired to the very best within a certain budget; her budget had now expanded.
She hoped it would not be too long before ‘Laura Ashley’ was itself producing material of this calibre.
1979 was a time of personal change, too, because the move abroad was followed by a major restructuring of the business which Laura eventually accepted, having first found a means of making it workable to her.
The single event which marked the dividing line was the company's twenty-fifth anniversary celebration in April 1979.
After a year abroad, Laura and Bernard drove up to Rhydoldog in snow to find that Ruby and Molly, as a welcoming gesture, had put out the French flag on the lawn.
They sat down to a celebration champagne lunch with Dai Davies, the farm manager, and set about opening the heaps of telegrams and congratulatory letters ‘so that we really felt on top of the world’.
They visited all the factories and shops they could squeeze into their brief, allotted time and the highlight of their visit was a Silver Anniversary Ball when 700 people gathered at the leisure centre near Deeside, Queensferry.
They were entertained by the Royal Artillery Band, the Brendan Shine Show and comedian Harry Secombe, who captured the poignancy of the occasion by singing ‘We'll Keep a Welcome’.
The festivities were capped by an emotional presentation of a set of Bohemian cut glass from the staff to Bernard and Laura.
They, in turn, gave each employee five pounds.
By the end of the evening Laura had shaken everybody's hand and found something to say to each one.
After twenty-five years of manufacturing, but a mere eleven retailing, company expansion worldwide had reached seventy shops.
In order to foster the feeling of family among such large numbers of staff the first edition of ‘Laura Ashley News’ was launched.
It was inevitable that as the company expanded, so did the role of accountants and planners and Laura, however rueful, never once proposed that expansion should be blocked.
After months of discussion, it was decided in 1980 to appoint Deloitte Haskins and Sells, management consultants, to produce a five-year  corporate plan for the Laura Ashley Group.
As a result of one recommendation, the company was no longer to be totally run from Wales, but broken up into smaller profit centres; four separate operating divisions were proposed, each with its own board comprising the principal managers within that division.
The stated aims of the restructuring were partly to reduce the recent increased level of borrowing, but also to make individuals more accountable and profit conscious for the areas of operation under their control.
The latter was not a goal which Laura espoused, nor was she comfortable working in such a formal setting.
The most dramatic symbol of the changing nature of the company was Laura's estrangement from the main board of the company which bore her name.
In 1980 she stopped attending board meetings, which she considered a pantomime; those things which she really cared about she managed to achieve quietly away from the meeting, in discussions with Phil Morris or Deborah James.
Although she often maintained that it was her own choice not to attend, she told an American interviewer, I would love to go to board meetings where he [Bernard]is chairman but I'm not invited.
I guess it wouldn't be right for me to differ with him.
But at home it's the petticoat rule.’
On another occasion she explained: ‘I'm not allowed to go to board meetings.’
She told a reporter from the Chicago Tribune ‘I'm titular head only.
What would be the point of my disagreeing with my husband at a board meeting?
We do talk about the agenda at breakfast before he goes and he will hear my point of view.’
Once the Deloitte's plan was implemented, Bernard remained Chairman, John James Group Managing Director, and a new role was specially created for Laura.
No longer Deputy Chairman, she was now, officially, Design Director, to be concerned with the artistic philosophy of the group as well as to oversee the development of the new product collections.
Her seat on the board was never formally revoked; it was just that it was clear she was not to use it.
Laura responded to this repositioning of her responsibilities neither by loudly insisting that she have more formal authority nor by sweetly surrendering the vestiges of power which she had.
In effect she was working harder than ever and enjoying a supreme burst of creative energy since she could now release her talents into producing fabrics and accessories for every aspect of the home, while leaving Deborah in charge of garments.
Her cherished ambition was that her customers should accept that ‘Laura Ashley’ was  not just for bedrooms, nurseries and other upstairs rooms but was indeed suitable for every room in the house, however grand.
Living in the château gave an enormous fillip to these aspirations.
Laura was in excellent health and neutralized the effect of the plan in a number of ways.
In the first place she sharpened her political antennae and manipulative skills.
She requested all telexes to be collected and sent out to her each week.
On a particularly difficult issue she had a habit of canvassing everyone privately, except the person directly involved, so that when the matter was finally aired she would already be in command of all views.
Typically circuitous is the way she used Bernard.
When she heard that a particular decision had not yet been implemented she telexed Moira, complaining: ‘BA would be very annoyed if he heard it had not been done.’
In her arguments with John James over powers allocated to her design group she wrote, also in a telex: ‘This company has always been design dominated,’ and then bolstered her argument by adding ‘see memos from BA leaving no doubt whatsoever.’
She went on: ‘The image has obviously been watered down these last seasons and the situation must be reversed.’
James responded by supporting the role of the merchandisers, of whom he said, ‘I do not think they are changing the LA image — I can only think they are enhancing it by ensuring the best level of stock service to the shops.’
Another method of retaining control was by keeping a firm grip on hours of work.
There were no written rules but nobody ever worked beyond five o'clock in her presence; at this point formal business ended regardless.
Bernard, just as much as Laura, disapproved of working endlessly round the clock.
However, those who came to Remaisnil for meetings could not but be struck by a paradox; they were expected to remain in the château for meals and afterwards, until they retired to bed.
Going out to find exciting nightlife was distinctly frowned upon.
Yet discussion during the evening was about the company and little else and samples of fabric were passed round the table at most meal times.
‘The company was an ever present reality that always hovered over us,’ one close associate commented.
Laura's insistence on punctuality for meal times became something of a fetish, not because she was herself preparing meals which risked being spoiled; she rarely had time for cooking any more.
It was something far deeper and was not merely affectation.
Meal times anchored the day and as such had a major place in family life.
Destruction of  such routine was a step towards destruction of the family itself, and by a short step the company, which was extended family.
Everyone knew how important punctuality was to Laura; she believed if you arrived late it could only be because you had not started out early enough.
Eventually she put her feelings on record.
‘If either of us calls a meeting here it must be assumed, unless otherwise stated, that the persons invited will arrive mid-morning for a day's meeting; lunch is at 12.30 pm French time and dinner 6.30 pm French time.
Yesterday, to our consternation and when in fact we had cancelled other plans for the meeting, eight people arrived here at 2.00 pm for a meeting we had anticipated would commence at 11.30 am at the latest.
We also had to provide them with lunch at 2.30 pm.
Please do not let this happen again,’ she wrote to John James.
Meals, meal times and the paraphernalia associated with them had always loomed large in the Laura Ashley ideology.
Whether or not she was cooking, she regularly donned an apron as a symbolically matriarchal gesture that she was in charge of domestic arrangements.
The fixation with aprons spilled over into her business life too as she insisted that her shops should always stock aprons.
Even when whole batches of these ended up on sale rails Laura was not given to tergiversation.
Parallel with this ideology and another means of countering the increasingly corporate nature of the business was the way she fostered the involvement of her own children and their friends.
David was, by this time, playing a major role in developing the fast-growing U S retailing operation; Nick was taking a larger hand in design strategy and had built a team of extremely young, artistic friends around him.
These included Sasha de Stroumillo, just nudging eighteen when she joined the company and Tottie Whately who, together, designed brilliantly original room sets for shop displays and catalogues.
Both were given a free hand to indulge their imagination and produced some of the wittiest and talked about windows in London, several of which featured life-sized stuffed animals or eye-catching visual puns.
Window displays were becoming controversial within the company; Laura liked to see windows full of antiques and atmosphere, but increasingly found herself at loggerheads with more prosaic minds who wanted products and price-tags.
Laura's preference for young, wholly committed staff invariably paid off; she knew they were less likely to criticize, were  unshackled either by experience or domestic ties and would exude energy.
Michael Howells, a painter friend of Nick's who stencilled the occasional floor and otherwise assisted in certain aspects of window display, found both Ashleys refreshingly open to suggestions, keen to encourage young staff and always trying to give them their first break.
Emma too, although still at school, was now provoked to make a contribution.
Concerned at the way neither she nor her friends wore ‘Laura Ashley’ clothes (too many frills, too much lace, all up to the neck and down to the ankles, they said) Laura asked them to come up with suggestions for the sort of outfits they would like to wear.
The result was ‘Emma's Collection’ of baggy clown dungarees in vibrant primary and luminous colours, dots and stripes.
Arguably, had an outside designer proposed such items, Laura would have found them unpalatably modern.
Nonetheless, they did so well that from then on Emma was asked to contribute on a regular basis.
Laura's relationship with her eldest daughter was less straightforward.
Jane had been hurt by her parents' occasional references to her in newspaper interviews as being a ‘difficult child’ or other remarks prompted only by Laura's nagging worries about what the future might hold for Jane.
At the same time, she never swayed from her view that Jane's photography had great artistic integrity and supported her within the company whatever the criticism.
She was proud of her daughter's originality and if Jane's work was becoming less commercial Laura was unconcerned.
Commercialism was not a quality she rated highly, but protection of one's children from outsiders was.
But inevitably, others in the company were pressing for a greater commercial awareness.
One of the worst clashes was over a batch of photographs Jane had taken in North Africa.
She had used inexperienced girls with no make-up, she had shown their deliberately unshaven armpits, she had dressed them in creased and crumpled frocks — the mood shot taken to its logical conclusion, perhaps, as well as an echo of her mother's antipathy towards using professional models, but a far cry from the traditional ‘Laura Ashley’ image of strawberries-and-cream-tea on the lawn.
Whatever Laura privately thought of these pictures, revolutionary in their way, she insisted they be used.
She was deaf to the arguments of those who told her that they would detract from the product, that they promoted only ugliness.
Those present at the meeting were in no doubt of her overriding philosophy: ‘I own the company, my daughter took the photographs, therefore you use them.
If you do not like the photographs we have produced you are free to leave the company.’
Laura herself was in any case developing more pronounced tendencies against commercialism.
From about 1979 onwards she started to buy Welsh tweed from the Cambrian Woollen Mill in mid-Wales.
This started as a small venture in the mid-Seventies, as a result of Laura's determination to produce cloth woven from wool from her own flock at Rhydoldog.
After much negotiation, the Welsh Wool Marketing Board agreed to a special arrangement whereby the Cambrian Mill could make up the Ashley's own wool into cloth as long as this was not sold, but used only for demonstration models and pattern samples.
Laura often visited the Cambrian Mill, owned by the British Legion since 1927 but run for the benefit of all local disabled people who then, as now, make up 80 per cent of the workforce.
‘She liked the quality of the product, but she was extremely sympathetic to our aims as well,’ recalls Eric Hetherington, former sales manager.
‘It was partly the Welshness of it all which appealed to her — the wool is grown, spun, woven and made up here in Wales, but it was also her feeling that in the commercial life everything was grab, grab, grab and here was a little corner of the world where she could do a bit of good.’
Whenever possible, Laura tried to visit the Mill personally and Hetherington was struck by her ability to pick a ‘winning’ cloth instantly from the fifty or so patterns he would show her.
Laura Ashley bought substantial amounts of tweed from Cambrian Mill and although they paid the regular price, the company drew upon its charity budget to subsidize this at the rate of a pound per metre.
Laura saw it as a project for saving jobs and therefore helping the survival of the rural community.
It was a perfect example of one of her most cherished values; retaining something of the past for use in the future.
But she was sensitive enough to let those at the Mill believe that they were making a competitive offer.
They were startled when, several years later, they learnt about the subsidy.
‘Thanks to Mrs Ashley we employed more people, the weavers were paid overtime and we enjoyed an Indian summer for a good few years.
She was a wonderful friend.’
In the early Eighties, she organized a venture which above all else satisfied her craving for rescuing the past with no obvious monetary benefit.
Shortly after her move abroad she had written to the then  Director of Manchester City Art Gallery, Tim Clifford, asking if she could view some of the Museum's early nineteenth-century cotton samples and take photographs.
Clifford replied that he would be delighted, he was a great admirer of hers, and would she join him for lunch when she came.
The lunch, however, was not a great success as Clifford had unknowingly double booked; his other guest was David Hockney.
Laura was greatly amused by Hockney but the pair did not have a great deal to say to one another.
However, Clifford invited Laura home to meet his wife and she spent the night at the Clifford's home admiring their eclectic collection of artefacts.
Jane Clifford was enchanted by Laura's capacity for instant, warm friendship as well as her wisdom about life, and it was not long before a mutually rewarding project was born, which was immensely gratifying to Laura personally.
‘You must have a higher goal in life than merely making money,’ she was fond of telling people.
She really believed her company had this greater purpose.
The Gallery of English Costume at Platt Hall, Manchester, part of the City Art Gallery and also run by Clifford, was badly in need of money and publicity and Laura offered to remake their collection of decaying dresses for an illustrated lecture.
Her enthusiasm did not, however, encompass all the complexities that would be involved in such a project, from researching the fabric to preparing special screens for printing and educating machinists to make up the dresses in a traditional way.
But she knew that Platt Hall had the finest collection of nineteenth-century dresses outside the Victoria and Albert Museum, and reason told her that undertaking such an unusual project would provide a unique opportunity to learn about historical fabrics and keep her company in the forefront of its competition.
Overseeing the project was Anne Wallwork, a television-trained period costume cutter specifically hired by Laura for the project.
Initially, Laura told her to start making samples at the Leeswood factory in Cheshire, but, determined that no one should interfere, did not inform anyone else there what Anne was doing.
However, it soon became clear that Laura could not secretly organize such a major undertaking while based abroad, and, in desperation, brought in Deborah, She, realizing the potential of the project, begged another year and set up the operation openly in the company's London workroom at Clapham.
Here Anne worked with a team of machinists  instructed to make four copies of each of sixty dresses selected from the years 1770–1870.
Laura insisted that they be made up as near as possible in the original manner, from the cutting and colouring to the hand-sewn hems; historical accuracy was to be paramount.
After eighteen months and thousands of pounds expenditure, Deborah and Laura realized that an illustrated lecture was ridiculously inadequate.
They approached choreographer Patrick Libby, who created a lavish theatrical presentation using students from the Royal Northern College of Music and Northern Ballet school to perform six scenes inspired by everyday life of the period.
These included a harvest supper, preparation for a wedding and a visit to the seaside.
The atmosphere was recreated not only through dance and costume but also by authentic contemporary music.
The show, on 22 and 23 June 1983, was deemed by all spectators to be a major success.
It generated widespread and unusual press coverage.
Suzy Menkes, then fashion editor of The Times, described Laura in a major feature as ‘The queen of printed cotton…who has nurtured a nostalgia for a vanished rural world.’
Such a show cut across many of Laura Ashley's established principles.
In the first place she had always consistently opposed fashion shows for her company; she did not approve of professional models wearing ‘Laura Ashley’ clothes since they were not representative of her real customers; furthermore, she had moral objections to catwalk cavortings as being sexually provocative; ‘Laura Ashley’clothes were not designed with sexual provocation in mind.
This was based on a deepseated disapproval of flaunting one's body, inherited from her childhood in the Welsh valleys.
And yet Laura's simple, but devastatingly effective attitude towards sexual attractiveness contained an essential contradiction.
She believed that the more a girl covered up the more exciting she was.
This was not a moral, but a pragmatic approach.
She herself is described by her own husband as ‘a very demure, but passionately sexy woman’.
Bernard maintains she recognized this ‘seeming hypocrisy’ within herself and often laughed at it.
By turning the show into a theatrical display, Laura felt comfortable; it was so far removed from reality that it could be viewed as a staged drama with no intention of portraying a ‘Laura Ashley’ customer in real life.
It was only her ability to view ball gowns as an aspect of theatrical dressing up, not real, everyday life, that  allowed her to accept these highly frivolous and glamorous garments now becoming a staple product of the company.
The second problem was her aversion to handing out money to charity; although she enjoyed being able to help specific ventures in a practical way she hated the idea of charity balls or making large cash handouts.
‘I prefer not to show in charity,’ she instructed Moira ‘as not acceptable to my principles (excuse for people to drink champagne etc and the needy get what's left).’
In spite of the altruistic intentions of the Platt Hall project, there were many long-term benefits.
Anne Wallwork was retained on a permanent basis to help with some of Laura's more exotic ideas.
Five of the print dresses and a cloak were put into general production and the rest, acting as powerful crowd pullers, went on display at various ‘Laura Ashley’ shops.
An illustrated book, The Fabric of Society, was published to coincide with the event and the company's credibility was enormously enhanced by the entire venture.
Laura could indulge these less directly profit-generating activities partly because of their invariable spin-offs but also because she knew others were taking care of the money-making imperative.
The company was enjoying a phase during which new products were constantly being introduced so that in January 1981, partly to keep customers aware of the ever-expanding range and also to enlarge the buying circle, the company initiated twice yearly catalogues.
Here, for the first time, the prints were given pretty names instead of numbers.
The seventy-two-page catalogue took months of planning and discussion before its format was agreed and the final version appeared in five languages.
Products were shown individually and in room settings with the complete new collection showcased on the right-hand pages so that all the designs and colours could be seen at a glance.
Among new items advertised were Italian floor and wall tiles, bedlinen, lamp bases, shades and luggage.
‘I suppose they are nice,’ Laura commented to a friend who saw some prototype suitcases lying about the château one day, ‘but they are not my idea’.
The catalogues were, above all, a crucial means of showing the customer a total lifestyle.
Laura believed everything in the home should contribute to a pervading sense of calm and peacefulness; the same calm and peacefulness she had first discovered at her aunt and uncle's home in suburban Wallington.
The first ‘Laura Ashley’ fragrance, produced in France and packaged  in a floral box designed by Nick, was another venture contributing to the total ‘Laura Ashley’woman.
A few months later ‘Laura Ashley’ soap arrived too, but in greater quantities than anticipated.
Sybille, told to order 5,000 bars, had inadvertently ordered 50,000.
Panic-struck once she saw her mistake she immediately confronted Bernard with the truth, apologized and offered her resignation.
‘He kept quiet for a long time working out how long soap could keep for, then he just said, ‘Well, we'll have to sell the things.’
For several years every drawer in my house was bulging with soaps.’
Bernard decided to produce perfume after being constantly solicited by cosmetic manufacturers wanting to use the ‘Laura Ashley’ name.
Typically, his reaction was to beat the professionals at their own game.
There was also an element of romance in the story as he wanted to create a fragrance especially for Laura.
Bernard approached a well-known Swiss firm, who sent a ‘nose’ to study Laura.
The result was two fragrances, which Laura liked equally, so they decided to introduce them both calling them, simply, Number 1 and Number 2.
Having created the venture, Bernard was less interested in running the day-to-day operation.
‘He just said to me, ‘You're French, you must know about perfume,’ and handed it over,’explained Sybille.
A grand ball in the château seemed the obvious way to celebrate such exciting new departures, especially as the decoration was, finally, complete.
Nick, by this time leading a glamorous social life in England with his girlfriend Arabella (Ari) Campbell MacNair-Wilson, daughter of a Conservative Member of Parliament, proposed that since nobody wanted a purely business party for journalists and other promotional appendages, each of the children should invite their own friends.
There were some special members of the company who classified as friends too, including Mariel Angel from Lyons and Anna von Meiss from Geneva.
Laura wanted to include her seventy-six-year-old mother, Bess Mountney, and sister, Mary Coates, and several family friends such as the Pollocks and the MacNulties.
The organization for the event fell to Sybille, who was expected to invite some of her friends and family to lend an authentic French air to the proceedings.
‘It was a mammoth task,’ Sybille recalled, ‘because it was really the first big party Laura had given in her life.
She was nervous and excited all at once just as if she was a young girl going to her first ball.’
At first Laura was quite happy to hand over all the arrangements to Sybille, but then, in the last few days, she wanted to be in on everything.
There were coaches to arrange from Dover to bring over the English contingent, there was breakfast and lunch the following day, there were marquees to order and decorate with flowers, most of which Ari undertook.
And there was the dancing.
Sybille booked a disc jockey who had been highly recommended, ‘but he was a bit too French for Bernard and Laura’, Sybille commented drily.
There were also some complicated sleeping arrangements to juggle: all Emma's friends were to stay in the ‘commun’ while most of the rest of the young people brought sleeping bags and pillows to put down on the marquee floor.
The adults were mostly farmed out, by special arrangement, to Sybille's friends' châteaux.
Bernard declared ‘No Smoking’ throughout; but Laura, pragmatic as ever, rather than countermanding him, simply had fifty ashtrays placed strategically around the château.
Laura wore a long, grey satin dress with a big bow which was especially made for her in a more girlish style than she normally allowed herself.
She looked young and pretty and relaxed for the first part of the evening until a ghastly sense of anti-climax set in when she realized that many of the young English guests had arrived well watered and rowdy after their coach trip, soon to become hideously drunk on the Ashley's generous provision of champagne and wine, with a few dainty canapés and other elegant nibbles.
There was a lot of noise, much broken glass and Bernard and Laura could only guess with horror at the disreputable behaviour until they found evidence on the lawn the following morning.
Bernard in a state of disgust, left the proceedings early and went up to bed.
Laura, desperately disappointed, tried to be a polite hostess for as long as required but when she finally retired found Bernard had locked the bedroom door.
With all the bedrooms allocated she had nowhere to sleep.
The maids found her the next morning hunched up in the laundry cupboard on the landing, dozing lightly.
The following few days were a nightmare.
Nick was briefly fired, Sybille, upset by the tense atmosphere, crashed the car, and Laura was frequently in tears.
But it blew over.
Nick's friends wrote that it was the best party they had ever been to, a truly unforgettable occasion.
ANGUISH AND AUTHENTICITY
Laura soon managed, in her customary fashion, to eliminate the nastier aspects of the evening.
She remembered only how beautiful the house had looked, how exciting were the preparations, and what fun it had all been, hadn't it?
She was soon telling Sybille: ‘We must have another party, we so loved that last one.’
In fact they did not host another major ball until Christmas 1983, by which time they had learned from their mistakes.
On this occasion, the guests were predominantly French, the music predominantly English and the dinner a sit-down at small tables of eight.
Although Bernard again retired early to bed, this time his wife was not forced to sleep in a cupboard.
Anyone close to Laura could not fail to notice her ability to ensure reality remained in the next room.
Even her needlework, at which she constantly prodded during bumpy aeroplane journeys, was not really undertaken in order to produce a fine object but as an aid to entering another world of deep thought and reflection.
It was not necessarily a world of fantasy.
Her daughter Jane was keenly aware of Laura's inner life.
‘My mother was always shutting herself off from reality and from nastiness; she was idealistic, which in commercial terms may have been a very good retailing idea but which I, as a rebellious teenager, found difficult to live with.’
Jane often tried to shock her mother into facing some of the world's uglier problems, but Laura did not react in the way Jane might have expected.
She simply was not interested in problems  on a global scale, but saw events in relation to her own family or, specifically, her own daughter.
She worried about Jane, but comforted herself that anything her own daughter believed in must a priori be acceptable.
In any case, her intense loyalty dictated that she would never discuss intimate family problems with outsiders.
Jane is convinced that this refusal to unburden herself to friends led to increased frustrations for her mother.
‘But I think it ties in with her romanticized view of the world; if she didn't talk about her problems, then she didn't have any.’
For all their differences in outlook, Jane forged a secure bond with Laura and, perhaps, came the closest of anyone to understanding her.
‘My mother used this romantic outlook as a strength on occasions to escape from the world.
Yet by doing so she was also making difficulties for herself.
I think my father found that frustrating too.
He dealt with it either by going off on long trips or by challenging it and then an argument might erupt,’ Jane explained.
But it was often a rather one-sided argument since open dialogue was something from which Laura always shied away.
‘The main conflict they always had was that she wanted to work more and he would not allow her,’ according to Jane.
True, Bernard did want her to be a housewife and mother but at the same time this was Laura's interpretation of what he wanted and she believed deeply that it was wrong to challenge a husband's authority.
For all her championing of old-fashioned standards, she was embroiled in a most contemporary dilemma, which, by circumventing, she never directly confronted, and thus was life made tolerable.
In spite of an inauspicious beginning, Laura and Bernard succeeded within a few years in developing an absorbing private life in their adopted country.
In some ways this was easier in France where there was not the same interest in accents or parentage.
If Laura dropped in conversation that a piece of furniture had been in the family for generations, who was to argue?
Bernard particularly enjoyed the dinner when he served his aristocratic French guests with wine from some dusty old bottles he said he had found in the cellar.
‘Ah, Château Margaux ‘48,’ one of them exclaimed with great excitement.
However, Bernard had filled the bottles with supermarket plonk, considering this adequate revenge for having been told by the same neighbour that his new perfume was ‘rather bourgeois’.
Sometimes the Ashleys mixed their French and English friends with  amusing results, such as the occasion when they invited Terence Conran and his wife Caroline, the cookery writer, who were inveighed against by their French dinner companions, claiming it was an audacity for the English to write about food as they knew nothing about it.
They often flew out their friends such as the McNulties, Cliffords or Pollocks, to stay for a weekend, and the friends invariably shared the aeroplane with baskets of food and Jenny, the cook.
Venetia Pollock, during one such weekend, was particularly struck by a scene at a French market.
She and Laura were chatting while Bernard went to buy a khaki-coloured safari jacket.
‘He's already got several exactly like it at home,’ Laura joked, ‘but I won't say anything because he so enjoys buying them.’
As Venetia commented: ‘Laura was clever; she knew her husband so well, just as she knew public taste in the Sixties.
She realized what we all wanted was to wear pretty, long dresses, so she produced them.’
Laura's sensitivities to her husband's needs had prevented her, as a teenager, from scolding him or his gang for drinking or smoking; she merely laughed.
She was not going to start lecturing him now and, in any case, insisted that she never saw her role in life as a reformer.
However much, privately, she may have hated seeing her husband drink, or hearing him swear, she would never rebuke him in front of others.
In public she insisted that gambling was the worst of all vices, much worse than alcoholism, and Bernard, a risk-taker perhaps, was no gambler.
In thirty years, if she had not learned to turn a blind eye to Bernard's excesses, she had learned nothing.
She excused his erratic behaviour because she assumed it was linked to business pressures and that it was part of the aggressive masculinity which she prized.
Friends might be appalled, and employees embarrassed at how little Laura resisted Bernard's will.
If she tried to experiment by wearing a little more make-up than usual, Bernard would be furious and despatch her upstairs to wipe it all away.
Without a murmur she would do as he bid.
When he burst out against some restriction, delay, inaccuracy or bureaucratic procedure that was choking him, Laura sat with her hands neatly folded staring straight in front of her, a controlled tear welling in the corner of her eye, but never even near to a response.
To some observers, it seemed that Laura's provoking passivity acted as a stimulant for Bernard's aggression.
In complete contrast to Laura, Bernard had never seen the need to control his temper.
If he wanted to smash  a telephone or hurl invective it cleared the air and nothing further would be said.
If, however, Bernard was having an argument with someone else Laura might then join battle in full support of her husband.
‘However much I ranted and raved, she always knew I loved her,’ Bernard said.
A serious conflagration threatened when the Daily Telegraph fashion writer, Avril Groom, was flown over to Remaisnil for an interview with Laura.
Bernard insisted on seeing her copy before publication which irked Ms Groom.
She declined, telling him that if he wanted advertising, this had to be paid for.
She boldly insisted, ‘I have never let anyone I interviewed check my own copy before publication.’
Bernard asserted that unless she agreed, the interview would not proceed.
Fiery criticism of the British press then followed from Bernard, with Laura contributing nothing to the debate.
Groom stood her ground and, eventually, as a way out of the impasse, telephoned the Woman's Page editor in London, who advised her that, as she was already in France, she should do the interview and would have to send it to the Ashleys for their approval before publication.
The following morning, Sara Freeman, the model the Ashleys had provided, appeared ready for the shots, but Bernard announced that Laura would not be coming down.
‘She is unable to give an interview to someone who has been so rude to her,’ he told Groom curtly, but agreed to furnish her himself with the few facts she needed.
The following day, Moira telephoned the Daily Telegraph with profuse apologies for the misunderstanding.
Sybille, who witnessed Laura's behaviour with journalists, believed she always felt under attack by the English press.
‘She was very proud of her success, not guilty, and did not like being made to feel so,’ one friend explained.
Laura found an occasional outlet in humorous accounts of their lives related to close women friends with an infectious laugh.
Once she was driving home from a riotous party in the French countryside in order to allow Bernard to sleep on the back seat.
However, after a series of wrong turnings, Laura lost her way and, an hour later, ended up where they had started.
Bernard soon awoke and asked; ‘Aren't we home yet?’
‘Oh no, you've only just fallen asleep,’ she was able to tell him.
He was in no fit state to know.
She delighted in retelling this anecdote, which she found hilarious.
Laura passed on her belief in the need to minister to the man you love to Nick's girlfriend, Ari.
‘She told me she always put the most beautiful girls next to Bernard when setting the table for  a party, and that I should do the same, because you want to give the best to the man you love.’
If ever Ari and Bernard had a tiff, Laura would take Ari on one side, explain all Bernard's good points and the difficulties he had encountered and then ‘make me write a letter saying how I respected him.’
One of Laura's favourite psychological ploys, to pre-empt criticism, was telling people how like Bernard they were themselves; Ari, Tim Clifford and her own daughter Jane, all came into this category but were, in reality, quite dissimilar.
For all Laura's inner calm there was a thread of tension running through her body clearly visible, for example, in the way she sat; legs neatly but uncomfortably crossed, back ramrod straight on an upright chair.
Just occasionally the tensions spilled over, such as when she berated Moira publicly about the way she was feeding her first child.
Moira had given birth just eight weeks previously and had started to wean the baby early in order to attend the Spring Collection meeting at Remaisnil without the child.
But, after a while, she had to excuse herself from the discussions to express some milk and Laura was furious.
Whatever Laura's motives — Moira believes she expected her to take injections or pills to dry up her milk supply entirely; Bernard believes she was opposed to mothers returning to work so soon — the atmosphere was charged.
‘It was a very acrimonious meeting, mostly about why we were changing lengths: the merchandisers were saying the customers want this and the designers were fighting their case and, as it was the first collection prepared without Laura present the whole time, it was not surprising that difficulties should surface,’ Moira explained.
Through her iron self-discipline, Laura had managed to control some of her phobias, such as fear of cows, small insects and mice, but she never obliterated the memory of how she had suffered in younger days.
Several colleagues remember her habit of turning a design to one side and the other and back again lest anything in it could be viewed as a tiny insect or wild animal's eyes, thus creating horrible fear for an imaginative child.
Once she turned a pattern on its side and discovered it could be viewed as a swastika; it was therefore rejected.
Yet Laura failed to conquer fully her fear of water or enclosed places and was never able to use underground trains.
She felt embarrassed about this when travelling around London with younger colleagues as they frequently had to resort to a taxi if no bus were available.
Nonetheless she was determined not to let her fear of water prevent her  from accompanying Bernard on their now frequent sailing holidays.
Bernard's latest vessel was a magnificent fifty-five-foot yacht, Quaeso, which they kept moored at St Tropez, alongside the family's small boathouse in the restored village.
Extra guests could be put up in the boat itself, which had a permanent skipper and crew, enabling Bernard and Laura to escape at short notice to idyllic, inaccessible Mediterranean islands, Laura still could not swim and often groaned with seasickness.
Sometimes she used to lie flat on deck, hoping the over-powering fear and nausea would leave her.
Other times she would go down to the galley to prepare a meal, which might have taken her mind off the water but rarely did.
But she never complained, nor suggested they should not go.
Laura was not tough, but possessed a strong character and would see this sort of action not as a sacrifice, but as an act of fulfilment, she was able to project herself through her husband.
That Bernard, since 1981, had had an entry in Who's Who, while she had no listing was of no concern.
What was his pleasure became hers.
For her, the only supreme sacrifice would have been in giving up her husband.
Sybille sometimes told Laura gently, ‘You spoil him far too much, you know.’
‘Yes, I do know,’ she replied after a moment's hesitation; ‘but I love him.’
Laura, having grasped the necessity of a calm private life for herself, tried to make it an attainable goal for all through her products.
Unencumbered by centuries of intellectual debate on the relationship between art and life, Laura saw clearly the effect of beautiful surroundings on the psyche.
One of her closest allies and friends in the last years of her life was Jane Clifford, whom she had met during the Platt Hall venture and to whom she now offered a new job as historical adviser.
As Laura's personal taste was moving away from the little cottage sprigs, Jane believed it was important that she was not deluged in an avalanche of everything that was vaguely old; that, for example, French eighteenth century was not mixed with Welsh nineteenth century.
She was therefore dedicated to bringing authenticity to the nostalgia for which ‘Laura Ashley’ was renowned.
Because of family commitments, Jane Clifford, like Sybille, had never felt able to work before.
Only Laura's secure philosophy of family life enabled her to combine the roles because she was given school holidays and other crucial times off.
‘There were often terrible panics about getting things done in time,’ Jane recalled, ‘but Laura would never let things fuss  you.
She was a tremendously calming influence.’
She wrote to Jane at the start of her employment: ‘There are two things I beg you to do: get your time each day in the fresh air and strictly limit the hours you spend on your work, which I have always had to do anyway with such a large family and it does make sense in the end.
Then there will be some days when nothing seems to resolve and so I always forget those days and do something else completely — I am sure it must be something to do with electricity in the air.’
One of Jane Clifford's first tasks was to prepare the uninhabited rooms at Rhydoldog for a major feature in the ‘Living’ section of Vogue.
As a result of her research, the drawing room was turned into an authentic Victorian Gothic chamber with mustard and red wallpaper copied from a Harewood House original in Leeds City Art Gallery collection.
A brownish red curtain fabric discovered on the footboard of a bed was originally from Clifton Castle and the pelmet design was taken from a nineteenth-century pattern book.
Jane Clifford made other changes in the house.
She designed a print room based on an eighteenth-century concept, by cutting out black and white prints and their hanging bows and pasting them on to an apricot Regency background.
No one imagined many customers would actually copy this precisely, but it was an inspiration, or guide, to show what could be done.
‘Laura always understood the importance of a brilliant idea to entice customers into the shop, even if their courage failed when it came to buying.
And she understood that authentic decor need not be confined to the country mansion; the whole idea was to bring good design down to the lowest levels,’ Jane Clifford said.
After Rhydoldog, Jane was invited to undertake a second phase of decoration at Remaisnil and, as one of her first gestures, removed a series of framed modern posters which Bernard had positioned up the main stairway; the focus of the hallway henceforth was a magnificent eighteenth-century Brussels tapestry.
Jane and Laura went on numerous shopping trips for antiques to Paris and, slowly, all the rooms in the château were redecorated in fabrics more in keeping with the building's style and history.
The ‘Ritz Bedroom’, for example, ‘so named by the Ashleys because the bath in the adjoining bathroom was exactly like those in their favourite hotel, the Paris Ritz’, was furnished with some choice pieces of Louis XV vintage.
The plain walls were painted in a typically French  eighteenth-century green, a colour picked up in the rich, floral design of the fabric, copied from an eighteenth-century Lyons silk, battened to the adjoining wall, and used for the opulent bed coverings.
Many of the decorative touches — bows, tassels, swags and rosettes — were derived from old prints, but adapted to contemporary needs.
Next door was the ‘Louis XVI Bedroom’, in which the bed and curtain fabric was also inspired by an eighteenth-century Lyons silk and which took many of its period details from an 1801 mezzotint.
The gilt chairs and sofa in this room were upholstered in their original Aubusson tapestry.
Laura was now discovering the art of interior design.
She realized that she achieved her most impressive results when faced with an empty room; this forced her, she said, to feel the sort of fabric and decor that was required.
Her fame was such that, in the early Eighties, the company received numerous offers from owners of beautiful houses who wanted to have them decorated in ‘Laura Ashley’ fabrics and then allow the company to use them in its publicity.
‘She used houses and rooms as decorating laboratories,’ explained Tony Lambert, former Vice President of ‘Laura Ashley’Home Furnishing in North America.
‘There's no other person who would first fall in love with a house and then do up the house inspired by its period details, putting everything in its proper place according to the house's architecture, history and setting.
The selection of print and design according to the house was not the usual way round but it was much more luxurious and that way we produced results that were unique.
No one else would go to those lengths or have the same passion about things.’
Recognizing that selecting the fabric according to the house was producing outstanding results, Laura encouraged Jane Clifford to oversee the decoration of both a four-storey Victorian London house and a Cotswold stone farmhouse.
Some very stylish fabrics emanated from these experiences, as well as two books recounting the transformations.
With the introduction in 1983 of twelve-colour printing as well as a heavier weight of high quality cotton fabric and brocade, everyone now finally accepted that drawing rooms and dining rooms were just as suitable ‘Laura Ashley’ sites as bedrooms or bathrooms.
The new prints still took their inspiration from the past but were more likely to be derived from the printed silks of eighteenth-century Lyons or the pattern books of Victorian designers and architects than the simpler fly leaves of books upon which Laura had formerly relied.
Large flowers and multi-coloured chintzes, the traditional fare of the aristocratic cluttered English country house, now abounded within the collection; they required large windows and large rooms.
This led to a debate within the company as to whether the role of ‘Laura Ashley’ was to demonstrate the sort of rooms ‘Mr and Mrs Average’might own, decorated only to those standards to which they could aspire, or should it display exotically luxurious settings, thus attaining an often impossibly high level in taste and quality.
Laura was supported by her US colleagues; their market, with its penchant for ‘designer’ status, and, to an extent, the continental European market, inclined strongly towards the ‘reach-for-the-moon’view.
But the UK, the most down-market of the three centres, was always pleading for more banality, fearing to risk losing touch with the moderate market who comprised the core customers.
The partial answer to this dilemma was for most of Laura's exotic ideas to be available in a special, higher priced ‘Decorator Collection’.
There had been a ‘decorator showroom’ in Sloane Street since 1980 which, as Carolyn Warrender remembers, Laura initially viewed with some unease.
‘We realized that decorators were buying our fabric and wallpaper in bulk and asking for a discount, as was available to them with any other brand.’
There was considerable pressure to accede to this and, therefore, for about two years, a Decorator Showroom, for trade only, existed in Lower Sloane Street.
‘But Laura was unhappy that if the company could afford to sell to decorators at a reduced rate, then the public should be allowed the products at that price too.
She was genuinely concerned to help the customer and found it difficult to see any other point of view.’
Yet by 1982 it was clear to Laura that if she wanted to see the exciting results of her latest researches used in people's homes, she could no longer rely on her traditional customers.
The general public still looked to ‘Laura Ashley’ for tried and tested colour schemes and patterns.
‘Towards the end, Laura became quite frustrated at the way her customers would not keep up with her ideas; they lagged behind in a way she found infuriating,’ Robert Landgrebe explained.
Having believed initially that a good print should be available in the collection for ever, she was now constantly urging her colleagues to be more innovative.
The obvious solution was to launch her most original ideas through a separate collection available in interior design shops  throughout the country.
She knew that decorators, always searching for something new, would quickly make use of them, and hoped the more adventurous of her customers would too.
Thus the Decorator collection, into which she plunged more and more of her energies, was not only a useful device for slicing through hidebound public taste, but gave Laura a focus once more for her creative effervescence.
While belatedly fulfilling her curtailed general education, she did not neglect her ambition to master the French language.
She pored over nineteenth-century French texts; Proust and Victor Hugo with leather covers and tiny print were favourites, and she listened to teach-yourself French cassettes.
When, in the summer of 1983, she went to England for a few weeks, she took a French companion whose role was to instruct her during every spare moment.
Her continual quest for learning prevented her, and the company, from stagnating; but nonetheless 1983 seemed to Bernard and Laura an appropriate time to take stock.
Neither partner could fail to be aware of the interest in their company which, more than once, threatened to result in a book chronicling their success, especially as Laura had just finished working on the first Laura Ashley Book of Home Decorating.
Work on this had started in 1980 and at first Laura seemed excited by the project; but the finished product did not please her.
It was largely a practical book, aimed at the DIY market, as until very recently this formed the bulk of purchasers of ‘Laura Ashley’ fabrics.
But during the two years between the time when the book was first mooted and its publication in 1982, the company had transformed itself and the book did not reflect the grander style of living which Laura was now espousing.
In spite of its success — the book quickly sold out its first edition of 60,000 — Laura dreaded the thought of another book which failed to represent the company as she saw it.
Far better therefore, like everything else the company had ever done, to produce it themselves.
Towards the end of 1982, Bernard was half-tempted to revive his old profession of writer and tackle a company history himself.
But he found flying and sailing both more invigorating and he kept procrastinating.
They decided, therefore, to employ an English graduate from Cambridge to document the ‘Laura Ashley’ story.
Marianne Brace spent eight months  taking the Ashleys back to Pimlico, Brasted, Machynlleth and Tybrith, in order to produce a valuable archive document of an amazing, late-twentieth-century success story.
But it remained unpublished and is as yet unfinished.
The company was, inexorably, being positioned for a further dramatic stage in its development, and Laura was uneasy about the next chapter in their own story.