

CHAPTER ONE
‘Romano! and Stephanie!’
Susan Hastings had spread her arms in warm greeting as the shyly smiling maid ushered in their lunch guests.
‘How lovely to see you!
Come and meet my daughter, Caroline…’
Caroline, poised on the first-floor terrace of her mother's old town house in Kalkara Creek, in the act of pouring herself a Campari and orange in the midday sunshine, looked up and started to smile politely.
Then she stiffened in shocked disbelief, the Campari bottle poised precariously over her glass.
The man who'd just strolled on to the terrace was tall, very lean, very dark.
He exuded an air of toughness, a whiff of the merciless adventurer, only lightly veneered by the impeccably tailored and highly civilised charcoal suit and silk tie.
Caroline found herself reminded, involuntarily, of those ancient Phoenician explorers who'd colonised Malta and half the Mediterranean besides, from their Lebanese homelands thousands of years before.
Her throat dried.
This was no reincarnation of some centuries-gone swashbuckling master-mariner, but even so— surely this wasn't the man she'd agreed to work with for the next few weeks?
as if struck by invisible lightning, she felt her whole body tense and prickle with reaction.
This couldn't be true.
Her brain had to be playing tricks on her.
This couldn't be Romano de Sciorto, her mother's friend, the man who'd invited her out here to Malta…
In panic, she blinked at him.
She was in the shade of the pergola above the drinks table, where crimson bougainvillaea tumbled in chaotic profusion with vines and potted palms.
He was standing in full sunlight, projecting easy, confident authority, powerful-looking, broad-shouldered, an imposing specimen of virile manhood against the almost biblical backdrop of dusty gold domes and fortresses, swaying green palms.
The raven-haired girl at his side in the tight white dress, with huge brown eyes and a tiny, rosebud mouth, was being introduced as Stephanie Marsa, his secretary.
But it was the man who magnetically held her gaze…
‘Delighted to meet you,’ he was saying, regarding her keenly from deep-set, mesmerising dark eyes.
The unusually deep, bass voice was amused, making the hair on Caroline's nape rise, and her heart lurch.
‘I am looking forward to working with you, Signorina Hastings.’
His voice.
That voice.
The last vestige of doubt evaporated in a painful rush.
She'd recognise that voice again anywhere.
Fathoms deep and velvety, midnight-dark, softly accented, resonantly masculine…
It was him.
The black, curly hair had been dried and tamed, soaked black polo shirt and denim Bermudas exchanged for this expensive lightweight grey suit and ice-white shirt.
But it was the same man…last night's rescuer and her new temporary employer were one and the same…
There was a fraught silence, while Caroline wished fervently that the ground could indeed open and swallow people.
She went alternately hot and cold, smoothed a shaking hand over her neat blonde topknot, her composure shattered.
‘Caroline?
Are you all right, darling?’
Her mother's voice was slightly puzzled.
She turned curious blue eyes on her daughter from beneath the rim of her battered straw hat, but Caroline hardly heard her.
‘You ?’
Caroline's voice was an appalled croak as she stared at the new arrival.
‘You're Romano de Sciorto?’
The intense dark eyes were mocking as he returned her stare.
‘Indeed I am.
And we have met already, have we not?’ he taunted calmly, a glint in the dark eyes wickedly amused.
‘Very recently.
In more…dramatic circumstances?’
Gritting her teeth, she glared back.
Under that boldly amused scrutiny, her smart white gabardine culottes suddenly failed to cover quite enough bare, slender brown leg.
Her grey and white striped silk blouse was clinging damply against her skin in the sudden rush of heat.
She didn't need the taunting reminder.
Last night's humiliating episode would be with her for a very long time.
And right now the drama exploded back into her mind, in vividly awful detail…
She'd been spending a few days' holiday in Sicily, with her friends Penny and Devlin.
Devlin's parents owned a holiday villa there.
He'd been keen to make the most of being able to borrow his parents' yacht, and do some sailing.
The short trip down from Sicily to Malta, dropping Caroline off for her business assignment, had provided the perfect opportunity.
Approaching Valletta at dusk, she'd been below decks, in the act of unclipping her bikini-top, about to change clothes after a long lazy day sunbathing with Penny, Devlin at the helm.
Devlin had called her to come up quickly and see the impressive sight of Grand Harbour's floodlit fortifications in the distance.
And so one minute she was standing on deck in the rush of bright wind, the next minute the motor launch was scything across their bows.
Devlin was shouting, swinging violently to an opposite tack…then she was losing her footing, plunging overboard…
After that, there'd been a bit of a void between floundering furiously in the deep waters of the Mediterranean — her denims weighing her down and her bikini-top, evidently not refastened securely enough, doing a treacherous disappearing act — and being hauled into strong male arms, dragged aboard a strange boat, then deposited on a plush banquette seat, feeling decidedly under-dressed for the occasion…
To give him his due, after the quip about illegal topless bathing, her rescuer had helpfully hunted round the saloon and found her a large rather battered white canvas jacket to wrap herself in.
She'd grabbed it in relief, struggling into it to cover her nakedness, her cheeks hot.
There had followed a brief but hotly acrimonious exchange over his reckless haste in the speedboat, versus her stupidity in not wearing a safety-line on board the ketch.
Her anger and indignation had appeared to vastly amuse him.
‘I have fished a poison-tongued mermaid from the sea,’ he'd grinned, straightening and gazing down at her as if inspecting her thoroughly for the first time.
With her soaked blonde hair plastered in a rather mermaid-like curtain around her face and shoulders, and the wet black denim clinging tightly to her legs, she stared back, shivering in spite of the warm June night, unnerved by the piercing appraisal, but unable to prevent herself from returning the curiosity…
Her saviour was as soaked to the skin as she was, she'd registered.
Focusing resentfully on the dark, angular face, her heart had flipped over suddenly in her chest.
He'd had the most compelling eyes she'd ever encountered.
The black polo shirt and close-fitting denim Bermudas had moulded a lean hard chest and long, aggressively muscled legs.
She hadn't been able to decide whether he looked Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, or simply overwhelmingly, barbarously alien …
She'd been grappling with the oddest emotional reaction, one she'd never come across before and couldn't fathom at all, clutching the jacket round her so tightly that her knuckles were white.
And then an impatient male voice had shouted from the cockpit above.
He'd briefly inclined his head towards her, a mocking, curiously patrician gesture, then turned and disappeared up on deck.
They'd reached harbour.
So, shortly afterwards, had the Kestrel .
She'd been scooped ignominiously into her rescuer's arms and carried with ease to the quayside.
In his haste to be gone on his mysteriously urgent errand, only the briefest of exchanges had taken place between the dark Maltese and her friends, while she was being returned like a sack of damp laundry to its rightful owners…
Hard fingers were gripping her hand where she held the Campari, levering the bottle upright.
The touch of his hand on hers felt like a scorching electric current, jolting her brutally out of her trance and back to the sunlit terrace.
‘The knack,’ the deep voice was saying close to her ear, ‘is to stop pouring when the glass is full, Miss Hastings.’
Caroline stared down in dismay at the drink she'd begun pouring for herself.
‘Oh…!’
Campari was cascading silently over the rim of her glass, and dripping in a slow red trickle from the table to the patio.
She released the bottle with a thud, surveying the small disaster blankly.
Amid laughter and teasing, Kathleen the maid appeared with a cloth.
All was wiped up and put to rights.
Caroline found herself seated at the lunch-table next to Romano de Sciorto, a state of affairs which did nothing for her shaky morale.
‘So, no ill effects from your accident?’
The query was curt, his eyes ruthlessly mocking.
‘None.
Thank you.’
With a shiver of reaction, her breasts tightened under his laconic gaze, tingled oddly beneath the silk of her shirt.
She tensed all over in shocked denial.
She'd disliked him intensely last night.
In fact she'd said some pretty rude things to him regarding his speedboat-driving, which made the prospect of working with him decidedly awkward.
But today she wasn't about to revise her opinion.
‘You could have drowned.’
‘Yes.
I know.
I'm eternally in your debt!’
The irony in her voice was heavily obvious.
Catching his eye again, she blinked and quickly looked away.
Despite her antagonism, she recognised him as an awesome adversary.
Her appetite was rapidly deserting her.
She pushed her spoon around in the delicious minestra soup, and forced herself to eat some.
‘I just can't believe it!’
Her mother was shaking her head in mystification, glancing round the lunch-table.
Slim and elegant, and deceptively youthful, with her cropped grey-blonde hair and long, loose blue linen dress, she had the satisfied glow of a hostess having brought together her favourite people.
‘Fancy it being you who saved Caroline last night, Roman!’
‘Yes.
Fancy.’
Roman's tone was drily sardonic.
He gave the impression of keeping his amusement on a tight rein as he turned to Caroline.
‘Do you suppose that our being thrown together in such…intimate circumstances will augur well for our working relationship,signorina ?’
‘Possibly not,’ she said flatly.
Averting her eyes from him, she speared a tender wedge of pork with her fork, and put it in her mouth.
It was juicily fragrant with rosemary and garlic.
At least Kathleen's cooking meant she could manage a passable display of unconcerned eating, time to gather her wits a little…
He was smiling at her, dark eyes gleaming.
Her rudeness hadn't gone unnoticed.
‘Or possibly you do yourself an injustice,signorina .’
His gaze blatantly appraised her, from her bare toes in the soft white sandals to the smoothly groomed crown of her head.
‘As introductions go, I assure you it was quite…unforgettable.’
She coloured involuntarily.
The man was impossible.
Determined to extract maximum mileage.
‘Come on, you two,’ Susan Hastings reproached, laughing, ‘first names, please!
Unless you'd rather we all bowed and scraped and addressed you by your noble title, Roman!’
There was a short, intrigued silence around the table.
‘Noble title?’
Caroline queried coldly, clearing her throat.
‘Why, yes, surely you knew?’
Her mother raised her eyebrows, slanting a wry smile at her guest.
Roman had gone very still, revealing no reaction whatsoever.
‘This is Count Romano de Sciorto, of the Casa Sciorto, Mdina.’
‘How thrilling!’
Caroline heard herself saying, with deliberate irony.
‘Why didn't you say so before?’
‘I rarely bother to use my title,’ Roman murmured drily, ‘as your mother knows very well.’
‘But why?’
Caroline persisted coolly.
‘Most men I know would hang a title round their necks for the whole world to see!’
‘That is sometimes how it feels.’
When Roman smiled, even sardonically, his harsh face was quite different.
Unnervingly, devastatingly attractive.
‘Like a label round my neck.
I prefer not to be labelled.’
He leaned back in his chair, took another sip of his wine.
Caroline privately decided that she could see why.
If he acknowledged his title more openly he might have to behave like a count, instead of roaring around like a reckless lunatic causing accidents in his speedboat…
And of course , how absolutely typical of this man to have caused that accident last night!
Caroline realised that she was floundering in such a morass of conflicting emotions that she hardly knew what to resent most.
Because it wasn't just last night that made her cool and wary towards this friend of her mother's.
She'd distrusted him from afar, for some time, even before leaving London, before ever setting eyes on him.
She already had plenty of evidence about Romano de Sciorto's legendary recklessness, didn't she?
Ever since Dad's death, she'd been reading letters from her mother singing Romano's praises, and detailing the dangerous sports she'd been encouraged to take up by the wretched man…
With a supreme effort, she kept these smouldering resentments to herself.
Last night's accident didn't make this the time to start hurling accusations…
Instead, she said calmly, masking her antagonism, ‘Last night you even seemed to prefer anonymity!
You dashed off without introducing yourself!
If you'd told me your name, at least I'd have been spared the sudden shock of finding that my temporary employer was last night's rescuer!’
He bowed his head a fraction, a ghost of a smile on his mouth.
‘My younger brother was in a hurry to reach Gozo.
His first child was about to be born.
His wife had gone into labour.’
‘Oh, I see…’
So that's why there'd been that electric air of haste pervading the whole episode.
Her mixed feelings underwent another upheaval.
‘Was…was everything all right?’
‘She had a baby boy.
In good health.’
‘And your brother made it in time for the birth?’
‘With seconds to spare.’
‘I'm glad.’
The words were impulsive, out before she'd had time to vet them.
‘In the circumstances, I could almost forgive the near-collision last night!’
‘You are too gracious, Caroline.’
The wry tone was accompanied by that impenetrable gaze, which had a disastrous effect on her composure.
‘But you exaggerate.
Our crafts were a long way from collision…’
‘I disagree…!’
‘Your friend Devlin admitted last night that he was late putting on his lights.
He apologised to me for paying insufficient attention while entering a strange harbour.’
Romano's tone was coolly implacable, ‘If you had been wearing a safety-line, there would have been no accident,’ he added evenly, goading her temper even further.
‘You've got the nerve to talk about safety?’ she blurted out, forgoing all hopes of maintaining a calm, sophisticated façade for the benefit of her professional reputation.
‘Indeed?’
Instead of looking angry, she realised, the dark eyes had kindled with fresh amusement.
She had the disagreeable impression that she'd now well and truly taken the bait, and was to provide entertainment accordingly.
She became aware of Stephanie Marsa's frosty expression, and of her mother, frowning across at their low-voiced exchange.
‘Enlighten me.’
Roman's deep voice was dry, underlaced with cool mockery.
‘Why should I not talk of safety, Caroline?’
‘I'm quite sure you already know!’ she snapped shortly, her control disintegrating with a surge of anger.
‘Forgive me.’
She glanced up at her mother with a brief, strained smile, pushing back her chair quickly as she stood up.
‘But would you excuse me, please?
I think maybe I have more ill effects than I imagined from last night…’
It was a lame apology, but as she plunged into the cooler shadow of the house she knew she'd used the first excuse which sprang to mind.
And in fact, it was true.
Gaining the peaceful emptiness of her mother's large sitting-room, with its windows overlooking the spectacular view over the water to Fort St Angelo, she sank down into one of the green chintz sofas and took stock of herself.
Last night did seem to have affected her deeply, but not in a physical sense, more an emotional one.
It was infuriating, unbearable, utterly dispiriting, feeling even partially beholden to that smug, arrogant, insufferable man…
She drew a deep breath.
After her brief confrontation with Romano de Sciorto she was trembling all over, she registered dimly, catching sight of herself in an ornate Venetian mirror on the wall.
Large, solemn grey eyes gazed back, shadowed with tension.
She felt not twenty-four, but about fourteen.
Not a successful woman with her own company but an awkward adolescent, beset with self-doubt and insecurity…
Compressing her lips, she fleetingly observed their full curve with a stab of dissatisfaction.
Her mouth was wide and generous, a classic Cupid's bow which no amount of severe, businesslike flattening would tone down.
Deceptively heavy eyelids gave her face an air of sleepy sensuality which boyfriends vowed was the most tantalising thing they'd ever seen, but which she always felt quite at odds with her true feelings.
In fact, there were lots of things she'd like to change about the way she looked, she reflected ruefully.
But there was no point hating your appearance.
You certainly couldn't change it…
She hadn't felt this unsettled about herself for years!
And it was all the fault of that hateful man…!
Leaning her head back against the sofa, she closed her eyes, trying consciously to tone down her wild agitation.
What on earth was the matter with her?
She'd come out here to Malta at the man's request,knowing his connection with her mother's new craze for danger, to do a job, to try to live up to her reputation as a lively, capable, sophisticated fixer of publicity.
She'd been flattered to be asked, of course.
There weren't all that many twenty-four-year-old graduates with the good fortune to run their own successful public relations business in London.
And, while her mother had recommended her to Romano de Sciorto, she knew that he'd run a thorough, ruthless check on her credentials through his London contacts.
Her business mind had jumped at the chance of a spot of international acclaim.
Plus, coming to Malta to work for a while had seemed the ideal opportunity, the perfect excuse quietly to check up on her mother, reassure herself that all was well…
But maybe she'd been wrong to accept this job, wrong to come.
Last night's fiasco hadn't helped, but even without it she wondered if she'd have been able to cope with her deeply buried resentment towards Romano de Sciorto.
If last night hadn't happened, would she still have flown off the handle, sooner or later…?
Kicking off her sandals, she curled her legs up beside her, running slim fingers absently along the silky golden skin of her shins, her grey eyes unfocused as she gazed out of the window.
The creek immediately below was bobbing with the brightly painted Maltese fishing-boats, the luzzu , and the dghajjes , the bigger water-taxis, rocking gently on aquamarine water.
The whole view slumbered beneath a cloudless gentian sky…
When she thought about it, it was hard to recall a time when she hadn't felt worried, in some vague, insubstantial yet unsettling way, about her parents.
It all seemed to stem from a separation, a fraught time when she was about four, when her mother had been taken seriously ill with some mystery virus and whisked off into Intensive Care.
Her father had been in bleak despair, and Caroline had been dispatched to a childless relative for the duration of the trauma.
All she could recall was the feeling of rejection.
The acute anxiety.
And then everything was better, back to normal.
Mother was home, cured.
But for Caroline the trauma had somehow lingered on, unrecognised for years.
And even when recognised, mentally acknowledged and examined with the maturity of adulthood, difficult to erase.
She smoothed distracted fingers through her hair, unconsciously unravelling silky blonde strands, which fell around her face.
Through the wide-open window floated the lightest of breezes, tangy with the scent of wild herbs growing up on the rugged hills behind the town.
Thyme, fennel, maybe.
Or oregano…
Malta in June.
The summer wasn't quite at its peak; it was still a fraction early for that hard brilliance, that riveting dazzle of hot sun on baked white walls and dried-up maquis scrub on the hills.
In June, Malta still flaunted a touch of green, softened by the last of the spring flowers.
The jumbles of limestone buildings glowed with golden warmth…
Her parents had retired out here so happily, three years ago.
Dad was only sixty, a journalist with a yen to write a book.
He'd met Romano de Sciorto through researching the book he'd been planning on the history of the islands.
It appeared that, despite the age gap, they'd become quite good friends…
And then, since her father's fatal heart attack eighteen months ago, no sooner had she slowly started to come to terms with his loss, to face the grief and despair at the thought of never seeing him again, than her mother's letters and telephone calls had begun to fill her with stunned horror.
Abseiling, at fifty-eight?
Learning to parascend from water-skis at fifty-nine?
Mother had seemed to be undergoing a complete personality change, seeking danger and excitement like a reckless teenager!
And Romano de Sciorto's name kept cropping up over and over, this fun, fearless and courageous friend, who was helping her to live her life to the full…
Caroline had endured the most lurid of nightmares, waking suddenly in the night, sweat-soaked with panic, her heart pounding and her mouth dry…
And today the whole thing was beginning to turn into a waking nightmare.
She'd thought she could cope with her fears.
But meeting Romano de Sciorto in the flesh seemed to be proving her wrong…
‘So here you are.’
She stiffened.
That deep voice made her whole scalp prickle with reaction.
Turning slowly, she saw him in the doorway, cool and laconic, inspecting her curled-up figure dispassionately.
Ducking his head slightly, he came in, came over to prop himself against the chimney-piece.
‘I think this is what is termed ‘sulking in your tent’.
Are you all right?’
‘Perfectly all right, thank you, Count de Sciorto.’
‘Roman.’
‘Roman…’
The name stuck in her throat, and she found herself fighting against this ludicrous anger.
If she wanted to hang on to the shreds of her professional reputation she'd better start by controlling her haywire emotions.
He was absently scrutinising her set face, projecting an air of such unshakeable self-confidence that she mourned her own reserves of self-esteem.
‘You seem very tense, Caroline.
I think perhaps your pride is hurt.
Iva ?
Yes?
You are embarrassed, about last night?’
To her intense chagrin she found she was blushing deeply.
‘Yes!’
It was all she could find to say.
It was close enough, and simpler than trying to explain the truth…
‘But why?
You have a very…attractive body.
You have no reason to feel ashamed of showing it.’
He spoke so reasonably, so casually, that she could almost imagine he cared about her feelings.
But the glint of mockery in his dark eyes put paid to that fantasy.
There was hostility, disguised beneath the surface calm.
Roman de Sciorto appeared to despise her, she decided, almost as thoroughly as she despised him.
She uncurled her legs, determinedly smoothed down the neat white culottes, and stood up.
She found that he was uncomfortably close, looming very tall and threatening.
She was a willowy five feet, five inches, but he had to be over six feet.
An uneven thud of apprehension had begun in her chest.
This was ridiculous.
She was mystified at her shattered composure.
Was this Caroline Hastings, cool up-and-coming career girl with her own successful business, falling apart because of an unsettling reaction to one particular man?
This sensation of being out of control was frightening her.
‘Thank you for the compliment,’ she said calmly.
‘But your opinion of my body is totally irrelevant.
Please don't feel you need to soothe my wounded pride.
I'll get over it.
Nothing which can't be forgotten, when we establish a working relationship…’
‘Ah, yes.
You are right, of course.’
His gravity was somehow doubly infuriating.
‘You must come to my office, as soon as possible, so that we can establish a working relationship.’
She stared very hard at the dark face above her, her hands pushed into her pockets to hide their idiotic trembling.
His gaze was very direct, but somehow managed to encompass her whole body, make her feel as if he saw her semi-naked again, vulnerable and furious, the way he had last night…
‘When would you like our first meeting?’ she said stiffly.
‘Tonight?’
The wide, chiselled mouth tilted up a fraction at one side as he detected her dismay.
‘You are a busy woman, Caroline.
I would not wish to detain you here in Malta longer than I need.’
‘Very considerate of you.’
She was unable to quell the acid in her voice.
‘What time?’
‘I'll call for you at eight-thirty p.m.
My staff will have left; we shall have the office to ourselves, without distractions.
And now, won't you come back and enjoy the delicious lunch your mother is providing for us?
For dessert, there is prinjolata .’
‘I'm afraid that doesn't mean anything to me.’
She strove to keep her voice steady.
‘Prinjolata is a special Maltese dessert.
Traditional around carnival-time.
But Kathleen has made it today, in honour of your arrival.
Do you like almonds and chocolate?’
She nodded slowly.
‘Then come and try some.’
Roman's smile was suddenly disturbingly persuasive.
Haughtily, she followed him to the door.
Somehow he'd scored the first small, barely discernible victory.
She felt consumed with the most idiotic resentment.
She wouldn't give him the satisfaction of showing any further anger or distress.
In fact, she would remain completely indifferent to him.
Indifference would be the best defence.
He seemed to her like the kind of man who loved to provoke reaction.
But when he put his hand lightly on her shoulder to steer her ahead of him through the door she jumped involuntarily, powerless to control the response.
‘Relax.’
He grinned tauntingly.
‘I am not dangerous,signorina .
In spite of this…obsession of yours with safety , you are quite safe with me!’
Never! she thought involuntarily.
She'd feel safer trapped in a cave, with some dark formless danger lurking in the shadows.
But the touch of his warm fingers through the silk of her blouse felt electrifying, like a shock ripping through every nerve-centre in her body.
CHAPTER TWO
‘So, basically…’
Caroline scanned the impressive showroom, with its array of gleaming electronic and navigational equipment, the intricate functions of which were completely beyond her ‘…
Emblem Communications sells, fits and repairs complicated navigational gadgets for all kinds of shipping.
Correct?’
‘Correct.
Or that is one way of putting it.’
‘I'm sorry, but electronics isn't my subject.’
‘Quite.
What is your subject, Caroline?’
The lazy query was deliberately provocative, and she expelled her breath sharply.
They'd completed the tour of his spacious offices on the waterfront at Msida.
This was a small creek forming a marina, just along the convoluted coastline from Valletta.
From an outer façade of imposing honey-gold limestone and carved wooden balconies they'd stepped into a world of contrasts, the latest modern technology against the sixteenth-century splendour of Maltese architecture.
Back in the showroom reception, with its open-fronted cabinets displaying Emblem's complex products, its wide mahogany desk and array of exotic potted palms, they were discussing the planned project.
This was to mark the tenth anniversary of Roman's company, with publicity to reflect the wide international market he appeared to operate in.
‘English.
At least, that's what I studied at Oxford.
Please don't side-track me,’ she said with brisk coolness, glancing down at the notebook in her hand, chewing the end of her pen, and perching on the edge of the desk.
‘And you import stuff from all over?’
Roman nodded slowly, reaching into the back pocket of his trousers for a small packet of cigars.
He'd swopped lunchtime's grey suit for soft cream twill trousers, beautifully cut and pleated at the waistband, with a dark olive silk shirt.
‘Do you mind?’
‘I'd rather you didn't.’
The words were out before she could monitor them.
A flicker of surprise in the dark gaze narrowed to amusement.
With a laconic shrug, he put the packet back in his pocket, then leaned against the desk, crossing his ankles.
‘You are quite right.
I'm trying to kick the habit.’
‘Sorry…
I'm afraid that sounded rather bossy…’
She blinked at her notes, silently cursing her outspokenness.
It was his office, after all!
‘But perfectly in character, Caroline,’ he told her with a derisive smile.
He folded his arms across his chest, and subjected her to a heavy-lidded, far from flattering appraisal.
‘You are very…safety-conscious, no?
And yes, I imagine, quite a bossy young lady.’
‘It's rather presumptuous to judge my character on such short acquaintance…’
‘Yet you seem confident in judging mine.’
The cool statement made her look at him sharply.
The dark gaze seemed to bore right inside her.
‘My mother has mentioned you a lot in her letters,’ she said at last, deciding that honesty was the only policy, if she was going to smooth over accusations made in the heat of the moment.
‘Fearless’ and ‘courageous’are her favourite adjectives.
But, to me, people who rush along taking unnecessary risks with their lives and other people's and…’
‘…drive speedboats too fast?’
‘Look, I don't want to resurrect that argument.
I came out here to do a job, Signor de Sciorto…’
‘Roman.’
‘Roman.’
She amended it reluctantly.
It sounded much too intimate.
The last thing she wanted was even the smallest degree of intimacy in this relationship.
‘So, you came out here at my invitation, but already you had labelled me a reckless fool,’ he agreed calmly, laughter glittering in the gold-flecked eyes, ‘only to have unexpected confirmation of your fears last night.
Poor Caroline.
Do you think you will be safe, working with me for a few weeks?
Or are you afraid some far worse accident will befall you?’
The undercurrents seemed to shimmer between them, almost visible in the quiet office.
For a few seconds she found her eyes trapped in that unnervingly steady gaze.
Something strange happened inside her, a swirl of emotion, heightening awareness to a sharp, almost painful degree…
With a huge effort she dragged her distracted senses back into line.
‘No.
Since you've already saved my life once, I'm sure I'm quite safe!’ she retorted at last.
‘Now, the international equipment you import,’ she ploughed on coolly, forcing a brisk, businesslike tone.
‘Would you say this represents the most important aspect of your business?
Your ability to supply the yachting community with big names, familiar equipment?’
The dark gaze narrowed.
It was hard to decide if he was laughing at her or impressed by her performance.
‘Absolutely.
Very astute.’
‘You sound surprised.
as if you didn't expect me to have a brain in my head.
Now, about your connection with —’
‘On the contrary, I had heard that you were very talented.’
She stared at him warily.
Compliments?
‘I'm flattered.
Why did you invite me all the way out here from London to mastermind your publicity campaign, Roman?
Apart from the fact that you know my mother, that is?’
‘Friends of mine in London recommended you.
I was told you were intuitive, original, and well-connected.’
‘Is that all?’
‘I wanted international coverage.
A London-based consultant seemed a shrewd idea.’
‘I'm sure it was,’ she agreed wryly.
‘But we're straying from the point again.
Where were we?
Yes, imports.
You have warehouses near by?’
Straightening up, Roman regarded her with an unreadable expression.
He stretched, panther-like, raked a lazy hand through his curly dark hair.
There was a ruthless light in his eyes.
‘At Gzira,’ he agreed evenly.
‘We receive shipments from foreign markets all over Europe, even Africa.
Enough for tonight.
Tomorrow I will introduce you to my staff.
There are just twelve of us in all.
But highly trained.
Very cosmopolitan.
I send them on regular trips abroad to keep up to date with new technology…’
He was firmly ushering her out, locking the door behind them.
Slightly bemused, she realised that the businesslike urgency appeared to be entirely on her side, in spite of the earlier impression that he knew how busy she must be, that he had no wish to waste any of her valuable time…
But she was aware of an intense flood of relief that the meeting, alone with him in his offices, appeared to have passed without incident.
What kind of incident she'd been fearing she hardly liked to admit, even to herself.
Suspecting him of being a reckless daredevil was one thing.
She had no real evidence to suggest he was a lecherous womaniser, prone to pouncing on any female in his company.
After all, last night could have been worse in that respect…
She shuddered involuntarily, swamped by a flood of unwelcome sensations.
Just recalling the incident, the feel of those capable brown hands roughly dragging her to safety, made her stomach twist, her breasts tense with reaction.
She compressed her mouth, and stepped carefully away from Roman's tall, rangy figure beside her, outraged by her own traitorous thoughts…
Out in the street, the night air was warm, velvety with that  mauvish softness peculiar to Mediterranean evenings.
She stood still for a moment, breathing the air, gazing round her.
A faint breeze wafted a salty tang off the sea, jingled the rigging on the rows of yachts.
A magical night.
A mythical place…
Last night, standing on the deck of Devlin's ketch as they rapidly approached the island, she'd been thinking the same thing.
Their passage down from Sicily had been easy.
The sun had shone.
None of the feared Mediterranean gales had sprung up.
The sea had been blue and calm, beguiling the unwary.
Gentle, flower-scented winds had blown them south.
And then she'd found herself confronted with this fabulous coastline, floodlit silver and peachy gold in the dusk.
The sky had been a vivid shade of mauve.
Valletta had loomed against it like some huge medieval fortress, the fabled kingdom of some fantastic fairy-tale…
Roman glanced down at her still figure, his face in shadow.
‘We'll drive out to St Paul's Bay.
There's a good restaurant there.’
‘I'm not hungry!’
‘But I am,’ he asserted with a grin, steering her towards the long metallic midnight-blue convertible parked a little way along the road.
‘Humour me.’
Roman's car was a custom-made Aston Martin.
It bristled with  hand-stitched leather, walnut fascia and electronic instruments.
In spite of her intense dislike of her companion, Caroline found it impossible not to feel pampered and privileged as they swung into their seats, the soft top down to allow the warm evening air to billow round them as they drove.
The engine purred throatily, doors clunked with glamorous solidity, the car felt luxurious and astronomically expensive.
She couldn't help wondering what Jeremy, her latest casual boyfriend back in London, would say, faced with such a wondrous object.
He'd probably drool with excitement, even though he drove a perfectly respectable BMW…
‘This isn't your first trip to Malta?’
It was a cool enquiry as they drove west along the coast road.
‘No.
I came over for a short visit when my parents first moved here…’
‘You weren't tempted to come more often?’
‘Of course.
But I was setting up my business.
I couldn't spare any time at all.
My parents were quite happy to come back to London and stay with me instead!
I've been working flat out, trying to get my consultancy off the ground.
That break in Sicily with my friends, and sailing down here on the Kestrel , was the first holiday I've taken in ages…’
‘So you like sailing?’
‘In warm climates, in fine weather.’
‘I see.
Yes, of course.’
She glanced sideways to see the hard mouth twisting in amusement, at her expense.
‘For one moment I thought I had discovered a hidden adventurous streak, Caroline.
She felt stung by his patronising tone.
Why was he so keen to twist the knife about her ‘adventurous streak’, or lack of it?
Did he think she was completely useless, the kind of girl who tripped over the side of boats half-dressed every other day of the week…?
‘Not everyone yearns to dice with death!’ she retorted sweetly.
‘I would hardly call sailing ‘dicing with death’.’
‘No.
I suppose you wouldn't.
You prefer much more precarious pastimes, I'm sure.’
‘Precarious?
Oh, yes, indeed.
You think I like to live dangerously.’
He was still smiling, she saw, shooting a quick, furious glance at him.
How could he be so arrogant?
It was one thing living dangerously, quite another encouraging other people to do so, putting their lives at risk…putting her mother's life at risk…
Roman said casually, ‘Your mother is planning a trip away.
Did I get the impression you weren't too pleased about that?’
Caroline bit her lip, startled.
Had he read her mind, somehow?
Known she was thinking about her mother?
She avoided looking at him, thinking with a fresh stab of disappointment about her mother's announcement.
She and Gwen, a fellow widow and expatriate, were booked on an escorted tour of the Holy Land.
They were leaving on Friday evening.
‘I didn't tell you before, because I didn't want you thinking it wasn't convenient to come and stay or something, darling!’ she'd told her apologetically over coffee after lunch.
‘And of course the house is yours for the duration, my love.
Phone your office in London as often as you like!
My phone bill can stand it!
I'm just furious that I'm going to miss the Mnarja !
It's the most wonderfully romantic all-night festival in the Buskett Gardens at the end of the month.
But Roman will take you, won't you, Roman?’
Mortified, inwardly seething with fury at this last suggestion, Caroline had endured Roman's taunting smile as he'd wryly assured his hostess that nothing would give him greater pleasure…
‘I was a bit disappointed,’ she admitted now.
‘I mean, I'm very pleased she's off on a holiday with her friend, but I was looking forward to spending some time with her…’
She shrugged slightly, watching a brightly lit pavement café with yellow awnings flashing past, glimpsing an elegant square shaded by lofty date palms, and another elaborately carved shrine to some unknown saint decorating the street corner.
She'd sounded rather forlorn, she realised, and she silently cursed her frankness.
She didn't want Roman thinking she was angling for sympathy.
‘Your mother is a very independent lady,’ was all he said.
They hadn't booked a table at the restaurant, but Roman's appearance seemed to galvanise the waiters into respectfully procuring the best table, at the centre of the balcony, with a magnificent view across the bay.
The small, brightly painted fishing-boats bobbed at their moorings.
A moon like a silver pumpkin hung above the water, skimming a pathway of light towards them.
Caroline sat opposite Roman, feeling increasingly distracted.
The night air was still warm, and on the breeze came the faintest scent of flowers.
Breathing in deeply, she tried to marshal her thoughts.
But predominant in her mind was the unsettling effect her companion seemed to be having on her.
Watching him as he leaned easily back in his chair, studying the wine list, she found herself reluctantly examining his face with compulsive curiosity.
He had a long, strong face, bony and angular.
His black curly hair looked crisp and shiningly clean, clinging close to the classic shape of his head, longer over a high, intelligent-looking forehead, and at the nape of his neck, where it just brushed the collar of his shirt.
His nose was large and slightly crooked, mouth wide and beautifully cut, chin firm and slightly indented.
His eyebrows were thick and dark, above deep-set eyes, the irises black-brown with a shimmer of gold radiating through them, the whites tinged with blue.
That, she decided absently, was the mystery ingredient which gave such mesmerising impact to his gaze.
That cool blue-white surrounding the velvet-dark iris…
Studying him now, dispassionately, without the emotional blindness of the aftermath of her accident, or the initial shock of finding that he was last night's rescuer, it was like seeing him properly for the first time…
‘I pose for photographs, for a fee,’ he was murmuring, the wide mouth twitching in amusement as he noticed her fixed stare.
‘And what is your verdict, Caroline?
Am I judged to be a member of the human race, or classified as some lesser species?’
Somehow, outside her conscious control, a small chink appeared in the icy atmosphere between them.
The deep voice was taunting, but there was a wry humour hidden somewhere beneath the laconic façade.
And, while the dark gaze stayed watchful, there was that devastating smile again, creasing the harsh features into warmth, taking her by surprise, exerting considerable charm.
It made her thaw a fraction towards him, in spite of herself.
She couldn't help smiling back.
‘Oh, some lesser species.
Definitely.’
She gave a short laugh, and dropped her head to study the menu, conscious of his amused eyes lingering reflectively on her as she kept her gaze determinedly averted.
Lunch might have been an unqualified disaster, she reflected a little while later, but dinner was proving less of an ordeal than anticipated.
Maybe it was simply the setting: the warm, powerfully evocative flower-scented evening, soft candlelight, dusky pink linen tablecloths, bunches of fragrant mimosa on the tables.
The restaurant was elegant and relaxing.
The food, in her case aubergines full of minced steak, olives and tomatoes, in Roman's case bragoli , a sort of Maltese variant on beef olives, was mouthwatering.
‘I was hungry after all,’ she admitted, finishing the main course with relish and taking another sip of the excellent French burgundy Roman had picked to complement their food.
‘That's because you left half your lunch,’ he pointed out drily, eyeing her through the warm haze of candlelight.
‘Which was a criminal waste.
It was majjal bil-Patata fil-Forn , a classic Maltese dish, exquisitely cooked by your mother's loyal housekeeper Kathleen.’
‘When I'm tense I lose my appetite.’
The slight smile on his mouth widened.
‘Then I am flattered you find you can relax in my company tonight, Caroline.’
There was something in his eyes, some subtle but predatory glimmer of male emotion, which made her heart begin to drum wildly in her chest.
Had she allowed herself to be lulled into a false sense of security?
He'd conducted a skilled, sophisticated dinner-table conversation since they'd begun eating, talking to her with accomplished ease about his business, about life on the island, about his brother Salvo's wife and new baby.
He'd drawn her into confidences about her own, rather flat-sounding lifestyle back in London, her business heavily overshadowing her personal life.
Now, abruptly, she could see that he imagined he'd chalked up yet another small victory.
He'd wined and dined the hostile little English girl, and now she was tamely eating out of his hand…
How naïve of her to let Roman de Sciorto's powerful charm override her normal caution!
His cool, shuttered gaze had dropped slowly to the open neck of her blouse, and, suddenly tingling with self-consciousness, she lifted a casual hand to her throat, fingering the silky collar, her skin warming under that overtly masculine scrutiny.
She cleared her throat, which felt infuriatingly husky.
‘This has been very pleasant,’ she said stiffly.
‘Thank you.
But I think I should be getting back…’
He glanced at his watch, impassive.
‘What are you frightened of now?’ he queried, with a mocking half-smile.
‘The only adventurous item on the agenda for your visit is a little sailing, to demonstrate Emblem's products in action.
Relax, Caroline.’
‘I'm not frightened of anything!’ she protested icily, suppressing a strong urge to stand up and thump him, willing her pulses to slow.
His taunt had infuriated her, as presumably he'd intended, but right now his blatant rudeness was the least of her worries.
That lazy, narrowed gaze moving over her had triggered the most humiliating physical reaction.
If he knew the effect he was having on her traitorous senses, she'd die of chagrin.
Confused, she kept her eyes down, scanning the dessert menu sightlessly.
This was the first time in her life that she'd been in the company of a man who could bring her out in nervous flushes, make her heartbeat race and her stomach turn all watery, just by watching her…
The irony was that she actively disliked him.
She was more than confused.
She was chaotically mixed up…
She recalled her reaction to his touch earlier, felt the adrenalin starting to pound through her veins all over again.
Fight or flight, they called it, didn't they?
She couldn't explain this, even to herself.
It was crazy.
She didn't trust him.
She had several varied reasons for deeply resenting him…
Could this sudden surge of sexual attraction be some kind of reaction from last night's trauma?
Some temporary psychological aberration, perhaps?
Provoked by abrupt intimacy with a complete stranger who then turned out to be someone she was forced to spend time with, forced to establish a formal business relationship with…?
‘The Gbejniet moxxi is good,’ he murmured helpfully, observing her silent conflict with what seemed to Caroline to be cruel amusement.
‘Dried goat's milk cheese.
Perhaps with fresh fruit?’
‘I've really no appetite left,’ she declared, laying down the heavy menu.
She expelled her breath sharply, and automatically reached up to fiddle with the bun at her nape, easing her arms back, trying to release the tension mounting in her shoulders.
The unconsciously voluptuous movement drew his dark gaze to the outline of her breasts, jutting high against the silk.
as if he were touching her, the tips of her nipples contracted into tight buds of awareness, pointing tell-tale peaks beneath the thin fabric.
‘Maybe I'll skip dessert too.’
The fathoms-deep voice was a detached drawl, his intonation cool.
And yet there was something in his tone which sent fresh shivers along her nerve-ends.
‘Just coffee,’ he told the discreetly hovering waiter.
Leaning back, he began to reach for the packet of cigars, then made a wry face and changed his mind.
Instead, he took another mouthful of red wine, inspecting the rich ruby liquid through lidded, thoughtful eyes before glancing up at her and inspecting her flushed face with lazy intensity.
‘How old are you, Caroline?’
‘I'm twenty-four…’
‘And how do you like to spend your time, when you are not building up your business?’
‘Why do you want to know?’ she countered evenly.
‘Are you hoping to recruit another novice to some of your risk-taking hobbies?’
The coffee arrived, strong and fragrant in a gold cafetière.
She watched as Roman poured it into small white cups.
The strong tendons in his darkly tanned hand sprang into relief as he lifted the pot.
She added cream to hers.
Roman left his thick and black.
‘Tell me about these risk-taking hobbies of mine.’
The dark gaze was narrowed to a thoughtful glitter in his face.
She took a sip of coffee to moisten a suddenly dry throat.
‘Climbing sheer rock-faces?
Abseiling down them again?
How should I know?
Perhaps bungy-jumping off the Dingli Cliffs?
Sky-diving without a parachute?’
The bitter sarcasm welled up unbidden.
‘Let me see if I can guess your favourite hobbies,’ he mused, deadpan.
‘Reading?
Country walks?
Embroidery?’
‘You left out tapestry, wild-flower-pressing, cooking and knitting!’ she pointed out with saccharine sweetness.
‘What would be so risible about those things, if they were my hobbies?’
Turning the tables on him drew an expressionless silence for a few seconds, and then he smiled, his eyes gleaming in genuine amusement.
He shrugged, loose-shouldered, infuriatingly unmoved.
‘Nothing at all,’ he assured her blandly.
‘But tell me, why do you disapprove so strongly of my choice of leisure pursuits?’
‘Disapprove?’ she echoed hotly.
‘I ‘disapprove’ only in so far as your adventurous inclinations affect my own family, I assure you.
Apart from that, I haven't the least interest in whether you choose to kill yourself by falling from a great height, or crashing into something at high speed.’
‘I'm touched by your solicitude.
But I plan on living to a healthy old age.’
‘I'd like my mother to do the same.’
The words were out before she could stop them.
The sharp edge to her voice reached him.
The amusement gradually died on his face, leaving an unnervingly patrician air to his harsh features.
‘Have you any valid reason to suppose she will not?’
‘With good health and God willing, no.
But if she continues to be led into trying out dangerous sports, who knows?
She is nearly sixty…’
‘Perhaps I misunderstand you,’ he said slowly.
‘Let me get this clear.
You seriously believe that I have some influence over your mother's activities, Caroline?’
Her mouth had dried.
Running her tongue over her lips, she said huskily, ‘You're supposed to be her friend!’
She couldn't help it; the words poured out, a torrent of pent-up emotional resentment, released at last.
‘If you love someone, you care about their safety, and I can't help feeling that safety is a foreign word to you…!’
There was a short pause.
‘If you really love someone, Caroline, you care about their freedom,’ Roman retorted coolly.
‘You would consign those you love to some joyless vacuum?
Afraid to live life to the full, for fear of injury?’
‘Plenty of people live life to the full without courting danger, deliberately taking crazy risks!’
Breathing jerkily, she locked her eyes angrily with Roman's calculating gaze.
‘Poor Caroline,’ he murmured finally, his deep voice expressionless.
‘You need a villain in your anxious little world, the bad guy you can blame for all your problems.
Have you cast me as your villain?’
Her thoughts kaleidoscoped suddenly.
Bewildered, she felt as if she'd stepped back into a dark cave and was falling into the unknown.
Had she cast him as the villain in her private emotional tangles?
She couldn't answer him.
Abruptly, all she wanted was to escape, escape that pitying, patronising gleam in his eyes, escape the mounting tension which was threatening to annihilate the last, precarious shreds of her self-control.
‘Can we go, please?’
It was a tight little request.
With a curt nod he beckoned the waiter, settled the bill, ushered her out into the silky darkness.
At the car, he reached to unlock her door, held it open for her, watched as she climbed in and reached for her strap.
They drove in silence, back to Kalkara.
He parked outside the tall façade of the house, cut the engine.
Glancing at her, he frowned, and reached to twist her face round to the moonlight.
‘Tears?’ he queried, his voice soft.
‘Who are you crying for, Caroline?’
Who , not why…
The significance of the question struck a buried chord, but she was too choked with angry emotion to query it.
‘I'm not crying.
Goodnight, Roman…’
She made to open her door, but he detained her, his hand sliding down to her shoulder, his fingers warm and fatally comforting through the silk blouse.
With his other hand, he touched her cheek.
His fingers slid through the wetness on the swell of her cheekbone.
‘But yes, you are crying…’
The deep voice sounded peremptory, softly persuasive and vaguely accusing at the same time.
Before she'd realised his intention, he'd turned her deftly into his arms, pulled her with surprising gentleness against the hard warmth of his chest.
‘Please, don't…’
The words were brushed gently aside.
Her chin was tilted up, and the coolness of his mouth moved over her lips, then returned with increased pressure, full and hard…
Heat crept through her, then abruptly consumed her.
She wriggled in outrage, but when he caught her head between his hands, pulling back for a few moments to stare intently into her face, she stopped fighting.
There was an invisible energy pulsating in the air between them.
‘Caroline…’
He murmured her name as if he was asking himself a question.
As she opened her mouth to speak, he kissed her again, and then deepened the kiss with an abrupt, almost fierce insistence which struck an answering chord inside her, like a lighted taper touching a dormant fire, long-buried, kindling into life…
Shocked by her own response, she closed her eyes, indescribable sensations scorching through her.
The hunger erupting between them was raw.
A heady, dangerous mix of curiosity, anger, desire…
His body-heat rocked her senses.
He smelled vibrantly clean and male, with a subtle trace of sandalwood, some discreetly expensive shaving lotion, heady and irresistible.
The neat bun tugged loose, collapsed in a tumble of honey-gold around her shoulders.
She moved convulsively against him, filled with a mindless urgency.
His fingers tangled in the smooth swath of her hair.
With a growled exclamation against her lips he tightened one hand in the silky blonde strands, and slid the other down to trace lightly the hollow at the base of her throat, then lower to skim the striped silk of her blouse over the swell of her breasts, an expert, fleeting exploration which drew a gasp of reaction from her yet left her taut and shivering in frustrated anger…
Putting her hands on his shoulders, she meant to push him away indignantly, but felt the hard, supple warmth of muscle beneath her fingers, and tightened her hands involuntarily, convulsively clinging to him instead of rejecting him.
Emotion stabbed her like a physical pain.
Like thirst in the desert, a blind frantic urgency and not enough water to slake the fire…
Abruptly it was over.
He released her, his fingers still loosely in the escaped strands of her hair, staring at her as blankly as if she were some phantom being from another incarnation, a mythical seductress beamed unexpectedly into the passenger seat of his car.
‘Tomorrow,’ he said at last, as if dragging his thoughts back from far away, his voice a fraction thicker, ‘tomorrow I'm busy all morning.
Come at three p.m.
We'll discuss a strategy for the campaign…’
as if belatedly recalling his manners, he got out to circle the car, opened her door for her.
He'd spoken as if nothing had happened, she realised, too stunned and distraught to retaliate.
‘Goodnight, Caroline.’
He stayed beside the car as she crossed the narrow pavement, but the shadowed gaze followed her as she shakily climbed the steps to the door of the house, slid her key into the lock with a trembling hand and let herself into the hallway.
CHAPTER THREE
Emblem Communications appeared to be humming with distant sounds of life when she arrived just after three p.m.
But the reception area was deserted.
Hovering beside the huge potted palm, Caroline waited for someone to appear, outwardly composed, inwardly tense.
Telephones rang, computer keyboards tapped.
Voices murmured in partitioned offices.
She fiddled with the strap of her small black leather shoulder-bag, and turned to stare out of the glass doors at the hot afternoon scene beyond.
The sun was beating down on rows of glittering white yachts, flashing on aluminium masts and highly polished brass and chrome.
On a gleaming fibreglass deck a girl with waist-length chestnut hair and tiny navy shorts was reclining against the cockpit, calling something to a man on a neighbouring craft.
It all looked so carefree, so enticingly Mediterranean and relaxed, that Caroline suddenly longed to be able to forget her business, abandon all her years of hard work, hop on board one of those yachts and sail off indefinitely towards the hazy blue horizon…
She'd spent her free morning on board the Kestrel , with Penny and Devlin, saying goodbye before they left.
They were taking the boat back up to Sicily today, ready for Devlin's parents to use.
She'd found herself on the receiving end of a great deal of teasing about her impromptu topless dip in the sea and her valiant rescuer, and she'd fenced it as calmly as she could.
But with the memory of that wild surge of reaction last night, the devouring way Roman had kissed her, she'd felt far more sensitive on the subject than necessary.
That kiss had been so bewildering, so utterly unlike anything that had ever happened to her in all her twenty-four years.
It was the sort of kiss you saw portrayed on the cinema screen, between two madly attracted people in mortal danger who fell dementedly upon each other as if there was no tomorrow…
Only there was a tomorrow.
And in this case it felt like an extremely embarrassing one.
Could the wine have been to blame?
She'd drunk plenty of wine before, for heaven's sake.
And it hadn't been some unknown island wine with mystical aphrodisiac properties, had it?
Because she'd seen the bottle, and it had been good French burgundy…
If it weren't so perplexing, it would be quite funny.
But it wasn't funny.
It wasn't funny at all.
Especially when she reflected that Romano de Sciorto would doubtless be doubled up with private mirth at the ‘pushover’ qualities of his hired PR girl…
Dragging her thoughts into line, she turned back to scan the empty office, mentally checking her appearance.
She needed to feel confident that she looked both efficient and professional, without in any way appearing seductive .
With this criterion in mind she'd picked a neat black cotton dress, short-sleeved and V-necked.
A plaited black and grey leather thong cinched her small waist, a discreet gold St Christopher gleamed at her throat, her hair was drawn into a rather severe bun at the nape.
With low-heeled black court shoes, and delicate gold hoop earrings, she felt as confident as she could be, in the circumstances.
This was silly, she decided, checking her watch impatiently.
She couldn't stand here all day waiting for someone to appear.
No wonder Roman needed a public relations expert.
Whoever his receptionist was, he'd be well advised to find himself another one…
Recalling last night's guided tour, she set off in search of his office.
Through the swing doors, along this passage, turn right and then up a short, wide flight of stairs.
She tapped lightly on the tall, wide, ornately panelled door, then pushed it open and walked in.
She caught her breath involuntarily.
The blood rushed to her face then receded, leaving her pale with shocked embarrassment.
Stephanie Marsa was in Roman's arms, her hands reached up and clasped possessively round his neck.
They broke apart almost as soon as she'd seen them.
Stephanie seemed in danger of losing her balance, teetering on impossibly high, fragile heels which only brought her to just below Roman's shoulder height.
Dumbfounded, Caroline watched him catch hold of the dark girl's arms, steadying her.
The glinting dark gaze was cool, but quizzical as he looked across the office.
‘Bongu , Caroline.’
The soft Maltese greeting echoed the French, a variation of ‘Bonjour ’.
‘You're five minutes late.’
Indignation joined the haphazard emotions churning through her.
Just as well, she felt like saying, from the look of things.
‘I was here just after three.’
Words seemed to stick in her throat.
‘I've been waiting around in Reception for about ten minutes.’
She felt engulfed in a frozen rage quite out of proportion to the situation…
‘I'm so sorry that you had to wait, Signorina Hastings.
Roman wanted to see me…urgently.’
Stephanie Marsa was darting daintily around Roman's desk, collecting a pile of letters and files.
In a short white silk suit, with a lace-edged jacket, she looked like a petite, rather smug Tinkerbell.
She paused, and smiled politely at Caroline, who gathered her will-power with the greatest difficulty and smiled back.
She found herself gazing at Roman's secretary-receptionist with an effort at detachment, trying to pin-point the exact logical reason for this rush of unprecedented hatred towards someone she barely knew.
Stephanie was very beautiful.
The rosebud mouth was painted a glowing coral pink, an exotic contrast with her creamy olive skin, liquid dark eyes.
The luxurious long black hair was caught up in another sleek French plait, exposing a smooth high forehead and expertly plucked eyebrows…
‘Don't give it another thought,’ Caroline murmured, clasping trembling fingers behind her back.
She'd identified the source of her anger.
She felt…humiliated.
After last night's brief encounter, after that raw eruption of feeling he'd provoked inside her, had this little scene been engineered deliberately?
Was Roman de Sciorto's rumoured ‘reputation’ based on a penchant for sadistic tricks on unsuspecting females?
Stephanie had gone, after a cool request from Roman to bring coffee.
‘Sit down,’ he suggested, his dark face shadowy and unreadable.
On stiff legs, Caroline walked to the proffered seat.
Roman lowered himself casually into his large executive swivel-chair behind his desk, and directed a dispassionate, shuttered gaze across the neat expanse of tooled dark green leather.
Instead of meeting his eyes, she occupied herself with finding her notebook, and then inspecting her surroundings with feigned detachment, cursing her thudding heart.
His desktop held three telephones and an answering machine, a computer screen and keyboard, and a fax machine.
In addition to this, as if to put modern technology in perspective, stood a wide, leather-trimmed green blotter, a traditional brass and onyx pen-stand, a leather-backed memo pad, and a revolving set of index cards.
The conflict of styles was echoed in the huge high-ceilinged room, decorated in vibrant blues and greens.
Ornately corniced and architraved, it was lined with polished wooden shelving, and row upon row of books stood alongside examples of the very latest in electronic instruments, with big colour photos of boats displaying ‘satellite communication systems’ or ‘video sounders’, all fitted by Emblem Communications.
Long dark blue silk curtains hung at the elegant sash window overlooking the creek.
A ceiling fan did duty in place of modern air-conditioning.
‘I have a few questions,’ she began coolly, keeping her eyelids defensively lowered to disguise her feelings.
Crossing her legs discreetly, she dug around in her bag for her pen.
‘First, is there a regular boat show on the island?
That could be the ideal showcase for your tenth-anniversary publicity…’
‘The boat show was at Naxxar, back in March,’ he returned, matching her coolness with an indolence which rankled in spite of everything.
‘We exhibited there.
But there's an International Business Fair coming up at the end of this month.’
‘Fine.
Well, maybe your PR campaign could coincide with that fair?
I'll contact TV and radio stations.
And I thought perhaps a pull-out supplement in your Sunday Times with photos of your staff, products, showrooms, yachts you've recently supplied and fitted with equipment.
Another angle could be printed congratulations from local firms linked with your line of business?
On the international side, I thought…’
‘Slow down,’ he challenged her tauntingly.
‘I'm impressed by the high-powered performance.
But give yourself time to gain an accurate picture…’
‘I think I have a pretty accurate picture of what goes on around here.’
‘Is that so?’
The husky purr was ominous.
She stared at him, absorbing his appearance in trepidation.
A pulse throbbed at the base of his throat.
In a light cream linen suit, cream silk shirt and gold striped tie, he was alarmingly attractive.
Her mouth dried.
‘I'm neither blind nor stupid!’
He slowly stood up and came round the desk.
He stopped beside her chair, reaching with easy strength to pull her up in front of him.
‘Certainly you are not blind.
Stupid?
Perhaps that remains to be proved, Caroline.
You know, since last night, I have been indulging in a series of small fantasies…’
‘I'm not in the least interested in your fantasies,signore …!’
‘No?
That was not the impression I received in my car last night…’
The deep voice sent tremors of enraged reaction through her bloodstream, and then without further warning she was in his arms, clamped in steel, and he was kissing her, hard, on the lips.
The assault was so unexpected that she was briefly stunned into submission.
Caught against the muscular hardness of his chest, warm and alien through the fine silk of his shirt, a matter of inches only between the shadowy regions of hip and groin, the familiar disturbing responses were shimmering through her bloodstream.
His seeking lips were cool and infinitely skilful, moving over hers.
He stepped closer, closed the gap between their bodies.
She was dimly conscious of an overpowering contrast, her female vulnerability against iron-hard male muscle and superior strength.
He slid one hand to her hips, pressing her into contact with his body all the way down as he did so.
The possessive, exclusively masculine movement triggered a shudder of excitement from her head to her toes.
A coil of heat seemed to rise from her thighs to her stomach, spreading up to her breasts.
Abruptly, she was engulfed by fierce indignation, flooding through her, rescuing her from her own weakness…
How dared he treat her like this — flirting first with Stephanie Marsa, and then cynically switching to her?
Pushing herself away from him with a jerk, she found herself locked into his taunting gaze.
Stormy grey battled in fury with dark, triumphant brown.
‘Sweet as Maltese honey,’ he murmured, his voice huskier, aching with laughter.
‘With hidden depths, I suspect…’
His gaze reminded her, suddenly, of a sleepy tiger.
Watchful, latently threatening.
It was impossible to tell what he was thinking.
He took her chin between thumb and forefinger, tilting her mutinous face up for his cool inspection.
With his other hand he slid one finger along the line of her temple, the slender arch of her neck, and then down along the soft swell of her breasts at the V-neckline of her dress, pausing at the small gold St Christopher gleaming against her freshly tanned skin, in the warm hollow of her cleavage.
Desire leapt inside her again, as his lean finger stroked and explored.
It feathered her skin with goosebumps, doubled her pulse-rate, melted her knees.
As she caught her breath, her temper erupted, and in wild self-defence she pushed against the steel wall of his chest, twisted frantically in his arms, her grey eyes sparking fire as she lifted her hand to hit out at him blindly.
He caught her arm in mid-air, a deceptively lazy reflex action, his fingers biting into her forearm.
Violence suddenly seemed to colour the air between them, a red mist igniting.
She glared at him fiercely, her breasts rising and falling rapidly as she struggled for breath.
‘Calm yourself,signorina ,’ he mocked softly.
‘Would you have my secretary bring in coffee and find me fighting with my new PR consultant from London?’
‘No worse than your PR consultant from London coming in and finding you kissing your secretary!’ she spat, rigid with outrage.
‘Let go of me!’
‘Certainly.
When I am assured of my physical safety.’
He grinned unrepentantly.
‘A black eye and a bloody nose would do nothing for my publicity photos.
As for kissing my secretary, I don't recall doing so.’
She sucked in her breath.
It was such gently acid mockery, she felt physically flayed under that worldly amusement.
Slowly, little by little, the fight ebbed from her.
He loosened his fingers, released her.
In taut silence she stared at him.
‘You really think you can play God with people's lives, don't you?’ she demanded shakily, rubbing her arm jerkily where his restraining grip seemed to have stopped the blood flow.
Glancing at where she rubbed, he frowned suddenly.
‘Mishut !’
It was a rough curse in Malti, as he noted the red weals on her skin.
‘Skuzi , Caroline.
I did not realise I had hurt you.’
‘Didn't you?
You probably enjoyed it.
You really are a total bastard , aren't you?’
The bitter words hung in the air.
Her emotions felt fragmented; all thought of a businesslike façade to carry her through the afternoon seemed meaningless.
‘Technically, far from it.’
His tone was deeply ironic.
‘The de Sciorto name and title goes back to the sixteenth century.
My parents are dead.
And I am the legitimate heir.’
‘Really?
What a shame your noble birth doesn't influence your behaviour!’
‘Is my behaviour so dreadful?’ he mocked softly, the lazy gaze unnerving.
‘Frankly,nothing you do surprises me,Count de Sciorto.
I think you're probably capable of anything !’
After a long pause, Roman turned away from her, and went to sit down behind his desk.
Rocking gently in his chair, his expression bland, he was the epitome of the suave, impeccable businessman.
It was hard to believe that a few moments earlier he'd aroused that snake-pit of desire inside her.
With a casual gesture he indicated the seat opposite.
Stiffly, she sat down again.
‘So, Caroline.
You think I am capable of anything ?’
It was a cool challenge, drawled so quietly that she almost missed it.
‘I think,’ she began carefully, picking her words with precision, ‘that you are used to acting without thought.
To…to taking what you want, and to hell with the consequences.’
‘I see.
Then, for all you know, I could be completely amoral?
A master criminal, perhaps?
A smuggler, a modern-day pirate?’
The taunting suggestions were made with mock-gravity aimed, she felt sure, at maximum provocation.
She shrugged with feigned indifference, but her heart was thudding uncomfortably.
‘You said it.’
‘And how about your ethical standards?’
He was watching her like a cat with a mouse.
‘Can you bring yourself to publicise the achievements of a man you distrust so profoundly?’
‘If you're not happy with my services, I'm prepared to call this whole thing off,’ she informed him coldly.
His lazy sarcasm was unbearable.
‘You can find someone else to handle your publicity…’
‘I'm more than happy with services rendered to date,’ he mocked.
He was motionless as he observed her agitation.
‘I asked if you felt morally comfortable with this assignment, Caroline.’
‘Personally, I wouldn't trust you as far as I could proverbially throw you!
However, I think I can manage to…to split business and personal feelings!’
‘I am deeply gratified.’
He sketched a deep bow with his head, his eyes gleaming ruthlessly.
‘I can only hope that in the course of your…investigations the evidence against me is not too incriminating.’
She absorbed the deliberate irony, the cruel banter, with growing resentment.
How could she have felt that hot surge of excitement when he kissed her, touched her?
Was she crazy?
This was the man who'd already demonstrated his wild, devil-may-care streak since her arrival in Malta only forty-eight hours ago.
The man who'd turned up the sexual voltage after their night out, only to be found embracing his secretary at precisely the time they'd agreed to meet today…
That goading note in his voice brought a slow flush to her face, rising from her neck to her cheeks.
She had to clench her hands at her sides to stop their tell-tale trembling.
Romano de Sciorto was hateful, arrogant, unbearable…
‘I'm not here to investigate any underhand dealings you may be involved in,’ she managed at last.
‘If you still require my…
PR services…’
‘I do.’
‘Then I'll honour our agreement.
Naturally.’
The office door swung open after the briefest of taps.
Stephanie appeared with a sheaf of papers.
Another girl followed her, bearing a tray of coffee.
Caroline took the chance to draw some calming deep breaths, get her scattered emotions under control.
Some of the high-octane tension in the room began to dissipate with the interruption.
Her pulse-rate began to slow down to something approaching normal.
‘There are several letters for you to sign, Roman,’ Stephanie informed him, in her soft, slightly sing-song voice.
‘And Salvo rang to say there will be another shipment from Tripoli tonight.’
Depositing the letters in front of him, and waiting until the younger girl had placed the tray on his desk, she flashed a dazzling smile at him, then retreated.
His dark gaze was enigmatic as he watched her disappearing.
‘Good.’
He switched back to Caroline, his eyes shuttered.
‘So you will stay to attend the business fair at the Palazzo Parisio, which starts on the twenty-eighth.
And the following night is the Mnarja .
As your mother suggested, an appropriate occasion to finish your visit.’
‘Yes.’
The conflict between professional credibility and suppressed hostility towards him was severely impeding her powers of speech.
He poured coffee, and passed her a cup in wry silence.
‘Thank you.’
The silence threatened to extend indefinitely.
Finally she felt compelled to pick up the conversation, make some pretence at normality.
‘So what exactly is the Mnarja ?’
‘It is just a country festival, which goes on all night.
Harvest is celebrated.
And farmers exhibit livestock.
There is folk music, singing and dancing…’
He stopped to drink some coffee.
Remembering her mother's enthusiasm, she realised she was fascinated, in spite of her buried anger.
‘Go on?’
It was a reluctant prompt.
‘It is otherwise known as the Feast of St Peter and St Paul.’
He shrugged, leaning back in his chair, smiling at her for the first time with that devastating smile which made her heart beat faster.
‘Its origins are obscure.
The name comes from the Italian,luminarja .
Illumination.
The countryside all around, and the woods of the Buskett Gardens, and the bastions around Mdina, used to be lit up by torch-lights and bonfires.
It is a very atmospheric festival.
The wooded gardens lie beneath the Verdala Palace, a moated medieval castle.
The gardens are full of Aleppo pine and citrus trees…’
‘It all sounds very…romantic !’
She stressed the words with mild but deliberate sarcasm.
She was in no mood to display starry-eyed fascination, however much she might feel it.
Roman's mouth twisted in wry amusement.
‘Indeed it is,’ he agreed gravely.
‘Traditionally, a bridegroom had to promise, in the marriage contract, to take his bride to Buskett, on Mnarja Day, every year.
His bride would wear her finest clothes.’
‘That's romantic,’ she conceded, with a small smile.
Her eyes were held for a few moments in the lazy gaze across the desk, then with a conscious effort she blinked herself free, looked down at her notepad.
The way her heart seemed to squeeze inside her chest, the way her pulses seemed to skip a beat whenever Roman watched her like that, was deeply disturbing.
What was wrong with her?
She could see, as plain as the nose on her face, that here was a man of the self-centred, philandering, dangerous variety, the kind of man no girl in her right mind would risk getting involved with…so how come her hormones were letting her down in this maddening way?
‘If we could get back to business,’ she began as calmly as she could, ‘I'd like the use of an office and a telephone, and a list of phone numbers — suppliers, customers, Press, the business fair organisers…’
‘Stephanie will help you out there.’
He stood up in the controlled, fluid style she was beginning to recognise as peculiarly his, and came around the desk again.
‘But first we do some practical research.
Come on…’
Blankly she stared up at him.
‘Come on where?’
‘Out.
I'm going to give you a conducted tour down in the marina.
You can see some of our equipment in situ .
And tomorrow morning we'll take one of the boats out.
Show you that same equipment in action.
So come dressed for sailing.’
Unsure if she felt relieved or irritated by his high-handed orders, she mutinously followed his easy stride and wide, supple shoulders downstairs.
Glancing back over her shoulder as she stepped out into the pounding heat of the afternoon, she saw that Stephanie Marsa was watching them go.
There was a glitter of hostility in the girl's velvet-dark eyes which momentarily took Caroline's breath away…
CHAPTER FOUR
‘You're invited to a party, on Saturday.
At Casa Sciorto.’
Roman glanced over his shoulder from his laconic position at the cabin entrance, watching as Caroline, clad in white Bermudas and canary-yellow shirt, darted around in the cockpit of the yacht, efficiently dealing with the paraphernalia of setting sail.
She was bending over the sail locker, and she jerked her head up to stare at him, dropping the lid with a bang, instantly suspicious.
Since the episode with Stephanie yesterday she'd discovered that she was instantly suspicious of most suggestions made by Roman.
She had no idea what was going on in his head.
All she knew was that she presumably represented a new challenge.
And, in his supreme arrogance, new challenges had to be swiftly conquered.
He'd collected her from Kalkara early this morning, to take one of his charter yachts for a test sail.
Now, the honey-gold, palm-dotted ramparts and fortifications of Grand Harbour were receding in the distance, the Mediterranean was crystal-clear turquoise beneath them, and the huge arc of the sky seemed to be widening invisible blue arms above the horizon.
A helpful northerly breeze was filling the sails, so that they were building up gentle speed across the waters of the bay.
For a while now there'd been no sound save the lazy creak of the sails and the soft slap of water against their bows.
‘Me ?’
It was impossible to read his expression behind the dark Ray-Bans.
But the ‘cat and mouse’ feeling had been growing stronger, ever since yesterday's confrontation in his office and the subsequent tour of the marina.
‘Why sound so shocked?’
He was grinning, his teeth very white against the dark of his face.
‘Don't public relations girls love parties?’
‘This particular public relations girl prefers quiet evenings with friends.
The only parties she attends are in a business capacity…’
She sat down at the helm, resting one hand on the tiller, and thrusting the other into her pocket.
In navy rope-soled canvas espadrilles, a white cricket hat and a yellow swimsuit under the shirt, she'd felt equipped to face whatever the day might bring.
But there was no fail-safe way to dress for outings in Roman's company.
Whatever she wore, she'd feel acutely self-conscious.
Or, maybe, acutely self-aware…
‘Then you can attend this party in a ‘business capacity’.’
‘At the Casa Sciorto?’ she queried bluntly.
‘Isn't that your ‘noble seat’ in Mdina?
Surely a business function would be held at your offices?
Or your town house in Valletta?’
‘I didn't say it was a business function.’
She glared at him, large, muscular and confident in cut-off denims and white T-shirt, and the usual wave of frustration rose up inside her.
What was it about this man?
How could he have this…this humiliating effect on her composure?
‘Then, if it's a private do, I'd feel out of place.
I'm here as a temporary employee, nothing more.’
She kept her voice cool with an effort.
There was an amused pause.
‘But I am a family friend,’ he pointed out mildly.
‘And your mother has asked me to keep an eye on you while she is away.’
‘She's what ?’
She couldn't help it, her temper erupted.
‘I don't believe it!
I'm not a child!’
‘But you are being childish.’
‘I am twenty-four, independent, I have my own flat, my own business, and I think I can take care of myself for a couple of weeks on a small, friendly Mediterranean island, thanks very much!
I don't need anyone ‘keeping an eye on me’!’
‘You presume to worry about your mother's safety,’ he countered thoughtfully, ‘yet you are indignant when the tables are turned?’
She bit her lip, jolted into considering this unwelcome snip of observation.
‘It's your friendship with my mother that worries me most!’ she said stiffly, her cheeks flushing under the cool gaze he returned.
‘But she puts you in charge of me because she's leaving me alone in her house!
For irony, that takes some beating!’
The Ray-Bans obscured his eyes, but from the subtle hardening of his jaw she had the feeling she'd angered him.
Her small stab of triumph was short-lived.
Or had it been triumph?
She wasn't sure.
Her reactions seemed permanently mixed up while she was with Roman…
‘Swing across to starboard,’ he said abruptly, ducking below to check the navigational aids.
‘We'll head round to the south coast.
Tell me, have you discussed your low opinion of me with your mother?’
‘Not in so many words!’
She hauled so hard on the tiller that the ketch swung dizzily to the opposite tack.
‘You thought perhaps she might feel insulted — that you should imagine she could be so easily led?’
The deep voice was expressionless.
‘But you seem to be intent on encouraging her to kill herself!’
She'd blurted it out before she could stop.
Abruptly she felt as if she were on some kind of mental treadmill, returning to the same overworked grievance.
‘Caroline —’ he spoke without rancour, but she sensed he was guarding his temper, exercising considerable patience ‘— your mother is a mature adult.
She is not being led blindly into dangerous pursuits.
She is trying out exciting sports she has spent a lifetime wanting to try.
Her choice.
Her decision.
She saw your father's death so soon after retirement as a kind of dire warning: that she must live her own life to the full.
What interests me is why you are so determined to find a scapegoat for your own inner fears.’
‘That's not true!’
Twisting her face away from that steady regard, she stared unseeingly into the hot blue distance, glad of her hat to pull over her eyes.
Was it, though? she wondered abruptly.
She'd had no intention of getting drawn into this tortuous emotional maze again.
But was this some kind of hangover from that early separation experience?
Had it left her short on trust, and overlong on anxiety?
Shouldn't she just accept that her feelings about her mother's lifestyle were irrational, stick to her original plan, keep everything on a cool, semi-formal basis, do the job and go home?
‘Where exactly are we going?’ she asked at last, to switch subjects before Roman could elaborate on his uncomfortable theory, and catch her off guard in the process.
‘To a little fishing inlet, Ghar Lapsi, for a picnic and a swim.
Via the Blue Grotto, which may not be too crowded this morning if we get there early enough.’
‘How long will we be gone?’
Roman shrugged, his lips twitching.
‘Most of the day.
Did you have something else planned, Caroline?’
A sinking feeling was reaching her abdomen.
Why was the prospect of a prolonged sail in this idyllic area so daunting?
‘I thought we were just going out for a couple of hours!’ she protested hotly.
‘What if I don't want to have a picnic at…at Ghar Lapsi and visit the Blue Grotto?’
‘Then you are unfortunately in the company of someone who does,’ Roman drawled unrepentantly.
‘If you don't make more effort to be civil, I may regret fishing you from the sea on your arrival.
My poison-tongued mermaid is certainly living up to her name!’
‘If I'm a poison-tongued mermaid, you're the original caveman !’ she informed him angrily.
‘Throwing your weight about!
Pouncing on me in your car, grabbing me in your office, practically kidnapping me today!’
Roman gave a shout of laughter, and she glared at him, mortified.
‘If I am a caveman, perhaps I am influenced by these islands’ proliferation of caves?’he suggested, grinning.
‘We have a dazzling selection to choose from.’
‘How interesting…’
Her scathing sarcasm was ignored.
‘Let me see, we have caves where an apostle of Christ was shipwrecked, caves where numerous island virgins entered, never to return, caves where the nymph Calypso seduced Homer's hero Ulysses on his return to Ithaca from the Trojan War.
And a cave we shall pass on our trip today, high in the cliffs on the southernmost point — Ghar Hasan.
A cave surrounded by myth and folklore.’
His smile deepened as he glanced over his shoulder at her.
‘Mathilde Bencini, my parents’ housekeeper, used to tell lurid stories about that one.
As a small child I used to dream about it so vividly, I believed it was real.
Whenever we went there, Salvo and I expected Hasan's ghost to leap out of the darkness and slit our throats with his dagger.
Even though we knew it was little girls he'd be after, not little boys…’
‘What on earth did she tell you?’
The question was torn from her.
In spite of herself, she found the image of Roman and his brother as small boys, full of wild imaginings, extraordinarily irresistible.
‘What I strongly suspect —’ Roman had strolled back to join her in the cockpit, stretching long, hair-coarsened dark legs unnervingly close to her own slender golden thighs ‘— is that Mathilde embroidered the local myths to suit herself!
The story goes that Ghar Hasan was used by a Saracen, over eight hundred years ago, as a hiding place, to avoid expulsion.
Unfortunately, his favourite pastime was kidnapping innocent virgins, holding them prisoner in his cave while he presumably had his wicked way with them, and then lowering them sixty metres down to waiting boats to be sold into slavery…’
‘Hold on — eight hundred years ago…’
Caroline did a rapid mental calculation, frowning at the rugged coastline as they skirted the eastern tip of the island.
‘Is that before or after the Knights of St John took over?’
‘Before.
Maltese history is complex.
We've had more invading rulers than we can remember!
The Knights came in 1530 and left in 1798.
Their eight-pointed cross still flies over Grand Harbour.
The warrior monks, they were known as.
They were aristocrats who traded their healing vocation for fearsome fighting skills to defend the islands from the invading Turks.
Before that, the Maltese islands were mortgaged by Spain for thirty thousand gold florins to a Sicilian Viceroy.
But the sinister Saracen lurking in the darkness of Ghar Hasan was reputed to live in 1120 — around the time of the Christian Count Roger of Normandy.’
‘So what happened to the sinister Saracen?’
‘Mathilde's story was that Hasan made the fatal mistake of falling in love with one of the kidnapped virgins.
She induced him to make love to her, and with his normal wits dulled by romantic infatuation she seized his dagger during their lovemaking, and stabbed him.’
‘Neat work,’ Caroline commented drily.
‘Sadly, it ended in tragedy.
In the dark, panic-stricken by what she'd done, she ran down the wrong passage, towards the sea instead of towards the land, slipped and fell to her death on the rocks below.’
‘Oh!
There's no justice in this world!’
Roman laughed.
From beneath the brim of her hat, she watched that devastating transformation of his face, creased in genuine amusement, and felt her stomach tighten in reaction.
‘Is that it?’
‘Mathilde used to tell us that whenever the moon was full, at dead of night, the fatal scenario was re-enacted…’
‘Ghosts ?’ she echoed, smiling in spite of herself.
‘And you believed her?’
‘We were very small boys!’
Roman was solemn, in mock-protest.
‘And Mathilde was a talented story-teller.’
‘She sounds an absolute ghoul!’
‘She'd tell us these tales on a dark December night, around the fire in the kitchen.
She was an encyclopaedia of superstitions and proverbs.
The best bit of Mathilde's Ghar Hasan story is her version of what befell the daughter of family friends.’
Roman paused.
Infuriated, she forgot herself sufficiently to reach out and prod his knee.
The feel of his warm flesh under her finger gave her such an odd surge of panic that she retracted her hand as if she'd been burnt.
The twist of the wide mouth indicated that he hadn't missed the reaction.
‘Go on, what happened to the daughter of family friends?’ she prompted, blushing slightly, and pulling herself a little further away from his male shape.
‘Look up at those cliffs now,’ he murmured, pointing a casual finger towards the towering limestone rocks on their right, with the waves breaking in plumes of white spray at their base.
‘The cave is up there.
You get to it from the cliff-top.’
She squinted against the sun, shielding her eyes with her hand.
‘I can't see any cave!’
‘It's hard to make out from down here.’
‘So…?
This family friend of Mathilde's…?’
‘Ah, yes.
This goes back a generation, to when Maltese marriage customs were very strictly observed.
And it brings us back to the Mnarja , at the Buskett Gardens.
When a girl was a marriageable age, her father advertised this by placing a pot of sweet basil on the windowsill of his house; the young man interested in finding himself a bride would send a matchmaker to her parents, as guarantors of his good character.
Once a deal was struck between matchmaker and the parents, the girl had to stay at home until her marriage.
The girl in Mathilde's story was named Louisa, and she was engaged to a very jealous man named Antonio.
Louisa, however, was also a jealous and very rebellious young lady.
She'd fallen in love with Antonio at first sight, but didn't trust his fidelity as a future husband.
She knew he was going to the Mnarja festival at Buskett, and she saw no reason why the betrothal customs should stop her from going too.
She crept out of her house, and made her way to the festa .
She met another man she knew and was dancing with him when Antonio discovered her, whereupon he was heard by onlookers to curse the moon for trusting in his fiancée's purity.
In Maltese folklore, cursing the moon is invariably ill-advised.
Sure enough, a tragedy of supernatural strangeness followed.
The couple vanished, only to be found weeks later in Ghar Hasan.’
‘Dead?’
‘Very dead.’
‘So if you curse the moon, the spirit of Hasan reappears and bumps you off!’
‘That's the gist of it.
Or Mathilde's version, at least.’
‘Talk about tall stories!
That's the most unlikely tale I've ever heard!’
‘Isn't it just?
Mathilde was a very moral lady.
I suspect it was a cautionary tale.
To emphasise the need for trust between lovers.’
Roman's tone was bland.
‘We'll pull closer to the shore now, and drop anchor.
The Blue Grotto is over there.’
An hour later, supine on the warm deck of the yacht, Caroline flipped a lazy arm over her forehead and tried to focus on her watch.
They'd taken the motorised dinghy across to explore the fairy-tale clarity of the water in the natural sea caves of the Blue Grotto, then on Roman's orders had spurned the small cove he'd mentioned as too crowded, and returned to take the yacht further out to sea, choosing a peaceful place to drop anchor and eat the picnic he'd stowed away as a surprise…
There, she had been feeling chaotically confused by her mounting enjoyment of the outing, but fatally seduced by Roman's excellent company, and the warmth and luxury and sheer hedonism of it all.
She'd drunk chilled champagne, eaten delectable local cheese, crusty bread, fresh prawns and quiche closely resembling quiche Lorraine, followed by honey and sesame cakes, and small, juicy Maltese strawberries.
They'd talked, in a lazy, desultory fashion, about so many things that she'd lost track.
They'd even discovered the unlikeliest things in common— a liking for potted shrimps and piano concertos, an aversion to veal and Wagner.
A preference for long walks and tennis over jogging or weight training.
She now felt so dangerously soporific that even the sneaking fear of Roman's insidious effect on her couldn't rouse her from this lovely torpor…
Maybe it was because today so closely mirrored that subconscious yearning for escape she'd experienced, gazing at the yachts outside Roman's office, that she felt slightly disorientated.
But here she was, floating on the calm blue sea, with Malta's rocky cliffs to the north, and Africa two hundred and thirty kilometres to the south, revelling in Roman's wry, amusing conversation, mentally relishing the folk-tales, the fictional fate of Antonio and Louisa, and revisualising the images of the luminous sponge and coral on the bed of the Blue Grotto, feeling as if someone had waved a magic wand, wafted her to a place of her heart's desire…
Or perhaps it was the champagne, said a more prosaic voice, mere alcohol exerting its potent spell on her prickly defences…
‘This is the first time I've seen you look relaxed,’ Roman commented softly.
He was propped on one elbow beside her, the width of the picnic hamper giving her an illusion of safety from too close an intimacy.
‘Do you  want any more champagne?’
‘I'd better not.
I want to swim soon.’
‘Not for a while,’ he warned with a half-smile.
‘Sailing must have given you an appetite.
This water is deep…’
‘And you don't want another live-saving episode?’
‘That's right.
Unlike a fish, you're not at your best freshly hooked from the sea…’
She lifted one eyelid to gauge his expression.
The picnic hamper had been stacked quietly and moved aside.
Roman's long dark body, all steely muscle and sinew and disturbing whorls of black hair, was uncomfortably close to her own paler limbs.
Wariness began to snake through her, from her stomach to her solar plexus, somehow interfering with her breathing.
‘Hardly surprising, is it?’ she countered lightly, determined to disguise her apprehension.
‘Few people are at their best bedraggled and half-drowned!’
‘Bedraggled?
I wouldn't say that.
The mermaid look quite suited you,’ he teased quietly.
‘Your temper seemed worst affected.
I've yet to work out why you were quite so angry with me just for hauling you out of the water, Caroline.’
Warmth was creeping across the surface of her skin, unrelated to the heat of the sun.
There was a disturbingly caressing note in the deep voice which made the perfectly respectable yellow fabric of her swimsuit feel transparent.
‘I didn't much care for finding myself topless in a strange boat with a strange man!’ she supplied succinctly, lifting her arms involuntarily to cover her breasts.
A firm hand caught hold of her left arm, drew it away from the female curve of her body.
Beneath the brim of her hat, her eyes flew open in alarm.
‘Don't panic again,’ he grinned, flattening her lower arm back on the deck at right angles to her elbow, catching her other arm as she lifted it in protest, and pushing it flat on her other side.
He'd flipped off the Ray-Bans, and the gold-flecked gaze was narrowed speculatively on the fluttering pulse at her throat, on the rapid rise and fall of her breasts as she strove to catch her breath.
‘I am only curious to find out why kissing you ignites such a conflagration inside us both…’
With an economical movement, he scooped both her wrists into one hand, leaving his other hand free to flick off her hat, and twist her face round.
Helpless in her pinioned position, she opened her mouth to make a cutting retort and met Roman's questing finger, slowly outlining her mouth, feathering indescribable sensations over the surface of her skin, then sliding between her lips and parting them with such lazy insistence that a shiver of reaction made her tremble all over.
Inexplicably her thighs felt boneless, her stomach hollow with a longing she'd never encountered…
‘Roman, I don't want —’
The bemused, husky whisper was cut off as he lightly pressed his finger to her lips, effectively blocking speech, taking expert advantage of her parted lips by gently forcing them wider with his finger before bending his head and covering her open mouth with his.
His lips traced the curves his finger had explored, and then he delved sensuously deeper, his tongue finding hers and abruptly intensifying the embrace, as if the intimacy of their tongues together had driven any intentions of reserve and restraint from his mind…
And somehow all her own reservations and objections seemed to evaporate at the same time.
A pulse of desire rushed through her bloodstream without warning, ricocheting through her senses like an inner explosion.
‘Caroline …’
His voice was thick and hoarse against her lips, and as she found her body instinctively straining towards him he ran a slightly shaking hand down over her shoulder to caress the jut of her breasts beneath the clinging yellow Lycra.
The caress made her cry out involuntarily.
He released her hands, and pinned her instead with one hard leg as he drew down the straps of her swimsuit, uncovering her full high breasts to his view.
Even before he touched the exposed flesh, she could feel her nipples tingling, tightening to aching points, thrusting proud and carmine under the caressing gaze.
‘Sabiha ,’ he breathed huskily.
‘You are beautiful, Caroline…’
‘No…’
She barely mouthed the word, but already, as if she was possessed by something beyond her control, her hands were reaching up to touch the black curl of his hair, agonisingly shy as she felt the clean, silky texture beneath her fingers.
When he dropped his head to circle each nipple with his tongue she gasped, convulsively tightening her fingers around his head, sensations almost like pain coursing through her whole body.
With his teeth teasing her nipples she was driven beyond argument as he skilfully peeled the costume lower, easing the material over the curve of her hips until the soft triangle of golden curls was unveiled at the junction of stomach and thighs.
Feeling the warm stroke of his fingers, she belatedly tensed in breathless protest.
From the far recesses of consciousness she was aware that things were moving too fast, much, much too fast…
‘Roman , this is wrong…
I…’
The whispered words were forced back down her throat as he moved up to bury his hard mouth on hers, the devouring urgency annihilating her sequence of thought.
With a shudder, she tightened her arms around the wide strength of his shoulders as he trailed small, teasing kisses from her lips, along her jawline, and up into the spread curtain of her hair.
With her hot face crushed blindly against the warm scent of his chest she felt the lean hand explore the silken plane of her stomach, slip with masculine sureness to separate her thighs.
Her breath caught in her throat.
Flashes of colour exploded in her head behind tightly shut eyelids as the expert stroke of his fingers moved boldly lower to seek and investigate, with utmost sensitivity, the small nub of femininity between the soft golden curls, and then hungrily on down into the moist, secret tightness below…
‘Irridek ,’ he breathed, lifting his head to stare into her stunned face with blackly dilated eyes.
‘I want you.
More than I have wanted a woman for a very long time…’
‘Roman, please…’
She had no idea what she meant.
Her own voice sounded totally unlike her own, her mouth dry, her throat thick and choked with emotion.
He was exerting ruthless self-control, she dimly registered, her cheeks burning as she dared a quick inspection of his body, saw the hard male evidence of his arousal taut and infinitely alarming beneath the black swimming-trunks.
‘You feel it too,’ he said hoarsely.
‘I can feel you want me, Caroline.’
With devastating confidence, he thrust his finger deep into her molten heat, then raked his fingers back up across her stomach to her breasts with a convulsive, possessive, shuddering movement which triggered a huge surge of longing inside her, so strong she felt dizzy.
‘I don't know what I feel!’
She could hardly speak; she was drowning, sinking under the suffocating weight of desire.
Her voice was small and shaky, tight with emotion.
‘This…this might be a regular diversion for you, but it's new to me…’
There was an infinitesimal silence as her words reached him, sank in.
Levering himself up to sit back on his heels and pulling her easily with him, he lifted her on to his lap, so that she found herself straddling him, her naked breasts pressed against the sensuous roughness of his chest, with only thin swimming costumes protecting her from ultimate intimacy.
She was trembling all over, in the grip of a convulsive spasm which was exhilarating but terrifying…
‘Are you saying what I think you are saying, Caroline?’ he croaked thickly, his lidded gaze devastatingly sensual, a trace of incredulity lurking somewhere at the back of his eyes.
‘That you are a virgin ?’
Abruptly, the sensual haze holding her in its spell was shattered.
Agonised shyness rushed back to take its place.
Stiffly, she tried to wriggle free of his arms, but he held her against him, restraining her until she stopped writhing.
‘Caroline.’
His rueful laugh was rougher, his voice raggedly deeper against her hair.
‘Unless you wish to initiate yourself into the ultimate joys of sex right now, be still.
These frantic struggles are very…inflammatory.’
She froze, aware of her heart pounding, with a deeper, slower echo of his, where their bodies were pressed together.
Slowly, carefully, he pushed her away from him, flicking his lazy dark eyes over her nakedness before reaching to pull her swimsuit back up again, smoothing it over her body with a practised skill which left her weak at the knees all over again.
She felt as if the scarlet patches must be permanently painted on her cheeks.
‘Why should you assume that I'm a virgin?’ she finally managed to say, twisting away to grapple inwardly for composure.
She felt as if she'd just escaped a raging tornado, flung to one side just in time.
‘I've had plenty of relationships back in England,’ she went on doggedly, salvaging her pride as best she could.
‘When…when I said this was new to me, I meant I'm hardly in the habit of sexual intimacy on such…such short acquaintance!’
‘I see.’
Roman sounded as if he too was battling for restraint, as well as controlling a degree of amusement, which made her fists clench in despair.
‘That would make more sense, would it not?
For a young lady from London, an independent career woman, to be still a virgin, at the age of twenty-four, would be hard to believe.
Nearly as unlikely as Mathilde's tales of Ghar Hasan,le ?’
‘Yes,’ she countered abruptly, hugging her arms round herself, wishing she could sprout wings and fly somewhere private to live down her intense humiliation.
‘I need a swim,’ he said with a rueful grin, levering himself upright and glancing down at her with a look which sent her senses spinning into chaos again.
He held out his hand, and caught hers, hauling her up beside him.
‘So do you.’
‘Yes…so do I.’ She murmured agreement for want of anything more constructive to say.
Numbly, she followed him to the ladder at the back of the yacht, then watched as he ignored it and dived powerfully into the indigo water, his body slicing cleanly with hardly a splash before he struck out with a strong, fast crawl towards the far distant shore.
Feeling less athletic, in fact weak and drained all over, she lowered herself slowly into the cool water.
Did she need a swim?
The disconcerting truth was that, unless it was a brain scan to determine what in the world had possessed her to behave the way she had just now, she had no idea at all what she needed…
CHAPTER FIVE
‘To make telephone calls —’ Roman's deep, sardonic voice made Caroline jump violently ‘— you dial a number.’
Idiotically she stared at the receiver in her hands and then dropped it back on its hook.
‘Sorry, I was miles away.’
‘I could see that.’
In the cramped confines of her office, which was white-painted, plantless, lined with black filing cabinets and overlooking a rather uninspiring car park at the rear, Roman looked overwhelmingly large, lean and muscular.
He'd just come in from a trip with a customer on one of the yachts.
Caroline could smell the tang of the sea on his loose black T-shirt and khaki Bermuda shorts.
Just propped lazily against the edge of her desk, long brown legs crossed at the ankles, watching her with that cool, speculative expression in his eyes, he had the ability to make her insides seize up.
‘Are you OK, working in this little rabbit hutch?’
‘Of course.
No problem.’
She kept her tone formal.
He bent to study her face more closely, his eyes taunting.
‘Stephanie could have found you somewhere more inspiring to work.
What were you lost in thought about, Caroline?’
‘I…’
Hectically she scrabbled for something constructive to say.
‘I've been thinking about how to maximise your display at the business fair.
I thought perhaps a video?
Of your showrooms, offices, your team, fitting equipment and so on?’
‘Great.’
He sounded relatively uninterested.
‘A friend of mine has a video company; I'll give you his number…’
The office door opened to admit Stephanie, with a cup of coffee for Roman.
With one of her smallest smiles she glanced at Caroline as if affecting surprise to see her there.
‘Would you like coffee too, Signorina Hastings?’
‘Thank you.
That would be lovely…’
Caroline tried a cool smile but the girl turned abruptly and disappeared, and Caroline bit her lip with a rueful stab of defeat.
Try as she might, her working relationship with Stephanie Marsa was strained to say the least.
Roman was gazing after his secretary with a thoughtful air, then he turned back to Caroline.
‘Is everything all right between you two?’ he queried abruptly.
‘Stephanie is being co-operative?’
‘Oh, yes, she's fine.’
She hesitated, winding the coils of the telephone wire around her finger, adding with a frosty note of sarcasm, ‘At least, no, that's not true.
To be frank…
I think perhaps Stephanie believes me to be a…a rival for your affections?’
‘A rival for my affections…?’
Roman's crack of laughter was far from flattering.
In mounting anger she glared up at the taunting dark face, wondering how she could ever have thought his laughter attractive.
He was mocking, ruthlessly so.
And she loathed him, intensely…
‘I said that she believed it,’ she persisted furiously.
‘I didn't say I was!’
She stood up suddenly, overcome by claustrophobia.
She couldn't stay in the small office with Roman's lazy, taunting presence.
A glance at her watch gave her the perfect excuse to leave immediately…
‘I'm sorry,’ she began tightly, ‘I have to go.
My mother is leaving tonight.
I promised I'd be back to say goodbye.
I'd no idea how late it was.’
‘I'll take you across in the launch,’ he said easily, standing up too.
‘Don't bother.
I can catch the bus.’
‘The bus takes ten times as long.
And it's no bother.
I'd like to see your mother before she goes.’
Mutinously she followed him out.
Short of making an embarrassing scene, she hadn't much option.
Besides, he was right.
She'd never make it if she tried to go by bus.
‘We need to talk.’
He shot her an enigmatic glance as she stepped on board the powerful speed-launch, scene of the dramatic rescue that first night.
‘Do we?
What about?’
‘About what happened on the yacht the other day.’
‘Why do we need to talk about that?’
Her voice was icy.
‘It was a little too hot to ignore, don't you think?’
‘I thought we'd both done an extremely good job of ignoring it!’ she retorted haughtily, willing her heartbeat to stop its idiotic racing.
Since that afternoon two days ago they'd treated each other with a cool formality, a style initiated by Roman on the return trip from the Blue Grotto, when he'd seemed to withdraw into a kind of amused reserve, as if he'd tested her out in some way and now lost interest in the original conquest.
In their dealings in the office they'd worked well together, achieved an excellent rapport regarding the PR for the business fair, but somehow he'd been the model of teasing aloofness, apparently with more time for Stephanie Marsa than for Caroline.
And the most humiliating thing of all was how much she cared …
‘It was just an…interlude,’ she finished, in a shaky voice.
‘An interlude?’
He repeated the word as if giving it due consideration.
The deep voice held a hint of buried laughter, as always.
‘Is that what it was?
Do you enjoy many such interludes in the course of your working life, Caroline?’
‘Oh, naturally!’
She was stung into acid defiance.
‘I throw myself half-naked at all my clients!’
The engine roared throatily into life.
She went to sit stiffly in the stern as they nosed cautiously out through the ranks of yachts, and then through the litter of fishing-boats, the bright Phoenician ‘Eye of Osiris’ painted on their bows, superstitiously warding off evil.
The breeze tugged at her hair, pulled it loose from its bun.
She dug in her shoulder-bag for dark glasses and retreated behind them, staring in some awe at the magnificent medieval jumble of forts and palaces and strongholds that comprised this stretch of coastline.
‘About Stephanie…’
Roman seemed to be taking his time over the comparatively short trip, lowering the throttle so that they chugged sedately.
‘She has worked for me for a long time.
It's possible she may have developed ideas which…don't necessarily tie in with mine.’
I'll bet, she thought caustically.
No doubt Stephanie wasn't alone in developing ‘ideas’ about the notorious Count de Sciorto…
‘You're saying you've never given the poor girl a scrap of encouragement?’ she mocked scornfully.
‘Dinner, after we've both worked late.
Treats like lunch with your mother at the weekend.’
Roman sounded irritatingly casual.
‘But nothing more.’
‘So, when I happened to see you in a clinch in your office, you're telling me she'd lost her balance?’
Roman laughed abruptly.
‘She did.’
‘Very convincing!’
‘What do I have to do to convince you?’
‘You're wasting your time…’
She was practically trembling with outrage.
Did he honestly expect her to believe him?
‘What happened between us the other day, after our picnic —’ his deep voice was suddenly slow and compelling as he steered the boat slowly towards the busy quay at Kalkara ‘— that seemed…special.
Special enough to take a stage further.
Are you telling me I'm wasting my time trying to get through this mental barrier of yours?’
‘Stop it!’ she hissed, engulfed by a shameful heat as his soft words stirred unwelcome emotions.
‘This isn't fair!
I'm here to organise your public relations campaign, as requested.
I'm here on business, nothing more.
I'm not interested in your cheap little seductions, Roman!
Can't you understand that?’
He cut the engine, regarding her levelly down the length of the boat.
The wide mouth twisted wryly.
‘If you didn't light up like a firework on festa night whenever I touch you, I could understand.’
His voice held a caressing note which flipped her heart over in her chest.
‘Let's call a truce.
Give things a chance?’
‘You just don't give up, do you?’ she fired back, outraged.
‘Give things a chance?
For what?
To get me into bed?
To get what you want, so you can chalk up another victory?’
‘You talk as if desire were one-sided,’ he countered softly, ‘as if it is only I who wants you.
Are you always so dishonest about your female needs, Caroline?’
‘Don't you dare presume to tell me what I need !’ she spat, trembling as she began to clamber on to the quayside.
He followed her with an easy stride, blocked her escape, looming very tall and dark above her.
‘I don't think you know yourself,’ he teased gently, his eyes on the curve of her lips as they trembled with intense emotion.
‘You talk with all the…the typical arrogance of the male!’ she countered in a choked voice.
‘as if sex were the same for men and women!’
‘I am thirty-two years old,’ he chided mockingly.
‘Old enough, I think, to know that it is not.’
‘Leave me alone, Roman…’
‘But I did leave you alone.’
His voice was husky, a deep soft growl in his throat.
‘On board the yacht, after our picnic, I could have taken you, right then.
And not by force,sabiha tieghi .
You were mine for the taking…’
‘No!’
Red lights seemed to explode inside her head at the outrageous arrogance of his words.
Her hand shot up, lashed out at him, and this time she made contact.
Her fingers caught his cheek with a stinging blow.
As she dropped her hand, a dark red patch began to emerge against the tan of his skin.
He didn't move.
For a long moment they stood facing each other.
She was breathing quickly, as if from physical exertion.
Roman's eyes had narrowed to dark, shuttered slits as he watched her.
She sensed the suppressed rage in him, stepped back instinctively…
‘Hi, you two!’
Susan Hastings appeared, smiling, beside them, glancing from one to the other with a slight tilt of her eyebrows.
‘How lovely — have you both come to see me off?’
Her mother must have been watching the quayside from her terrace, Caroline realised with a jolt.
How much had she seen?
Roman had bent to kiss her mother's cheek, smiling at the older woman with a warmth Caroline rarely saw him use.
‘We have.
You're sure I can't drive you to the airport?’
‘No, Gwen's terribly organised.
She booked a mini-cab about a month ago!
In fact, you've just caught me.
She rang to say they'll be here in about twenty minutes.
Come in and have a drink while we're waiting!’
On the first-floor terrace they sat at the round table while Roman did the honours with gin and tonics.
‘Not that I'm nervous about flying, but a quick gin and tonic always goes down rather well!’
Susan smiled.
Caroline took hers in silence.
She was feeling impossibly tense and edgy.
‘It's dreadful of me, dashing off and leaving you all alone!’ her mother was saying.
‘Caroline will be well taken care of.
She is coming to Casa Sciorto tomorrow evening.’
Roman casually leaned back in his chair and sipped his drink with relish.
‘A family gathering.
It is Christian's first birthday…’
‘Anneliese's son?’
Her mother beamed in delight.
‘Then it will be Il-Quccija ?’
Roman nodded, smiling.
‘Il — what?’
Caroline felt compelled to ask.
‘And who is Anneliese?’
For the first time since they'd come into the house, Roman turned his dark gaze directly on to her.
A small shiver of apprehension feathered her spine.
Despite his calm composure she suddenly had the feeling that the fierce slap was far from forgiven…
‘Anneliese is my sister.
Il-Quccija is an old Maltese custom — a party on a child's first birthday.’
‘The child's choice of various items offered is supposed to indicate his future career,’ Susan added, filling out Roman's short, cool explanation.
‘Something else I shall miss by going on this dratted tour with Gwen!’
‘Never mind.
It will be Salvo's new baby's first birthday in a year's time,’ Roman pointed out humorously.
‘Put the date in your diary.’
A car horn sounded from below.
Her mother sprang up.
‘That's the cab.
I'm off.
Oh, and Caroline, if you're going to the party, make sure you stay the night at Casa Sciorto.
Roman won't mind.
You're welcome to borrow my car while I'm away, but I don't relish the thought of you driving yourself all that way back alone late on a Saturday night!’
‘Mother !’
Caroline's protest was waved aside as her mother prepared to leave, with Roman carrying her suitcases downstairs.
‘Naturally she will stay the night,’ he murmured, a laughing note in his voice as they waved her mother into the mini-cab to join her waiting friend.
‘Goodbye, Roman.
Bye, darling.
Enjoy the party, and the Mnarja !’
When she was gone, Caroline turned slowly back into the house, seething so much with frustrated anger that she was speechless.
Wordlessly Roman followed her back to the terrace, where their half-finished drinks stood on the table.
‘It seems to me,’ Roman broke the silence at last, his tone coolly amused, ‘that the anxiety between you and your mother is mutual!’
‘Quite likely.
Except that on her part it's totally unnecessary!’
‘On the contrary, Susan speaks from experience.
Kalkara is still quaint in many ways, but as a residential area it is mixed.
It is perhaps not the ideal place for a beautiful blonde to return late on a Saturday night.’
‘Don't talk such chauvinist rubbish…!’
‘Nor are the roads between here and Mdina any place for a young woman alone.’
‘So what do you suggest I do?
Barricade myself in at dusk each evening?’
‘Unnecessary.
I shall fulfil your mother's expectations, Caroline, and volunteer my services as your escort…’
‘I don't want your damn services as escort!’ she blazed at him, so angry that she could have hit him again.
With an abrupt muttered curse under his breath Roman came around to pull her up into his arms, subduing her struggles with iron strength.
Slammed against his body, Caroline barely had time to catch her breath in a choked gasp before he bent to cover her mouth, his kiss so fiercely unexpected that her head fell back.
She clung involuntarily to his powerful shoulders.
‘Never, in my life,’ he murmured distractedly, leaving her mouth for a few seconds to hungrily kiss her cheekbone, her temple, to lightly nip the lobe of her ear, ‘have I met a woman so obstinate, so pigheaded…’
‘Flattery will get you nowhere,’ she managed to quip, her anger diffusing into the familiar shadows of response.
‘I don't trust you, Roman!
I don't care how cleverly you've conned my mother…’
‘You are determined to think the worst of me?’ he demanded, his wry voice a fraction unsteady as he ran his hands hungrily down her back, crushing her softness against his hard body.
‘To believe that I am reckless, immoral, unprincipled?
What else?
Do I smuggle contraband goods?
Do I maybe deal in some modern equivalent of white-slave trading?’
She struggled in his arms, her throat drying.
The heat was smouldering between their bodies to an almost unbearable degree.
Goaded, she burst out, ‘I told you, I don't trust you!
How the hell should I know how the noble Count de Sciorto chooses to amuse himself?’
‘I could demonstrate, right now,’ he grated.
The flare of anger suddenly transformed his face.
His fingers gripped her shoulders cruelly.
Warning signals were trembling through her; her stomach was convulsed with a mixture of desire and apprehension.
‘Roman, please, don't…’
The air passages deep in her throat seemed to be blocked; her voice was a croak of fear.
The atmosphere seemed to vibrate with tension.
He sensed her fear, read it in her eyes.
With an abruptness which left her staggering, he let her go, his dark face incredulous.
‘You really think I would hurt you?’ he demanded softly, his eyes narrowed on her tense expression.
‘Caroline?’
‘I…
I'm not sure…’
She swung away, hugged her arms round herself, suddenly cold in spite of the warmth of the evening.
The air was heavy, fragrant with scents from the sea and the hills.
But she was shaking all over, shivering as if it were a winter's night.
After an endless pause, Roman swung away to drain the remainder of his gin and tonic, snapping the glass back on the table with a decisive click.
‘I must go,’ he said coolly, moving towards the door.
When she risked a glance at him his gaze held that patrician mockery, the scathing expression she remembered from their first meeting.
For some inexplicable reason her spirits seemed to plummet earthwards.
What did she want, for the love of heaven?
To be pressurised into some kind of sexual surrender?
Or to be despised as someone hardly worth bothering with?
Did the choice of alternatives have to be so narrow, so dramatic?
She wasn't sure who was causing the dramas — herself, or Roman?
‘Tomorrow is Saturday.
I'll be at the office part of the day, but I don't expect you to be there.’
His tone was dismissive.
With a jolt of self-knowledge Caroline registered the same feeling of dismay as at that cool withdrawal after their picnic.
He was switching off from her again, and for some utterly incomprehensible reason her heart was tightening in protest.
‘Take the day off,’ he was adding calmly, ‘go shopping, sunbathing, swimming, whatever you like.’
‘Thank you.’
Her sweetly ironic tone seemed lost on him.
‘Will you be all right, here alone tonight?’ he queried curtly.
‘Yes, of course!
Back in England I live alone in fairly central London!’ she pointed out, with a tremor of impatience in her voice.
‘I won't come to any harm on this friendly little island.’
‘In London, you are a native.
Streetwise, used to London ways.
Here, you are a foreigner, therefore more vulnerable.
I'll be at my flat in Valletta tonight.’
He spoke flatly.
‘My number is by the telephone if you get into any trouble.’
‘I bet you I could put on my tightest dress, my highest heels, and walk the streets of Valletta all night without getting into any trouble!’
She couldn't think what had made her blurt out the goading words.
His face tightened.
His stare was suddenly gaunt, as he searched her white face.
‘Steer clear of Strait Steet,’ he advised wryly, turning away, ‘otherwise you may be wrong.
Goodnight, Caroline.’
‘Goodnight…’
She listened to his footsteps going lightly down the stairs, heard the front door slamming below.
After a short while she saw him emerge on to the quayside, a tall, lean man with the kind of rangy, loose-limbed walk which drew admiring glances from any female within range.
Hands still clenched into defensive fists, she watched him jump lithely on board the launch, fire the engine, manoeuvre expertly out into the creek.
Frozen to the spot at her vantage-point on the terrace, she braced herself to meet his backward glance as he disappeared, but he didn't once look back.
It wasn't until the launch had vanished around the tip of Vittoriosa, and the soaring golden bulk of Fort St Angelo, that she realised he hadn't told her what time he expected her at Casa Sciorto tomorrow evening.
Good, she told herself fiercely, swinging away from the view and collecting the glasses to take them into the kitchen.
Maybe that meant he'd changed his mind; he didn't want her there after all.
Wasn't that exactly what she wanted?
Roman's ancient family home, the walled medieval hill town of Mdina, the ‘Silent City’— it might sound wildly romantic, but she could live without it.
The sooner the business fair was over and she could fly back to London, the better she'd sleep at nights…
Lying in bed later, after a solitary supper of chicken salad and almond flan, and a defiant but remarkably uneventful evening stroll alone along the quayside, sleep frustratingly eluded her, as if to prove her point.
Flinging over in bed for the hundredth time, she tried to ignore the subtle, spreading ache in her stomach whenever she thought about Roman's last hungrily demanding kiss…
Despairingly she moved her hands along the slender curves of her body, naked between the sheets.
The surface of her skin felt acutely sensitised, as if someone had mysteriously switched her own body for another.
Her breasts were tight and tender, her nipples shivery and taut.
A flood of heat engulfed her, and she bit her lip, curling on to her side and pressing her hands to her hot face.
She felt hopelessly confused.
He infuriated her, didn't he?
And he frightened her.
She disliked the wretched man so intensely that she didn't care if she never had to see him again.
She didn't trust him.
For all she knew, he could be a white-slave trader…the more she thought about the possibility, the more distinctly possible it became…
Hot and angry, she tossed in bed again, suppressing such nonsensical flights of fancy.
But the more she thought about his arrogant assumptions, his conceited certainty that she was his for the taking, the more she bristled with indignation…
An irrational thought crept into her mind, the kind of thought that only reared its ugly head in the tortured small hours of the morning.
What if she could uncover some evidence that he wasn't the paragon of virtue her mother blindly worshipped?
Flipping on to her back, she stared at the dark ceiling, listening to the faint night-time sounds from the creek, the far-off slap of water against the bows of the fishing-boats moored below.
If she did a little surreptitious investigating, and discovered something…
Nothing criminal , of course; even in her present slightly illogical and decidedly vengeful frame of mind she didn't seriously suspect Count Romano de Sciorto of criminal activity.
But to confront him, after those sardonic taunts, with some justification for her fears…what was it people used to say?
Don't get mad, get even?
She closed her eyes, exhaustion suddenly washing over her.
She didn't know how she felt.
She was wound up, jumbled inside like a spilled jigsaw puzzle.
All she knew was that, unlike Cinderella, she did not want to go to Roman's ball…
And, that being the case, she supposed she just had to hope that, having been insulted so thoroughly, Count Romano de Sciorto would renege on his promise to Mother, and strike her off his guest-list for the whole duration of her stay in Malta…
CHAPTER SIX
The market in Valletta was crowded.
Strolling alone between the tall old buildings in Merchants Street, through the Saturday morning throngs, cool and comfortable in white sundress and dark glasses, Caroline reflected with a stab of surprise that she was really enjoying herself.
What was it about shopping, she wondered wryly, that was so therapeutic?
Her sleepless, restless night seemed a long way off.
She'd driven into Valletta early after a quick breakfast of warm honey rolls and coffee and a phone call to London to Angie, her loyal secretary-PA, to check on things in the office.
She'd triumphantly managed to negotiate the traffic to park in Palace Square, then wandered around the shops, glad of her flat tan sandals, with the promise of coffee at one of the shady pavement cafés when she'd tired herself out.
She paused at one of the stalls to inspect some tablecloths, beautifully made in Malta weave and Maltese lace.
She was just shaking one out to admire it when she saw Roman.
He was across the street in the deep, sharp shadow thrown by the high buildings.
Frozen to the spot, she stared at him.
He was standing beneath a house with a painted balcony, bright red geraniums trailing from a terracotta pot on the ledge.
He was gesticulating and laughing, talking to someone.
In baggy collarless cream shirt and hip-hugging chino trousers he looked so overwhelmingly attractive that she couldn't drag her eyes away.
Her pulses were racing, her throat felt tight, just looking at him across a crowded street…
She had a panicky urge to escape before he saw her.
She began bundling the huge tablecloth back on to the market stall.
Her fingers wouldn't obey her.
Somehow the expanse of green and white cloth cascaded from her trembling hands towards the ground, and as she muttered furiously at it under her breath he looked round and saw her.
He gazed calmly for a few seconds before he lifted his hand in greeting.
Behind him, she caught a glimpse of his companion, a girl of roughly her own age, with glossy dark curls and a dimpled smile.
Not Stephanie, she registered automatically, fighting down the lamentable twist of emotion in her stomach.
Another girl caught up in Roman's potent charisma?
‘Bongu , Caroline.’
He'd bent to kiss the girl, warmly, said a laughing farewell, and weaved his way across to her through the crowd, his eyes faintly amused but cool as he assessed her contortions with the unruly material.
‘Are you thinking of buying this?’
The stall-holder wore a long-suffering expression.
Her face was growing hot.
‘No, I just can't get it folded together again.
It seems to have a will of its own…’
He took the unravelling length of fabric from her and expertly refolded it, depositing it back on the stall.
She glared at him resentfully, and then felt slightly ashamed.
Whenever she was in the vicinity of Roman, her manners deserted her.
She bit her lip, found herself returning Roman's quizzical gaze with a rueful, involuntary smile.
‘The least you could do is say thank you,’ he taunted.
‘Thank you,’ she said drily.
‘I'm not sure why, but you invariably seem to bring out the worst in me…’
‘I had noticed.’
There was silence.
By mutual consent they'd begun to walk back towards the centre of the city, in the direction of Republic Square.
They side-stepped to avoid a horse-drawn karozzin , bearing a couple of laughing holidaymakers on a tour of the city.
‘Have you been to the office yet?’ she asked, attempting cool civility.
‘No.
I decided to go diving instead.’
His dark hair still looked slightly damp.
‘Where?’
‘Near Comino.
There are some underwater caves.’
They'd reached the turning into the Square.
Caroline paused, uncertainly.
‘Have you been shopping all morning?’ he enquired, gravely polite.
‘You seem to have enough bags.’
To maintain this fragile truce, she began to relate what she'd bought.
A beautiful silver filigree choker for Penny, a Maltese lace evening shawl for her mother.
Some onyx bookends for Jeremy…
‘Jeremy?’
Glancing up at Roman's face, she felt her heart miss a beat.
There was no flicker of emotion in the dark eyes.
‘A…friend.
Back in London.’
She met his eyes determinedly.
In the sun, the gold flecks made his gaze even harder to read.
‘Just a friend?’
Tensing, she gave a slight shrug.
She and Jeremy had been seeing each other fairly regularly, but he was an investment banker and they were both so hectically involved in their jobs that they'd opted for casual, no-strings dating almost by mutual consent.
‘Boyfriend, then.’
‘Is it a serious relationship?’
The deep voice was deceptively casual.
‘Surely my personal relationships are my own affair,’ she countered lightly.
‘I don't cross-examine you about yours!’
‘Perhaps you should.’
That taunting, dismissive tone must have taken him years to perfect, she thought irritably.
‘I'm not interested.’
She could sense her temper rising again, and strove for calm.
Why did she let him get under her skin like this?
The only way to maintain her defences with him was to stay cool, keep things formal and friendly…
‘I am suitably diminished,’ he mocked with a grin.
‘I had never realised what a deeply uninteresting person I was.’
Now they were at the elegant pavement café beside the library.
The tantalising aroma of fresh coffee wafted towards them, over the buzz of voices and laughter.
Her feet ached, her mouth was parched.
Hesitating, she said lightly, ‘I think I'll stop off here.
I've been promising myself a drink for the last couple of hours…’
‘Do you mind if I join you?’
The request sounded impeccably polite, but tinged with dry sarcasm.
‘No, of course not…’
They sat down beneath the shade of an umbrella, and looked at each other across the table.
Roman's slow smile was infinitely sardonic.
She was grateful for the small privacy of her sunglasses.
‘We are being exceedingly civil to each other this morning,le ?’
‘We are,’ she agreed, expressionlessly.
‘But if you'd like me to be rude, I can assure you you're the last person I wanted to bump into.’
‘Naturally.’
He threw back his head and laughed, signalling for the waiter with an easy confidence which brought an instant response.
‘But I have my uses.
So let me buy you a coffee.’
Watching the departing waiter, he asked casually, ‘Are you sleeping with Jeremy?’
Colour flooded her face.
‘Mind you own damn business!’
It was hopeless, she thought angrily.
Trying to stay calm around Roman was like trying to count grains of sand on a beach…
‘So you're not.’
The dark gaze held her stormy grey eyes, ruthlessly probing.
‘Are you sleeping with…with Stephanie ?’ she demanded bluntly.
‘No.’
Roman's narrowed eyes held a disturbing air of mockery.
She turned away, stared unseeing at the colourful cosmopolitan scene in the sunlit square.
From various tables near by she could hear a handful of languages being spoken: English, Italian, Malti, even Arabic.
She was wrestling with her conscience, she realised abruptly.
Roman, as always, was being arrogant, deliberately provocative.
But, having fallen asleep in militant mood last night, she'd woken up this morning reluctantly aware that she owed him an apology.
It had been her mother's anxious fussing that had triggered the revelation.
It wasn't until her mother had issued those ridiculous and unnecessary warnings over driving alone at night that the idiocy of her own attitude had dawned on her.
Their drinks arrived.
After a reviving sip of coffee, she took a deep breath, flipped off her dark glasses, and fixed him with a level gaze.
‘I really don't care whether you're having sex with Stephanie and…and half a dozen other willing females, all at the same time!
But I do have an apology to make,’ she confessed unsteadily, digging her nails into the palm of her hand in her lap as his eyes narrowed on her face.
‘Go on?’
He spoke very softly.
The long pause which followed weighed heavily in the warm air.
‘I've been wrong…accusing you over my mother's lifestyle.
Blaming you for a…a change in her personality.
I can see now that she has the right to live her own life.
Just as I have the right to live mine…’
She managed a slight, wry smile.
‘The funny side hit me when I woke up this morning.
Me, worrying myself sick over my mother.
And my mother, evidently doing exactly the same over me!
Farcical, isn't it?’
There was another lengthy silence.
‘Full marks for courage,’ he said at last.
‘That must have cost you a great deal, Caroline.’
‘To apologise, you mean?’
‘Precisely.
Pride is your greatest handicap, wouldn't you agree?’
She drank some more coffee.
Her brain, as usual, seemed to have seized up in Roman's overpowering company.
Her emotions felt fragmented…
Roman's gaze was very direct when he finally spoke again.
‘We have only one life, Caroline.
Some of us live that life cautiously, frightened to be ourselves, to be free.
But tomorrow any one of us could be dead.
No one is saying we should take crazy risks.
But today is for living life to the full.
In that respect, my own philosophy of life is exactly the same as your mother's.’
She stared at him, her curiosity spiked, and her heart stirred slightly, in spite of her antagonism towards him.
‘When and why did you arrive at that conclusion?’ she queried quietly.
He was silent for a moment.
‘Ten years ago, someone I knew became ill and died.’
‘So?’ she prompted.
‘I'm not sure I see…’
‘It was a girl of only nineteen.
She happened to be my fiancée.
It made a strong impact.’
She gazed at his dark face, abruptly appalled.
There was no emotion in his shuttered expression.
Impulsively, she reached out and touched his arm, in a quick, unavoidable gesture.
‘Oh, Roman, I'm so sorry.
What…what did she die of?’
‘A very rare form of leukaemia.
It was ten years ago,’ he reminded her wryly, glancing down at his forearm where her hand had briefly brushed.
‘I don't need your pity, Caroline.’
He took a drink of his coffee, with a slight dismissive shrug.
Stung by his cool sarcasm, suddenly acutely embarrassed by her spurned show of emotion, she put her coffee-cup down with a sharp click and started gathering her bags, preparing to leave.
With an easy movement he put out his hand and caught hers, pinning her in her chair.
‘There's no need to flounce off,’ he began with a slight smile, and she stiffened in anger.
‘I'm not flouncing anywhere!’ she said in an icy undertone.
‘I'm just…going!’
‘Where are you going?’ he quizzed mildly.
‘Back to my car, then for a drive.
I'm going…sightseeing, for rest of the day!’
‘Come with me,’ he ordered softly, his amused eyes narrowing to that unnerving lidded appraisal which turned her stomach upside-down.
‘Sightseeing is no fun on your own…’
‘That's a matter of opinion.’
Wrenching her arm free, she grabbed her bags and swung away, marching stiffly back across the square.
Her heart thumping, she was aware that he was following her.
At the corner, she swung round angrily, and found herself in his arms, held with insulting ease against the hard wall of his body.
‘Caroline, calm down,’ he murmured, half laughing, half angry.
‘I'm glad we met this morning, because I was going to ring you anyway.
I know it's the weekend, but I need to discuss some public relations business.
I'm seeing my friend the video company owner today.
At Casa Sciorto.
Just before the party begins.
I'd like you in on the meeting.’
She was speechless.
Held against him, she could feel the slow, sure beat of his heart against hers.
Feel the heady warmth of his chest, the strength of his arms.
He smelt wonderful — clean, salty, male…
‘If you want me with you for a business meeting,’ she protested huskily, ‘you're not acting in a very businesslike manner!’
Her senses were swimming suddenly.
Blinking indignantly, she pushed against him, but instead of releasing her he bent and kissed her.
He claimed her mouth with that arrogance which outraged yet treacherously aroused her.
Delight coursed through her wilful body.
Every tiny hair follicle on her skin seemed to prickle into overdrive.
She felt as angry with her own wayward senses as she did with Roman's overbearing behaviour.
‘Nor are you,’ he taunted softly, lifting his head and gazing down into her flushed face.
‘Not businesslike at all, Signorina Hastings.
Maybe we should agree to tolerate each other for twenty-four hours.
Who knows what dizzy heights that might lead us to?’
‘Please let go of me.’
She had to force the words out, her throat felt so tight and choked.
He released her.
‘I'll pick you up from Kalkara at three.
Pack an overnight bag.’
‘That's for business reasons too, is it?’
‘No.’
He smiled down at her, melting her knees.
‘That's to keep your mother happy.
If she found out I'd let you drive home late on your own she'd never forgive me!’
‘I'm perfectly capable of taking care of myself…!’
‘So you say.
But you will enjoy spending the night at Casa Sciorto.
And I am not planning to seduce you.’
His mocking smile deepened.
‘My housekeeper — Mathilde's successor — is there to act as chaperon.’
Caroline didn't trust herself to argue any longer.
With a stiff nod, her cheeks burning, she turned and walked away in the direction of Palace Square and the temporary safety of her car.
She was so furious that she drove with exaggerated care back to Kalkara, in case she crashed into someone in her distracted state.
How dared Roman put such…such pressure on her to do as he ordered?
She was here in Malta at his bidding, but she wasn't his slave.
And Mother might have displayed a surprisingly anxious side to her nature, but Roman didn't have to humour her mother's unnecessary fussing!
If she were a sixteen-year-old it would be understandable.
But she was twenty-four, she'd lived alone for years, she needed no nannying or nursemaiding.
Roman must know that.
He was simply doing this to goad her.
For some reason he enjoyed doing so.
Maybe, she reflected, storming round her room to throw some clothes into her suitcase, it was because she rose so satisfactorily to the bait?
Was the excuse of a business meeting at Casa Sciorto merely his way of making sure she came to his party?
Dropping her soap-bag on top of the folded clothes, she slammed the case lid down and ferociously snapped the fastenings.
Maybe the only way of handling this situation, she told herself, fighting for calm, was to refuse to be provoked.
Stay cool, smile politely at his taunts, be her normal efficient professional self, finish the job without further humiliating scenes.
That should protect her from those worrying bouts of weakness whenever Roman took it in his head to produce his caveman act and haul her into a passionate clinch…
She caught her breath, her palms damp just thinking about the powerful surges of emotion she'd felt in his arms.
Surely forewarned was forearmed?
Now she knew the potency of his sexual technique, she could switch into an appropriate iceberg act, freeze the moment before it had the chance to escalate into another near-escape like the one by the Blue Grotto…
All she had to do was refuse to be provoked.
It wasn't much consolation, but it was the best mental panacea she could come up with.
Mdina wasn't called Malta's ‘Silent City’ for nothing, Caroline decided later, as they purred through the ancient gateway into the traffic-free streets.
Only residents were allowed to drive their cars into the city.
And from the air of timeless tranquillity there weren't all that many of those.
Not even the groups of sightseers and holidaymakers, strolling round on foot and admiring the baroque palaces and museums and cathedrals, could detract from the romantic, secretive atmosphere.
It felt literally soaked in history.
as if the happenings of the last thousand years had been impregnated in the massive stone walls, and could begin a phantom replay at any moment…
The entrance to the Casa Sciorto led off a narrow side-street, its huge carved door embellished with massive brass door-knockers in the shape of diving dolphins.
Standing on the pavement outside, the afternoon sun striking blindingly off the baked limestone walls, Caroline couldn't stifle a gasp, it was such a surprising contrast to step inside.
From the riveting heat of the pavement she followed Roman into a vast, cool green courtyard, dappled with light and shade.
A fountain sprayed cool water into the air.
‘Welcome to Casa Sciorto, Caroline.’
Despite the wry smile she fancied that there was an unfamiliar tinge of formality in Roman's deep voice.
as if he'd absorbed some of the invisible layers of antiquity, some of the manners of his ancestors.
Suddenly he was every inch Count Romano de Sciorto.
Caroline stopped, and stood quite still, staring around her.
The courtyard was surrounded by what were presumably the inner walls of the palace.
Their honey-coloured façades seemed to soar upwards, the austerity broken by high arched windows, carved stone balustrading, tall French doors, and everywhere trails of flowers, geraniums and bougainvillaea splashing pink and scarlet and white, and a small forest of green leaves, tall trees, palms and what looked like an acacia tree.
Turning, she found Roman watching her face, his expression difficult to gauge.
‘This is unreal!’ she breathed, quite forgetting the tension that had dogged their journey out here.
‘Another world.
Back in time.’
‘That's how it feels to me, too.’
He was amused, but there was a tinge of sincerity in his voice.
‘That's why I need my apartment in Valletta, my involvement in the business world, the real world.
Otherwise the ghosts take over.’
‘Ghosts again?’
She flicked a brief smile up at him.
‘I'm beginning to think you really believe in ghosts!’
‘I'm fairly ambivalent about ghosts,’ he admitted with a smile.
‘This island has to be full of them.
Have you read our history?’
‘Oh, yes…’
She nodded slowly, gazing around in a dream.
‘Fierce and bloody battles.
Invasions and sieges.
The Christians against the Turkish infidels!’
‘There were atrocities on both sides which would make your blood curdle.’
She shivered, despite the heat.
‘And before that, or was it after — there were the Barbary pirates?
Didn't they virtually decimate Gozo?
Sell most of the population off as slaves?’ she recalled with a grimace.
Roman nodded, with a slight laugh.
‘There's a modern resurgence of piracy on the high seas.
Did you know?’
‘I'd rather not know, thanks.
It might put me off sailing for good!’
‘Signor Romano!’
The ecstatic welcome came as a door was flung open and a short, ample-busted woman came running to meet them, her round brown face wreathed in smiles, surprisingly green eyes warm with pleasure.
‘Caroline, meet Dolores, my housekeeper.
Dolores, this is Signorina Caroline Hastings, the public relations consultant from London.’
‘Delighted to meet you,signorina .
Come, come this way and I will show you where you are to sleep tonight!’
Roman had clearly primed his housekeeper well in advance, Caroline reflected, finding herself whisked off through grandiose high-ceilinged passageways, up a curving staircase wide enough to accommodate a coach and four, and into a room large enough to hold a full-scale ball.
Its walls were ornately corniced in gold and papered in watered silk, a delicate bluebell colour.
The carpet was a deeper hyacinth shade.
The room was dominated by an ornate half-tester bed, with midnight-blue satin drapes, and a mauve and white and gold silk counterpane.
But it was the view which drew her, like a magnet.
There, framed in the arched window, lay a dizzy bird's-eye panorama.
When Dolores had disappeared she went to lean on the ledge to gaze down.
Far below, down across the wide sun-drenched valley, she could see the huge red dome of the church at Mosta, and in the distance the spires of Valletta and the blue sea beyond.
‘Do you like the view?’
Roman's deep voice made her jump.
She turned her head without moving her elbows from their resting place on the window-ledge and gazed at him, too awestruck by her surroundings to feel defensive.
‘It's just…breathtaking.’
He was smiling at her, an unreadable expression in his eyes.
‘You look like Rapunzel in her high prison tower,’ he grinned, touching her hair.
She'd styled it into a long, fat French plait.
The blonde braid had fallen over her shoulder, shining honey-gold against the vivid jade of the T-shirt dress she'd worn for the trip out here.
‘Except there isn't a wicked witch — is there?’
‘No.
No wicked witch.’
‘Perhaps a wicked count?’ she suggested lightly, shivering as his fingers brushed her shoulder.
‘Ah, yes, of course.
Your wicked, reckless, untrustworthy count,’ he agreed, gravely.
‘You said it.’
There was a pause as Roman inspected her carefully composed face.
‘You know, there is a story in Malta,’ he said drily, ‘that when St Paul the Apostle was shipwrecked on our shores, back in 60 AD, and he performed a miracle by removing the poison from a snakebite, he merely transferred that poison on to the tongues of Maltese women.’
‘That sounds the kind of chauvinist remark I'd expect from you!’
‘Are you sure you have no Maltese blood in your veins, Caroline?’
She managed a sweet smile.
‘None whatsoever.
Pure Anglo-Saxon.’
‘Then perhaps women are the same the world over.’
‘To someone as arrogant and…and superior as you, I expect they are!’
Roman laughed suddenly, catching her by the shoulders and twisting her round to face him.
‘Impasse!’ he declared wryly.
‘But you are wrong, Caroline.
I confess I have never met any woman as shrewish or as critical as you!’
It was no good, it was quite impossible to maintain this calm composure.
‘I am not shrewish and critical!’ she exclaimed indignantly, stiffening in his grasp.
‘Yes, you are.
But you are also quite…adorable ,’ he mocked softly, his voice deepening as he tilted her chin up to his inspection.
‘Irridek , Caroline.
That, in Malti, means ‘I want you’…’
‘Roman…please !’
Her whole body was hot under that burning, glinting appraisal.
‘Please?’ he teased huskily.
‘Please what?
Please make love to me?’
‘Please leave me alone!
You promised!’
She could hardly speak.
Anger and fear had her throat in such a tight constriction that she could barely breathe.
‘You said you had no intention of…seducing me!’
He dropped his hands from her, shrugging with mock-surrender.
‘Am I seducing you?’ he asked softly.
‘Here, in broad daylight, the door open, Dolores hovering near by?’
Her cheeks were hot.
Shaking, she pressed her fingers to her face and turned furiously away from him.
‘Come down when you are ready.
My friend Massimo Grech will be here in half an hour,’ he suggested easily, turning for the door.
‘We'll hammer out a strategy for the PR video.
The business fair runs for a fortnight, and starts next Sunday.
We are going to have to work very hard to be ready in time.’
From sex to business talk in the space of a few sentences, she reflected fiercely, as he disappeared.
She collapsed on to the window-seat and stared down at the spectacular landscape spread out below.
‘The body is the landscape of the mind.’
Where had she heard that pearl of wisdom?
She chewed her lip distractedly.
If only she could examine the complex landscape of her mind.
If only she could convince herself that her body as well as her mind were equally averse to Roman's devastating sensuality…
CHAPTER SEVEN
‘I'm so glad to have met you,’ Anneliese was saying over the chatter and hubbub of the party, one-year-old Christian in her arms.
Roman's sister was in her mid-twenties, enchantingly pretty, petite and slender, with short, shining dark curls and peachy skin.
Warm dark eyes were subjecting Caroline to a friendly appraisal.
‘I saw you from a distance this morning, didn't I?
Riveting my brother's attention in the market in Valletta?
Roman's mentioned your name so often this last few days, we've started counting!’
‘Counting…?’
Caroline blinked in slight confusion.
After the initial wave of guilty surprise, finding that the beautiful girl she'd seen at the market had been Roman's younger sister, she'd taken an immediate liking to Anneliese.
She had the kind of open, outgoing personality it was impossible to dislike.
And she seemed so radiantly happy, with her husband Marc, a tall, humorous man with a high, intelligent forehead and thick horn-rimmed glasses, and her little baby son.
She'd felt drawn to her, just as she'd found herself drawn to all Roman's family, including Salvo and his wife Sofia, and their tiny new baby, snuggled sleepily in its carry-cot, blissfully oblivious to the world around it.
There were also numerous cousins, aunts, uncles, plus a wide assortment of friends, Maltese, Italian, French, English, all displaying the same enviable social accomplishments of making a stranger in their midst feel instantly at home.
What a pity Roman didn't take after any of them, she thought privately, smiling as Christian reached out a rather sticky little hand and tugged the poppy-flowered silk sleeve of her sheath-dress, and then caught at the heavy blonde plait at her nape.
‘Counting the number of times he says ‘Caroline this’, or ‘Caroline that’…’
Anneliese grinned, casting a wicked look over her shoulder at where her older brother stood close by, talking and laughing in a group with Salvo and several other relatives.
They were all out in the courtyard, and the evening sun was slanting low golden shafts of colour from the west, catching the windows of the ancient palace and turning them to molten copper.
Earlier, the amusing ceremony of Il-Quccija had resulted in Christian choosing a pen, followed by delighted, if joking predictions of his emulating his grandfather and becoming a lawyer…
‘Christian, no!’
Anneliese extracted Caroline's plait, and frowned at the mark her son's curious clutches had left on the pale silk of the dress.
‘Skuzi , Caroline.
Christian is only a year old, but already he is a little monster!’
‘I don't mind,’ Caroline laughed, holding out her arms to the child, who came willingly for a cuddle.
‘You remind me of Roman,’ Anneliese commented wryly.
‘Children only have to see him and they're climbing all over him!
He adores them; he'll make a perfect father one of these days.
If he ever settles down!’
‘Surely he's far too…irresponsible?’
Caroline found herself saying impulsively, regretting the impulse immediately as Anneliese cast her a surprised look.
‘I mean, wild?
Addicted to danger?’
‘Addicted to danger ?
Oh, you mean all his frenetic climbing, cave-diving, paragliding, parascending et cetera?’
The dark girl nodded with a thoughtful smile.
‘I'm not sure I'd call those ‘being addicted to danger’.
Those are just bachelor indulgences.
Roman's way of living life to the full, without daring to get himself involved in another deep relationship!’
Living life to the full.
Caroline reflected on the phrase.
She'd heard it recently, from Roman's lips.
‘Live life to the full, because tomorrow any one of us could be dead,’ or something like that.
It struck her as an unnervingly fatalistic way of looking at things.
‘Your brother doesn't strike me as lacking in daring!’
‘There are different ways of being daring,’ Anneliese pointed out calmly.
‘Roman was hurt so badly when Gabriella died.
He was like a wounded tiger.
He wouldn't let anyone near enough to heal him.
Mother used to say he had to work it out of his system.
It cut him so deep, you see.
He's not a man who loves easily…’
Caroline found she couldn't speak.
She just stared at Anneliese, her throat constricted.
She had no idea what Roman's sister was thinking as she gazed steadily back.
Eventually, the other girl said gently, ‘But one day he will marry.
I know, because of the way he reacts to seeing Salvo and me happy with our new families.
He loves children.
More than most men I know.
And it looks to me as if you do, too?’
‘You're right.
I do,’ Caroline admitted, holding the warm little body against her and experiencing a faint, inexplicable pang at the other girl's words.
‘Sticky little fingers and all!’
‘But he'll ruin your lovely dress!’
Anneliese was admiring the cut and style with a practised European eye for fashion.
‘It has a designer-label look, unless I'm mistaken?’
Hoisting the child on to her hip, Caroline glanced down at the short, figure-skimming creation, deceptively simple with its low sweetheart neckline and floaty cap sleeves.
She made a slight face.
‘Thanks for the compliment.
Actually it's not as glamorous as it looks.
I'm a bit too frugal to splash out masses of cash on designer clothes.
There's a marvellous little shop near my office in London which sells cast-offs from the super-rich!
But I love your dress…’
Anneliese's was palest apricot chiffon, round-necked and full-skirted to ballerina length.
With her glossy curls and ripe-peach skin she seemed to glow from top to toe.
‘Why, thank you.
It's Italian.
There's a wonderful place down in Valletta…’
Anneliese stopped, frowning in despair at Christian, who was solemnly intent on tugging thick strands of honey-blonde hair from the top of Caroline's neat French plait, deaf to her laughing protests.
‘Here, come to me, you little monster!’
She extracted him determinedly and set him down on his feet, whereupon he wobbled perilously backwards and forwards, then set off at a tremendous pace across the courtyard, with his mother following, calling apologies back to Caroline as she disappeared from view.
Pushing the stray hair from her eyes, Caroline grinned after them, then glanced around her, temporarily alone.
Searching round for where she'd put her champagne glass, she discovered it on a wrought-iron table behind her.
Taking a sip, she caught a glimpse of someone familiar out of the corner of her eye.
A petite, curvaceous figure, clad in clinging geranium-red, dark hair flying like a glossy cloak around her shoulders.
A late arrival.
Greeted by Dolores with a tray of champagne, Stephanie Marsa was weaving through the crowds on slender black high heels, and brushed close by where Caroline stood, so close that she left a waft of heady, exotic perfume in the air, making a single-minded bee-line for Roman.
‘Roman, darling.
What a perfect party…’
The words floated across to Caroline on the still evening air.
She glanced reluctantly across at the group, and saw Stephanie reaching up on tiptoe to kiss Roman's dark cheek.
Some pang of reaction caught at Caroline's stomach, jolted her with its intensity.
What was wrong with her?
She didn't care if Stephanie clung to Roman all night long, did she?
Roman had his back to her, tall and lean and impressively broad-shouldered in an expensive beige silk suit.
Salvo, a shorter, slightly more thick-set version of Roman, was grinning at Stephanie, saying something to her.
But the girl was hanging on Roman's arm, gazing up into his face with such an adoring expression that Caroline found herself feeling quite sick…
‘Caroline, come over here.’
Roman's cool, unexpected summons made her jump so violently that she spilled some champagne down the front of her dress.
Under his dark, quizzical gaze she felt as if she were under a microscope as she forced her legs to move, glued a polite smile on her lips.
‘Are you all right,cara ?’
The soft query, the unexpected use of the Italian endearment brought colour surging idiotically to her cheeks.
Stephanie detached herself from his arm, her beautiful features frozen in hostility.
With an amused expression in his eyes, Roman rested a casual arm along Caroline's  shoulders , a calmly proprietorial gesture which sent shivers over the surface of her skin.
He was inspecting her dishevelled appearance with what appeared to be sardonic enjoyment.
What a ruthless bastard he was, she found herself thinking, the pain on Stephanie's face touching her despite the other girl's undisguised hatred.
Was this the treatment Roman meted out to any female who presumed a little too much, grew a little too possessive?
But in spite of her anger she could feel the warmth of his fingers through the silk of her dress, and that warmth was doing unspeakable things to her insides.
Could he feel the vibration in her shoulders from her heart, hammering like a piston behind her breastbone?
‘Of course.
I'm fine…’
‘You look a little distraite ,’ he observed drily, his eyes moving from the rumpled strands of blonde hair escaping from her plait to the finger-marks and the damp champagne patch on the front of her dress.
She felt an absolute wreck, yet at the same time she felt acutely self-aware.
She tensed involuntarily, looking into his eyes with growing panic.
It was as if he were touching her, physically caressing her with that dark, gold-flecked gaze.
There was the frightening sensation of being sucked into an invisible vortex, some dark cavern of the senses where she could no longer stand back and resist, where she could only feel…
With an immense effort she dragged her gaze free, clamped down on her wildly over-active imagination.
‘You are working Caroline too hard, Roman,’ Salvo was suggesting, with a friendly, amused smile.
He'd disarmed her earlier on by profusely apologising for his role in the near-collision with the Kestrel .
They'd chatted at length about the progression of the public relations arrangements, about the meeting she'd just had with the video expert, and Salvo had appeared impressed at the amount of hours she was putting in.
Now he said, ‘Not content with pestering her all week, you take up her freedom at the weekend!
Force her to attend business meetings at your house!
Inflict your family on her!’
‘Thoughtless of me,’ Roman agreed unrepentantly.
‘But I am paying for her services.’
‘Don't worry.’
Caroline stiffened, but shot Salvo a quick smile.
‘I'm used to clients demanding overtime.
I charge accordingly!’
‘You do that!’
Salvo grinned, shooting a teasing look at his older brother.
‘I'd overcharge , if I were you!
Invoice this domineering devil for every minute of your time, Caroline!
He's probably counting on family connections to get you on the cheap!
And look at all the business you must be losing in London while you're out here running around after Malta's nobility!’
‘I'm sure Signorina Hastings has staff in London who can handle business in her absence,’ Stephanie Marsa put in, her cool, high voice precise and colourless.
‘And Caroline is always very professional in her dealings with clients,’ Roman murmured drily.
‘Absolutely,’ Caroline agreed calmly.
‘I just wish clients could always be relied on to behave likewise.’
There was a short, charged silence following this loaded statement.
‘How pleasant, then, for you to relax on this assignment,’ Roman countered smoothly, a steely note beneath the surface, ‘knowing that family friendship absolves us from the need for stiff formality.’
‘I make it a rule never to mix business with pleasure.
And friendship with one generation doesn't automatically lead to friendship with the next,’ she pointed out with delicate sarcasm.
Salvo was observing the taut veneer of civility, the masked hostility between them, with an amused gleam in his eyes.
‘Here I believe my brother has met his Waterloo,’ he murmured, half to himself.
The silence between Roman and Caroline stretched tight as piano-wire.
She could almost feel the physical edge of Roman's icy displeasure.
‘Here are the ghannejja ,’ Stephanie announced flatly, breaking the spell of tension.
Caroline turned to see a group of men and women, in peasant-style attire of white shirts, black boots and braid-trimmed red and yellow skirts and trousers, making their way towards them.
They carried a variety of instruments: Spanish guitar, tambourine, flute, drums and something which resembled bagpipes.
‘Folk singers,’ Roman explained shortly, for Caroline's benefit, before strolling lazily away to greet the new arrivals.
In spite of herself she watched his departing back, hating him for that supple arrogance in his walk, the way that simply by walking away from her he could fill her with an inexplicable, infuriating urge to run after him…
The sun had sunk, and without her noticing, Caroline suddenly realised, darkness had fallen.
The night air was scented with pine and some heady flower fragrance.
And so warm, if felt as if it had substance.
Like a weightless shawl round her shoulders.
Lights had sprung on inside Casa Sciorto's rooms, spilling glowing pools of gold into the courtyard.
Anneliese suddenly reappeared, minus Christian.
‘One of Dolores's helpers is putting him to bed,’ she explained, with an unashamed air of relief.
‘Isn't this beautiful, with the lamps being switched on out here?’
‘Magical.’
In spite of the warily tense session just now with Roman, Caroline couldn't help the involuntary verdict.
The beauty of her surroundings was provoking a warmth, right inside herself, like a small fire in her heart.
What looked like ancient coach-lamps were springing to life all over the high stone walls, like a son et lumière display in some centuries-old castle.
In the warm, lamplit darkness the musicians had begun to play and sing haunting ballad-style folk music, in the soft exotic Maltese language.
The refrain was almost achingly beautiful.
‘Shouldn't Christian be staying up, as this party is all in his honour?’ she queried, with a teasing smile at Anneliese's horrified reaction.
‘Deo gratias et Maria — babies sleep!’ she confessed with a good-natured laugh.
‘And this was Christian's Il-Quccija , but now it's our private start to the Mnarja festival.
Mdina begins its lead-up to the Mnarja on Monday.’
‘I thought the Mnarja wasn't until next weekend?’
‘True.
But that is the all-night festival in the Buskett Gardens, near here.
This Monday, all round the streets of Mdina and Rabat, it is Il-Bandu — that is when the town crier heralds the forthcoming Mnarja horse-races.
They are bareback, very fast and very wild.
And all this coming week Mdina will be celebrating.
You must stay on at Casa Sciorto, Caroline…’
‘Sounds wonderful.
But I'll be far too busy organising Roman's public relations campaign ready for the business fair!
I am over here to do a job, remember!’
‘Surely not all the time…you're masterminding it, aren't you?’
Anneliese's dark eyes twinkled conspiratorially.
‘You're the expert, with the reputation for successful PR.
The spade-work can be done by Stephanie and his office staff; delegate, that's the secret!
I'm sure Roman would agree!’
‘Whenever I hear my name on the lips of my little sister,’ Roman cut in behind them, his voice sardonic, ‘I smell trouble.’
‘Oh, there you are, Romano!’
Anneliese gave him a swift sisterly kiss, then glanced across at where the guests had started drifting over to the folk singers.
‘Dance with Caroline while I go and find my errant husband!
Ciao !’
With a quick wave she darted off through the clusters of people, and Caroline was left facing Roman, abruptly gripped by shyness as well as the usual quietly simmering resentment.
‘Enjoying yourself?’ he asked quietly.
In the darkness the angular planes of his face were thrown into stark relief.
He looked taller, more formidable, more patrician.
Beneath the lightweight beige suit he wore a white shirt and a tan striped tie, loosened at the neck.
‘Yes.
Your sister is lovely.
You brother is charming.
The only mystery is how you could possibly be related to either of them!’
The shadowed gaze narrowed.
A muscle tensed a fraction in his jaw.
Roman, for once, gave the impression that he wasn't amused.
He smiled, but with his mouth only.
‘To what do I owe this new attack on my character?’
‘How dare you use me to offload Stephanie?’ she demanded shakily.
‘Making it look as if there's something between us, when there isn't —’
‘Isn't there?
Come and dance with me, Caroline.’
The calm, laconic interruption made her cheeks burn.
‘No.
I don't want to dance with you!
And you know damn well there's nothing between us.
I came here because you wanted some PR done.
That's it, end of story!’
‘You talk like a hard businesswoman,’ he murmured, his eyes glinting, ‘but with your hair tousled over your face, and in that sexy, rumpled little dress, you're so damn desirable that all thoughts of business vanish from my mind, Caroline.’
‘Stop it, Roman…’
‘When I kiss you, you catch fire,’ he teased huskily.
‘When I touch you, I feel you tremble.
And there's nothing between us?’
She was trembling now, without him laying a finger on her.
A flood of furious resentment engulfed her.
‘Try this hackneyed line on some other swooning female,’ she retorted unevenly, ruthlessly flattening the small leap of desire triggered by his husky words, starting to push her way past him.
‘I'm suddenly very tired.
I'm going to bed.’
She was conscious, as she marched angrily away, of his mocking eyes watching her as she made her escape.
With a swiftness prompted by desperation she weaved a path through the crowds of guests and plunged into the relative quiet of the old house.
Desperation to escape also helped her to find her way through the labyrinth of passageways, up to her room on the second floor.
This had been prepared for her by Dolores, or one of the maids.
The lights by the bed were on, glowing softly, the bed turned down to show a welcoming triangle of starched white sheet.
A silver tray containing a bottle of mineral water and a glass stood on the polished wood dressing-table.
The deep blue curtains had been pulled halfway across, revealing a rectangle of midnight-black sky, a sprinkle of stars, and a pale shimmer of moonlight…
She was in the grip of a white-hot fury, she registered, standing there in the middle of the room, staring at the calm, peaceful setting.
That last taut exchange with Roman seemed to have whipped up some invisible energy that wouldn't let her relax, prickling through her like an electric storm.
as if her skin were too tight for her, as if a tornado were spinning inside her, whirling her into a silent frenzy.
It felt like being fiercely torn apart, pulled in two directions, without understanding either…
Pulling off the silky dress with trembling hands, then the slips of white lace which did service as bra and pants, she angrily kicked off the low-heeled white sandals, raked her long blonde hair out of its French plait, and then plunged gratefully for the privacy of the small en-suite bathroom, standing beneath the shower for a long, soothing soak before she climbed into bed in the baggy jade T-shirt which she wore as a nightshirt.
It took a long time before she could even bring herself to close her eyes, let alone contemplate sleep.
Thoughts circled relentlessly in her head, jumbled together, so that their rational order of importance no longer seemed to govern.
Anneliese's comments about Gabriella, the girl Roman had loved and lost.
Her mother, singing Roman's praises.
Her father, quiet, humorous, stubbornly determined, gone now, no longer there to consult and confide in.
That brief dark phase from her childhood, when she'd imagined all her loved ones had abandoned her, filled with fear and apprehension and anxiety at that forced separation…
Roman, desiring her, his dark gaze drawing her into that hot, frightening vortex of her own senses…caves, black as night, ‘caverns measureless to man’, and the story of the wicked Hasan…
Her dreams seemed to blend into her waking thoughts, a natural continuation of that irrational, disturbing, butterfly series of images.
She woke later to the sound of a voice calling out in panic.
She lay there in the faint moonlit darkness, her face wet from crying, her pulse-rate frantic, completely disorientated for a few seconds.
What had woken her?
Her dream drifted back in fragments.
Not a dream, more of a nightmare…
The door opened and a shaft of light spilled into the room from the landing, falling on the bed, startling her.
‘Are you all right, Caroline?’
Roman's voice was low, tinged with genuine concern.
‘I had a dream — that's all.’
He'd come in, across the room, to sit on the edge of the bed.
He reached to switch on the soft bedside light.
‘You were shouting.’
‘I know.
Sorry.’
She managed a wry smile, pushing her hair away from her face and rubbing her eyes.
‘I think Hasan was about to throw me down the cliffs out of his cave!’
Roman shook his head mockingly.
‘You keep telling me how grown-up you are, Caroline.
If I'd known you were prone to nightmares I'd never have told you the story!’
‘Sorry I disturbed you…’ she began stiffly, then registered that he still wore the clothes he'd worn earlier, minus the suit jacket and tie.
The open neck of the white shirt revealed the smooth dark column of his neck, the beginning of dark hair on his chest.
The dim light of the table-lamp cast his hard features into that unnerving resemblance to some long-ago pirate raider…
‘I was having a shower,’ he explained briefly.
‘Your bathroom is next door to mine.
Your screams were quite chilling.
Worthy of Hitchcock's Psycho .
I decided to put some clothes back on and investigate.’
‘At least I didn't wake you up, then,’ she observed huskily, waves of warmth invading her body at Roman's nearness.
There was a silence.
She blinked her eyes away from that steady, searching appraisal, panic tugging at the back of her mind.
The tight, hyperactive tension she'd experienced earlier was returning, double-strength.
‘I'm sorry you didn't enjoy the party,’ he said expressionlessly.
‘I did!
I enjoyed it very much,’ she was moved to protest.
‘I think your family and your friends are the most charming people I've met in ages!
With the lights and the folk singers, it was a fairy-tale kind of evening…’
‘It was just my presence that tarnished the fairy-tale for you?’
Yours and Stephanie's, she wanted to say.
But that would be tantamount to admitting that somehow, by some outrageous quirk of emotion, she cared whether Roman had a relationship with Stephanie…which was unthinkable…
The silence threatened to engulf her.
Horrified by the emotions whirling inside her, she sought a safe change of topic.
‘I lost count of the members of the aristocracy I was introduced to,’ she said quickly, to cover her confusion.
‘I had no idea there were so many counts, barons and marquises in Malta…’
‘The correct order is baron, count then marquis.’
Roman sounded gravely resigned to humour her, his gaze wry as he watched her.
‘There are twenty-eight titles recognised by the British Crown.
The oldest title goes back to 1350.
No title has been conferred since 1798.
So here in Malta precedence among the nobility is determined by the date of origin of the title, not by the degree.’
‘What does that mean?’
She realised that, subconsciously, she wanted him to keep talking to her.
Just until the nightmare, lingering in the back of her brain, had begun to disperse…
‘It means that, since the de Sciorto title dates from the mid-sixteenth century, I come somewhere in the middle of the pecking order,’ he grinned, his eyes lidded as he moved his gaze down over her defensively folded arms, lingering on the golden swell of her breasts at the button fastening on her T-shirt.
‘Are you feeling better now,cara ?’ he added, on that deeper, more gentle note which sent the small hairs on the nape of her neck into a kind of ecstasy of awareness.
She gritted her teeth, nodding jerkily.
‘Yes…’
She felt confused.
She was fervently wishing that he would go away, and yet part of her wanted him to stay.
‘Do you like Mdina?’ he asked quietly, as if he knew what was going through her mind.
‘It's beautiful.
So is the Casa Sciorto.
There are so many ancient buildings…’
‘We have a Benedictine nunnery just across the street.’
Without warning, he'd slowly reached his hand forward to touch her cheek, slid his fingers down to grasp her chin between his thumb and forefinger, tilting her face to the light.
She caught her breath involuntarily.
‘A nunnery?’ she echoed foolishly, her throat drying.
His touch seemed to burn her…
‘It was started in the fifteenth century.’
There was a glimmer of amusement in his dark eyes as he slid his fingers down to the pulse drumming wildly at the base of her throat.
‘No man is allowed to enter the building, except the doctor.
And, years ago, the white-washer.’
‘The white-washer ?’
Only half her mind was on their conversation; the other half was reacting wildly to his touch.
‘To white-wash the walls, in times of plague…
Caroline, if you want to sleep alone in your bed tonight, don't look at me like that…’
‘I was just imagining spending an entire life closeted with only the company of your own sex…’
The hoarse words were intended to come out as a joke, but instead they held a raw note of emotion which seemed to hang in the air between them.
‘Quite.
Sublimation is the technique, I believe…’
Roman had dropped his hand from her throat, and his voice held a slightly ragged note of humour.
‘I've been practising it myself recently.
But I'm not convinced I'd make a Benedictine monk…’
She was trapped, now, in the endless warm darkness of his eyes.
Her heart was pumping so violently against her breastbone that she could hardly breathe.
‘I'd better go,’ he said roughly, but he didn't move.
And abruptly, from what buried part of her muddled brain she had no idea, she found herself shaking her head, reaching out a hand which seemed to be operating on automatic pilot.
‘Don't…’
What was she doing?
What was she saying ?
Somewhere in the far regions of her mind a voice was screaming warnings, but she closed her ears to it, as if some insidious substance in the night air had rendered her brain oblivious to reason.
‘Caroline…’
It was a deep, rough warning, half-mocking, half-agonised.
Then somehow she was in his arms.
The hard warmth of him annihilated her last reservations, substituting instead some primitive, age-old need she could neither deny nor control.
‘Roman, please…kiss me…’
The husky, breathless plea was wrung from her.
He drew away slightly, clasping her face with his hands, the dark gaze searching her wide grey eyes.
She felt parched with wanting him…
‘Deo , Caroline…’
Urgency took over, a heady impatience driven by the potent strength of Roman's desire.
Like a novice swimmer suddenly caught in a flood-tide, she was swept along, clinging fiercely to his shoulders as he found her lips, invaded her mouth, his tongue entwining with hers.
With a low murmur in his throat he raked unsteady fingers into her tousled blonde hair, ripped back the bedclothes and peeled the jade T-shirt up over her slender thighs, her stomach, her breasts, sliding it over her head to uncover the unexpected treasure in his arms.
Without conscious thought she found she was pushing her hands inside his shirt, fumbling for the buttons in a frenzy of haste which made him smile against her lips.
‘Wait, calm yourself,sabiha tieghi , my beautiful one,’ he teased softly, unbuttoning his shirt with fingers which shook almost as much as hers had done.
‘See how you make me tremble, Caroline?’
He shrugged the shirt off, flung it to the floor, unfastened the waist of the immaculate beige trousers, disposed of the rest of his clothes with a cool composure which sent tiny shivers all over the heated surface of her body.
The sheer size of the dark, lean, muscled male body made her throat dry in panic.
‘I want you so badly…’
It was murmured throatily against the swell of her breasts, before his lips found the hard jut of her nipples and she dropped her head back with a gasp of pure delight.
The panic was receding again, physical need surging back with a vengeance.
‘Just tell me, do you want me too?’
He was moving lower, his lips cool and sensitive as he trailed kisses over the curves and hollows exposed for his exploration.
‘I want to hear you say it,cara …’
‘I…there's nothing I want more…’
Her throat was so tight that she could hardly speak.
The words came on a husky out-breath.
It was someone else speaking, not her own voice, surely…?
But it had to be, because every inch of her body was wildly responding to Roman's bold investigation, the unfamiliar but intoxicating movements of hands and mouth.
He'd reached to click off the light, and the room shimmered again with the faintest light from the moon.
Her fingers reached up to entwine in the clean curl of his black hair, every part of her aching shamelessly to be discovered and touched, by this one man who could whip up a storm in her heart…
His hands were expertly smoothing her thighs, from groin to knee, gently but firmly pressing her legs apart.
She tensed; as if some buried defence had been touched by this ultimate surrender, some distant alarm bell sounded.
But the words he breathed, his deep voice hoarse against her lips, her ear, her throat, her breasts, were fanning the flames of conflagration…
When he slid his fingers across the spring of gold curls, parting the intimate secret of her, finding the hard nub of her womanhood before slipping below to the hot, molten tightness at her centre, she tensed and then capitulated in a flood of aching heat, and she heard herself say his name, moan his name again and again.
‘You feel wonderful,cara …oh, sweetheart, you're driving me insane…’
Roman's thickly murmured response seemed to shiver through her very soul.
She was floating, eyes closed, the waves of desire obliterating any other thoughts.
When he moved abruptly to cover her, to force a place for himself on top of her, levering her legs wider to open her body to him, his coarse, muscled weight was a blissful assuagement of hunger, a hunger burning through her so fiercely that she felt almost faint…
‘Caroline…cara …’
As he thrust triumphantly inside her, her mind seemed to go black, behind her closed eyelids.
Then it erupted in a shower of cold, bright stars, brilliant with a sharp, astonishing, searing pain.
A stretched, tight, utterly unexpected pain which tensed every muscle in her body, until she was rigid as steel beneath him.
‘Roman, stop…stop !’
It was a gasp of anguish, torn from her.
Roman had turned to stone above her, his dark face sheened with sweat.
The muscles of his chest and forearms stood out in powerful relief as he stared incredulously down at her tense, frightened face…
‘Caroline …’
His voice was a hoarse, uneven groan, half despairing, half humorous.
‘Deo , Caroline…forgive me,cara , but now is no time to ask me to stop…’
Heat suffused her.
Roman watched the delicate colour flood her face, his dark gaze unreadable.
His jaw was tense.
‘Sweetheart…relax.’
His deep voice was rough and thick with controlled desire, the gleam in his dark gaze brilliant beneath the heavy lids, triggering a fresh wave of melting desire down through her stomach and thighs, almost overriding the panic which had frozen her.
‘Why didn't you tell me you were still a virgin, Caroline?’
He added slowly, his deep voice unsteady, ‘I admit, at first I was sure you were, but then you led me to believe…’
‘I…
I didn't realise I had to sign a declaration to the contrary.’
Her voice was choked and shaky with emotion.
‘It's not important…’
‘Not important ?’
He sounded stunned.
‘No…it's my virginity!’
She was acutely embarrassed suddenly, but her body still glowed with its own heat, as if some white-hot reactor had been ignited inside her; she was still melting and longing inside, her senses way beyond recall.
‘It's just…’
Her throat felt tight.
She clutched at the hard, reassuring warmth of his shoulders for courage.
Her heart was pounding so rapidly that she felt sure he must hear it.
‘Until now I'd just…never got around to the process of losing it…’
There was an endless pause, as Roman seemed to be weighing up this piece of sheer bravado.
Then, his eyes shadowed and unreadable, he lowered himself slowly down to kiss her hot, upturned face, to smooth the rumpled blonde hair back from her forehead.
‘And now you have reached the point of no return,’ he told her, some arrogant finality in his tone sending shivers down her spine.
‘The process is almost completed.’
His voice was still thick with suppressed desire.
With a smooth swoop, he caught hold of both her hands and drew her arms up above her head, holding them on the pillows behind her, sliding his free hand beneath her hips, lifting her with one strong, determined movement to meet the invading male power of his body.
She felt a slight resurgence of panic, opened her mouth to protest.
But he forced the words back inside her mouth, kissing her deeply, possessively.
‘Relax, sweetheart, you're a beautiful, desirable woman,’ he whispered against her lips.
‘There's nothing wrong, everything is just the way it should be…you're soft, and warm and ready for this; just let your muscles relax, just relax, my love…’
His husky, confident words were more devastating than his physical caresses.
Rocked to the very centre of her being, all thought of resistance erased from her mind, she stared wide-eyed at his dark, angular face as if imprinting it on her brain.
‘Oh, Roman…oh, yes…’
This time the sensation was altogether different.
She closed her eyes and arched blindly against him, let him guide her into another kind of darkness, where that unknown vortex of emotion, that powerful pull of attraction between them swirled and hypnotised, and this time the stars behind her eyelids were brilliant but softly incandescent, fireworks of intense delight, bursting in her head…
It wasn't until long afterwards, after an endless length of time had passed, that, cradled in Roman's protective arms, his lips on her hair, her fingers tightly and convulsively entwined with his, she finally began to come to her senses, finally began to think straight, and to wonder what dangerous, reckless lunacy she'd plunged, willing and headlong, into…
CHAPTER EIGHT
When in the brilliant sunshine of the morning, Caroline woke to find herself alone, she couldn't decide if she felt relieved or dismayed.
Right or wrong, sane or irretrievably foolish, the feel of Roman's strong male body holding her close as she drifted into sleep lingered as an indescribable, aching sort of pleasure; his absence, however brief that experience, made her feel oddly…incomplete?
Lying on her back, stretched flat beneath the sheet, she gazed abstractedly at the oblong of high, cobalt-blue sky framed in the window.
She'd opened the curtains before she'd gone to bed last night.
The moon had been shining in, silvering everything with its ghostly light, when Roman had made love to her.
She relived that moment when he'd reached to click off the bedside light, and those cool blue rays had stolen silently into the room, highlighting the unfamiliar ecstasy she'd somehow denied herself until now…
She had some mental stocktaking to do, she told herself sternly, tentatively tracing the lines of her body with her hands, and shivering with renewed disbelief at the remembered sensations, the utter, unexpected bliss of Roman's lovemaking.
With a muffled groan she rolled on to her side and screwed herself up into a tight ball, alternately hot and shivery with emotion.
She felt different, she was different…
Why had she found it so impossible to resist Roman?
Why, having found herself remarkably unmoved by her succession of boyfriends to date, even Jeremy's cunning ploys and reasoned arguments, and having reached the not inconsiderable age of twenty-four, had she been consumed with that burning hunger last night?
The practical questions scratched at her consciousness, refusing to be ignored.
Because it had felt right?
Because she'd abruptly felt as if her heart would burst if she didn't let him touch her, kiss her, hold her in his arms again, and then the desire had escalated so quickly that kissing hadn't been enough?
Not nearly enough…?
But, a few hours before, she'd been furious with him.
And before that, yesterday, the day before — every day since she'd come to Malta, in fact — she'd thought she actively disliked him…
Her head hurt with trying to make sense of it.
Impatiently she jumped out of bed and went to run herself a bath perfumed with her favourite bath-foam.
The only certainty, she reflected ruefully, soaking in fragrant warm water up to her chin, was that in half an hour or so she'd have to find the courage to face Roman again, possibly over the breakfast-table.
She had no idea what to say to him.
Or what he might say to her…
Closing her eyes, she took a deep breath, striving to calm her nerves.
Whatever happened, she had no regrets about last night.
Crazy, impulsive, illogical it might have been, but somewhere deep inside there'd been a feeling of inevitability about it…
Live for today, wasn't that Roman's motto?
Maybe life was too short to pass up the chance to experience the kind of volcanic passion she'd felt with Roman last night…
However much she might have set herself up to be hurt, she told herself defiantly, selecting white Bermudas and a cool Chinese-style silk blouse from her small selection of clothes, however much of a fool she might have made of herself, she wouldn't change a thing.
Breakfast was laid in the shade of the palm trees, in the sun-dappled courtyard.
Pausing just before stepping out into view, she absorbed the scene with a tight squeeze inside her heart.
Roman sat there, in black T-shirt and black chinos, leaning back in his chair in an attitude of total relaxation, absorbed in the morning paper.
He was alone, although from the debris on the white-clothed table there was evidence of several overnight guests having already breakfasted and departed elsewhere.
Caroline bit her lip, thrusting her trembling hands into the pockets of her shorts.
She was late down.
It would be just her and Roman at the breakfast-table.
And the brave resolutions in the bath were vanishing in a sudden turmoil of nerves and shyness…
As she hesitated in the shadow of the doorway, footsteps rang out on the patio from another direction, and she saw Salvo come into view, heading quickly across to where his older brother sat.
‘Did you speak to Stephanie?’
Salvo spoke in a low voice, but his words carried easily on the still air.
‘Success.’
Roman's deep response was soft, but clearly audible.
‘The consignment has arrived safely.
I'm assured that it's well hidden!’
The words floated across to her, and as their implication sank in Caroline stiffened, her ears pricking automatically.
What on earth were they talking about?
‘…it's certainly getting more difficult!’
That was the end of Roman's wryly murmured response to something else Salvo had said.
‘Such daring coups have always been difficult, my friend!’ was Salvo's triumphant reply.
Caroline felt riveted to the floor, motionless, unwilling to consciously eavesdrop but tense with curiosity.
Both men were laughing, then talking in lower voices, and only snatches drifted to her now.
A breath of warm breeze stirred the cascade of papery pink bougainvillaea just outside the door where she stood.
Unseeing, she stared at the perfection of the exotic plant, hugging her sides in unconscious apprehension, her fingers pressed against her ribs.
She could feel the uneven thump of her heart through the silky, Oriental-patterned material of her blouse, while her brain was whirring…
A hidden consignment?
A phone call to Stephanie?
Some kind of secret subterfuge?
Whatever were they talking about?
Abruptly, those fleeting fantasies of revenge, lying in bed at Kalkara only two nights ago, loomed back to haunt her.
Surely Roman wasn't really mixed up in something shady?
She bit her lip, wincing at the memory of her resentful scheming.
If he was involved in something underhand, surely she should be feeling the expected surge of triumph, delighted at being proved right?
But last night's momentous happenings had shattered those feelings into tiny pieces.
None of it seemed remotely realistic or important any longer.
Roman's taunts, her mother's irritating adulation, her own antagonism…
She shivered convulsively.
This was the man she'd given herself to, willingly, wholeheartedly, by some mysterious process of transmutation from acute dislike to ardent desire, in the wild heat of last night…dislike and distrust had dissolved in the drugging excitement of his arms.
Had been in the process of dissolving, she realised dimly, ever since she'd seen the light over her mother's safety, then met his sister and the rest of his family and his friends last night.
Was she really contemplating the possibility that he could be involved in something illegal?
The only man to whom she'd felt driven to surrender her virginity…the man she'd fallen hopelessly and irrevocably in love with…?
This last notion stunned her more than any other.
She was in love with him?
Swift denial came sweeping in to rescue her.
No, not in love.
That just wasn't possible.
You didn't fall in love with someone in the space of a few days, just because you'd finally succumbed to the lures of sex, or lust, or whatever had overwhelmed her ever since he'd fished her out of the sea that first night…
This was her brain playing tricks on her again.
Or maybe the strange, timeless, other-world influence of the Casa Sciorto, of Mdina itself, slumbering up here on this rocky hill, in its ancient, secretive walls…
What was it Roman had said?
He needed the ‘real world’, regular large doses of it, or else the ghosts of the past took over…
She grasped, panic-stricken, at this protective straw.
Last night's hectic surrender, and this morning's fantasies, were the result of too much ‘real world’ deprivation.
The sooner she beat a hasty retreat back to Valletta and Kalkara, and ultimately to the even safer distance of London, England, the better for everyone…
This exemplary logic completed, it was another few breathless minutes before she found the necessary strength to contemplate walking the few feet to join Roman's laughing, relaxed presence at the breakfast-table.
‘Good morning.’
Her soft, polite greeting brought both men to their feet, with impeccable breeding.
There was a casual, friendly response from Salvo.
Roman, pulling out a chair for her to sit, turned a slow, devastating gaze on her, totally annihilating her composure.
‘Bongu , Caroline.’
The dark eyes, gold-flecked, were warm, relaxed and humorous.
Nevertheless, tension seemed to tighten the air between them.
She felt her face warming under that searching male scrutiny.
Salvo, showing an impressive sensitivity to atmosphere, took himself off almost immediately on the pretext of helping Sofia with the baby.
Or had Roman told him about last night?
Her cheeks burned hotter at the thought.
Suddenly she was aware of how little she knew Roman.
That eruption of passion had blinkered her to the risks she was taking, letting herself get involved with a man like this…
‘Are you all right this morning,cara ?’
Roman's husky enquiry contained layers of male emotion, cautious and triumphant, protective and possessive, the conqueror and the persuader…
She felt as if her own emotions had been tossed brutally into a whirlwind.
They circled frantically in her head and in her heart.
Passion and surrender, her romantic fantasies of love, the overheard conversation just now, her abrupt return to reality…
‘Yes…’
She took a shaky breath and reached for the coffee-pot, an invisible shell of protective self-defence closing around her just in time.
‘In fact, I'm fully recovered, thank you…’
There was a moment's silence.
As she risked a glance up at Roman's dark face, her heart seemed to plummet down to her stomach.
‘Recovered ?’ he echoed softly.
‘Yes, recovered.’
She took a roll from the basket, found the butter, and some of the rich local honey.
She felt as if she were operating on auto-pilot.
‘From what have you fully recovered, Caroline?’
‘From my…brainstorm.’
‘Would you mind explaining just what the hell you are talking about?’
Roman's narrowed gaze was too compelling.
As calmly as she could, she laid down her knife and turned a steady grey gaze on his face.
‘Last night,’ she began evenly, trying to ignore the frantic thud of her heart against her ribs.
‘I'm talking about what happened last night.
We can't…undo it.
I know that.
And I'm certainly not saying I…
I regret it.
Because I don't.
Not in the least…’
‘How gratifying.’
‘But let's just…put it down to experience.
And forget about it.
Agreed?’
Another fraught silence descended.
This time Roman said nothing, just observed her with a brooding air of deliberation, for so long that she felt quite faint with nervous tension.
‘This is my fault,’ he said at last, the deep voice grating with amused frustration.
‘It was an old-fashioned impulse which drove me back to my own room before the house staff and my other guests awoke.
For your sake, for your reputation.
I did not wish you to feel embarrassed by the speed at which things happened last night…’
‘Roman,please …’
She was sinking, drowning in remembered sensation…
‘I should have thrown convention to the winds.
Followed my normal instincts.
I should have stayed the whole night in your bed, with you in my arms.
I should have been there when you woke this morning,cara .
Then you would not be talking to me like a business client with whom you have experienced an unfortunate misunderstanding.’
‘But that's…that's what you are,’ she countered, her throat so dry that she struggled to speak.
Roman's words were like a drug, pouring over her, evoking those helpless, hypnotic feelings of need and desire and hunger all over again.
‘Have you forgotten the reason I'm here?’
‘No.
I have not forgotten.
But I am not the automaton you appear to believe.’
His voice was harsh, the humour self-deprecating.
‘The tenth anniversary of my company is important, true.
But I do not seduce twenty-four-year-old virgins every other day, Caroline…’
‘I'm sure you don't.’
Her face and neck felt as if she'd been sitting in the heat of an oven.
Bending her head to hide her acute discomfort, she concentrated on adding cream to her coffee.
‘I expect they're normally a great deal younger!’
Roman observed her for another few moments.
Finally he stood up, thrusting his hands into the pockets of his black trousers.
She had the fleeting impression that she'd caught him on the raw.
A muscle jerked in his jaw, and although he still retained the humorous gleam it didn't quite warm his eyes.
The sunlight glimmered through the palm leaves above them, playing shadows over his harsh features.
There was an ache in her solar plexus, growing and expanding, until she felt as if she would explode with the pain of her suppressed emotions.
‘True,’ he mocked softly, a merciless glitter in his eyes.
‘I have a regular diet of virgin maidens delivered to my door.
On weekdays they tend to be eighteen.
Weekends, even younger.
And I'm intrigued, I must confess, about what kept you from the delights of the flesh for so long, Caroline — since, once initiated, you showed a remarkable talent for sensual enjoyment.’
She couldn't stand it any longer.
Standing up slowly, she faced him with as much composure as she could muster.
‘I suppose you think this is very entertaining!’ she whispered furiously.
‘When I suggested we just…just put it down to experience, I didn't expect you to start dissecting and analysing everything, and mocking me in the process…’
‘Didn't you?’
He stepped closer, and her heart somersaulted in her chest as he reached to cup her hot face in his hands, inspecting her stormy expression through lidded, thoughtful eyes.
‘Then what did you expect, Caroline?’
‘I expected you to be…more considerate.
I imagined that, having got what you've been after all week, you'd be quite happy to agree…’
She felt, abruptly, as if she were screaming silently inside.
Confusion was muddling her responses, putting up barriers where she'd give anything for a free and open path forward…
‘That is what you thought?’
The mocking hostility in the deep voice made her wince.
He dropped his hands from her face.
‘You trust me so little, Caroline?’
‘Why should I trust you?’
The words were out before she could stop them.
‘I hardly know you!’
‘Don't you?
Yet you know my business, my family, my home.
Already you are familiar with my lifestyle, my hobbies; you are even one of the few people who know of Gabriella.’
His gaze was wry as he scanned her white face.
‘And after last night, Caroline, I think I know a great deal more about you…’
‘So what am I supposed to think when I overhear you and Salvo colluding together just now?’ she shot at him stiffly.
‘Colluding?’
There was a blank expression in Roman's dark eyes.
‘You and Salvo were talking just before I came out to breakfast.
You…you sounded decidedly secretive!
as if you're involved in something…underhand?’
A degree of comprehension seemed to have crept into his frozen expression.
A faint glitter of angry amusement grew to a smile, then an abrupt crack of laughter.
But his voice, when he spoke, was heavy with sarcasm.
‘What a scathing indictment of my character.’
His gaze was ink-black and unfathomable on her face.
‘And what a mixed-up, suspicious young lady you are, Caroline.
Last night you trusted me enough to be your first lover.
Yet this morning I am once more not only an unprincipled seducer, but…what?
A common criminal, perhaps?’
‘Roman, I didn't say that…’
She felt sick inside, sick with uncertainty.
And so miserable that she felt she would never drag herself out of this pit of misery.
What had she said?
Why on earth had she blurted out such an idiotic-sounding accusation…?
‘So tell me, why me, last night?’ he persisted, in a low harsh voice.
‘Why give yourself to a man you do not trust?’
‘I didn't give myself !’
‘Oh, yes, you did…’
It was a soft, arrogant assertion that sent a shiver to the centre of her body.
‘No!
We made love, it just happened to be the first time for me.
I don't know why.
I don't have any logical answers…’
‘And your lack of previous experience?
I think I already have the answer.
You were frightened to let go, to let yourself feel out of control.’
He took hold of her shoulders, giving her a slight, infuriated shake.
‘It is all part of the same problem with you, is it not?
Fear of life.
Fear of living.
Poor, insecure little Caroline, clinging rigidly to what she knows, terrified of the unknown, terrified to trust people in case they let her down, hurt her feelings, or even endanger her in some way…?’
‘Will you stop trying to analyse ?’ she shot back jerkily.
‘People don't always have logical reasons for the things they do!
Put it down to…to ‘midsummer madness’, or your damned moonlit ghosts !’
He dropped his hands from her shoulders, his face wryly mocking.
‘Take care, Caroline.
Do not curse the moon, remember?
It can bring ill fortune.’
‘I'm sick of your superstitious nonsense…’
‘What would Mathilde have made of you?
I wonder,’ he taunted softly, his gaze wryly amused despite his anger.
‘Mathilde?
She'd have turned me into another of her tasteless folk stories, I expect!
I have to go, Roman.
I'm supposed to be working on your PR for next weekend…’
The need to escape was paramount.
Roman's nearness, the strength of his personality, the insidious memories of last night were undermining her defences…
‘Today is Sunday.
You are entitled to a free day.’
‘Precisely.
So I'm going back to Kalkara to have one!’
He gazed at her, in silence, as if waiting to see if she had the strength to carry out this assertion.
Her knees seemed to have gone on strike.
Her legs felt numb, her feet like lead.
The messages from her brain to turn and walk away seemed to take so long reaching their destination, she thought she might be riveted to the ground forever.
Retribution from the long-dead Mathilde, for cursing the moon?
She could move.
Stiffly, she spun on her heel and began to march away, but Roman caught her arm, hauling her back with an insulting lack of effort.
‘Where are you storming off to?’ he murmured, a harder note in his voice.
‘To ring for a taxi!
Unless you intend tying me up and locking me in my room?’
She was trembling.
His eyes narrowed incredulously.
‘It may surprise you to learn that, despite your low opinion of my character, I do not number kidnapping among my hobbies, Caroline,’ he assured her, his voice ominously calm.
‘If you wish to return to Kalkara, I will drive you.’
‘There's no need…’ she began angrily, but, met with such a quelling look, she fell silent.
Every trace of emotion seemed to have drained from his face.
Even his colour, beneath the darkness of his skin.
Staring up at him, her stomach in knots, she thought she'd never seen him look so frighteningly distant and patrician…
‘There is every need.
Go and pack your things.
I will wait for you.’
His tone was impersonal.
And coldly angry.
Retreating to her bedroom, flinging things into her suitcase, she was furious to find that tears were pricking the backs of her eyes, and her heart felt as if it might be slowly breaking into a million pieces…
The irony of her situation struck her several times over during the following few days.
Here she was, throwing all her professional energies into promoting Romano de Sciorto and his company, when personally she wouldn't mind if he went out of business tomorrow…
No, no…that wasn't true…
She laid down the telephone and stared at the view outside her office window.
She'd been moved from the uninspiring cupboard allocated to her by Stephanie on her arrival.
She could now see the creek, filled with its glamorous yachts and strolling, beautiful people…
She didn't wish Roman's company any harm at all, she acknowledged miserably, biting the end of her tortoiseshell pen.
She just wished she'd never met him.
Wished she could turn back the clock to when, only a matter of ten days ago, she'd led a calm and orderly life back in London, in control of her business and her private life…
Gazing out of the window, she scarcely saw the breathtaking panorama spread out there for her delight.
The sky was a high, brilliant blue bowl above the jumble of old buildings and church spires along the quayside.
The Mediterranean rippled and sparkled, its sapphire surface cut into waves by the movement of the pleasure-craft…
She squeezed her eyes shut, shivering with remembered emotion.
The night with Roman had been unforgettable.
His touch on her skin, the intimate awakening of his lips and fingers in places she'd never even contemplated being awakened, the indescribable, explosive response he'd aroused inside her.
And, even more disturbing, the shuddering, all-consuming masculine passion she'd appeared to arouse in him …
Whatever happened, nothing could be the same again.
Whatever the impulse of the moment, she hadn't given herself lightly to Roman.
It had felt inevitable.
Like something preordained…
How on earth could she have accused him over that conversation with Salvo?
Picking up the internal telephone, she buzzed Stephanie, abruptly coming to a decision she'd been wrestling with for a couple of days, one she considered to be eminently sensible and practical…
‘I'd like to visit the warehouse, at Gzira,’ she began without preamble.
‘Can you make sure someone will let me in, early evening?’
‘Roman would not want you going there.’
The flat response made Caroline's heart plummet.
Subconsciously, she realised, she'd been hoping for a ready answer, an explanation which would clear her niggling doubts…
‘Why ever not?’ she countered calmly, fighting down the dismay threatening to overwhelm her.
‘There was an important consignment at the weekend, wasn't there?
It occurs to me that the firm's international links cannot be over-emphasised.
It would make very good public relations material if we can show how you import from all over the world…’
There was a frozen pause.
‘I'll have to ask Roman when he gets back.’
‘When will that be?’
‘He's gone out on a customer's boat…’
‘Can you contact him?’ she prompted, exasperated.
She felt impatient now.
She had a burning need to get this ridiculous misunderstanding sorted out as quickly as possible.
‘No.
And I know Roman would not want you to go there.
Roman does not want you here at all, Signorina Hastings.
You stir up trouble.
The sooner you go back to London, the happier Roman will be!’
The telephone was slammed down.
Caroline stared at the receiver, aghast, her brain whirling.
She'd already suspected that Roman's secretary was in love with him.
But first-hand confirmation did nothing to raise her spirits.
And on the second count, now that she'd virtually made up her mind to visit the warehouse tonight, did she really want to discover the truth, after all…?
The shadows were lengthening as Caroline parked her mother's car on the small industrial estate and was shown inside the warehouse by a storeman.
Primed by Stephanie's reaction, she had the presence of mind to put on an impressive pretence of knowing all about the recent ‘mystery’ consignment.
She even managed to convince the man that she'd been sent by Roman to inspect the goods.
So, instead of having to wander round and use her own powers of observation, she was escorted, heart thudding guiltily, straight to the back of the warehouse.
It was a massive, hangar-like building, clean and surprisingly dust-free, neatly stacked with rows of metal shelves on which lay hundreds of cartons, of varied origin.
A section at the back of the warehouse was partitioned off.
A door faced her, white-painted.
Following the storeman inside, staring round blankly, she saw yet more cartons, and a pile of something, crates possibly, apparently concealed under a tarpaulin.
‘There we are,’ the man grinned, eyeing her slender figure in the short black cotton dress.
‘Count de Sciorto has decided to take the wraps off at last, has he?’
‘Er — yes…thank you.’
‘I'll leave you to it,signorina .’
Left alone, consumed with yet more guilt, she felt like a character in a second-rate detective film.
She bent to tug at the covering, found it securely fastened.
Abandoning her shoulder-bag impatiently, she used both hands, pulling the rope which fastened the heavy oil-cloth.
She'd just got some leverage, loosened enough to see the front of a plywood box, when a soft footstep in the doorway made her leap, guiltily, to her feet.
‘Bonswa , Caroline.’
Roman was propped casually against the door-jamb, arms crossed, one ankle tilted over the other, blocking her exit.
His smile was grim, his dark eyes as hard as ebony in the granite lines of his face.
In deck shoes, casual close-fitting denim Bermudas, and black polo-shirt, his hair tousled as if he'd just jumped off a boat, he looked very large and male and intimidating.
She faced him defiantly, her hands clasped behind her back, feeling like a burglar caught red-handed.
His eyes raked from her slender tanned legs over the V-neck of her short black dress, and on up to her flushed cheeks, and the blonde strands of hair escaping her neat bun.
‘How did you know I was here?’
‘Stephanie radioed me on the boat.
Were you looking for something?’
‘I…
I was trying to solve the mystery of that secret ‘consignment’ you and Salvo were talking about!’
She confessed her motives with commendable honesty, her face burning under his derisive scrutiny.
‘Perhaps I can help?’
His tone was bland.
He fished a wad of papers from his top pocket as he strolled across to cut through the retaining rope on the tarpaulin.
‘The secret is simple, and perfectly legal.’
He handed her the folded documents as he prised open the first box.
‘That's the official paperwork covering this consignment.
All above-board.
In these crates —’ he beckoned her over with a cool, authoritative wave ‘— is the very latest ‘state of the art’satellite communication system imported from France.
Emblem have been negotiating an exclusive agency here in Malta…’
‘So?
Why the secrecy?’
She stared at the papers in her hand uncomprehendingly.
‘That agency is not yet signed and sealed.
We were anxious to preserve total secrecy on the new product to protect our legal rights.
But we wanted to get it here, to spring maximum surprise over our competitors at the business fair.’
‘I see…’
She frowned at him, her temper beginning to simmer quietly as his words sank in.
‘Hence the cloak-and-dagger stuff,’ she went on, slowly, her voice deceptively calm.
‘Hence the need to ship it in under maximum security, I presume?
And hence Stephanie's shock-horror performance when I made my innocent enquiries?’
‘Precisely.’
She stared at him, in growing disbelief.
She'd never really believed he was importing undeclared goods, or in any way breaking the law.
But this was altogether different…
‘So, these crates contain your prize exhibits for the business fair?
Am I understanding this correctly?’
Her voice shook with suppressed anger.
‘At last, I think we can safely say that you are understanding the situation correctly.’
Roman's voice was bitingly sarcastic.
He was observing her anger with a wry gleam in his eyes.
‘And when, exactly, were you going to tell me of their existence?
So that, as your specially commissioned public relations consultant, I could use their impact to full effect?
Maximise their importance to your company's image?’ she enquired sweetly.
‘I wasn't.’
‘So what am I doing here in Malta?’ she hissed incredulously.
‘Why are you wasting your precious money paying me to look an absolute fool on your behalf, Roman?’
CHAPTER NINE
‘Perhaps this question of trust works both ways, Caroline?’
‘We're talking about my professional integrity here!’
Caroline was rigid with outrage.
‘I simply can't believe you kept such a…a crucial sales advantage to yourself!
What did you imagine I might do?
Rush to your competitors?
Sell your secret to the highest bidder?’
‘Walls have ears in these situations.’
Roman shrugged, unrepentant.
‘Without intimate knowledge of the business, it would have been easy for you to make an unintentional slip.
Now that the Press releases have all been dispatched, the publicity details more or less finalised, I see no reason why I should not put you out of your misery, allay those nasty suspicious thoughts of yours!’
‘I haven't been having any nasty suspicious thoughts…’
‘Haven't you?’ he mocked ruthlessly, snaking out a hand to catch her against him, the hard contact of his body triggering frantic shivers of reaction.
‘That's not the impression you gave me last weekend at Casa Sciorto, Caroline.’
‘I was upset, and confused.
I'm not confused any more.
Not…about that.’
Her low voice was shaky, her heart drumming so hard she could hardly hear herself.
‘I just wasn't sure what this mystery was all about, that's all, but now that I know, I —’
His narrowed gaze was on the full curve of her mouth.
‘You're not confused any more?’ he echoed disbelievingly, cutting across her sentence, dropping his head to cover her parted lips with his mouth in a demanding, possessive kiss which drove coherent thought clean out of her head.
He lifted his head just as abruptly to scan her shattered face with a cool, challenging glitter in his eyes.
‘Well, I sure as hell am!
Trust is everything.
Forget your professional integrity, Caroline.
What about my personal integrity?
Ever since we met I've been the target for veiled accusations and suspicions!
And even after we spent the night together you were still busy distrusting me.
If there's no trust, there's nothing left, Caroline.’
Her breath caught angrily in her throat.
She stared up at the granite-harsh features, trembling as much from the insidious effect of his hands on her back, pressing her against the male strength of his body, as from her growing anger at his arrogant, hurtful lack of confidence in her…
But he was justified, a small voice reminded her, in his scathing indictment.
If he'd been wary of placing too much trust in her, she'd been openly sceptical about him, right from their first meeting.
She had been suspicious, wary, accusing…she couldn't deny it…
‘If I said that I trusted you,’ she whispered, forcing the words to form, ‘if I told you that, come what may, I trusted you, would you still be confused?’
He gave a short, harsh laugh.
‘Even more so,’ he mocked ruthlessly.
‘Roman, please…’
She swallowed a lump in her throat, clenched her hands into small fists at her sides.
‘You're not making this easy for me!’
‘Why should I make it easy for you?
In fact —’ an ominous gleam had come into his dark gaze ‘— after avoiding the issue these last few days, I'm tired of prevaricating.
I'm sorely tempted to make it as hard for you as possible!’
‘Roman…’
‘We're going for a drive.’
Speechless, Caroline found herself marched out of the warehouse to Roman's Aston Martin.
She stopped abruptly by the passenger door, staring at him in wide-eyed silence.
The evening shadows had lengthened still more.
Soon, with the briefest of twilights, it would be dark.
The storeman seemed to have gone.
There was no one else around.
There were only the crickets shrilling away to themselves in the bushes.
‘Get in.’
After a fractional hesitation she did as he said.
There was an air of amused but brutal determination about him which was sending her brain scuttling in all directions.
But intuition told her it was unwise to argue.
She was angry, but so was Roman.
Spectacularly, awesomely so.
It might be diplomatic to humour him for the moment…
‘Would it be too suspicious-sounding to ask where we're going?’ she enquired huskily, after a few miles had been gobbled up by the powerful car.
They were skirting Valletta and Floriana, and heading out south-east on the airport road.
Was he planning on putting her on a plane back to England?
Her heart, in spite of everything, lurched painfully.
She couldn't bear this.
All she wanted, as she sat motionless beside him in the luxurious interior of the Aston Martin, was to reach out and touch the muscular, sun-bronzed knee so close to her own slender legs.
How could she feel so physically drawn to him, when intellectually she was detesting him for this arrogant charade?
For his insulting treatment of her over that exclusive French agency?
‘Let me see,’ he mused, casting her a cool, heavy-lidded glance.
‘Now that you've discovered my secret store of ‘smuggled’ loot, there's no alternative, is there?
I'll have to spirit you away to my cave, and dispose of you on the white-slave market, just like wicked old Hasan.’
‘Roman, don't you think this farce has gone far enough?’ she snapped, beginning to lose her calm diplomacy.
‘Yes.
That's exactly what I think.’
She bit her lip, writhing in suppressed fury as he continued driving.
The roads were busy at first, then the traffic grew more scarce.
The warm evening air brushed her face and tugged at her hair as the car sped south.
Eventually, they reached what seemed to be a disused airfield.
There was a control tower, and runways.
Roman stopped the car and climbed out, came around to open her door.
For a few seconds she knew a stab of fear, and then she looked into his eyes and the fear disappeared.
Whatever he was up to, whatever his intentions towards her, at least she'd just discovered something about her feelings towards him.
She wasn't afraid of him.
But the anger remained.
‘Roman, where are we?’
‘Come on, get out.
We're going for a walk…’
He reached inside the dashboard and extracted a powerful flashlight.
Together, with Roman's arm like an iron band round her shoulders, they began to walk, towards the cliffs.
There were signposts, and suddenly she knew where they were.
They were heading for Ghar Hasan…
‘For heaven's sake, Roman!’
She turned to him, half indignant, half bewildered.
‘Is this route-march necessary?’
‘A visit to Ghar Hasan?
Very necessary, Caroline…’
The deep voice was rich in mocking laughter but, underneath, the anger remained.
They walked on.
Drew nearer to the cliff-edge.
She could hear the sea pounding on the rocks far below.
There was a pathway, steps cut in the cliff.
Darkness was rapidly turning the sky a deep indigo, studded with silver stars, and a platinum disc of a moon, almost full.
They reached the entrance in mutual silence and, seething in mounting outrage, she was propelled inside.
The darkness was absolute.
The flashlight illuminated a labyrinth of limestone passageways.
Taking her hand, Roman steered her to a right-hand fork and she stumbled after him.
She'd never liked the dark.
And the darkness in this cave had a peculiar density which seemed to close right in over her, like a suffocating blanket.
She found herself thinking of the story of Antonio and Louisa.
Ridiculous folklore nonsense.
But here in the clammy blackness of a strange, confusing cave, with Roman in this unbearably taunting mood, she felt the stirrings of panic.
Then abruptly she gasped.
They'd reached a dramatic opening, and through it she could see the moon-silvered sea hundreds of feet below, moving in a slow, deep swell towards the foot of the cliffs.
‘Roman, what in heaven's name are you doing?’ she whispered, her voice almost deserting her.
Roman had stopped, and turned to her, his face unreadable in the shadow.
Grasping his shoulder, she tugged urgently at him.
‘I'm showing you Ghar Hasan,’ he murmured implacably.
‘Now tell me, Caroline, do you trust me?’
‘Of course…yes, I do.’
‘You trust me not to hurt you in any way?’
‘Roman, I have never imagined you would hurt me in any way!
But why on earth have you brought me here ?’
‘To teach you something about trust,’ he told her softly, pulling her into his arms.
‘To see for myself what depravity you think I am capable of.’
‘I don't think you're capable of any depravity…’
‘No?
Yet already you have accused me of trying to endanger your mother's life through risky water sports.
Of colluding with my brother in some illegal deal.
Is this not depravity, Caroline?
Where do you draw the line in these matters?’
‘Roman, I'm sorry!’
She glared up at him through the darkness, her fingers clinging to the reassuring warmth of his broad shoulders.
Fighting down a wave of combined anger and panic, she found herself gabbling furiously, ‘I'm sorry !
I was wrong about my mother.
I've already apologised.
I accept that my mother makes her own choices.
Really I do!
And I think your ‘live for the day’ philosophy is absolutely spot-on; I couldn't agree more!
And I believe that consignment back in the warehouse is totally, completely, unquestionably legal .
Satisfied?
Roman, I don't like this cave; please could we discuss this somewhere…civilised?’
‘You don't like the Cave of Hasan?
But this is a popular venue.
Locals come here to picnic, to race their cars along the disused runways of the airfield…’
‘I expect they come in daylight ?’
‘True.
But tonight we can see by moonlight.
I believe there is a full moon.
You are not concerned that Mathilde's ghosts might appear, to act our their tragic performance?’
‘No!’
She shivered involuntarily, clinging more tightly.
‘I don't believe in ghosts, Roman, but please can we go…?’
‘Don't be afraid.’
He laughed mercilessly.
‘I have more than enough courage for both of us,cara .
Maybe I should have taken you to Calypso's Cave, over on Gozo,’ he added mockingly, running his hands down over her hips and closing the gap between them so that every hollow and curve came into contact with the steely wall of his legs and stomach, ‘where the goddess Calypso managed to detain Ulysses for seven years…’
‘I hope you're not planning on detaining me in here for seven years!’ she managed to protest, her voice trailing into a breathless gasp as he slid his fingers up to her throat, and caressed the pulse throbbing at the base of her neck.
‘No, I think not.
As the setting for a love-scene it has a great deal to be desired, don't you think?’
‘A love-scene?’
It was a mere husky whisper.
She could feel her heart thudding against his chest.
Her stomach seemed to have disappeared in a warm, melting  whirlpool of longing.
‘Oh, Roman…’
‘The problem with casting myself as the male version of Calypso is that I doubt if Ulysses trusted her as far as he could throw her.’
‘Ulysses was pretty strong, wasn't he?’
The comment was flippant, but she pressed her face against Roman's shoulder, shivering, desperately seeking the comforting power of muscle and sinew as he held her in his arms.
‘Calypso was trying to mesmerise him to forget about his life back home.’
His voice was wry against her hair.
‘To forget his faithful partner waiting for him.
If we turn that around, where does that leave me?
I wonder.
Is there a faithful partner waiting for you back at home,cara ?
One you trust more easily than you find you can trust me?’
‘Roman, the other night at Casa Sciorto,’ she whispered shakily, tightening her arms around his neck, trembling as he bent his head to trace the lightest of kisses along her temple, ‘making…making love with you.
It was something I've never wanted to do with any other man.
Something that has never felt right before.
Does…does that answer your question?’
‘I think it answers part of my question, Caroline…’
He sounded huskily amused, but his deep voice was a fraction unsteady.
‘But how about the morning after,cara ?
That frigid little scene you treated me to over breakfast?’
‘Deep down, I think it…it wasn't so much you I didn't trust…’
She swallowed jerkily, pressing herself more closely to him in the eerie darkness.
‘More…myself.
My own feelings…’
‘You didn't trust your own judgement?’ he supplied softly, his lips brushing her neck, making her arch herself involuntarily against him.
‘Is that what you're saying, Caroline?’
‘I suppose so…’
She sighed shudderingly, momentarily glad of the shadows of the cave, even if she longed to be out of it.
‘And do you still feel that you made an error of judgement?’
She took a shaky breath, groping blindly for the words.
‘I know it's ridiculous, but it felt as if I'd taken an enormous jump into the dark, that night with you…’
‘And you are afraid of the dark?’ he murmured, tightening his hold on her, smoothing a long caress down the length of her spine and skimming the high curve of her buttocks with a possessive movement which sent her heart into skittering panic.
‘Of course you are…’
‘Roman, don't sneer …’
It was a muffled half-sob against the reassuring hardness of his shoulder.
‘I'm not.
To sneer would be to imply that I don't care about you, Caroline.
And that, in spite of the short time we have known each other, would not be true…’
He'd spoken so quietly, his face against the top of her head, that she'd only just heard his words.
She lifted her head to look into his eyes, see his face, read his expression, but in the long shadows thrown by the torchlight it was impossible to read.
Her pulses racing, she looked past him to the dizzy drop through the hole in the cliff, to the sea below.
The water's surface shimmered with a million moon-fragments.
She felt as if her heart were reflected there.
All her doubts and fears, her insecurities and uncertainties, scattered down there, waiting to vanish forever in the dark water…
‘Roman…’
The urgent whisper died, choked by an abrupt surge of self-doubt.
Words to express her feelings seemed to wither and die inside her.
What did she feel?
Desire?
Infatuation?
A wild urge to cling to him like this for the rest of her life?
On Monday she flew home to London, to her flat, her office, her own business, her friends.
To the real world, thousands of miles from this suspended animation, this emotional nirvana she'd plunged unexpectedly into…
But she didn't want to go.
That world no longer seemed real.
The only reality was this growing excitement, this joyful, aching need, blossoming inside, her softness in contact with Roman's hard strength, her insides melting and dissolving into an endless void of desire, and warmth, and belonging…
‘At least—’ his voice held a husky tinge of wry amusement against her ear ‘— you are not hysterical, convinced I am about to fling you down on to the rocks below.’
‘Even I trust you to that degree,’ she agreed shakily, smiling in spite of herself.
‘But have I withstood my punishment for long enough now?
Am I to be allowed out of here?’
‘I think that might be advisable.’
Roman's deep voice was thick with desire.
The short black dress had ridden up and she'd reached to wind her arms round his neck, and as his hands moved exploratively down they encountered silky bare thighs, and the lacy, high-cut material of her brief black panties.
The heat smouldering between their bodies had intensified, and with a light-headed sensation she felt him crush her convulsively against the lean hardness of his hips, and felt the powerful stirrings of male arousal, triggering a small explosion of response inside her.
‘Roman…’
It was a shy, shaky whisper.
In that moment she wasn't sure if she could fling decorum to the wind and beg him to make love to her again, right there, standing up in the blackness of Ghar Hasan.
‘Oh, Roman…’
‘If you persist in clinging to me in that limpet-like way, Caroline, I will not answer for the consequences…’
‘I can't help it, it's this horrible cave…’ she complained huskily, her fingers finding the spring of his curly hair at the nape of his neck, and raking through it with shameless provocation.
With a hoarse groan he slid his fingers around and beneath the hem of her dress, making her gasp as he smoothed his hands inside the lace of her panties, caressing the taut silk of her buttocks, running audaciously between her legs to seek the hot, tell-tale moistness, the satin-soft centre of her femininity as she shivered helplessly in his supporting grip.
Her defences were gone.
With a mindless urgency she lifted her lips to his mouth, opened to the hungry, devouring thrust of his tongue against hers.
She felt as if the entire universe were spinning out of control with her soaring, throbbing need…
‘Shameless,’ he teased thickly, lifting his mouth for a moment to gaze darkly down at her rapt face.
‘If I had known you were planning to entice me with your feminine wiles I would not have risked bringing you here,cara !’
‘Roman, I want you so much…’
She hardly cared what she said; she was utterly ensnared.
‘Not as much as I want you,sabiha tieghi , my beautiful one.’
His voice was hoarse and uneven.
‘But I do not feel I can do justice to that need here, in the uncomfortable cold of this cave.
I like to take my pleasures in more congenial surroundings,cara .
I have a burning desire to see you spread out on my bed, every inch of you revealed for my delectation…’
His breathing was shallow, the heat from his body like a slow-burning furnace, sending her temperature rocketing.
She sensed that he was holding back with a massive effort, suppressing his own hunger with iron discipline.
Self-conscious again, she loosened her hold on him, hot all over in spite of the clammy atmosphere of the cave.
‘Let's get out of here,’ she said unevenly.
‘Yes, let's…’
The deep voice was dry.
Back in the warm, silken night air, beneath the massive arc of bright stars, she breathed in greedily, revelling in the blessed contrast, the giddy relief of being out of the cave.
But at the same time she felt strangely bereft.
as if something vital had been within her grasp, and removed at the last minute…
Physically she felt devastated.
Shivery, and weak with reaction…
In silence, Roman led the way back to the car.
An uneasy tension seemed to have fallen between them again, as if the hot, searing flash of passion inside the cave had been a product of their environment, and not of their own feelings for each other.
Feeling desolate, she climbed back into the car, not daring to look at Roman in the silver moonlight.
‘Midsummer madness’,’ he quoted softly, his gaze on her averted profile.
‘That was your explanation for what happened last weekend…’
She turned slowly, reluctantly, to see his dark face.
His expression was shuttered again, unfathomable.
Something seemed to tighten and die inside her.
What had she hoped he would say?
What had she secretly been yearning to hear him say?
The pain in the region of her heart was so intense that she wrapped her arms around herself involuntarily.
This was unbearable…
‘Or moonlit ghosts,’ she said in a choked voice, forcing a slight laugh.
‘It happens.
Brief…sexual attraction between people…’
There was a long silence.
Then Roman reached slowly to flick on the ignition, and the soft, throaty roar of the engine shattered the silence.
‘Oh, yes, indeed,’ he agreed expressionlessly.
‘It happens.’
He flicked a cassette player on the dashboard, and the soft, haunting strains of a ballad stole into the silence between them.
Feeling as if she were slowly dying inside, she listened to the words.
It was a song she'd heard many times in the past, one that had stayed in the popular charts for months.
Full of explosive passion and suppressed romantic yearning.
But suddenly the singer's raw, husky voice seemed to touch her soul.
The familiar song seemed to have taken on an extraordinarily personal message for her.
Tears pricked the backs of her eyes, swelled in her throat.
Was this how it happened? she wondered despairingly.
How you knew that you'd fallen hopelessly, profoundly in love with someone who was very far from feeling the same way?
You experienced a moonlit night with an intensity never experienced before?
And the words of love-songs made you cry?
‘So…what comes next?’ she managed at last, as they drove on.
‘Business or pleasure?’
The cool query threw her composure.
Wincing involuntarily, feeling as if she were groping in a dark quicksand, she said quickly, ‘Business…’
‘We finalise our campaign for the opening of the fair at Naxxar.
And then you fly home to London.’
‘Yes.’
She hadn't imagined it, then.
Roman was coolly uninterested.
They were true, those rumours about men who relished the thrill of the chase, tossed their quarry aside once it was over.
Rejection was so icily painful that she caught her breath.
It was like a jagged knife, jerking in her solar plexus.
And then an empty, agonising, lonely ache, closing her throat with suppressed emotion and disappointment…
‘Yes, I suppose that's right,’ she agreed.
She was impressing herself with her ability to inject a casual calm into her voice, to compose her features in the darkness of the car.
‘And that's it.’
Roman's deep voice was flat, devoid of emotion.
‘The next few days are going to be a long, hard slog.
Not much time for pleasure.
Except for the Mnarja , of course…’
They were approaching the turn to Kalkara.
‘Yes.
Except for the Mnarja …’
‘Will you come with me, Caroline?’
He'd drawn up outside the old town house, cut the engine.
She gazed at him uncomprehendingly, too bruised and wary inside to risk reading anything into that shuttered, quizzical stare.
‘What…?’
‘To the Mnarja ,’ he supplied wryly, scanning her white face without visible sign of emotion.
‘Will you?’
Stiffly she shrugged.
Forced a cool smile, as she climbed out of the car, searched for her key in her bag.
‘Of course,’ she replied, in a clear voice which sounded too high, and artificial, even to her own ears.
‘After everything I've heard about it, I wouldn't miss the Mnarja for the world!’
CHAPTER TEN
‘You look pale, Caroline!’
Anneliese was frowning in concern, studying her face then casting a quick, accusing glance at her elder brother.
‘Roman has been making you work far too hard!
Shame on you, Romano — look at the dark shadows beneath her eyes!’
There wasn't really enough light to allow a thorough examination of the shadows in question, but Roman duly bent his head to inspect the pale oval of Caroline's face in the soft lights from the trees.
The grave, thoughtful concentration in the dark eyes sent her heart into scudding panic.
The Mnarja festival had drawn crowds from all over the island.
There were people everywhere, hundreds of them, most of them beautifully dressed for the highlight of the midsummer festas .
The woods of the Buskett Gardens, with their Aleppo pines and citrus groves, oak ash and poplar, beneath the floodlit Verdala Palace, were alive with lights and folk music and dancing, and with the aromatic wafts of Maltese specialities on sale at booths and stalls for the all-night consumption of the revellers.
Some of the dancers wore the Maltese national costume, the huge black faldetta head-dress over long blue silk dresses with embroidered bodices.
She'd already seen Il-Maltija , a country dance which Roman had told her began in the royal courts of the eighteenth century.
Now they were standing listening to some male folk singers who were taking turns to sing, to the accompaniment of Spanish guitars, reminiscent of flamenco.
‘It is true that the last few days have been hard,’ he confessed quietly, sliding his arm along Caroline's taut shoulders, ‘but tonight I will look after her.
So do not look at me in that accusing way, little sister!’
The wry humour in Roman's voice did nothing to improve Caroline's temper.
‘Thanks, I can look after myself!’ she pointed out calmly, twisting away from his arm and turning a faint apologetic smile on the watchful Anneliese.
‘I even managed to drive my mother's car all the way out here by myself this evening!’
The mild sarcasm wasn't lost on Roman.
He'd offered to pick her up and drive her out here.
This time, stung by his coolness, she'd found the strength to insist on her independence.
‘Ah, yes, of course,’ Roman murmured, a scathing note in his voice.
‘You can look after yourself.
Even in your most revealing dress, in the back streets of Valletta, I recall?’
His eyes moved over her slender figure, clad in filmy chiffon, his expression unfathomable.
She coloured slightly.
She'd treated herself to the new dress, from the boutique recommended by Anneliese.
Made of fine violet chiffon, with a floaty, ankle-length skirt, it had a low-cut bodice and narrow shoe-string straps which were deliciously feminine but impossible to wear with a bra.
The dark, lazy appraisal moved down over the jut of her breasts beneath the soft material, and she shivered involuntarily, despite the warm night.
Even the faint breeze held an exotic heat, like hot air blown from a fire, sporadically flicking the fluted hem of her dress against her bare legs, lifting strands of blonde hair from her neck and temples.
‘Well, I'm in a respectable dress,’ she countered coolly.
‘And the Buskett Gardens are a long way from the back streets of Valletta.’
‘And I think you look gorgeous!’
Anneliese declared, her own dark beauty vibrant in a pale pink silk suit.
‘And, if you want to know my feelings, I wish you two would stop this cat-and-mouse game and just get together!’
There was a stunned, appalled silence.
‘Anneliese…’
Roman's deep voice held a warning edge, but his sister shrugged unrepentantly in expressive Continental impatience.
‘But you make me so angry,’ she said on a short laugh, ‘when anyone with half a brain can see what is going on!’
‘Very little point in your brother's and my ‘getting together’, Anneliese,’ Caroline heard herself laugh flippantly, rigid with embarrassment at the other girl's blunt attempts at matchmaking, ‘since I'm flying back to London tomorrow!’
‘And how, my interfering little sister, can you be so sure that Caroline and I have not already ‘got together’?’
Caroline froze, motionless, her heart splintering a little more inside.
Roman's voice was smooth, bland.
She somehow had to fumble for words to keep up her own façade of blithe sophistication.
‘True, we've certainly just achieved a major success together at Naxxar!’ she told Anneliese, with determined briskness.
‘Emblem Communications is the star of the business fair.
I think the campaign worked brilliantly, despite Roman's keeping the most important publicity coup under wraps until the very last minute!’
‘Certainly, I cannot fault the Caroline Hastings Public Relations machine,’ Roman agreed silkily.
‘Caroline,cara , are you truly going back to London tomorrow?’
Anneliese's dismay was almost comical.
‘What about your mother?
Will she not be back from her trip soon, and hope to see you before you go?’
‘Caroline is a busy career-woman,’ Roman supplied casually.
‘She has a successful business in London.
Not to mention…
Jeremy?’
She winced, aghast at his easy cruelty.
Did he actually hate her now?
She couldn't recall ever feeling so desperately, fiercely angry and unhappy.
It was as if , having goaded her to the point of total capitulation, he'd opted for a wary cooling-off period.
Certainly, since the disturbing emotions unleashed at Ghar Hasan, he'd withdrawn from her in some subtle way.
There'd been an uneasy truce, a kind of businesslike friendliness while the matter of the fair at the Palazzo Parisio was handled and finalised.
Tonight, since she'd driven up to Mdina to join Roman's party attending the Mnarja , was the first chance they'd had to relax, explore any remaining vestiges of their relationship…
If ‘relationship’ was the word.
It was becoming painfully obvious that apart from a brief, overpowering lust there was no reciprocation of her fragile feelings.
His interest had lasted while he'd had the challenge of disproving her suspicions about his business activities.
Had the satisfaction of hearing her confess her desire for him.
Since that victory, she'd felt like yesterday's fad, out-of-date and discarded…
She sipped some red wine and felt a shudder of emotion convulse her.
She'd made the oldest mistake in the book, hadn't she?
Confusing the female view of romantic love with the male sex-drive…
Anneliese had turned to talk to her husband and friends near by, and Caroline felt abruptly marooned with Roman, unnerved by the force of her feelings.
The enchanting atmosphere of the Mnarja festival, the moonlit night, the lights and laughter in the darkness of the woods…everything seemed to be conspiring to demolish her composure.
She'd been crazy to come.
She should never have come.
Roman was standing close to her, so close that she could feel the warmth from his body.
Yet she'd never felt more estranged from him, more alone.
‘What do they sing about?’ she asked quietly.
The haunting melody of the guitarist on the small stage beneath the floodlit trees, the husky, lilting Malti, with its strange blend of Moorish and European, was mesmerising.
‘It's a singing game,’ Roman supplied, his deep voice preoccupied.
He glanced down at her with a slight smile.
‘A very ancient one.
Called the ghanja .
They compose the songs on the spot.
In Malti this is called spirtu prent .
Improvisation.
Often, they are ballads marking some important event, some…sensational happening.
Murders, maybe.
Tragic events, folk stories…’
‘Like Mathilde's Antonio and Louisa?’
She found herself half smiling, faintly, back up at him.
‘Something like that.’
The silence felt charged, heavy with unspoken thoughts, uncharted feelings.
‘Do the Maltese really believe such stories?’
‘No more and no less than the English believe their folk tales.’
‘And these ghosts of yours?’
She gave a slight, husky laugh.
‘I am not interested in ghosts, Caroline.
I am not greatly interested in the past just now.
It is the present and the future which occupy my thoughts.’
She was silent again, floundering in the dark.
She had no idea of Roman's feelings towards her, she realised with a jolt of despair.
And no courage to enquire, after the subtle but humiliating rejection she'd experienced as they left Ghar Hasan.
Was he paying her attention this evening because he felt guilty in some way?
Embarrassed at having seduced the daughter of a friend, and now encumbered with the threat of a far more intense relationship than he'd bargained for?
Her head swam in confusion.
She wasn't making any sense.
Maybe she had worked too hard these last few days.
Her thoughts were chasing round in circles…
‘Are you still hungry?’ he asked softly, sliding his arm along her shoulders again and glancing towards a nearby stall.
‘Would you like to try patizzi ?’
‘Is that sweet or savoury?’
‘Savoury.
Anchovies, ricotta and vegetables in pastry.’
‘It sounds delicious but…
I'm not really hungry now.’
Earlier she'd eaten some of the traditional casserole — fried rabbit in red wine — but any appetite she had left was rapidly deserting her.
Roman's warm hand on her bare shoulder was deeply disturbing, throwing her emotions into turmoil.
‘Did…did you bring Gabriella here?
To the Mnarja ?’
She heard herself ask the question, aghast at her stupidity.
‘Yes…’
Roman dropped his arm from her shoulders, faced her as if he'd just returned, mentally, from some distant place.
‘And…would she have wanted a yearly visit written into her marriage contract?’
He gave a short laugh.
‘That was an ancient custom.
This was only ten years ago, Caroline.’
She thought he would say nothing more, then he went on slowly, ‘Gabriella and I were engaged for only three months.
But I had known her since we were children.
She was as much an old friend as a lover, or future wife…’
‘But you loved her?’
‘Iva , yes, of course I loved her.’
The dark gaze was intent on her strained face.
‘But I was also very young.
Both of us were.
Looking back now, I can see that our love was that of a boy for a girl.
Not that of a man for a woman…’
‘But this…live-for-the-day philosophy of yours…’
Her heart was thudding as she persisted, watched the narrowing of his eyes as he gazed down at her.
‘Almost…nihilistic?
as if you don't really care whether you live or die?
Doesn't that stem from…from your heartbreak over Gabriella?’
‘Nihilistic ?
Are you crazy?’ he grated softly, reaching to grip her shoulders in his hands.
‘Caroline,cara , I have told you already, I take no deliberate risks.
Life is precious !
And life is sweet.
But there is no life, if you dare not test yourself, if you dare not feel free to live it to the full.
Have you listened to nothing I have said to you since you came here to Malta?
Do you not realise that since I met you I —?’
‘Roman…xemm , Roman!
Hi, Roman!’
The fluting voice was familiar.
‘Mishut !’
The harsh swear-word was grated under his breath.
Abruptly, Roman let his hands once more fall from her shoulders as Stephanie's petite figure came into view, waving in delight as she saw their party.
With a tightening of her stomach Caroline watched the girl approach.
She was curvaceous and stunningly attractive in a saffron-yellow Thai silk sarong-dress, her long black hair swinging loose and straight down her back.
‘Bonswa , Stephanie.’
Roman bent to kiss her in greeting.
Caroline caught the heady waft of the other girl's perfume.
‘They are dancing Il-Parata ; are you coming to see?’
Stephanie's rosebud mouth had curved in a small pout.
She'd slipped her arm through his, urging him to go with her, a gleam of possession in her eyes.
Caroline stared at them as they began a rapid, incomprehensible exchange in Malti, sickened by her own feelings of painful rejection.
The truth had just, belatedly, dawned on her.
The realisation that, no matter what Roman might have said to her, and whether he was faithful to her or not, he and Stephanie were a couple…
She thought of that first lunchtime, when Roman had appeared on her mother's terrace with Stephanie at his side.
Why had she been so blind ?
Why had she let his persuasive charisma overcome common sense?
How ludicrous, after all, to have imagined that the great Count Romano de Sciorto, of Casa Sciorto, of the Città Notabile , the Noble City, could fall seriously in love with her.
With his ancient lineage, his three-hundred-year-old title, and the long-dead Gabriella still representing his only true love?
He'd just been amusing himself with a new challenge, the new blonde female who'd temporarily appeared in his life…
He was listening with a shuttered, unreadable expression to Stephanie's soft, unintelligible flood of words, tall and devastatingly attractive in expensively tailored beige silk suit, white silk shirt, cream and gold patterned silk tie.
She found her eyes drawn and caught in his dark gaze.
The soft lights in the surrounding trees emphasised the harsh hollows and angles of his features, turned his eyes into dark caverns, compelling but unfathomable…
‘Roman and I have been working so hard on this business fair, he's promised to take me away with him when it's over!’
Stephanie had broken off breathlessly to announce this in English to Anneliese, adding with a determined glitter of hostility in her eyes, ‘What time does your flight go tomorrow, Signorina Hastings?’
‘Ten o'clock…’
Caroline's throat felt choked.
It was no good, she couldn't play-act indifference any longer.
This was more than she could stand.
‘In fact, I've just remembered, I'd better get back and start packing.
And there are some phone calls I have to make tonight —’
‘Deo , Caroline…!’
Roman's interruption held a note of such ferocious anger that in any other circumstances it would have stopped her in her tracks.
Now, however, she was too shattered to pay attention.
‘So, would you all excuse me?’
The words came out in a rush, and with an infuriating blur of tears she thrust her wine glass into Anneliese's hand, spun on her heel and walked swiftly away.
‘Caroline, come back!
Please don't dash away…’
Anneliese called after her, in distress.
Feeling even more guilty, and appalled at her own behaviour, she quickened her pace, desperate to escape.
She couldn't break down and start crying and yelling in front of Roman's family and friends, could she?
‘Caroline…!’
Roman's deep, angry voice came from behind her.
Panic and fury engulfed her.
She didn't want to face him.
She couldn't face him, feeling the way she did now.
Thankful for her low-heeled sandals, she broke into a run.
Throngs of people blocked her way, then parted in surprise as she blindly ran through them.
The night became a blur of faces, trees, light and dark, the scents of the woods enveloping her as she stirred the warm night air with her urgent flight.
‘Caroline, wait!’
She'd reached a floodlit clearing where a group of costumed dancers were performing, brilliant in pink skirts, white petticoats, black bodices and bright head-scarves.
The music filled the night air, hauntingly medieval with pipes and drums.
As she hesitated for a split-second when her escape was barred by the dancers, Roman caught up with her, grabbed her arm, hauled her to a standstill.
Her breasts heaving, her throat dry, she strained tensely to release herself.
‘Let go of me.
Go back to Stephanie.
Leave me alone…!’
‘Stop fighting me,’ he murmured huskily, dragging her into his arms to restrain her.
‘Stop it, do you hear me?
Somebody will think I am trying to abduct you…’
In response she kicked at his shins, pummelled him furiously with her fists, and opened her mouth to shout.
With a powerful, angry jerk he slammed her against his body and covered her parted lips with his mouth, kissing her deeply and forcefully, his tongue plundering hers with such fierce urgency that the world seemed to stop spinning, fall as still and silent as the eye of a hurricane.
When he lifted his head, gazed down at her stunned face, her bruised and swollen mouth, his measured gaze was brilliant with banked-down emotion.
‘Now will you stop fighting me?’
The husky voice was grimly amused.
‘Let me go home, Roman.
You've had your fun.’
His gaze darkened, his jaw hardening.
‘I have had no fun at all, Caroline.’
‘Well, thanks a lot…’
She was so breathless that her bitter words sounded strangled.
‘You think what the French call a coup de foudre is fun?’ he protested hoarsely, a hint of rueful humour warming his eyes.
‘You think it is fun, discovering that the only woman in the world you would like to marry suspects you of having a seriously flawed character?’
People were turning away from the dance spectacle to watch, with varying degrees of amusement, the small drama being enacted in their midst.
Oblivious to them, Caroline stared furiously at Roman.
‘I do not suspect any such thing; in fact I…’
She stopped abruptly as his words slowly permeated her consciousness.
Blankly she gazed at him.
The colour crept back into her wary face.
‘What did you just say?’
Her voice was unrecognisable, hoarse and shaky.
Roman's smile made her heart thump faster, her pulses race crazily.
‘I think I said, in a lamentably floundering fashion, that I want to marry you.’
She was dumbstruck.
Standing in his arms, in the warm fairy-lit darkness of the woods, with music and laughter and festa revelry all around them, she could have been alone in the world, Roman the only other human being.
‘But you don't…’
‘What don't I?’ he mocked, the husky caress in his voice shooting a hectic surge of emotion right through her body.
‘I mean…’ she strove for some kind of coherence ‘…
I didn't think you even liked me very much at the moment, let alone…let alone cared sufficiently to want to marry me…’
‘Forgive me.’
The smile had died from his eyes, and he tightened his arms round her so hard that she thought her ribs might crack.
‘Cara , this time I have been the one wrestling with the problem of trust.
My pride is to blame.
Can you forgive me?’
‘Roman, I —’
‘Caroline, pride is a terrible failing.
I freely confess to this failing.
I have wanted you from the moment I saw you, wet and half-naked, on the deck of my motor-launch that night.
When I made love to you, and then, even more devastating, discovered I was the first, that you'd chosen me to be your first lover, it was like…capturing the castle, stealing the Crown Jewels…’
His deep voice held that black velvet softness which knocked the breath from her body.
She gazed up at him in stunned silence.
‘The next day, when I thought you suspected me of smuggling, perhaps worse, my pride took quite a battering.’
He was stroking her hair, the nape of her neck, rhythmically caressing her bare shoulders, tracing the slim length of her upper arms.
Convulsed with emotion, she closed her eyes, rested her forehead against the sensual silk of his shirt, the hard wall of his chest.
‘So you dragged me off to Ghar Hasan…?’ she whispered shakily.
‘To see if you really feared me, if you truly saw me as a shady villain!
A reincarnation of that wicked seducer Hasan, perhaps?’
He gave a short laugh, twisting back from her to lift her chin, inspect her shattered face.
‘You reacted with a very gratifying eruption of passion,cara .
The problem was that I could not be sure if this was your true feeling for me, or just your terror of Mathilde's ghosts making you cling to me in that delightful and extremely inflammatory fashion.
I very nearly took you then and there, standing up, in a cold dark cave…after that I needed a little time to sort through my feelings,sabiha tieghi …’
Roman's voice was a little unsteady, grating with grim amusement and suppressed desire.
Standing in his arms in this way was arousing sensations Caroline had never felt before.
A flow of love and light and warmth seemed to move from his hard nearness into her own body.
Her breasts tingled, the nipples tightening into small peaks of desire against the silk of his shirt.
Her stomach felt hollow with longing.
Her thighs and knees could quite conceivably, she deduced in bewilderment, be turning to rubber.
‘And now you've sorted through you feelings?’ she queried softly, her heart tight in her chest.
‘Marry me.
Stay here, in Malta.
Set up your own PR business here if you want to, or give up work and have babies with me,cara .
Just say that you will marry me.’
She was so stunned, she couldn't get her tongue round a single word.
She went hot and cold, dizzy with confusion.
Finally she blurted out stupidly, ‘But…what…what about Stephanie?
She's in love with you.
You surely know that?’
‘Stephanie has what I think is known as an…infatuation for me.
Since you arrived, ever since she picked up the…vibrations between us, that first lunchtime, she has done everything in her power to stir up trouble, including that episode in my office, and tonight's performance.
She has been trying to stake a claim which I vow to you on my honour she has never had a right to.
After the brief words I have just exchanged with Stephanie, I promise she will trouble us no longer,cara .’
She shivered slightly at the steely note in his voice.
‘And if the anaemic Jeremy were in love with you?’ he demanded softly.
‘Would this have any bearing on your feelings for me, Caroline?’
‘Jeremy is not anaemic,’ she said, with a shaky laugh.
There was a fraught silence.
He stared down at her at such length, with such kindling desire in his dark eyes, that she felt the heat flood through her, a hot, sweet eruption of desire.
‘I just don't know what to say…’ she whispered shyly, overwhelmed by the confusion of her own feelings.
‘Then say nothing,’ he instructed her, a huskily ruthless note creeping back into his voice.
With his arm tightly around her shoulders she found herself steered away from their small, amused, interested audience, away from the music and colourful dancing, out of the floodlit wood and back to the Aston Martin.
Then they were sweeping silently up the hill to the soaring secret walls of Mdina, and the Casa Sciorto.
‘Come,’ he murmured with soft intensity, taking her shaking fingers and guiding her with arrogant lack of consultation up the curving palatial stairway into a large square bedroom.
He closed the door behind them with a decisive click, his gaze heavy-lidded on her tense white face.
She stared round.
Personal items on bedside- and dressing-tables marked this as Roman's room.
There was an aura of masculine occupation — neat, but unmistakably masculine.
But the four-poster dominated this room, too, draped in grey and gold.
Dove-grey walls, the ornate cornice picked out in white.
A long sash window framing a view down, far below, to where she fancied she could almost see the floodlit Verdala Palace and the Buskett Gardens, where the Mnarja would flow on until dawn…
‘Roman —’ It was a strangled, breathless protest.
Her pulses were racing madly as he watched him tug his tie undone with a rough impatience, shrug off his jacket and begin to dispose of his shirt in the same cool, determined style.
‘If you had in mind sex as a way of…of press -ganging me into submission, I —’
‘No, that is not what I had in mind!’ he told her wryly, a wealth of sensual persuasion in his deep voice.
‘Come here, Caroline…’
He stood by the massive four-poster bed in the centre of the room, the ridged hardness of chest, abdomen and steely pectoral muscles a dark contrast above the waistband of the beige trousers.
‘Come to bed with me, now,cara , and then I will know your answer…’
‘Wouldn't it be more…traditional, more civilised, if I just told you my answer?’ she ventured unsteadily.
She felt angry, indignant, yet disturbingly, soaringly excited and happy, all rolled bewilderingly into one.
‘I am a man of action,’ he confessed drily.
‘I would prefer a…practical demonstration.’
The wry edge of hunger in his voice demolished her hesitation.
There was the merest hint of vulnerability in the urgency of his need for her.
It swept away doubts and inhibitions.
On shaky legs she walked slowly over to him, stood before him, her breathing suddenly shallow and jerky as he moved his dark gaze the length of her body.
He was motionless, the only movement a nerve jerking in his tense jaw as she reached her hands up to slip the shoe-string straps from her shoulders, then felt behind her back for the zip.
The soft violet chiffon fell to her waist, exposing creamy gold breasts to his view, high and proud above the narrow line of her ribcage, their tips rose-brown and tight with longing.
Desire warmed her blood, tingling through her veins at the expression in the dark, lidded gaze.
She closed her eyes as he reached an exploratory finger to slowly outline the curve of her cheek, her chin, her throat, all the way down to one tight, aching nipple.
With a low, shuddering exclamation he reached to switch off the light, letting the moon illuminate the room with its pale brilliance.
‘Roman, love me,’ she breathed unsteadily.
‘Please, love me…’
‘That is so very easy,sabiha tieghi …’
He caught his breath, pulled her closer, reaching behind to unfasten the rest of the dress, letting it slip to the floor in a heap at her feet.
‘You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,’ he whispered huskily, smoothing his hands down over her slim waist, the curve of her hips, to the delicate lace of her panties, peeling the scrap of white material down to reveal the whole of her, trembling and weak-kneed, as she stood before him.
‘And, despite your shrewish tongue,’ he teased unevenly, ‘the most loveable…’
Bending his head, he brushed her lips with his mouth, then moved down to her breasts, bent to take one small, tight nipple between cool, hard lips, his tongue circling hungrily, sucking with growing pressure.
Wild pleasure streaked to every nerve-end in Caroline's body, the reaction intensifying as he moved his mouth to the other breast, scorching such shafts of response through her that she caught his dark head in her hands, convulsively raking her fingers through the silky curls of his hair, arching herself up to his touch.
He straightened to kiss her with lazy possessiveness on her mouth, his tongue devouring her even as he was impatiently unbuckling the waist of his trousers, dispensing with the remainder of his clothes with rough masculine haste.
‘Sabiha ,inhobbok , Caroline…’
The hoarse foreign words held such a depth of emotion that she pulled back to stare into his eyes.
‘What does that mean?’ she whispered raggedly.
‘You are beautiful.
I love you.’
The translation was simple, but the effect was electric.
She sought his mouth again, wrapping her arms around his neck, offering and receiving a kiss so fierce, impatient and demanding that she clung to him and she lost her balance, fell against him, felt him gather her up against the inflammatory hardness of his body and lift her on to the bed.
‘Irridek ,cara .
I want you, I want to make love to you again,’ he said thickly, tugging her hair from its unruly topknot, so that it spread out on the pillows in a golden cloud, stroking slow, drugging caresses the length of her spread body.
‘So much,cara , I've been wanting to do nothing else all week, and my self-control has been nearly crippling me…’
‘Oh, Roman…’
It was a shaky whisper against his shoulder, and then she ceased to think at all, simply shut her eyes and let the hot, sweet river of desire flow unchecked through her veins and her limbs and her bloodstream.
He covered her trembling body with his muscled hardness and she felt the weight of his arousal, full and hard and infinitely exciting against her thighs.
The texture of his skin, the taut, elongated muscles of his back and shoulders and thighs, the contrast of his hair-roughened body with the satin-softness of her own, filled her with a surge of warmth and love and heady, consuming passion.
She let her fingers explore his body, inch by inch, as he trailed expert lips and hands over her breasts, her stomach, her thighs.
‘Roman, now, please, oh, please love me now…’
Was it her own whispered, husky voice, unrecognisable, as her head moved feverishly from side to side in the growing, unbearable tension of desire?
‘Caroline…
Caroline …!’
The hoarse exclamation was wrenched from him as he parted her trembling thighs, slid his fingers higher to roughly, urgently widen her body to accommodate his strength.
‘Oh…oh, yes…!’
As she clung to the powerful width of his shoulders, trembling from head to foot with the force of her emotions, he grasped the softness of her buttocks and drove deeply, irrevocably into the silken white-hot sheath of her with a harsh, abrupt shout of victory, his lidded gaze brilliant with triumph…
This time there was no tightness, no panicky feeling of some massive, unfamiliar invasion of her body.
Only a mysterious, mounting, electric tightness in her stomach and her groin, a build-up of sensation so extraordinary that she clung to his hard back as he moved rhythmically, fiercely claiming possession; she dug in her nails without conscious thought of injury, heard herself cry out in astonished delight.
The world seemed to tilt and spin and fold itself inside out in a volcanic eruption of pleasure…
Later, years and enchanted years later, it seemed, she lay enfolded in the hard warmth of his arms, shivering from time to time as memory of the passion and intensity of their lovemaking rocked her slender frame all over again.
‘So…do you know my answer?’ she whispered at last on a shaky laugh, tightening her fingers round Roman's hard forearm as he drew her closer against him.
‘You will marry me.
Stay here with me.’
‘I will.’
There was a ridiculous lump in her throat.
Twisting her round, he examined her face with a wry gleam of amusement, mingled with a dark tenderness which splintered her fragile composure into a million fragments.
‘Tears?’
‘Only happy ones…’
‘Do you love me, Caroline?’
‘I thought you said you would know all the answers!’ she teased him unsteadily, burying her damp face against his shoulder and feeling his arms close protectively around her.
‘I confess to a touch of male bravado,’ he admitted ruefully, kissing the lobe of her ear and then doing things with his tongue which made her writhe in delight.
‘If I seem arrogant, Caroline, then I grovel here at your feet.
Do you love me,cara ?’
‘Does the moon shine in the night sky?’ she mocked shakily, laughing at him through her tears.
‘Does the tide ebb and flow?’
‘Very poetic, my little tormenter,’ he chided, tightening his arms even more so that she could hardly breathe.
‘Did you know that unmarried Maltese girls were once advised to comb their hair by the light of the moon, to find themselves a husband?
Come, come and swear on the moon that you will love me always…’
She found herself swept off the bed and across to the long sash window, then stood on her feet with Roman's warmth supporting her from behind, his arms wrapped around her.
There was a brilliant full moon.
Its ethereal light was bathing the dizzy drop from the high citadel of Mdina, silvering the hillside and the valley across to the sea.
‘I will love you always,’ she whispered gravely, so softly that he needed to bend his dark head to hear her.
‘And I you, Caroline,’ He was smiling at her with his eyes, in a way which played havoc with her composure.
‘I'll have to go back to London and sort everything out,’ she said shakily.
‘But maybe…that is, you could come with me?’
‘I'm not sure Calypso would approve,’ he laughed, burying his face in the cascade of tumbled blonde hair around her shoulders.
‘I should keep you here, lock you up in my cave, never take my eyes off you.
But yes, I shall come with you.
I cannot risk giving the anaemic Jeremy a chance to change your mind…’
‘Jeremy is not anaemic.
But I don't love him; I never have — he was just one in a long line of convenient, undemanding escorts I chose because they didn't threaten my independence…’
‘Whereas I do.
I not only require total dependence,sabiha tieghi ,’ he teased, steering her back to the shadowy bed, and drawing her into his arms against the rumpled linen sheets.
‘I command you to stay with me forever!’
‘Didn't the goddess Calypso promise Ulysses immortality if he stayed with her forever?
And he still left her?’
‘I believe that is the myth,’ he agreed, twisting her round roughly in his arms to kiss her, lingeringly, on the mouth.
‘But rumour goes that she had a very inferior, draughty little cave, and one hell of a climb to get to it.
Anyway, immortality isn't on the agenda.
So maybe I could tempt you to settle for a mere lifetime with me, Caroline?’
‘Oh, Roman…’ she breathed laughingly, lifting her arms to wind them around his neck, feeling the joyful surge of love and desire beginning all over again.
‘The way I feel about you, my darling, even immortality wouldn't be anywhere near long enough…’
‘Maybe we'll pay a visit to Calypso's Cave…’
He grinned, kissing her with a hard shudder of emotion.
‘Strike a deal with the ghosts of the gods?’
She gave a delicate shudder, wriggling into the reassuring strength of his arms.
‘No.
Definitely not.
No more visits to dark, ghostly caves, Roman!
I'll settle for a deal with you…’
And the kiss he gave her, deep and demanding, but infinitely tender and loving, told her without words exactly what the deal would be…