

The Ascendancy of Italy
Introduction
Although the musical ascendancy of Italy did not begin to assert itself immediately after the deaths of Josquin and Isaac and their great contemporaries, Pierre de La Rue and Loyset Compere, its foundations were already laid.
And now that specifically Italian form, the madrigal, was born.
(The tidy-minded may like to date it from Petrucci's publication of Bernardo Pisano's Musica…sopra le canzone del petrarcha which actually occurred in 1520.)
So long as such men as Willaert, Verdelot, and Arcadelt held posts in Venice, Florence, and Rome that is, until the mid-century or after Italian music cannot be said to have emancipated itself from northern tutelage.
Yet, when it did, it quickly established a leadership even more remarkable than that of north-western Europe during the Middle Ages and maintained that position until near the end of the eighteenth century.
It may seem premature to date the ‘ascendancy’ so early.
But the madrigal was not merely a new art form — it had nothing in common with the trecento madrigal except the name — but a landmark in a revolution of which we have already seen the beginnings in the frottole and laudi spirituali and occasional passages in the Italian-influenced northerners from Dufay onward.
The madrigal was polyphonic but not purely polyphonic.
Its polyphony had to reckon with an element to which Humanism attached enormous importance: the words.
Whereas the intellectual, ‘mathematical’ polyphony of the Middle Ages had, as John XXII complained, treated sacred texts as mere subjects for music, music was now often composed expressly to project words especially secular ones.
But ‘the humanistic subordination of music to text, the insistence that music shall have meaning through carrying words or shall simply heighten the effect of words, is as evident in religious music as in frottola, madrigal, and chanson.
And in the religious music both of the Catholics and of every variety of Protestant.’
In so far as religious thinking was permeated by the spirit of Humanism, religious music also submitted to become the vehicle of the word while pure polyphony of the utmost technical refinement continued to serve the religion of pure unreasoning faith, ‘the magic of sound matching the magic of faith’.
As it happens, the supreme masters of ‘golden age’ polyphony toward the latter part of the century, when Italian innovators were making  even bolder experiments with word-carrying music, were an Italian, Palestrina, an Italianized Spaniard, and — more affected by humanism — an Italianized Fleming, who are widely known by Italianized forms of their names, ‘Vittoria’and ‘Orlando di Lasso’.
While these were the two basic trends in European music, the general picture was much more complicated.
The Church had ceased to be monolithic; the social structure of Europe had become more fluid.
Hitherto, music other than the anonymous, never written down and therefore lost music of the people — had been the affair of the Church or the court or great nobles.
Now, an increasingly influential and literate middle class was sharing in making it and in the demand for it.
It was able to do so more easily when large-scale music publication, including a high proportion of Italian music, spread from Italy to France (with Pierre Attaingnant in Paris from 1528 and Jacques Moderne at Lyons four years later), Germany (with Georg Rhaw at Wittenberg from 1538 and Montanus (Berg) and Neuber at Nuremberg from 1542), and the Netherlands (with Tylman Susato at Antwerp from 1543 and Pierre Phalese at Louvain in 1545).
Conversely, reputable composers became more interested in popular music, the tunes of which they preserved in keyboard or lute arrangements and as themes for instrumental variation or even for Masses.
Intimate music-making by amateurs must have been practised much earlier, but never on the scale made possible by the invention of printing.
And publication also tells us what the amateur was considered likely to want.
The frottola and madrigal were evidently good commercial lines — though there were also madrigals for ceremonial occasions.
French publishers found a lively market for the polyphonic chanson and its instrumental arrangements; composers based Masses on it, even in its most scabrous forms; and even before the foundation in 1570 of the Académie de Poésie et de Musique on the initiative of Jean-Antoine de Baif, French composers had developed an extreme form of Humanist song in musique mesurée a l'antique.
This was music in which note-values were determined entirely by the prosodic quantities of the text, so that note-against-note setting was inevitable.
But everywhere else — equally in the madrigal, chanson, and German polyphonic Lied, in the music of the Roman Church, Lutheran hymn, and Calvinist psalm note-against-note writing, in chords rather than contrapuntal lines, met most fully the demand for verbal clarity.
A different cause, the hand on the keyboard, produced a similar effect.
English music during the sixteenth century was prolific in every field and on the whole as remarkable in quality as in quantity.
But it was insular and its diffusion was sadly retarded by the lack of English music-printers.
The tradition of church music was confused by the peculiar nature of Henry VIII's semi-Reformation.
The English part-song continued to flourish but few examples were printed before 1588.
The real impact of the madrigal also dates from the same year, when Thomas East published Musica Transalpina, a collection of Italian madrigals with English translations together with one English madrigal by Byrd.
It heralded a flood of Italian imitation  such as might be expected of a period when English culture was particularly fascinated by everything Italian.
Not only madrigals but canzonette and balletti, under anglicized names, were modelled sometimes all too closely on Italian originals and printing at last gave them to the public.
English keyboard music had a tradition at least as old, was produced at least as copiously, and was later to influence through Sweelinck the German organ school from Samuel Scheidt onward.
Yet it was not until 1612 that the little selection entitled Parthenia got into print.
Italian keyboard music never lacked publishers after the Roman, Andrea Antico, issued a collection of organ arrangements of frottole in 1517.
But it was not instrumental music per se that gave Italy its centuries of primacy, though it contributed to the main form in which that primacy was manifested; it was the continuing drive to make music express poetic texts.
The madrigal composers of the late cinquecento had striven by the introduction of chromaticism, tone-painting, tone-symbolism, and other means sometimes as dramatic as the work of the great contemporary ‘mannerist’ painters — El Greco, Caravaggio — to convey violent emotion and pictorial suggestion.
In music for court entertainments, masques and dramatic intermedii, a group of Florentine musicians influenced by a learned Humanist, Girolamo Mei, who had come to the correct conclusion that ancient Greek music had been monodic, mixed madrigals with a new kind of monody in ‘another way of singing than the usual’(un altro modo di cantare che l'ordinario).
It was what we know as recitative and it became the staple of opera in musica.
Yet from the first the doctrinaire employment of recitative was tempered by occasional songs, dances, and instrumental pieces; and in the first real masterpiece of the new genre, Monteverdi's Orfeo of 1607, the element of vocal melody — even virtuosity — bulked much more considerably.
In France the same ingredients of spectacle, song, dance, and instrumental music were likewise compounded under the influence of a humanist ‘academy’, Bälf's, but in different proportions so that the result was not opera but ballet de cour.
It is true that the ballet de cour exercised great influence on French opera when it emerged very much later, but French opera remained French and by that time Italian opera was well on the way to becoming European.
Opera was peculiarly suited to the Italian genius: its sense of drama, its intense musicality, its language rich in broad open vowels and liquid consonants.
It is not surprising that as opera spread over Europe it tended to preserve its original language, resisting the various vernaculars.
Indeed if one were obliged to single out Italy's basic contribution to the expressive vocabulary of Western music it would have to be the warm sensuous cantilena generated by her speech.
Opera soon ceased to be a severely intellectual form of art and with the opening of the first public opera-house in Venice in 1637 it ceased to be an exclusively aristocratic one, though it seldom flourished without princely or aristocratic support.
(The opera founded at Hamburg in the late seventeenth century was exceptional, a social portent.)
Long before the century was out recitative was becoming  more and more perfunctory, the interpolated arias more numerous, and the heyday of aria opera was reached with Alessandro Scarlatti and the numerous composers born or trained at Naples.
It was now so cosmopolitan that Italian opera was composed by Handel, Hasse, Gluck (until he defected to French opera, of which the first great master, Lully, had been a native of Italy), Haydn and, greatest of all, Mozart.
Until vernacular opera made progress during the second half of the eighteenth century, ‘opera’ was almost synonymous with Italian opera from one end of Europe to the other.
In Spain, which shared a monarch with Naples from 1735 onward, opera was almost entirely in the hands of Neapolitans and Parmesans who only occasionally set Spanish texts.
Under the Vasa and Saxon kings opera in Poland was purely Italian.
Araja took Italian opera to Russia in 1736 and Italians almost completely monopolized the imperial opera for nearly half a century while promising Russian musicians, such as Bortnyansky and Berezovsky, were sent to Italy to be trained — and had their operas produced there.
In England Handel's most serious rival was a native Italian, G. B. Bononcini, and of the next generation the most successful London composer of opere serie in a city obsessed with pasticci and ballad-operas was the totally Italianized Johann Christian Bach.
In France, the one country that had developed a strong tradition of vernacular opera with its own different aesthetic, it needed only a visit of an Italian company playing a repertoire of opere buffe to spark off one of the most celebrated of musical civil wars, the querelle des bouffons, a war which was renewed a quarter of a century later when the pro-Italian faction set up Piccinni in rivalry with the now gallicized Gluck.
It was not only in opera that Italy bestrode Europe like a Colossus.
In the 1590s the Polish king, Sigismund III, invited Marenzio to Warsaw and for at least half a century the directors of the royal chapel were Italians.
The greatest German composer of the seventeenth century, Heinrich Schutz, studied in Venice with Giovanni Gabrieli, composed Italian madrigals there, and returned twenty years later to sit at the feet of Monteverdi.
Italy originated the oratorio and chamber cantata, the sonata, the concerto, and the sinfonia.
It gave us the violin — an instrument which (it has been said)‘with its vibrato manner of performance, in distinction from the older viol family, emulates and even surpasses the human voice' — indeed the whole violin family with viola and cello.
The finest makers were the Amati and Guarneri and Stradivari families and the finest idiosyncratic composers Corelli, Vivaldi, Tartini, Viotti.
Purcell declared that in his first set of trio sonatas he had ‘faithfully endeavour'd a just imitation of the most fam'd Italian Masters’, and a few years later a French writer, Le Cerf de La Viéville, complained bitterly of ‘cette fureur de composer des sonates á la manière italienne’.
François Couperin, captivated by Corelli's sonatas, produced his own earliest ones under an Italian-sounding anagram of his own name and in later years paid homage to Corelli in a splendid Apothéose.
Bach himself did not disdain to transcribe Vivaldi concertos for organ or harpsichord and to borrow fugue-subjects from Legrenzi and Corelli.
The ultimate weakening of this unique ascendancy was due not to lack of outstanding operatic composers to continue the tradition, though vernacular opera — sometimes consciously national and therefore to some extent anti-Italian — produced more and more gifted rivals.
Nor was it mainly caused by the increasing importance of symphony and sonata, a field in which such fine musicians as Boccherini and Clementi could hardly rival their Germanic contemporaries.
The yeast of romanticism was fermenting and the Italian genius was not particularly sympathetic to romanticism.
Operatic composers might take subjects from romantic literature.
But intimate, self-centred poetry on the one hand and heaven-storming energy on the other conquered music north of the Alps and Italian music gradually ceased to be pan-European.
Music during the Reformation
VERBAL INTELLIGIBILITY IN CHURCH MUSIC
The third decade of the sixteenth century was a real turning-point in musical history — and not only because the Reformation quickly called into existence a body of religious music which preferred the vernacular to Latin and served other liturgical needs than those of the Roman church.
Latin was by no means totally banished from the Lutheran liturgy.
Various linguistic alternatives were permitted but the Greek Kyrie and Latin Gloria were generally retained.
Yet the preference for the vernacular was itself symptomatic.
The Humanist stress on the importance of the word was not only redoubled but given a special orientation by the Reformation-which experienced its supreme crisis, the Diet of Worms, in 1521, four months before Josquin's death.
It was desirable that the words of the liturgy should be understood by the congregation and that the congregation should take part in the singing.
Indeed, a younger and more radical Reformer than Luther, Thomas Münzer (1491–1525), the real pioneer of ‘German song’ for the congregation, wished them to participate much more fully in a vernacular liturgy.
This need for verbal intelligibility was recognized not only by the Reformers in the Lutheran hymns and Calvinist psalm-settings but by the semi-Reformers (Cranmer's view that the musical setting of his translation of the liturgy in 1544 should ‘not be full of notes, but, as near as may be, for every syllable a note, so that it may be sung distinctly and devoutly’) and the Counter-Reformers (the direction of the Council of Trent in 1562 that the words of the Mass ‘should be uttered clearly and perfectly, and sink quietly into the ears and hearts of the hearers’, not with music ‘contrived for the empty delight of the ears’).
CHURCH MUSIC OF JOSQUIN'S FOLLOWERS
Yet throughout these eventful years the tradition of Catholic imitative polyphony flowed on undisturbed, reaching even greater technical equability in the work of Josquin's presumed pupil Nicolas Gombert (c. 1500–c. 1556) and Jacobus Clemens ‘non Papa' (c. 1510–c. 1557), with whom we may associate other natives of French Flanders: Thomas Crecquillon (d.c. 1557); Jean Richafort (c. 1480–c. 1547), an older pupil of Josquin's; two composers whose identities were confused even in their  lifetime, Lupus Hellinck (c. 1495–1541) and Johannes Lupus or Lupi (Jean Leleu)(c. 1506–1539), the confusion being worse confounded by two less distinguished contemporaries named Johannes Lupus; Noel Bauldewyn (d. 1530), who was Richafort's successor at Malines Cathedral and composer of the Missa Da Pacem long attributed to Josquin; 3 and Pierre de Manchicourt (c. 1510–1564) who towards the end of his life became master of Philip II's capilla flamenca, in which both Gombert and Crecquillon had served under Philip's father, the Emperor Charles V.
Although traditionalists, the best of these were not mere epigones.
They tightened the polyphonic weave, intensifying the element of imitation plastic rather than strict — in which all voices, usually five, participate on equal terms, and concealing the cadential seams.
(The Josquinian antiphony of paired parts was abandoned.)
Gombert's linear sense — and sometimes Crecquillon's and Lupi's was so strong that he cared nothing for the asperities of harsh suspensions or accented passing-notes, as in this passage from his motet, ‘Ave sanctissima Maria’:
Clemens cultivated euphony.
He will end with a third in the final chord, even when he omits the fifth, and both he and Crecquillon anticipate Palestrina in the climactic use of great descending scales often in thirds, sixths, or tenths — as at the end of his ‘Jerusalem surge’: or the end of Crecquillon's ‘Ingemuit Susanna’.
Initial motives are often conditioned by the text, and the melodic lines, particularly with Gombert and Crecquillon, are generally more syllabic than melismatic; even the old practice of employing homorhythmic, ‘chordal’, music for special verbal emphasis is occasionally remembered.
But emotional expressiveness like that of Clemens's famous ‘Vox in Rama’, with its unforgettable opening motive, is rare.
Rhythmic patterns tend to be sober and square-cut, and that liking for the C mode — as such, e.g. in Clemens's Missa Misericorde, s or transposed to F with a B flat key-signature — which we have already noticed in Josquin, becomes very pronounced.
The  legitimization of the C and A modes, ‘Ionian’ and ‘Aeolian’, by the Swiss theorist Heinrich Loris (‘Glareanus’) in his Dodecachordon (Basel, 1547) was a very belated admission of their existence.
All the same, the Missa Misericorde is not ‘in C major’; every section ends with a triad on C but the final cadences of Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, and Agnus are plagal.
On the other hand, the chanson on which it is based is really in C major with a number of V-I and I-V cadences (see Ex. 57).
Practically all the work of these composers lay in the fields of Mass, motet, and chanson.
Gombert, Clemens, and Richafort wrote Magnificats.
Clemens made a nearly complete three-part setting of the popular tunes of the Dutch metrical psalter, the Souterliedekens (Antwerp, 1556–7).
Crecquillon composed Lamentations and a few French psalms.
But their favourite form was the motet, which offered a wide field for expressive symbolism and the suggestion of generalized emotions.
Gombert composed 160, Clemens 230, Crecquillon 116, Richafort merely 35 (but his output in all fields was small).
As for Hellinck and Lupi, their work is a chaos of dubious attributions but motets bulk largely in it.
The variety underlying the superficial similarity of idiom is enormous, even within the work of a  single composer.
Bernet Kempers has shown, for instance, that one can distinguish between Clemens's motets for solo voices and those which are genuinely choral.
They may be, indeed they usually are, based on freshly invented material or the composer may take a plainsong melody not as a cantus firmus but for plastic treatment through all the parts, as Gombert does in his ‘Salve regina’.
The texture may be close and the effect massive, as in his six-part ‘Quem dicunt homines’, or as light-handed as Clemens's ‘Nobilis illa’.
Very many are cast in the AB:CB form employed by Mouton and the others of the previous generation (see p. 179).
But here, the B section may be no more than a brief refrain like the ‘Alleluias’ which end both parts of Richafort's ‘Quem dicunt homines’or an extended section of more than forty bars as with the ‘fera pessima devoravit filium meum Joseph’of Clemens's ‘Tulerunt autem’which is spliced with the ends of the preceding sections in a way that epitomizes the composer's technical skill:
NEW PARAPHRASE TECHNIQUES IN THE MASSES
The motets of these composers show their liturgical style in its purest form.
In their Masses it is complicated — in some cases one is tempted to say ‘contaminated’ by another factor: the res facta, the model, which was often secular.
The missa parodia was, of course, nothing new but these composers devoted themselves to it almost exclusively and developed new techniques.
Of Gombert's ten Masses, all but two —‘Da pacem’ and the big Missa Tempore paschali for six (in the Agnus twelve) voices — are parodiae.
So are all Clemens's except his Requiem, and so are all but one of Crecquillon's sixteen, the exception in his case being a cantus firmus Mass on a German secular song.
Their models are their own or each others' motets and chansons and the chansons of such Parisian colleagues as Claudin de Sermisy, and they make fuller use of the whole polyphonic complex of the model than their predecessors had done: how flexibly may be seen by comparing the opening of the Kyrie of Clemens's already mentioned Mass ‘Misericorde’: with that of his chanson ‘Misericorde au martir amoureulx’: Bars 3–5 of the Kyrie are not the extraneous interpolation they seem to be; they come from bars 18–20 of the chanson:
The repeated application of this technique of varied adaptation to each movement has led to the not unjust description of Clemens's Masses in particular as sets of variations.
The Agnus is naturally the culminating variation; in ‘Misericorde’ the four parts are expanded for it to six.
Even when the highest part of a secular model was more obviously tuneful than that of ‘Misericorde au martir amoureulx’— as we shall see, such songs were very fashionable in Paris at this time and the composer took few pains to disguise it (e.g. Gombert's Mass ‘Je suys déshéritée’ on a chanson attributed in the earliest source, Attaingnant's Trente chansons musicales (Paris, 1533) to Lupi, in later ones to Pierre Cadéac), the  incongruence evidently did not disconcert contemporaries.
Clemens was not content to borrow Pierre Sandrin's very popular ‘Doulce memoire’(first published in the first book of Moderne's Le Parangon des chansons (Lyons, 1538)) for the ‘Sicut erat’ of his first Magnificat Primi Toni; he based every section of his Magnificat Octavi Toni on a chanson, actually drawing attention to their titles in his superius part:
The first five notes of Clemens's bass are indeed those of the plainsong eighth-tone Magnificat, but his superius is identical with that of Sermisy's ‘C'est une dure despartie’ except that it does not follow Sermisy's repeat of the first two phrases and does repeat his last phrase.
It is noteworthy that ‘Fecit potentiam’ follows Sermisy's version of ‘C'est a grant tort’, not Clemens's own six-part setting.
THE FRENCH CHANSON
Clemens, Gombert, Crecquillon, and their colleagues all cultivated the chanson with great success.
The first two are represented in Attaingnant's collections — Clemens, it is true, by an anonymous and doubtfully authentic piece — as early as 1529 and by a trickle of songs during the next decade.
But it was only when Susato began to publish at Antwerp in 1543 that their songs appeared in quantity and it was Susato who really launched Crecquillon with a book of 36 chansons à 4 parties in 1543, though he had published Crecquillon's greatest hit, ‘Ung gay bergier’, in a miscellaneous collection the year before.
‘Ung gay bergier’, a bawdy little anecdote for which the music is the simple, effective vehicle, with its opening note repetition in  rhythm, its mixture of imitative with note-against-note passages, and its loose form (AaBCc), is characteristic of the French chanson of the second quarter of the century.
But the chanson was by no means always obscene.
Clemens was a master of the frankly bawdy song and the song à double entente — witness his musically delicious ‘Jaquin jaquet’, his enormously popular ‘Frisque et gaillard’, and his ‘Entre vous filles de XV ans’(‘Tetin poignant, bouche riant, connin mouflant’) which provided the model for the most scandalous of Lassus's Masses — but his ‘Je prens en gre’(if it is his: one source attributes it to ‘Jennequin’) is a gravely beautiful love-song.
And despite the obvious connections between the Netherlanders and the Parisian composers, Clement Janequin (c. 1475–c. 1559), Claudin de Sermisy (c. 1495–1562), and their younger colleagues, there were notable stylistic differences.
The four-part chansons which poured from Attaingnant's press from 1528 to 1550 — Clement Marot (1496–1544) his favourite poet, Sermisy his favourite composer (though he devoted one of his earliest volumes solely to Janequin)— still have so much in common with the frottola and kindred Italian popular forms, however much they sophisticated them, that their Italian ancestry hardly needs a birth-certificate.
(Frottole were performed in France.) 26 They inherited the syllabic note-against-note style, dominated by the text and with a good many repeat notes, lightly relieved by melismas or imitation, and the clearly marked cadences.
Even the   opening had already appeared in the Italian settings of Genet/Carpentras (see p. 179), a Frenchman who worked in Italy.
Like the frottole they were music for a wide public and, as with the frottole, the printing-presses multiplied their popularity by producing them in alternative forms.
In any case, with their predominant highest parts, the lower parts could be played instead of sung — as we see from contemporary pictures.
Attaingnant lost no time in following the examples of Petrucci and Antico by bringing out in 1529 a Tres breue et familiere introduction pour entendre et apprendre…a iouer toutes chansons reduictes en la tablature du Lutz, containing among other things seven of Claudin's songs from the Chansons nouvelles…a quatre parties of the previous year, now arranged both for lute solo and for voice with lute accompaniment.
And he published in 1531 three volumes respectively of Dixneuf; Vingt et cinq, and Vingt et six chansons musicales reduictes en la tabulature des Orgues Espinettes Manichordions, et telz semblables instrumentz.
Janequin is popularly known by his imitative, or rather onomatopoeic, chansons — four of which, ‘Le chant des oyseaux’, ‘La guerre’(celebrating Francis I's victory at Marignano in 1515), ‘La chasse’, and ‘L'alouette’, appeared in Attaingnant's Chansons de maistre C. Janequin of 1528.
But in fact his range was very much wider, from the Rabelaisian but musically brilliant ‘Au joly jeu du pousse avant’(he was an almost exact contemporary of Rabelais) to the innocent sweetness of ‘Au premier jour du joly moys de may’ and the exquisite ‘Petite Nymphe folastre’, from the pure homophony of ‘Ce moys de may’to the florid counterpoint of ‘Si d'ung petit de vostre bien’.
He even published in 1540 an Italian madrigal.
And beside Janequin and Sermisy Attaingnant brought out the songs of such younger men as the immensely prolific Pierre Certon and Sandrin, whose ‘Doulce memoire’ was transcribed for lute or keyboard all over Europe from Spain to Poland.
Like Sandrin, Pierre Cadeac was a late arrival on the scene (1538) and he was published at Lyons, a more cosmopolitan musical centre than Paris, by Jacques Moderne who had as his musical adviser the composer Francois Layolle (c. 1475–c. 1540), friend of Benvenuto Cellini and Andrea del Sarto.
THE CHANSON AFTER ATTAINGNANT
The heyday of the Parisian chanson was over by 1550 when Attaingnant was succeeded by other publishers (Du Chemin, Le Roy, Ballard); the most important song-publishers were now Susato at Antwerp and Pierre Phalese at Louvain.
And it was presumably owing to their encouragement that in the 1540s Crecquillon began to compose chansons and Clemens and Gombert increased their production from a trickle to a flood.
It was now that a more marked difference from the Parisians showed itself in their work, most obviously when they laid hands on Sermisy or Janequin for their own purposes.
When Clemens and Crecquillon borrow respectively the superius of Sermisy's ‘C'est a grant tort’ and ‘Dont vient cela’, their own six- and five-part compositions make considerably more use of imitation and the cadence points are woven over.
So with Gombert's and Crecquillon's compositions on the musically insignificant tenor of ‘C'est a grant tort’.
Most curious of all is Gombert's delightful re-composition of Janequin's famous ‘Chant des oyseaux’ in three parts yet with more closely knit polyphony and concealment of caesurae which Janequin had not attempted to disguise.
Comparison of the Sermisy and Clemens settings of ‘C'est a grant tort’ vividly illustrates the difference between Parisian and Netherland chanson:
In this he followed Attaingnant, who had from his earliest days been printing gaillardes et pavanes for four instruments (1529), basses danses garnies de recoupes for the lute (1529), basses dances, branles, pavennes and gaillardes, nearly all in four instrumental parts (1530), and gaillardes pavennes, branles et basses dances for keyboard (1531), at least some of which were based on polyphonic chansons.
Again at the end of his career Attaingnant, and after him his widow, published similar Livres de danceries  (1550–5) compiled by Claude Gervaise which may have suggested Francesco Bendusi's Opera Nova de Balli a quatro (Venice, 1553).
PARISIAN CHURCH MUSIC
Although Janequin and Sermisy, Certon and Sandrin, served in the chapels of Francis I and Henry II, their church music is unremarkable.
Sandrin left none; Certon left a great deal but it is mostly frivolous or feeble.
Only two Masses by Janequin have survived — an early one ‘La Bataille’, on the non-onomatopoeic sections of ‘La guerre’, and a later one on his chanson ‘L'aveugle dieu’— and a single motet.
Sermisy's contribution was larger and more substantial.
No French composer in the generation after Fevin and Brumel could disguise the secular flavour of his church music and sometimes Sermisy shows the cloven hoof of the chanson writer, but generally his Masses and motets are more ‘Netherlandish’.
(In his Mass ‘Tota pulchra es’, for instance, he sets the Benedictus as a canon for tenor and bass.)
And he is noteworthy also as the composer of one of the only two known French Passion-settings of the sixteenth century: a Matthew Passion published by Attaingnant in 1534 in his tenth volume of motets, where it is followed by an anonymous John Passion.
These were not ‘motet Passions’ like Longueval's, mentioned on p. 177, but ‘dramatic’Passions in which the various persons are represented by two or more soloists (e.g. in both works Pilate is impersonated by two, three, or four voices, with no consistency).
In both the polyphony is freely based on the traditional Passion tones.
Sermisy was the only contemporary composer represented (by his ‘Si bona suscepimus’) in the Treze Motetz musicaulx avec ung Prelude transcribed for organ of 1531, the others being older men: Obrecht (‘Parce Domine’), Compere (‘O vos omnes’), Fevin, Brumel, and Louis XII's mâitre de chapelle in 1507, Johannes Prioris (the ‘Dulcis amica’ mentioned in n. 35 below).
VERNACULAR RELIGIOUS SONG: CALVINIST PSALTERS
At the middle of the century both Janequin and Certon became involved in another form of religious, though not liturgical, composition.
The Reformation  had quickly called into being a great quantity of vernacular religious song: hymns, ‘spiritual songs’ for domestic devotion, metrical translations of the Psalms.
Numerous collections were published, some with tunes only, some for (usually) four voices, with melodies either original or adapted from plainsong or popular song.
The most important early Lutheran ones include the four-part Geystliche gesangk Buchleyn (Wittenberg, 1524) of Johann Walter (1496–1570), supervised by Luther himself, Valentin Babst's monophonic Geystliche Lieder for congregational singing (Leipzig, 1545), and Martin Bucer's also monophonic Gesangbuch (Strasbourg, 1541).
Strasbourg was also the birthplace of the modest first Calvinist psalter in 1539.
It contained 19 psalms (with other cantiques), translated by Marot, six by Calvin himself, some of the melodies by a Strasbourg musician, Mathias Greiter (c. 1490–1550).
Marot continued his translations but had produced only fifty when he died in 1544, so that the work had to be finished by Theodore de Beze.
But it was Marot's fifty which were ‘mise en musique…à quatre parties à voix de contrepoinct égal consonante au verbe’ by Loys Bourgeois and published at Lyons in 1547.
In this collection, not to be confused with Le premier livre des Pseaulmes of the same year in which he treats 24 of them more elaborately, Bourgeois nearly always puts the (usually borrowed) tune in the tenor with note-against-note counterpoint.
It was 28 of these Marot translations which Janequin set (Paris, 1549), also in four parts and also with ‘le chant ia usité’ in the tenor, following these with 82 ‘by Marot and others’in 1559.
All 50 of Marot's were set by Certon (Paris, 1546) though only 13 of them have survived in a transcription for voice and lute by Guillaume Morlaye published in 1555.
The Dutch Souterliedekens with tunes only were published at Antwerp in 1540 and in England during the same period Miles Coverdale brought out his Goostly psalmes and spirituall songes, also with tunes only (c. 1543), while Francis Seagar's selection of 19 Certayne Psalmes (London, 1553) are all accommodated to two four-part compositions.
Owing to the Maryan interlude Thomas Sternhold's version, with a tune for each psalm, had to be first published at Geneva in 1556.
The most famous of the French psalm-composers, Claude Goudimel (C. 1514–1572), who also wrote chansons (notably settings of Ronsard), Horatian odes, Masses, and Latin motets, published in 1551 eight  compositions of Marot's psalms ‘mis en musique au long (en forme des mottetz)’ based on the Bourgeois melodies, for three, four, or five voices, and during the next fifteen years produced seven more books of ‘motet’psalms.
About 1560 he became a Protestant, as Janequin and Certon never did, and made a four-part setting of the complete Marot-de Beze Psalter in lightly ornamented note-against-note counterpoint with the melodies generally in the highest part (Paris, 1564).
This was reissued in slightly different form at Geneva in 1580 after his death at Lyons in the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, but before this Goudimel had made another and even simpler complete setting, leaning heavily on Bourgeois's of 1547, with the tunes usually in the tenor (Geneva, 1565):
These settings must have been intended for private use since Calvin objected to polyphony in church, but when the Lutherans adopted them, using Ambrosius Lobwasser's translation of Marot-de Beze (Leipzig, 1573), their congregations undoubtedly sang the tunes.
LUTHERAN HYMNS
Despite the widespread diffusion, adaptation, and imitation of the Calvinist psalm-tunes throughout northern Europe, their ultimate contribution to Western music generally was less than that of the Lutheran hymns to which they were so closely related.
Or they made their contribution through Lutheran forms, as happened in the famous case of Greiter's melody for Ps.119, ‘Es sind doch alle’.
This was used by Bourgeois and Certon for Ps. 36 and Goudimel for Ps. 68, ‘Que Dieu se montre seulement’, but has come down through the centuries as a hymn to Sebaldus Heyden's words ‘O Mensch bewein dein Sunde gross’.
The psalm-settings certainly pointed the way for Lutheran unison congregational singing with organ or other instruments playing the accompanying parts.
But political conditions favoured Lutheranism more than Calvinism and gave free scope to Lutheran composers to develop their church-music on the basis of hymnody, with such a publisher as Georg Rhaw, a former cantor of the Thomasschule at Leipzig, to encourage them.
Rhaw's collection of Newe deudsche geistliche Gesenge (1544) was not the earliest collection of polyphonic Lutheran hymn-compositions — Walter's Gesangbüchlein (see p. 220) reached its fifth edition in the same year and the Concentus novi trium vocum of Hans Kugelmann (d. 1542) had appeared at Augsburg in 1540 but it was by far the most important.
Like Kugelmann's Concentus, it was  intended ‘fur die gemeinen Schulen’, for young and untrained singers.
But Rhaw drew on all the leading German composers of the post-Isaac generation — Ludwig Senfl (c. 1486–c. 1543), Balthasar Resinarius (Harzer)(C. 1485–1544), Arnold von Bruck (c. 1490–1554), Sixt Dietrich (c. 1493–1548), Benedictus Ducis (d. 1544)(who is possibly the same man as Benedictus de Opitiis), Stephan Mahu (c. 1485–c. 1541)— as well as the long dead Stoltzer and one Fleming, Lupus Hellinck.
And although the basic conception of song-treatment is generally the same as in Walter's collection (four or five parts, melody usually in the tenor) there is much more imitative polyphony and higher technical accomplishment.
This is particularly true of the contributions by Senfl, by far the greatest of the group, such as his setting of ‘Gelobet seist du’.
by no means all the composers were Protestants; Senfl, Arnold von Bruck, Mahu, and Hellinck were not, although they may have had secret leanings to Protestantism; but Rhaw also published Latin church music, while Catholics all over Europe enjoyed vernacular Calvinist psalms.
Intolerance set in only with the Counter-Reformation.
The stylistic difference was not so much between Lutheran and Catholic as between settings of German words and settings of Latin ones, even by the same composer: e.g. Senfl's ‘Ewiger Gott’, conditioned by the hymn-text, and his ‘purely’ musical, exquisite ‘Ave rosa sine spinis’based, like Josquin's ‘Stabat mater’, on the chanson tenor ‘Comme femme’.
The difference is still more striking when it occurs in the same work, e.g. Arnold von Bruck's ‘O du armer Judas’(published by Hans Ott of Nuremberg in his collection of 121 newe Lieder, 1534) which ends with a Kyrie:
GERMAN SECULAR SONG
German secular songs of this period, like the religious ones, are preponderantly on tenor cantus firmi, the tenors usually being ‘courtly songs’(Hofweisen).
But more popular tunes and words figure largely in the collections compiled, and partly composed, by the Nuremberg doctor Georg Forster (c. 1510-1568) and originally published during 1539–56.
Forster also includes student drinking-songs with the melody in the highest part and purely chordal support.
His title-pages specify that his songs may not only be sung but also played ‘on all sorts of instruments’(auff allerley Instrumenten zu brauchen); indeed the non-tenor parts are often obviously instrumental, as in Senfl's ‘Wol kumpt der May’ in Ott's 121.
But broadly speaking the tendency around the middle of the century was toward a more motet-like treatment of the parts.
In this field, as in those of religious song and Latin church music, Senfl was outstanding in variety of technique and subject: to take three examples from Ott's collections, the loose polyphony of ‘Oho, so geb’ der Mann ein Pfenning', the more tightly woven ‘Es jagt ein Jager’, and the purely onomatopoeic bell-sounds of the six-part ‘Das Glaut zu Speyr’, where polyphony and melody are both discarded.
Some of his compositions are based on songs dating back to the mid-fifteenth century.
The youngest composers of this group were Caspar Othmayr (1515–53) whose songs began to appear in Ott's and Forster's collections from 1544 onward and to whom the Nuremberg publishers Berg (Montanus) and Neuber devoted an entire volume, Reutterische und Jegerische Liedlein, in 1549, and Jobst vom Brandt (1517–70).
With these ‘Heidelberg masters’, not unworthy disciples of Senfl, the secular Tenorlied became more and more nearly a miniature motet.
GERMAN AND POLISH KEYBOARD TABLATURES
One looks in vain for any reflection of this outpouring of German song in keyboard tablatures.
The organists of the ‘Imperial’ group (see pp. 180 and 183–5), to whom we may add Buchner's pupil, the St. Gall organist Fridolin Sicher (1490–1546), were still active through much of this period.
But their tablatures had been completed around 1530 and cover an older repertory, plus a few pieces by Senfl, and then there is an almost complete gap until Ammerbach published his Orgel oder Instrument Tabulatur in 1571.
The two chief Polish tablatures, that of ‘Ioannis de Lyublyn’(Jan z Lublina)(1540) and that from the Monastery of the Holy Ghost at Cracow  1548), are scarcely more aware of German song.
They preserve a great number of preludes and dances (many by ‘N.C.’, supposedly Nicolaus Cracoviensis, ‘Mikolaj z Krakowa’), organ service-music, transcriptions of Josquin and his contemporaries, chansons by Janequin (‘La Guerre' of course), Sermisy, Sandrin, a little Senfl (including ‘Ave rosa’), but only three or four German songs by minor composers — though the monk of Cracow does include a transcription of Mahu's ‘Ein' feste Burg’ which had appeared in Rhaw's Newe deudsche geistliche Gesenge only four years before.
However, the gap in the German organ tablatures is to some extent filled by those for lute from Hans Judenkünig's (Vienna, 1523) onward.
Beside the very numerous ‘preambles’ and dances — courtly and popular German, Italian, French, gypsy — and transcriptions of Netherland motets and Parisian chansons, there are plenty of German songs, both secular and sacred, Senfl again being the most popular composer.
NEW FORMS OF SECULAR POLYPHONY
Like the Parisian chanson, the Tenorlied was a purely national form, as conservative as the contemporary Netherland polyphony.
Its secular form began to die after the middle of the century and the geistlicher Gesang with tenor cantus firmus was supplanted, perhaps under the influence of the Calvinist psalms, by the so-called Kantionalsatz — melody in the highest part, the others note-against-note — to encourage congregational singing.
But in Italy at the same time both foreign and native composers were developing forms of secular polyphony which later in the century were to spread over most of Europe and bring about a remarkable expansion of music's technical resources in the regions of harmony and tonality and in emotional and pictorial expressiveness.
The madrigal and its cognate forms not only embodied the musical spirit of the age in southern Europe but ultimately provided the basic vocabulary of a new, Humanist type of monody, of opera, and even of independent instrumental music.
If one wished to sum up the ‘spirit of the age’ in early sixteenth-century Italy in a single word, that word would have to be ‘neo-Petrarchan’.
Mainly under the influence of Pietro Bembo, the codifier of the Tuscan speech as the literary language of Italy in his Prose della Volgar Lingua (1525), there had been an extraordinary revival of interest in Petrarch and the patrons of the frottola-composers, such as the Mantuan Duchess Isabella d'Este, asked them for settings of Petrarch's sonnets and strophic canzoni.
Tromboncino's composition of the sonnet ‘Hor che'l ciel et la terra’ has been  mentioned in Chapter 102 (p.174).
The poetic canzone was a strophic form, like the musical frottola in which the same music was commonly fitted to each quatrain or tercet, carrying the words very distinctly but without reflecting their specific sense.
The frottola ultimately disintegrated not only ‘through the intrusion of polyphonic passages’(loc. cit.) but under literary pressure.
The ‘madrigal’ which succeeded it — a fourteenth-century term revived in 1530 for something quite different from the Florentine madrigal — was a fairly free poem of anything from six to sixteen lines, roughly equivalent to one stanza of a canzone.
When a frottola is through-composed under textual pressure, and aerated and enlivened by polyphonic passages, it is indistinguishable in musical style from the earlier madrigal, particularly as the madrigal tended at first to cling to the note against-note style with a melodically more important highest part.
The distinction, if any, was in the less frivolous nature and superior literary quality of the madrigal texts.
The term ‘frottola’ died out during the 1520s; its substance may be seen at its most sophisticated in Antico's Canzoni Sonetti Strambotti et Frottole, Libro Tertio (Rome, 1517), which includes beside a number of examples by Tromboncino some nearly madrigalian pieces by Genet/Carpentras and Michele Vicentino.
Three years later Petrucci brought out a collection of Musica di messer Bernardo pisano sopra le Canzone del petrarcha (Fossom-brone, 1520).
It was his last publication, but at the same time the first in which he printed secular music in part-books with full text to each separate part, in place of the choirbook lay-out.
This innovation was quickly adopted and greatly facilitated the singing of all four parts (whether or not instrumentally supported).
Pisano (1490–1548), a protege of the Medici pope, Leo X, friend of Andrea del Sarto in Florence and Michelangelo in Rome, approached even nearer to the madrigal, as in his setting of Petrarch's canzone 22, ‘Che debb'io far?’, the end of which: shows several highly characteristic features: free, irregular imitation, the melodic line of the superius in bars 5–4 from the end, the repetition of the last line of the text.
On the other hand, the same music had to serve for six more stanzas — Pisano wrote fresh music for the short final one and therefore could not reflect details of the text.
THE EARLIER SIXTEENTH-CENTURY MADRIGAL
All the same, Pisano's work is more truly ‘madrigalian’ than some of the earliest published madrigals actually so called , the Madrigali de diversi musici libr. po. de la serena (Rome, 1530).
Of the seventeen pieces in this collection, which survives complete only in the second edition of 1533, no fewer than eight — only seven in the 1533 version — are by Philippe Verdelot (d. c. 1540), a Frenchman who lived in Italy from a very early age, two (three in the second edition) are by an Italian, Costanzo Festa (C. 1495–1545), one is by another Festa, Sebastiano, of whom we know nothing, one by a mysterious ‘Maistre Jan’ or Ihan who has only recently been identified as ‘a French-born musician active at the court of Ferrara from 1512 to about 1543’, and the remainder by still more shadowy characters.
This publication was a landmark only in its title; the ‘madrigals’ are still predominantly note-against-note pieces, as are the majority of Verdelot's later ones.
Willaert (see below, p. 230) had no difficulty in arranging 22 of Verdelot's four-part madrigals for voice and lute (Intavolatura de li madrigali  de Verdelotto, Venice, 1536) as had been done with frottole and Parisian chansons.
Chanson and madrigal were still closely related to each other as well as to the frottola.
(Both Verdelot and Festa composed chansons and the 1533 edition of the Madrigali included Sermisy's ‘Languir me fais’ and an anonymous ‘Tous mes amys’from Attaingnant's Trente deux chansons of 1529.)
What distinguishes them is the relationship to the text.
The madrigal is nearly always ‘through composed’ even when, exceptionally, the text is strophic; the music of the chanson carries the text and is moulded by its symmetry while that of the madrigal more closely reflects the details of an often much freer text.
Melismas tend to be expressive or symbolic rather than purely ornamental.
Indeed fluidity — of both form and texture is perhaps the chief characteristic of a type of music so free and richly varied that it defies definition.
When phrases of the text are repeated or thrown from voice to voice, they may or may not be set to the same or similar melodic phrase; imitation is free and texturally loose; metrical symmetry is at a discount.
A passage from Verdelot's ‘Ogn'hor per voi sospiro’(in his Secondo libro de Madrigali, 1537) will illustrate typical early madrigal texture with an exchange of phrases obvious only to the singer (madrigals were seldom written with listeners in mind)(cantus, bars 2–4, and tenor 4–6; altus bars 2–4, and cantus 4–6), contrasts of four- and two-part, writing, highlighting of ‘tacendo’ and ‘amando’with their semitonal sighs:
In the late 1530s another Northerner, the Fleming Jakob Arcadelt (c.1504–after 1567), began to publish madrigals at Venice, including one of the most popular of all, ‘Il bianco e dolce cigno’.
Later he left the Papal service and in the 1550s accompanied the Cardinal Charles de Lorraine to France where he naturally preferred the chanson.
Arcadelt was more successful than Verdelot in catching Italian dolcezza e soavita, particularly in such pieces as ‘O felici occhi miei’, although of course less so than the native Italians: for instance, Festa in ‘Cosi suav' è'l; foco et dolce il nodo’, and Domenico Ferrabosco, earliest of a whole dynasty of musicians, in his very popular setting of Boccaccio's ‘Io mi son giovinetta’.
Even this belongs to a type that one might call the ‘declamatory madrigal’(cf.
Verdelot's ‘Divini occhi’ and Arcadelt's ‘Ancidetemi’).
However all these composers are overshadowed in historical importance by a Flemish master of all-round achievement, Adrian Willaert (c. 1490–1562), pupil of Mouton in Paris, who served the court of Ferrara for several years from 1522 but went to Venice as magister cappellae at St. Mark's in 1527 and spent the rest of his life there.
As early as 1520 some Willaert motets and chanzoni franciose a quatro sopra doi (that is, double canonic chansons) had been published in Venice.
His madrigals began to be printed in 1536 when he was already a complete master of the Verdelot type of madrigal, as is demonstrated in ‘Amor mi fa morire’.
There the transition near the end to the recapitulated music (and words) of the opening is effected as subtly as any Wagnerian transition.
He went on to exploit the complete range of types and styles from what is practically a secular ‘Netherland’ motet in two partes, corresponding here to the ottava and sestina of the sonnet text, to the completely Italianate lighter  forms in the tradition of the simplest type of frottola such as the North Italian villotte and the canzone villanesche alla napolitana of which he published a collection in 1545.
Typical of his dramatic handling of words is this passage from ‘Quanto piu m'arde’(published in 1540).
Like ‘Mentre che'l cor’ it is in five parts, already the favourite combination of voices:
As Einstein says, ‘The singers seem to snatch the single words from one another 's mouths’.
THE CHURCH MUSIC OF WILLAERT AND HIS CIRCLE
Both Verdelot and Arcadelt wrote church music but are far more important as madrigalists.
Festa was a much more considerable church composer and Willaert also did perhaps his greatest work in this field.
His last publication, the Musica nova of 1559, contains 33 motets as against 24 madrigalian settings of Petrarch sonnets and the proportion of motets (more than three hundred) to madrigals (sixty odd) in his total output is much greater.
His handful of Masses, three of them ‘parodies’ of motets by his teacher Mouton, do not show him as an innovator.
Nor do a great many of his motets.
What they do present, like those of Gombert or Clemens non Papa, is a superb display of Netherland polyphony of the post-Josquin period from the freest to the strictest, though sometimes more declamatory and expressive, more ‘madrigalian’, than theirs.
Madrigalian also are the occasional chromaticisms, such as the F sharps in his four-part setting of ‘Pater noster’.
But in the motets proper Willaert never employs the device of cori spezzati, ‘broken’(i.e. antiphonal) choirs, which he used in eight psalm-settings published in a collection of psalms by Jachet of Mantua, ‘Maistre Jan’, and others in 1550.
This was a practice already known in Padua and its neighbourhood, notably to Ruffino d'Assisi (c. 1524) whose salmi spezzati anticipated the later Venetian double-choral style more closely than Willaert's.
Willaert was one of those musicians, like Josquin and Isaac in the previous generation, whose influence was more than that of a great model for composition.
His circle of friends and pupils, the younger of whom will have to be considered in the next chapter, was vast.
Together with them he established the musical pre-eminence of Venice in composition and performance, as Petrucci had done half a century earlier in publishing.
Two of them were fellow-countrymen, Cipriano di Rore (1516–65) and Jakob Buus (d. 1564), the rest Italians: to name only some outstanding ones, Marco Antonio Cavazzoni (‘di Bologna’)(c. 1490–c. 1559) and his son Girolamo, Alfonso della Viola (c. 1508–70), one of a family of Ferrarese musicians, Andrea Gabrieli (c. 1515–86), Girolamo Parabosco (c. 1522–57), Annibale Padovano (1527–75), Costanzo Porta (c. 1529–1601), Baldissera Donato (c. 15301604), Gioseffo Guami (c. 1535C. 1611), and two who were  notable also as theorists, Nicola Vicentino (1511–76) and Gioseffo Zarlino (1517–90)
CIPRIANO DE RORE AND THE MADRIGAL
Rore properly stands at the head of this roll-call, above all for his madrigals which are both artistically and historically more important than his generally rather conservative Masses and motets.
The latter are by no means all religious, e.g. the intensely dramatic setting of Dido's bitter reproach, ‘Dissimulare etiam sperasti’, in the Fourth Book of the Aeneid.
This piece also illustrates profoundly important innovations of musical idiom.
These, already adumbrated here and there by Willaert-for instance in the above-mentioned ‘Pater noster’ and in ‘Amor mi fa morire’— are boldly developed in some of Rore's madrigals: the insertion of accidentals beyond those which simply confirm the procedures of musica ficta, accidentals related to points in the text which they underline.
That which is possibly implicit in Clemens non Papa's ‘Vox in Rama’(see p. 209 n. 7) is here explicit.
In a passage such as this:
‘mode’ crumbles in beautiful ruins but is not replaced by any sense of ‘key’.
At the words ‘Porto de’ ciechi e miseri mortali' in the madrigal ‘O morte, eterno fin’Rore writes what in modern terminology we should call a succession of C major, A major, B minor, G major, C major, and G minor chords.
Setting another poem concerned with death, Petrarch's ‘Crudele acerba  inexorabil morte’, he employs conflicting key-signatures to sharpen the ‘bitterness’.
Yet these kinds of ‘chromaticism’ were exceptional in Rore.
The most popular of all his madrigals, ‘Anchor che col partire’, contains no more than one or two F sharps and G sharps which are written-out musica ficta.
And when Rore himself uses the term ‘chromatic’, as in the title of his Primo libro de madregali cromatici a cinque voci (1544), he means something quite different: the writing of note negre, ‘black notes’, modern crotchets, as the time unit (414) instead of the minim (412).
The black notation of the second and third partes of the Virgil motet, ‘Dissimulare’, produces an acceleration, perhaps a final change to triple scansion.
This corresponds with the augmentation of voices: five in the prima pars, six in the second (‘Quin etiam’), and seven in the third (‘Mene fugis’).
Rore also composed a Missa a note negre on one of his own few chansons, ‘Tout ce qu'on peut’.
VENETIAN INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC
Rore's instrumental compositions are negligible.
But Willaert is well represented in Musica nova accomodata per cantar et sonar sopra organi et altri strumenti (Venice, 1540), and we also have a number of his three-part ricercari, notably eight in a collection of Fantasie et rechercari a tre voci accomodate da cantare et sonare per ogni instrumento (Venice, 1549), in which Rore is also represented.
They are essentially wordless motets, each polyphonic section neatly dovetailed into the next.
Neither Willaert nor Rore composed for the keyboard though their works were often published in lute or keyboard transcription.
More surprisingly, Buus and Annibale Padovano, organists at St. Mark's, composed their ricercari originally for four solo instruments — Buus's two books in 1547 and 1549 and Annibale's in 1556 — and Buus's sole Intabolatura d'Organo (also 1549) contains only four pieces: ornamented transcriptions of four of the other ricercari obviously made for the use of the ‘molto nobile e vertuoso giovane’ to whom they are dedicated.
No doubt Buus played his other pieces from memory and improvised the ornamentation.
As for Annibale's organ-works, three  toccatas and two ricercari were published in 1604, long after he was dead; they are probably late works.
His ‘toccatas’ are essentially quasi-preludial and improvisatory affairs of passage-work but two of them have polyphonic sections.
So far as we know, the real pioneer of the motet-type of organ ricercar was Girolamo Cavazzoni.
His two books of Intavolature (Venice, 1542–3) contain four such ricercari (together with organ Masses, alternatim Magnificats, hymn-settings, and free re-workings of two chansons by Josquin and Passereau), whereas the two examples in his father's publication are of the same improvisatory nature as the German organ preludes and the early ricercari for luted Girolamo's are actually more instrumental than the ensemble ricercari of Willaert and Buus; the influence of hand on keyboard is apparent in more than ornamentation.
It remained for Buus (e.g. in No. 4 of his First Book) to achieve the unification of a ricercare by deriving all its imitative sections from the same basic theme, which was, exceptionally, transposed to other degrees of the mode — not merely to the fifth or fourth.
A parallel development occurred in the ricercari, or fantasie as they are often called, for lute: a development from those of the Capirola lute-manuscript of c. 1517, which have been compared with Marco Antonio Cavazzoni's, to the fully imitative fantasie in the first and third Intabolature (Venice, 1546 and 1547) of Francesco da Milano (1497–1543), or to the ricercari which Simon Gintzler, lutenist to the Cardinal of Trent, published with transcriptions of vocal works by Josquin, Willaert, Senfl, Verdelot, Arcadelt, and others, also at Venice in 1547.
Indeed during 1546–8 there was a remarkable amount of lute publication at Venice.
While genuinely instrumental styles had emerged in keyboard and lute music and were beginning to emerge in ensemble music, the problem of purely instrumental construction remained unsolved except in the short dance-forms.
The successive musical ideas of the motet were given cohesion by the words; those of the ricercare merely follow each other.
Willaert will immediately repeat a section (or a bass only) near the end of a piece but not an earlier section.
Buus does in a few cases revert to earlier material or in one instance, as we have seen, achieve cohesion at the expense of monotony by basing a whole piece on a single idea.
He also perceived that monotony could be relieved by transposition of material, a foreshadowing of the key-schemes  that would be possible when modality had given way to tonality.
Meanwhile an alternative way of achieving variety within unity had been discovered in Spain.
SPANISH CHURCH MUSIC
Throughout this period Spanish church music was mainly in the pure Netherland tradition.
Until his abdication in 1555 the king — the Emperor Charles V kept his ‘Flemish chapel’, while the greatest native composer, Cristobal Morales (c. 1500–1553), apart from ten years in the Papal service, spent his whole life not at court but in his native Andalusia.
Morales, too, followed the Netherland tradition; of his 22 Masses, two are on ‘L'homme arme’ and others are modelled on motets by Gombert, Mouton, Richafort, Verdelot, and Josquin's ‘Mille regretz’, only two on Spanish villancicos.
He is perhaps most Spanish in the mystical emotion at the heart of such motets as ‘Emendemus in melius’ and ‘O crux, ave’.
However the king-emperor allowed his wife, Isabella of Portugal, in 1526 to have a chapel of Spanish and Portuguese musicians and it was among the instrumentalists of this body, which was taken over by Philip II when he became regent of Spain in 1543, that we find the innovators: the blind organist Antonio de Cabezon (C. 1500–1566), who was one of its original members, the clavichordist Francisco de Soto (c. 1500–1563), who joined soon after, and Luis de Narváez (d. after 1555), a player of the vihuela de mano (the Spanish lute) who was recruited by Philip.
INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN SPAIN
Cabezón and Narváez were the pioneers of diferencias, sets of variations, and it is impossible to claim priority for either.
For although Cabezón's compositions first appeared in print in Luys Venegas de Henestrosa's Libro de cifra (figure notation) nueva para tecla (keyboard), harpay vihuela (Alcala, 1557), and the rest of them only in the Obras de musica published posthumously by his son (Madrid, 1578), no doubt many had been written as early as the lute pieces in Narvaez's Delphin de musica (Valladolid, 1538).
The most obvious origin of their diferencias is the organ versets which alternated with the sung verses of a psalm or hymn, the plainsong now in one part, now in another being surrounded each time by fresh counterpoints.
Cabezón wrote such versos or versillos and it has been  suggested that he was stimulated by the example of Arnolt Schlick (see p.184) who also composed what one might call suites of versets, notably those on ‘Da pacem Domine’ in the first part of his Tabulaturen (1512), without the choral alternation.
It remained for the Spaniards to connect them in extended compositions and base them on secular songs as Cabezón did on the ‘Canto del Caballero’ and ‘Guardame las vacas’or play them as so many Mass-movements and motets were even more incongruously played — on the lute.
But the composers of diferencias went further.
They combined variations on a melody with a similar technique originating in dance-music: composition on ‘conventional’ tenors or basses (see p. 170, n. 28), which, like the melodies, were elaborated with great freedom.
In fact melody and bass together defined harmonies which were the real basis of variation.
One extremely popular melody-and-bass was ‘Guardame las vacas’.
This was varied not only by Narvaez and Cabezón but by Venegas de Henestrosa in his Libro de cifra and the contemporary lute-composers Alonso de Mudarra (who also calls it ‘Romanesca’ under which name the bass became one of the most popular of all ‘conventional basses’in Italy as well), Enrique de Valderrabano, and Diego Pisador:
Another famous conventional melody-and-bass, ‘Ruggiero’(to which originally a stanza from Ariosto's Orlando furioso, xliv, 61, was sung), also made probably its first appearance in a Spanish source, the Tratado de glosas  (treatise on ornamental variation)(Rome, 1553) Of Diego Ortiz.
This teaches players of the vihuela de arco how to make glosas on cadences and recercadas on a cantus firmus which the cymbalo will harmonize or on a single part of a chanson or madrigal, the other parts being played on the ‘cymbalo’ with illustrations based on Sandrin's ‘Doulce memoire’and Rore's ‘O felice occhi miei’.
The vihuela tablatures contained villancicos and romances — with the melody in red figures– as in Luis Milan's El Maestro (Valencia, 1535 or 6), so that it could easily be sung as well as played.
They also included sets of diferencias and dances (e.g. Milan's beautiful pavanas), transcriptions of sacred and secular polyphony, and fantasias or tientos.
These last show the same development of imitative polyphony as the Italian lute fantasias; indeed, those in Narváez's Delphin anticipate Francesco da Milano and Gintzler by several years, though Mudarra includes a few simply ‘para desenboluer las manos’.
Narváez's fantasias also occasionally have echo passages like those in Francisco de Soto's keyboard tientos (see p. 236, n. 106).
In Miguel de Fuenllana's Orphénica lyra (Seville, 1554) the transcription of a vocal piece is often followed by a fantasia sometimes thematically related to it.
(Both Spanish and Italian lute-composers used the terms ‘tiento’ and ‘ricercare’for the more loosely constructed type of piece.)
THE LUTE IN OTHER COUNTRIES
The rest of Europe could at this time show little lute music comparable with that of the Spanish and Italian lutenists.
The German Hans Neusidler (c. 1510–1563) and the Parisian Guillaume Morlaye (c. 1515–1560) were essentially transcribers and dance-composers, though skilled ones.
Perhaps only the Transylvanian Valentin Bakfark (Greff)(1507–76), lutenist at the Polish court, who not only made the customary transcriptions but composed ten extended fantasias packed with imitative polyphony, can be ranked with Francisco de Milano, Gintzler, and the Spaniards.
As for England, although the lute was played at the beginning of the century, the only music for it in any source earlier than c. 1540 consists of a few pieces in the British Library manuscript, Royal App. 58 (see p. 186), two of which bear titles showing that they were settings of songs by Sir Thomas Wyatt (‘Hevyn and erth’) and Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey (‘In winter's just return’).
Henry VII engaged as his court lutenist not an Englishman but a Brescian.
ENGLISH ORGAN MUSIC
English organ music began to flourish after the King's recruitment of two foreign organists, the Venetian Memo and Benedictus Opitiis, a Hofhaimer pupil, in 1516.
Both stayed for five or six years.
Not long after this time (c. 1530) we have a source, Royal App. 56, containing half-a-dozen anonymous  liturgical pieces: a Kyrie and Christe, two ‘Felix namque’ and a Communion ‘Beata viscera’, an antiphon, ‘Miserere’, and an unornamented transcription of a four-part hymn, ‘A solis ortus cardine’.
The Kyrie-Christe is based on one of the set of conventional tenors employed at this period in English votive Masses of the Virgin, for instance those of Nicolas Ludford (c. 1485–c. 1557), which are mysteriously called ‘squares’.
Indeed the Kyrie of Ludford's Lady-Mass for Tuesday is based on the same square as the organ piece.
The organ-writing is undistinguished, a florid, aimless counterpoint for right or left hand, while in the ‘Felix namque’ and ‘Beata viscera’long-note cantus firmi are accompanied by two parts in loose and minimal imitation.
Another source of perhaps a decade later, Brit.
Lib., Add.
15233, however, gives us seven pieces — mostly Office hymns — by a composer of different quality who knew how to make his texture cohere by sequences, short ostinato motives, and other devices.
This was John Redford, vicar-choral and master of the choristers of St. Paul's Cathedral from at least as early as 1534 (when he signed the loyal declaration denying papal authority over the Church in England) till his death in 1547, playwright and poet.
Brit.
Lib., Add.
29996 preserves many more of his compositions, together with an alternatim organ Mass by another St. Paul's musician Philip ap Rhys, who succeeded him as organist, and a considerable number of organ works (including the Proper of a Mass for Easter Day and eight ‘Felix namque’ which might be regarded as a set of variations though they were not of course played as such) by Thomas Preston (d. c. 1564), organist of Magdalen College, Oxford, and later of the Chapel Royal at Windsor.
Even more of Redford's music exists in the great repertory-book belonging to Thomas Mulliner, possibly also of St. Paul's and later at Oxford, more than half of which was probably copied between 1550 and 1560.
Redford is much more richly represented in Mulliner's book than anyone else, with Thomas Tallis (c. 1505–1585) as the next and a younger man, William Blitheman (c. 1525–1591), third.
Of the composers of Redford's own generation, two of the greatest Christopher Tye (c. 1500–1573) and John Taverner (c. 1490–1545)— are represented by only one piece each, although Taverner's ‘In nomine’ was the progenitor of a whole species of English music for keyboard, lute, or instrumental ensemble during the next hundred years and more.
This ‘In nomine’ of Taverner's is an almost exact  transcription of the section ‘In nomine Domini’of the Benedictus of his Mass Gloria tibi Trinitas (on the Sarum version of a Vesper antiphon for Trinity Sunday), and it was this segment of plainsong, sometimes with quotation of Taverner's other parts, which served generations of English composers as cantus firmus for contrapuntal ‘fancies’.
(Tye alone wrote more than twenty for viols, nearly all in five parts.)
Two such ‘In nomines’ in Mulliner's book by the Scottish religious refugee Robert Johnson (C. 1490–c. 1565) and Robert White (c. 1530–1574)— appear to be transcriptions of viol compositions.
That by the otherwise almost unknown Nicholas Carleton, probably a pupil of Redford's, however, and the six by Blitheman– practically a set of variations all styled ‘Gloria tibi Trinitas’, are unmistakably keyboard compositions with showy and rhythmically complicated passage-work.
Indeed Mulliner's collection contains an entire repertory: original keyboard pieces, some brilliant, some as sober as most of Redford's organ hymns, transcriptions of Latin motets, English anthems and unsophisticated secular part-songs, a few dances, and a ‘fancy’, probably originally for viols, by one Newman otherwise unknown.
CHURCH MUSIC UNDER HENRY VIII AND MARY
What Mulliner's book does not represent adequately is English church music during the agonizing years 1534–58 which saw Henry VIII's pseudo-Reformation and dissolution of those musical strongholds, the monasteries; the Protestant triumph and English liturgy of 1549; the Catholic reaction and Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain (who brought with him during 1554–5 his ‘Flemish chapel’ including Philipp de Monte and his organist Cabezon); and the accession of Elizabeth I. Most of Taverner's church music was probably written before this period, during the years 1526–30 when he was organist and choirmaster of Cardinal College (now Christ Church), Oxford; it includes eight Masses, three Magnificats, as well as shorter pieces.
But he was already attracted to Lutheranism.
He became a zealous agent of Thomas Cromwell in the Dissolution and, according to John Foxe, ‘repented him very muche that he had made Songes to Popish Ditties in the time of his blindnes’ and seemingly abandoned composition.
The rather clumsy adaptations of his Masses, The Meane Mass and Small Devotion, to English words can hardly have been his own.
Some of  Tallis's Latin motets were turned into English anthems in the same dubious way, though the bulk of his music for the English rite is original.
So is Tye's and presumably that of John Sheppard, a turbulent and eccentric figure too little of whose music has been printed.
But the Anglicans, like the Lutherans, did not suddenly give up the composition of Latin texts.
Their Scottish contemporary Robert Carver (1487–after 1546) never accepted the Reformation.
The music of this last flowering of Latin church composition in Britain, with all its often masterly workmanship and sheer beauty of sound, has hardly anything in common with contemporary Continental music.
Taverner's dense polyphony often flows in florid and rhythmically subtle lines in the tradition of the masters of the Eton Choirbook and his imitational practice is, if anything, nearer to Ockeghem's than to Gombert's or Clemens non Papa's.
Only Sheppard, in his ‘Frences Mass’, shows any sign of foreign influence.
Tallis, greatest of the group, was capable of the most ingenious contrapuntal feats — as he demonstrates in his seven-part ‘Miserere nostri’ where superius I and II are in canon at the unison while simultaneously the descant is in canon with (a) the contratenor in quadruple augmentation,(b) bassus I in inverted intervals and 16-fold augmentation,(c) bassus II inverted and in double augmentation — to say nothing of his famous ‘Spem in alium’for eight five-part choirs with its effects of mass rather than subtlety.
But ‘Miserere nostri’ is medieval in technique as the lovely ‘Ave rosa sine spinis’is in feeling, and at his finest — as in the glorious antiphon ‘Gaude gloriosa Dei mater’— we hear him as the heir of the Eton composers, not of Josquin.
Taverner made one innovation in English music: the use of a secular cantus firmus, the tune of ‘Westron wynde’ very obviously in the highest part, throughout a Mass.
Tye and Sheppard also wrote ‘Westron wynde’ Masses and these are almost the only big English masses after Taverner's (if we exclude Lady Masses and the three much later examples by Byrd).
We have only two Masses by Tallis.
English composers preferred the votive antiphon, hymn, and respond, and in Mary's reign there was an outburst of Latin psalm-settings by Tallis, Tye, Sheppard, White in particular and others.
By Tallis and White we also have particularly fine Lamentations.
But despite the generalized emotional expressiveness of such works, English composers achieved a true marriage of words and music only in the next generation.
Music during the Counter-Reformation
Until the middle of the sixteenth century there was considerable hope, held by the Emperor Charles V among others, that the breach between Catholic and Protestant might yet be closed; the abortive visit of the Protestant envoys to the Council of Trent in 1551 showed once and for all that that hope was delusive.
The second half of the century was a period of intolerance, of deepening division not only between Catholic and Protestant — though a Catholic emperor, Maximilian II, could still favour Lutherans and as late as 1583 a Catholic Archbishop of Cologne could contemplate marriage to a nun — but between Lutheran and Calvinist and even within the various religious camps.
The religious divisions also hardened to a considerable extent into national ones; Catholicism not only held firm in southern Europe but extended itself northward, Lutheranism failed to root itself outside the Teutonic lands, while Calvinism spread in a long thin arc from Scotland, through France and the Netherlands to Poland and Hungary.
These differences are clearly reflected in music.
Even Catholic music suffered a crisis.
THE TRIDENTINE REFORM
There had for some time been complaints about the secular elements in Catholic church music, the exhibitionism of organists, the use of tropes, the obscuring of the sacred texts by polyphony, and so on.
They came to a head in 1562 at the Council of Trent, reconvened after a ten-year break.
In September the Council formulated the general directive quoted in the previous chapter (see p. 207) and the next year, just before it broke up, two new members actually advocated the suppression of polyphonic church music altogether.
But this aroused influential opposition notably from the Emperor, Ferdinand I, and the Bavarian Duke, Albrecht V. The Pope's motu proprio of 2 August 1564, which nominated eight cardinals to see to the carrying out of the Tridentine reforms generally, says nothing at all about music.
However, the two cardinals who did take over the musical reforms the Pope's young nephew Carlo Borromeo and Vitellozzo Vitellozzi were men of intelligence and culture.
They probably adopted as their standard of  ‘homophonic polyphony’ with clearly intelligible text the Preces speciales of the Italianized Netherlander Jacobus de Kerle (c. 1532–1591) and his Mass ‘Regina coeli’; the ‘special prayers’for the Council's success had been commissioned by a German cardinal, Truchsess von Waldburg, in 1562 and were sung at Trent three times almost every week.
The Missa Papae Marcelli of Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina (C. 1525–1594), then master of the chapel at St. Maria Maggiore at Rome, may well date from this time and have been accepted at once as an embodiment of the Tridentine ideal but there is no evidence that it was the unique exemplar of the legend.
It was probably among the Masses performed at Vitellozzi's house on 27 April 1565.
His Masses ‘Benedicta es’(on Josquin's motet), ‘De beata Virgine’, and ‘Ut re mi fa sol la’ are also said to have been approved.
So, rather surprisingly, was a Mass on Rore's madrigal ‘Qual donna attende’ by Albrecht V's magister capellae Lassus (‘Orlando di Lasso’)(c. 1532–1594), though this grave work is admittedly very different from Lassus's flippant, not to say scandalous chanson-Masses like the one on Clemens non Papa's ‘Entre vous filles’(cf. p. 213), which nevertheless is preserved in a post-Tridentine Munich copy.
Palestrina himself composed Masses modelled on chansons and madrigals, e.g. the Lupus/Cadéac ‘Je suys desheritée’(cf. p. 212) and Domenico Ferrabosco's ‘Io mi son giovinetta’(cf. p. 230).
But he took care to publish them as ‘Sine nomine’ or ‘Missa primi toni’and when he issued his Second Book of  Masses (Rome, 1567) he claimed that he had composed ‘music of a new order in accordance with the views of the most serious and religious-minded persons in high places’.
In the same year Giovanni Animuccia (C. 1500–1571), who succeeded Palestrina as master of the Cappella Giuliana in 1555 and was succeeded by him in 1571, described his First Book of Masses as composed ‘seconda la forma del Concilio di Trento’, and Vincenzo Ruffo (c. 1510–1587) of Milan Cathedral explained in the dedication of his book of Masses ‘according to the Milan rite’(1570) that he had composed them on Borromeo's instructions ‘ex sancti tridentini Concilii decreto’.
In Ruffo's case this necessitated a striking change of style from his Madrigali a notte negre (Venice, 1545) and Madrigali cromatici of 1552.
Other composers did not yet differentiate so sharply between secular and sacred idioms; even Palestrina introduced madrigalian elements — with beautiful effect — in his settings from the Song of Songs, while Victoria toward the end of his life, in 1600, broke into a much more surprisingly secular vein in a Missa pro victoria with organ, modelled on Janequin's ‘La guerre’.
THE ORATORIAN MOVEMENT AND ‘GREGORIAN’ REFORM
The Tridentine reforms were in practice essentially an Italian, even a Roman affair, except where they were enforced by the Jesuits, the ‘soldiers of the Counter-Reformation’.
In Rome itself there was another musical manifestation of the Counter-Reformation, associated with the Oratorian movement founded by St. Philip Neri for which Animuccia composed two volumes of laudi spirituali (1563 and 1570).
These were very much in the tradition of the older polyphonic laudi, but before long imitation and chromaticism appeared in Oratorian laudi and by the end of the century an element of dramatic dialogue which was to flower into the full-blown ‘oratorio’.
A more sophisticated form of vernacular religious music of the Counter-Reformation was the madrigale spirituale which began to flower in 1581 with the publication of the first book of Madrigali spirituali a cinque voci by the Imperial Kapellmeister Philipp de Monte (1521–1603), another Italianized Fleming.
The supreme masterpieces in this short-lived genre are Lassus's posthumously published Lagrime di San Pietro.
One most unfortunate consequence of the Counter-Reformation must be mentioned.
In 1577 Gregory XIII took it into his head that the ‘Gregorian’ chant itself needed reform and entrusted the task to Palestrina and a Papal contralto, Annibale Zoilo.
They were frustrated by the intervention of a  Spanish composer, Fernando de las Infantas, but in 1582 Palestrina's pupil Giovanni Guidetti published a version giving the notes definite mensural values which his master warmly approved, and further attempts at ‘reformation’ led to the disastrous so-called ‘Medici’edition of 1614.
THE PERFECTION OF THE ROMAN STYLE
The ‘Roman style’ was not, of course, created by the Council of Trent though the Council did give it a partial façade of quasi-homophonic simplicity.
Essentially it is the ultimate perfection — a hostile critic might say ‘emasculation’— of Netherland polyphony, its florid elements pruned, its dissonances disguised or mollified by preparation and other devices which so lend themselves to codification that ‘the style of Palestrina’ has become the ideal model for students of sixteenth-century composition.
It was practised not only by Palestrina but by Animuccia, by the Mantuan court composer, the Netherlander Giaches de Wert (1535–96), by Marc Antonio Ingegneri of Cremona (after 1547–1592) and Giovanni Matteo Asola of Verona (c. 1524–1609), both probably pupils of Ruffo, by the Nanino brothers, Giovanni Maria (c. 1545–1607) and Giovanni Bernardino (c. 1560–1623), and by Palestrina's own pupils Francesco Soriano (c. 1549–1620) and Felice Anerio (1560–1614), who were responsible for the Editio Medicaea of the chant, and Felice's younger brother Giovanni Francesco (c. 1567–1630), although the music of these younger composers reveals the impression of new ideas.
Far greater than any of these, second only to Palestrina himself, was Tomas Luis de Victoria (c. 1548–1611), who in 1565 came to Rome from Spain where Morales (see p. 236) and his pupil Francisco Guerrero (c. 1527–1599) had already arrived at a perfection of the Netherland style hardly distinguishable from the Roman.
Palestrina's more than a hundred Masses are of all the familiar types: Masses like ‘Aeterna Christi munera’, based on the plainsong Matins hymn, ‘parodies’ like ‘Assumpta est Maria’based on his own six-part motet, freely composed ones like the Missa Papae Marcelli and Missa brevis, to mention only a few supremely fine examples.
Victoria's output of Masses, and of motets, was much smaller — no more than a score — eight of them being modelled on his own motets, though he was much more selective than most of his contemporaries, borrowing only sparsely from the model instead of treating it almost as the theme for a series of variations as Palestrina does with ‘Assumpta est’ and de Monte in most of his Masses.
Both Palestrina and Victoria toward the end of their lives became aware of the festive possibilities of the Venetian double-choral effect, Palestrina in the Mass ‘Laudate l) ominum’ and a number of motets, Victoria in the already mentioned Missa pro victoria and the three Marian Masses published with it (Madrid, 1600), all of which have organ accompaniment.
But the great bulk of their music makes its effect exclusively by its singing lines, moving by step more often than leap, and beautifully spaced harmonic euphony, producing a sense of timelessness by the absence of marked rhythm or the thrust of any but the gentlest dissonance.
The spirit had been caught from time to time long before and by the same crossing of Italian sweetness with Netherland technique, for instance in Josquin's ‘Pange lingua’ Mass (see pp. 1767), but in Palestrina and Victoria it is all-pervading, incantatory, the ideal music of mystical faith, totally purged of human emotion (except occasionally in their motets) and of human vanity — except the vanity of performers who (we learn with a shock from Giovanni Bassano's Motetti, Madrigali el Canzoni Francese di diversi eccellentissimi Auttori…
Diminuiti per sonar con ogni sorte di Stromenti & anco per cantar con semplice Voce, published in 1591, when Palestrina was still living) ornamented the highest parts not only of madrigals and chansons but of motets.
Here, for example, is Bassano's version of a few bars of the soprano part of Palestrina's ‘Benedicta sit sancta Trinitas’:
Bassano's book was published in Venice, however, and Venice-where ‘music had her very own home’ as Francesco Sansovino claimed in his Venetia, citta nobilissima et singolare (Venice, 1581)— was politically at odds with the papacy during the latter part of the century and was shortly afterwards able to defy successfully a papal interdict.
The austere artistic ideals of Rome made little impression on the city of Veronese, who himself got into trouble with the Roman Inquisition for his secular treatment of a ‘Last Supper’.
Even one of the more conservative of Willaert's disciples, Andrea Gabrieli (c. 1515–1586), expressly mentions the use of instruments (‘tum viva Voce, tum omnis generis Instrumentis’) in his Sacrae cantiones (1565) and again in his Penitential Psalms (1583).
He makes it clear in the  dedication of the latter that voices and instruments were to be used now together, now separately (‘per vocum et instrumentorum melodiam, tam conjuncte quam divisim’) but not at all clear how this was to be done.
However it is evident that he intended something different from the simple a cappella doubling of voices by instruments, and this ‘something different’ became known as the ‘concerted style’(stile concertato), a ‘consort’of voices and instruments.
Clearly this is what Andrea's nephew Giovanni (C. 1555–1612) had in mind when in 1587 he published a collection of motets, Mass-movements, and madrigals by his uncle and himself as Concerti (a very early use of the term) per voci, & stromenti Musicali; a 6.7.8.10.12. & 16.
(The stromenti musicali available at San Marco at that time, besides the two organs, were cornetti and trombones plus one or two violini — the only stringed instruments that could hold their own with the brass — engaged as extras.)
Whereas in his earlier four- and five-part motets Andrea had generally maintained a conservative style, the Penitential Psalms show his skill in what one may call choral orchestration, and in the Concerti he developed polychoral writing far beyond the simple antiphony of the salmi spezzati of Ruffino and Willaert.
He employed for instance three four-part groups differentiated by pitch (high, medium, and low) and probably by constitution (soli, tutti), by instrumental support or substitution, and positioning in the church — to produce those exciting contrasts which led Michael Praetorius thirty years later into the etymological error of deriving the term ‘concerto’ from the Latin concertare, to contend.
A typical example is shown in Ex. 71, from the last concerto in the collection, ‘Magnificat anima mea’(see p. 250).
This is far indeed in both technique and spirit from the contemporary work of Palestrina and Victoria.
Religious music in Venice, in particular at San Marco, was very often music for state occasions and Andrea Gabrieli was very much an official composer.
He wrote the music for royal visits, for the carnival rejoicings after the battle of Lepanto, for the performance of Edippo Tiranno, a translation of Sophocles which opened Palladio's Teatro Olimpico at Vicenza in 1585, and his church music was planned with much greater concern for splendid and effective sound than these secular compositions.
One can trace the same development from conservative polyphony to polychoral music demanding instrumental co-operation for its full effect in the works of the other Venetians and Willaert pupils of the latter half of the century: Costanzo Porta (c. 1529–1601), Claudio Merulo    (1533–1604), Giovanni Croce (c. 1557–1609), and above all Andrea's nephew Giovanni Gabrieli (c. 1555–1612).
Of these the most conservative was Porta, who as late as 1578 could publish an old-fashioned cantus firmus Mass on the Josquin subject ‘La sol fa re mi’ and who corresponded with Carlo Borromeo; on the other hand, his Magnificat for the Franciscan Chapter at Bologna was in 24 parts and we know that he frequently employed trombones, cornetts, violins, and portative organs as well as the large ones at San Antonio, Padua, where he spent the last six years of his life.
Merulo, as one would expect of such a prolific instrumental composer, included in his second book of motets (1593) 7 per concerti e per cantare, and after his death were published two remarkable Masses, on Giaches de Wert's madrigal ‘Cara la vita mia’ for two choirs and on Andrea Gabrieli's ‘Benedicam Dominum’itself a three-choir work — for three.
SPARTITURA AND BASSO CONTINUO Croce published his earliest motets and Masses for two choirs in 1594 and 1596 respectively.
They are works of peculiar historical interest since they are the earliest publications to include a special part — what the publisher, Giacomo Vincenti, called a sparditura or partidura — for the accompanying organist.
It consists of the bass-parts for each choir, placed one above the other, with bar-lines but no text or figures to indicate how he was to fill out the bass, only an occasional flat or sharp above the notes; when in the Masses a movement begins in a higher part only, this is shown in the organ part; but when the higher voices sing without the bass, the organ part is marked ‘tacet’ or ‘non est hic’.
At the same time (1595) Vincenti published the eight-part Concerti ecclesiastici of another of the San Marco musicians, Adriano Banchieri (1567–1634), with a spartitura for the choro primo only.
This gives both cantus and bass above each other, textless, with the indication ‘a 8’ where the secondo choro sings as well , and a note telling organists how quickly and easily they can make a ‘spartitura di tutti due chori’for themselves if they need one.
The usefulness of having voice-parts in score, so that they could be played on a keyboard instrument (as distinct from the highly embellished transcriptions) or used ‘for the study of counterpoint’, had been recognized at least as early as 1577, when Gardano published two such volumes, one of Rore's four-part madrigals, the other of miscellaneous pieces.
And ten years later the Mantuan composer Alessandro Striggio (c. 1535–c. 1595), in order to hold together the forty parts of his four-choir motet ‘Ecce beatam lucem’, devised a bassone or ‘general bass’‘extracted from the lowest voices, to be played in the middle of the circle [of performers]by a trombone for the sustaining of the harmony  with organ, lute and cembali or viols’.
Porta's alleged pupil Ludovico Viadana (c. 1560–1627) needed no such aid to the performance of his Concerti ecclesiastici…
Con il basso continuo per sonar nell' organo (Book I, Venice, 1602), for the mainly solo voices never number more than four.
The Second Book of his Concerti (1607) actually contains a monodic ‘Missa Dominicalis’ with continuo, though his textures are often contrapuntal and have no very close affinity, except in coloratura, with the secular monody which was developing at this time.
Although the monodists were already using figures to indicate the intervals to be played above the bass, Viadana does not.
But in 1607 his friend Agostino Agazzari published the first little treatise on continuo performance, Del suonare sopra il basso con tutti stromenti & uso loro nel conserto, which does explain the use of figures.
And in the same year as Agazzari, Giovanni Gabrieli's German pupil Gregor Aichinger (1564–1628) published at Dillingen his Cantiones ecclesiasticae, partly composed earlier in Rome in admitted emulation of Viadana, with an appendix in German explaining the ‘Bassus Generalis Et Continuus’.
Thus in a few years a mere convenience for keyboard players had developed into a widely adopted performing practice which revolutionized musical textures and was to remain in use for two centuries.
The extent of the revolution is most strikingly illustrated by comparison of Giovanni Gabrieli's two settings of ‘O Jesu mi dulcissime’: in his First Book of Sacrae Symphoniae (1597) and in his Second Book (posthumously published in 1615).
In his First Book Giovanni, like Croce in his Sacrae Cantilene Concertate (also posthumous, 1610), was following splendidly in his uncle's footsteps.
(Like Andrea, he and Croce were first and foremost composers for state occasions, although Giovanni could also express intense personal anguish in a smaller work, the six-part ‘Timor et tremor’ with its madrigalian symbolism from the literal ‘tremor’motive at the beginning to the descending chromatic line of ‘non confundar’at the end.)
Already in the ‘O magnum mysterium’ of the 1587 volume of Concerti, he had revealed his penchant for festive passages in triple time.
But although instruments were freely used they are not clearly differentiated from voices until the Second Book of Symphoniae.
Here, in the ‘Surrexit Christus’(for three-part choir, two violini, two cornetti, and four trombones) and ‘In ecclesiis’(for  four soloists, four-part choir, violino, two cornetti, and four trombones), the obbligato parts are not only independent but written in an unmistakably instrumental style while the florid or declamatory vocal solos are contrasted with the generally block-like — but at times harmonically startling — chords of the choir.
Obbligato instruments were by this time also being used in much more modest works, such as the Concerti Ecclesiastici (Venice, 1608) of the Ferrarese Archangelo Crotti which actually include a ‘Sonata sopra Sancta Maria’ humbly anticipating the famous one in Monteverdi's Vespers.
MONTEVERDI'S CHURCH MUSIC
Claudio Monteverdi (1567–1643) was already famous as a madrigalist and composer of the operas Orfeo and Arianna but when he brought out his Sanctissimae Virgini Missa senis vocibus…ac Vesperae (Venice, 1610) he had published no church music since the juvenile Cantiunculae Sacrae of the ‘pupil of the eminent Ingegneri’ in 1582.
He was still in the service of the Mantuan court and did not begin his three decades as maestro di cappella of San Marco till three years later.
The Mass and Vespers nicely illustrate the stylistic dichotomy of church music which was to last for a very long time and which Monteverdi had already distinguished in the foreword to his Fifth Book of madrigals as prima and seconda pratica.
The Mass is an old-fashioned a cappella Mass — for the continuo is disposable — freely modelled on Gombert's motet ‘In illo tempore’; the Vespers, although ‘composto sopra canti fermi’, exhibit the most modern idioms of expressive declamation, showy coloratura, echo effects of forte and piano, and free use of instruments, but also double-choral passages a cappella (opening of the ‘Ave maris stella’).
The voice-parts of the opening ‘Domine ad adjuvandum’ are largely composed on to a transposed version of the preludial ‘toccata’a true Shakespearian ‘tucket’of Orfeo.
The solo vocal coloratura of ‘Audi caelum’, echoed by an unspecified instrument, and the instrumental ritornelli of ‘Ave maris stella’ could equally well have originated in the opera.
As an appendix to the Vespers, Monteverdi added two versions of what is essentially the same Magnificat, though one is for six voices and organ only, the other for seven voices and a considerable orchestra.
So far had music come in the sixteen years since Palestrina's death.
Monteverdi's Vespers were of course quite exceptional, yet common Venetian and North Italian practices were better adapted to the expression of human emotion than of transcendental faith.
And the year after the Vespers Carlo Borromeo's nephew, the Neapolitan Carlo Gesualdo, Prince of Venosa (c.  1562–1613), published a set of Responsoria charged with chromatic emotionalism.
THE END OF THE NETHERLAND TRADITION
Nor was the successful Counter-Reformation beyond the Alps much affected by the spirit of Trent even in non-musical matters; the most firmly Catholic of rulers, the King of Spain and the prince-bishops of the Empire, were very jealous of Papal interference in their domains.
The Emperors Ferdinand I and Maximilian II were tolerant and Rudolf II (1576–1612), though a fervent Catholic, was a mentally unstable recluse; their court chapel, stationed mostly at Prague particularly during Rudolf's reign, consisted almost entirely of Netherlanders.
Philipp de Monte (1521–1603) was the outstanding character: the last surviving great master of the parody-Mass, composer of more than three hundred motets, and the most prolific madrigalist of his day.
With his compatriot colleagues — the already mentioned Kerle, Jacob Regnart (c. 1540–1599), Charles Luython (C. 1557–1620)— and other composers in Prague, Jacobus Handl, ‘Gallus vocatus, Carniolanus’(1550–91) and the remarkable Czech amateur Kryštof Harant z Polžic (1564–1621), together with Giaches de Wert (1535–96) who settled in Italy, he represents the last flowering of the Netherland tradition in church music.
Admittedly it was an Italianized flowering, and the pollination is particularly apparent in the Masses based on madrigals, e.g. on Verdelot's ‘Ultimi miei sospiri’, Rore's ‘Ancor che col partire’, and de Monte's own ‘La dolce vista’— the last a superb quasi-Venetian Mass for two four-part choirs.
Another fine eight-part composition, the motet ‘Super flumina Babylonis’, was in 1583 sent by de Monte to William Byrd whom he must have met thirty years earlier during his visit to England as a member of Philip II's chapel.
THE RELIGIOUS MUSIC OF LASSUS
A yet greater Netherlander, Lassus — much more versatile than de Monte in his church music alone, to say nothing of the secular field, and a much stronger and more complex creative personality — served the dukes of Bavaria from 1556 till his death in 1594.
It was Bavaria that provided the Catholic leadership of the Counter-Reformation in Germany, yet as we have seen the young Lassus was capable of composing not only Masses approved by the reforming cardinals but others in flagrant disregard of everything that Trent stood for (see p. 245).
While the Psalmi Davidis penitentiales were commissioned by Albrecht V, their textual expressiveness of the kind we have already noticed in Rore (p. 2–) is so intense that one is tempted to  hear in them a note of personal anguish.
The same note, perhaps struck from him by Loyola's Exercises, is often heard in Lassus's motets — in ‘Infelix ego’ and ‘Timor et tremor’, both from the Sacrae Cantiones of 1566, to take only two examples out of many — in the Lamentationes of 1585, and in his very last composition, the already mentioned Lagrime di San Pietro.
His music in general reflects his character, which we know from his letters and from the diagnosis of his friend, the Court doctor Thomas Mermann, to have been manic-depressive; and comparable extremes are apparent even in the vocabulary of his church music.
He employs every technical device from the archaism of fauxbourdon, as at ‘descendit de coelis’ in the Credo of the Mass on Sandrin's ‘Douce memoire’, to the boldest harmonic progressions.
He uses Josquin's paired imitation, as at the beginning of ‘Exspectans exspectavi’, and achieves Josquin's pellucid serenity.
He employs Venetian double and triple choral effects.
(He was clearly influenced by Andrea Gabrieli and influenced him in turn, as he did Giovanni who served under him in the Munich choir from c. 1575 to 1579.)
Above all, he delights in madrigalian pictography and symbolism — to some extent in the Masses, but very much more in the motets where they are innumerable and infinitely varied.
He juxtaposes dramatically contrasted chords, as in ‘Concupiscendo concupiscit’: and opens ‘Non des mulieri potestatem’ with coloratura curiously instrumental in character.
And as we shall see in the next chapter, his secular music was at least equally various.
VERNACULAR PSALM SETTINGS
Lassus's church music was extremely well known in France where his works were published from 1564 onward by Le Roy and Ballard.
But religious music was composed in France largely by Huguenots and therefore limited to little other than psalms.
Goudimel seems to have composed no more Latin church music after he embraced Protestantism c. 1560.
Of the Latin church music of Jacques Mauduit (1557–1627), a Catholic, little survives except the end of his Requiem for Ronsard (1586), an early and probably uncharacteristic work in the peculiar style of musique mesurée à l'antique which will be discussed in the next chapter (p. 284); we know that he employed instruments in his annual Holy Week concerts at the Abbaye Saint-Antoine and the St. Cecilia celebrations in Notre Dame.
Another Requiem Mass which enjoyed considerable popularity was that by Eustache Du Caurroy (1549–1609), a member of the Royal Chapel, whose motets for double choir are supposed to have introduced the ‘Venetian’ style n France.
Yet it was the vernacular psalms, whether for private or public devotion, which more faithfully reflected the mood of France during the years of the religious wars.
Although Calvinist in origin, they were sung and fresh settings were composed by Catholics and Lutherans as well.
The Marot-Bèze Psalter was set by Mauduit as well as by Claude Le Jeune (C. 1530–1600) and Pascal de L'Estocart (b. c. 1540); LeJeune and Mauduit also published psalms (posthumously 1606, and 1623) in musique mesurée and Le Jeune furthermore composed elaborate motet settings, notably the Dodecacorde contenant douze pseaumes de David (La Rochelle, 1598), each in one of Glareanus's twelve modes.
Nor were they confined to France.
Lobwasser's German translation of Marot-Beze, with Goudimel's music adapted, was sung by Lutherans for nearly three centuries after its appearance in 1573 and there were less successful Lutheran and Catholic translations, some with fresh music.
The treatment was as diverse as the  geographical distribution, from the simple four-part settings of the complete Psalter in Polish by Mikolaj Gomolka (Cracow, 1580), employing tunes drawn from plainsong, Protestant song, and the popular music of Eastern Europe generally, to the astonishing collection of settings of Marot-Bèze published by the Dutch master Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck (15621621) in four books (Amsterdam, 1604, 1613, 1614, and Haarlem, 1621).
Sweelinck set the Geneva tunes in styles which range from those of the motet and madrigal to the onomatopoeic French chanson; it is indeed strange that he ignored both words and tunes of his native Souterliedekens.
LUTHERAN GEISTLICHE LIEDER
In the Lutheran lands the ‘spiritual song’ was cultivated with the same variety of treatment, often by the same composer.
For instance the Geistliche und Weltliche teutsche Geseng (Wittenberg, 1566) of Johann Walter's successor as Dresden Court Kapellmeister, the  Liègeois Mattheus Le Maistre (C. 1505–1577), include both simple settings with the hymn-melody in the highest part and elaborate canonic ones in the Netherland tradition.
In a second collection (1577) Le Maistre keeps generally to a simpler polyphonic style, while the enormously influential Fünffzig Geistliche Lieder und Psalmen (Nuremberg, 1586) of Lucas Osiander (1534–1604) were specifically ‘set so that an entire Christian congregation can join in the singing throughout (durchaus mitsingen)’, in four-part block harmony with the melody in the highest part and firmly marked tonal (V-I) cadences on what may surely be called ‘dominant’ and ‘tonic’:
At the same time Lutheran music began to be exposed to foreign influences.
While such German Catholics as Blasius Amon (c. 1560–90) and Gregor Aichinger (1564–1628) studied in Venice, came under the influence  of Lassus, and introduced cori spezzati and the basso continuo in their native land, it was the contact of the same musical influences with Lutheran thought and the poetry and music of Lutheran song which proved more fruitful.
In his Sacrae cantiones of 1573 Joachim a Burck (1646–1610) had employed chromaticism and the other devices of musica reservata to underline the sense of the Biblical texts, but when he began to set the very personal religious verse of Ludwig Helmbold — Latin odes and German Liedlein — the relationship between text and music became much closer, even madrigalian, and he himself claimed he had provided the 40 deutsche christl.
Liedlein of 1599 with ‘suavibus harmoniis ad imitationem italicarum Villanescarum’.
Another composer, friend of Burck and singer in the Munich choir under Lassus, who set Helmbold's poems on similar lines was Johann Eccard (1553–1611).
He published geistliche Lieder in 1578 and 1589, though the finest of them, the Preussische Festlieder, appeared more than thirty years after his death.
Yet after all, these original compositions had less historical importance than his Geystliche Lieder, au–den Choral (Königsberg, 1597), the familiar melody in the highest part while the four lower ones move in ornamented harmony rather than true polyphony.
Another Lassus pupil at Munich, Leonhard Lechner (c. 1553–1606), later a convert to Protestantism, began his career with Latin church music in his master's style, composed a great tri-choral, 24-part epithalamium, ‘Quid chaos’(1582) in the Venetian manner, and bade farewell to life in an extraordinary set of fifteen Spruche von Leben und Tod — the dramatic power and profound emotion of which, however, he had already anticipated in ‘O Tod, du bist ein bittre Gallen’, one of his Newe teutsche Lieder (Nuremberg, 1582).
GERMAN PASSION MUSIC
Burck and Lechner also made significant contributions to German Passion music.
Luther's musical adviser, Johann Walter (see p. 220) had composed ‘dramatic’ Passions after both St. Matthew and St. John which exist in various forms, the earliest dating from 1545.
Another Dresden Court musician, the Italian Lutheran convert Antonio Scandello (1517–80), had composed a John Passion in 1561.
But Burck's Deutsche Passion was the earliest German motet-Passion and it had the distinction of getting into print, in 1568, before either of Walter's.
It is to some extent modelled on the supposed ‘Obrecht’ Passion, which he mentions in his preface, though his text is entirely from St. John and he goes on to point out that he has been ‘diligent so to set the words under the notes that almost every syllable has its  note, and the four voices sing the words at the same time so that the listeners may hear the words clearly’.
However he does admit ‘madrigalisms’ such as the agonized chromatic harmonies in which the Evangelist tells of the crown of thorns.
There are similar touches of word-painting in Lechner's Das Leiden unsers Herren Jesu Christi (Nuremberg, 1594), a ‘motet’ setting of an early Lutheran ‘Gospel-harmony’by Johann Bugenhagen; but this is an altogether finer work, based on the traditional ‘Passion tone’from which Lechner sometimes spins most lovely and moving polyphony:
VENETIAN INFLUENCE AND THE LUTHERAN HYMN-MOTET
Some of the rather younger Lutheran composers — Hieronymus Praetorius (1560–1629), Hans Leo Hassler (1564–1612), Christoph Demantius (1567–1643), and Michael Praetorius (c. 1571–1621)(unrelated to Hieronymus)— came under Venetian as well as Lassus's influence, although only one of them, Hassler, is known to have visited Venice (1585) and studied with Andrea Gabrieli.
Hassler, a Protestant, was long in the service of the banking family of Fugger of Augsburg, who were strict Catholics, and was later — with his brothers Kaspar and Jakob, both notable musicians ennobled by the Emperor Rudolf II.
Consequently while his secular music (see the next chapter) was set to German words his church music consists mainly of Latin motets and Masses.
Some of it — e.g. ‘Ad Dominum, cum  tribularer’ from the Sacri concentus of 1601, with the five successive rising semitones of the opening phrase in each voice successively and the five falling ones at ‘et a lingua dolosa’— remarkably ‘modern’.
Latin motets, particularly the shorter and simpler ones by Lassus and Gallus (Handl), were much used by the Lutheran church.
Yet it was only toward the end of his life — in the Psalmen und christliche Gesang…auff die Melodeyen fugweiss componiert (Nuremberg, 1607) and the Kirchengesäng, Psalmen und geistliche Lieder, auff die gemeinen Melodeyen simpliciter gesetzt (1608), which paved the way to his connection with the Protestant court of Dresden that Hassler turned to the Lutheran hymn.
The ‘simpliciter’ collection is simple indeed — four parts, the highest carrying the melody — but the ‘fugue-wise’ones treat the successive phrases of the hymn in motet style on lines that were to be followed throughout the seventeenth century and beyond.
But in this field of the Lutheran hymn-motet Hassler was far surpassed in bulk and variety, if not in artistic achievement, by Michael Praetorius.
Almost the whole of Praetorius's enormous output consists of compositions of the most diverse types, from the simplest to the most elaborate, on Lutheran hymns (and secondarily on the Latin portions of the Lutheran liturgy).
The nine parts of his Musae Sioniae, published in various centres between 1605 and 1610 when he was in the service of the Brunswick court at Wolfenbuttel, are in themselves an astonishing monument of skill and industry.
Parts I-IV consist of double-choral pieces for eight, but sometimes twelve, voices; with Part V he began a systematization according to category, with motet-settings of Festlieder, and went on to produce three volumes — 746 pieces to 458 different texts — of straightforward four-part settings for congregational use plus a few organ ‘variations’ in VII; in IX he again set the hymns of I-IV but for two or three voices and even contemplated doing them yet again ‘motet-wise in the style of Lassus’, ‘madrigal-wise in the style of Marenzio’, and per choros in the style of Victoria.
Next he turned his attention to the Latin pieces and finally, after a short period (1613–16) at the Dresden court with its greater resources, produced a group of publications of which the most important is the Polyhymnia Caduceatrix et Panegyrica (1619).
In this he took as models all the most up-to-date Italian works with which he boasts his acquaintance: Monteverdi's Vespers, Giovanni Gabrieli's Second Book of Sacrae Symphoniae, the works of Viadana and Agazzari.
At the same time he embarked on a great literary work, Syntagma musicum, in three volumes: I, historical, published at Wittenberg in 1615; II, ‘concerning instruments’, 1618 (with a supplementary volume of illustrations, Theatrum Instrumentorum, in 1620); and III, 1619, in which, as in the preface to Polyhymnia, he gives the most copious information as to the heterogeneous  ways in which these great Italian-mannered but profoundly German compositions may be performed-with or without continuo, with contrasting groups of instruments, voices soli or ripieni, and so on.
RELIGIOUS MUSIC IN ENGLAND
The religious situation in Britain throughout this period was peculiar and, particularly in England, complicated.
While in Scotland Calvinism was soon officially triumphant, in England it was on the whole successfully opposed by the compromise of Elizabethan Anglicanism upheld by the monarch and most of the Archbishops of Canterbury.
Only during the regime of Edmund Grindal did the Puritan reformers stand any chance of success, but Grindal was quickly suspended and his successors, Whitgift and then Bancroft were intolerant of them.
And all the time there was a powerful Catholic minority which included the greatest English composer of the age, William Byrd (1543–1623), and possibly also his pupil Thomas Morley (1557–1602) though the latter's politico-religious activities were mysterious and ambiguous.
Another notable Catholic, Peter Philips (c. 1560–1628), left England as a young man.
Nevertheless the dividing line between the musicians who composed both Latin and English church music and those who composed only English music must be drawn not between Catholics and Protestants but between generations.
Byrd and his master Tallis (see p. 242), Morley and William Mundy (c. 1529–c. 1591) composed both; the church music of William's son John (c. 1552–1630) is overwhelmingly English; and that of Byrd's pupil Thomas Tomkins (1572–1656), Thomas Weelkes (c. 1575–1623), and Orlando Gibbons (1583–1625) is entirely so.
The earliest essays in English service-music were on similar lines to early Lutheran ones: truncation of the Mass, and drastic simplification of plainsong as in the Cranmerian Booke of Common praier noted (1550) of John Marbeck (c. 1510–85).
The Anglican ‘Service’ as set by Tallis, Byrd, and the elder Mundy consists of Morning Prayers with responses, litany, ‘Te Deum’and ‘Benedictus’, Kyrie and Creed for the Communion, and the Evening canticles ‘Magnificat’and ‘Nunc dimittis’, or some portion of these (e.g. Byrd's second and third Services consist only of the evening canticles).
Yet the demand ‘for every syllable a note’ was felt as a constraint and only when Byrd for some reason was able to resist it, in his Great Service, does he rise to the heights of the four- and five-part Masses evidently intended for some great Catholic household, and the finest of his motets, in which  he reveals his mastery of freely imitative polyphony.
However his second Service is marked by a peculiarly English innovation: the introduction of passages for solo voice and organ, which plays not a continuo role but polyphony to which the voice doubles a part or supplies an otherwise missing one:
Byrd employs the same device in some of his anthems, a type later known as ‘verse anthems’.
But never in these and only exceptionally in his ‘full anthems’(English motets) does he display the expressive power of his Latin motets.
For Byrd's finest expression of religious emotion to English words we must turn to his Psalmes, Sonets and songs of Sadnes and pietie (1588), his Songs of sundrie natures (1589), and his Psalmes, Songs and Sonnets (1611), which include equivalents of the geistlicher Gesang and madrigale spirituale though often conceived with instrumental parts; for his greatest church music to his two hundred or so motets.
The earliest of these were collected in a volume of Cantiones which he published in 1575 jointly with Tallis, thus marking Elizabeth I's grant to them of a twenty-one year monopoly of music printing; others followed in two sets of Cantiones sacrae (1589 and 1591) and two of Gradualia (1605 and 1607), a corpus of work almost as varied in technique and sometimes as ‘madrigalian’ in word-painting as that of Lassus — some of which Byrd may well have known — or of Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder (1543–88) who was his friend and colleague in the Queen's service for sixteen years and wrote not only ‘madrigalian’motets but simple Latin hymn-settings in a style very similar to Byrd's.
With Morley's dozen Latin works, probably early and almost all intensely penitential, the motet in England came to a not undistinguished end.
The motet was replaced by the two forms of anthem, the Mass by the Service.
But the Service soon became less important, musically, than the anthem.
Despite some fine passages in the Services of Tomkins and Weelkes, and the two specimens by Gibbons, it is their anthems — and some of those by their lesser contemporaries — which are the finest flowers of Anglican church music in this, its greatest, period.
Full anthems like Tomkins's ‘When David heard’, Weelkes's ‘Gloria in excelsis: Sing, my soul’ and ‘Hosanna to the Son of David’, Gibbons's setting of the latter text and his ‘O clap your hands’are masterpieces of free and flexible polyphony.
But the full anthem was gradually making way for the verse anthem, of which Gibbons was the outstanding master.
His finest things in this form date from his later years —‘Behold thou has made my days’ can be dated 1618 and ‘Glorious and powerful God’was probably nearly contemporary and the great ‘O Lord, let me know mine end’of the long-lived though generally conservative Tomkins may be later still.
Gibbons's verse anthems generally have accompaniments for viols as well as organ, while Tomkins's organ accompaniments are full and sometimes marked by florid ornament in strong contrast to the frequently sketchy organ parts of the previous generation.
Secular Song and Instrumental Music (c. 1560–c.1610)
So long as religious music and sophisticated secular music shared the common techniques of imitative polyphony they naturally preserved a relationship the closeness of which is demonstrated by the numerous paraphrase Masses based on madrigals or chansons.
But as new technical means evolved through the emergence of the keyboard and other instrumental idioms, the continual striving for closer relationship with texts (particularly the various vernacular texts), and the novel conceptions of space and contrast, so the role of imitative polyphony became less important — particularly in secular music.
Even in church music its purest type reached ultimate perfection in the work of Palestrina and Victoria, and thereafter became the idiom of epigones.
It was an exhausted technique and its exhaustion quickly weakened the relationship of religious and secular.
NETHERLAND COMPOSERS OF MADRIGAL AND CHANSON
The last great  ambidextrous polyphonist was Lassus.
Whereas Palestrina is almost negligible as a composer of secular music, Lassus was equally at home in the Italian madrigal and the more popular and homophonic villanella (successor of the frottola), the French chanson and German song, to say nothing of the secular Latin motet.
His German compositions are the least numerous: less than a hundred (of which half are geistliche Lieder) as against nearly 140 chansons and about 180 madrigals and villanelle.
Like the chansons they are permeated with the stylistic influence of the Italian forms and show delight in the bawdy, the roistering, and the comic, but unlike the chansons they lack poetry, elegance, and lightness.
The chansons, mostly published between 1564 and 1576, vary in style from the mostly note-against-note of ‘Margot labourez’ and the setting of Ronsard's ‘Bon jour, mon coeur’to the graceful polyphony of ‘Le rossignol’, l from three such different scherzi as ‘Fuyons tous d'amour’, ‘Quand mon mary’, and ‘Sauter, danser’to the grave du Bellay settings ‘O foible esprit’, a pure madrigal, and ‘La nuict froide et sombre’.
Lassus was no less versatile in his Italian pieces: such classic madrigals as his early Petrarch settings —‘Occhi  piangete’, ‘Amor che ved' ogni pensier’— and the profoundly melancholy Lagrime di San Pietro of his last years, mentioned in the previous chapter (p. 246), and the delicious humour of the Villanelle, Moresche et altre canzoni (Paris, 1581) which include his best-known songs: the Landsknecht's serenade in Germanic Italian, ‘Matonna mia cara’, and ‘O la, o che bon eccho!’ in which two quartets sing in close canon throughout.
With Lassus the last notable Netherland madrigalists — Sweelinck's four isolated examples hardly make him ‘notable' — were de Monte, his pupil ‘Giovanni’ de Macque (1551–1614), and Giaches de Wert.
De Monte published some Ronsard sonnet-settings in 1575, including a beautiful ‘Le premier iour du moy de may’, and a few other chansons, but nothing German despite his long residence at the Imperial court in Vienna and Prague.
But his output of madrigals between 1554 and 1603 — more than a thousand secular ones alone — is so overwhelming in bulk and seemingly so equable in accomplishment that even anthologists have generally recoiled from it although Alfred Einstein has published de Monte's greatest success in his own day, ‘Verament’ in amore' in his Fifth Book a cinque voci (Venice, 1574).
De Monte was a quiet, pious man who excelled in the madrigale spirituale which he also produced in great quantity, a celibate who never forgot he was an ecclesiastic; Wert's temperament was very different.
He also had the advantage of employment at a much livelier court — that of Mantua where Tasso became his friend, with that of Ferrara and the celebrated three lady singers who ornamented it from c. 1580 onward near at hand.
He became the lover of one of the ladies, Tarquinia Molza, and in his Eighth Book of five-part madrigals (Venice, 1586) he published two examples of what have been described as forerunners of the concerto da camera, ‘Vezzosi augelli’ and ‘Non e si denso velo’.
In these pieces the three higher parts are clearly distinguished from the two lower and given showy coloratura.
Declamation, not coloratura, distinguishes the three upper parts in ‘O Primavera’, the second of a set of pieces on Guarini's Pastor fido in his Eleventh Book.
It was perhaps the influence of the three ladies that brought about a re-casting of five-part writing: two sopranos, alto, tenor, and bass supplanting soprano, alto, two tenors, and bass.
THE ITALIAN MADRIGALISTS
Similar parts for the tre nobilissime giovani Dame (or a similar group at Mantua) were composed by a younger musician at the Mantuan court, Claudio Monteverdi, whose Terzo Libro de Madrigali (1592) includes a number of such pieces exploiting their various skills.
 Alessandro Striggio sent them his compositions from Florence where their master, the Duke of  Ferrara, also allowed them to participate in masques.
And the final tribute was paid them by the Ferrarese organist Luzzasco Luzzaschi (1545? -1607), a pupil of Rore, in his Madrigali…per cantare et sonare a uno, e doi, e tre soprani (Rome, 1601) in which the lower parts of the madrigal were played on a harpsichord.
More precisely: all four polyphonic parts were played, and the highest part or parts doubled, with elaborate coloratura of the type suggested by Bassano (see p. 248) and others, by the voice or voices.
Perhaps the duets were those sung by one of the giovani Dame and her sister, accompanied by the composer at the gravicembalo, when the future Emperor Rudolf II passed through Brescello in 1571.
Even in his conventional madrigals — for instance, the Dante setting ‘Quivi sospiri, pianti ed alti guai’ in his Second Book (Venice, 1576) and ‘Dolorosi martir’in his Fourth (Ferrara, 1594)— Luzzaschi indulged in that exaggerated, even agonized, expressiveness which it is so tempting to relate to ‘mannerism’in painting.
Mannerism had appeared in the madrigal at least twenty years earlier, with Rore (see p. 233), and still more with Wert who, like Luzzaschi, had studied with Rore.
Wert's setting of ‘Crudele acerba’(pub.
1588) challenges comparison with his master's of thirty years before, beginning less bitterly but with great chromatic intensification at ‘Ma di menar tutta mia vita in pianto’.
Another of his Petrarch settings, ‘Solo e pensoso’(pub.
1581), is decidedly more manneristic than Marenzio's famous one.’
Luca Marenzio (1553–99) has been justly hailed as ‘the Schubert of the madrigal’.
Einstein has traced in his work the conservative influences of Ingegneri, a melodious master of Palestrinian polyphony, and Andrea Gabrieli, who excelled in the lighter types of madrigal and villanella, the Venetian gregesche and giustiniane.
Unlike the Mantuan and Ferrarese madrigalists, Marenzio composed mainly for the pleasure of the performers themselves, not for courtly audiences listening to brilliant executants, though he did make some essays in the three-upper-part style associated with the Ferrarese ladies, notably the exquisite ‘Hor chi Clori’ in his Sixth five-part book (1594), and he must have reckoned on good performers to  tackle the chromaticisms of ‘O voi che sospirate’(Book II, 1581).
But his style was essentially diatonic, melodically and rhythmically inventive, exploiting all the sensuous charm of passages in thirds and tenths (for instance in ‘Scaldava il sol’(Book III, 1582) or in ‘Vezzosi augelli’ in Book I of four-part madrigals, 1587), and the all-pervading pictorial touches are seldom exaggerated.
Marenzio's First Book appeared in 1580.
Containing such things as ‘Liquidi perle’, ‘Tirsi morir volea’, and ‘Dolorosi martir’, it is no wonder that by 1588 it had been reprinted four times and that in the same year five of the madrigals — with ‘Io partirò’ from the Second Book — were published in London with English words.
In later years the shadow of the Counter-Reformation overcast his work with a new seriousness which found its most impressive expression in the Sixth Book of six-part madrigals (1595) with ‘Se quel dolor’ and the Ninth Book of five-part madrigals (1599) with ‘Solo e pensoso’.
The madrigals of Marenzio's younger contemporaries, Gesualdo, Prince of Venosa, and Claudio Monteverdi, take very different directions.
Gesualdo, after publishing four books of not particularly individual madrigals in the Rore-Wert tradition (1594–6), brought out two more in 1611 in which chromatic alteration simultaneously in several parts produces the most extraordinary effects of dislocation (often alternating with very commonplace diatonic passages).
Monteverdi, an Ingegneri pupil like Marenzio, began by publishing three books of more or less conventional madrigals (1587–92), though they include such a masterpiece of tone-painting as ‘Ecco mormorar l'onde’ in Book II and a striking increase in monotone declamation, particularly in three more Tasso settings (from Gerusalemme liberata), in Book III.
He went on in Book IV (1603) to introduce free declamation on whole chords (‘Sfogava con le stelle’) and to heighten his norm of unconventional dissonance, thus provoking a famous attack by the conservative theorist Giovanni Artusi.
In his Fifth Book (1605) he introduced the continuo and — also in the three-part Scherzi musicali (1607)— instrumental sinfonie and ritornelli.
Gesualdo's later madrigals, however fascinating their scent of decadence, are an evolutionary dead end; Monteverdi was taking part in the transformation of the madrigal into something quite different, though in view of his dramatic and pictorial ability it is strange that he neglected to produce one of those suites of madrigals popular at the time (comedie armoniche) realistically describing women gossiping at the wash (Striggio's Cicalamento delle donne al bucato, 1567), Venetian scenes (Croce's Triaca musicale, 1596), or a complete commedia dell'arte (the Am–parnaso, 1597, of Orazio Vecchi (1550–1605), the outstanding masterpiece of this genre), and a whole series of works by Banchieri.
Already about 1580, when Marenzio was bringing out his earliest madrigals, secular vocal music had entered a period of crisis.
The conception of musica reservata (see p. 175) might suffice for the relationship of music and words in church, where Zarlino's rules for verbal expression and underlaying words to music (in his Istituzioni armoniche, Venice, 1558) were still valid.
But in the madrigal it had led to heightened tone-painting of individual words and phrases, a practice which Zarlino's own pupil, the Florentine lutenist and singer Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520–1591), father of the astronomer, ridiculed in his Dialogo della musica antica e della moderna (Venice, 1581).
Influenced by a learned correspondent, Girolamo Mei, a philologist and student of ancient Greek music and drama who rightly believed Greek music to have been monodic (but seemingly supplied Galilei with thirteenth-century Byzantine melodies to Mesomedes' hymns under the impression that they were ancient), Galilei argued that the polyphonic ‘music of today is not of great value for expressing the passions of the mind by means of words, but is of value merely for the wind and stringed instruments, from which the ear…desires nothing but the sweet enjoyment of the variety of their harmonies…
‘. Vocal music should be monodic, as simple as such popular tunes as the ‘Romanesca’(see p. 237) or those of laudi and villanelle, with an accompaniment too simple to distract the listener.
Galilei's own monodies with accompaniments by a consort of viols are lost.
But such songs were no novelties even at court entertainments in Florence and we have the melody and bass of a song composed by Piero Strozzi and sung by Giulio Caccini (1550–1610) in a masque for the wedding of Francesco I two years before the publication of Galilei's Dialogo, in which Strozzi was supposed to be one of the interlocutors.
All three-Strozzi, Caccini, and Galilei — belonged to the camerata or salon of Count Giovanni de' Bardi, the deviser of the masque, a wealthy amateur who (c. 15XO) addressed to Caccini a Discorso…sopra la musica antica e'l cantar bene making points like those of the Dialogo.
THE FLORENTINE INTERMEDII
When the next Grand Duke, Ferdinando I, was married in 1589, the music for the dramatic intermedii (again devised by Bardi) was composed by a  number of musicians including Cristoforo Malvezzi (1547–97), Marenzio, Caccini, Bardi himself, Emilio de Cavalieri (c. 1550–1602), and Malvezzi's pupil, Jacopo Peri (1561–1633).
Ottavio Rinuccini, who had written verses for the ladies of Ferrara, was one of the poets.
The music consists largely of madrigals, though there is a good deal of purely chordal writing; the solos by Caccini, Cavalieri, and Peri have a great deal of coloratura, as in this ‘Ecco con due risposte’ by Peri in the fifth intermedio:
The composer sang the principal part himself and the accompaniment was played on a chitarrone.
But the accompanying instruments are constantly varied, and the groups which play introductory sinfonie to the intermedii or double the voices in the madrigals are impressive: Malvezzi's madrigal ‘Noi  che cantando’ in the first intermedio is sung by two choirs, the first doubled by lyre, harp, large lute, and ‘sotto Basso di Viola’, the second by lyre, harp, chitarrone, and ‘Basso di Viola’, while in the six-part sinfonia which follows these instruments are joined by 6 lutes (three large and three small), psaltery, ‘Basso di Viola’with three tenor viols, 4 trombones, cornetto, flauto traverso, cetera (cittern), mandola, and a ‘Sopranino di Viola’(which was played by Striggio).
These intermedii with their mixture of styles and resources, differing from earlier sixteenth-century dramatic or festive ones only in their lavishness, were not yet opera but they were the most important harbinger of opera, which just because of that mixture was gradually to supplant church music as the very heart of European music and hence establish Italian pre-eminence throughout the continent.
And it was the composers of Bardi's circle who began it.
The most important missing ingredient was supplied by Cavalieri, who had devised the extended final ballet of the intermedii and composed the music for it.
The very next year (1590) he provided music for the pastoral interludes of Tasso's Aminta and two other  pastorals which was in an ‘altro modo di cantare che l'ordinario’, presumably some kind of recitative.
The music is lost, but Cavalieri's contemporaries agree that it was he who, as Peri put it in the preface to his Euridice (1600), ‘before anyone else made our music’(i.e. the ‘nuova maniera di canto’)‘heard on the stage’.
Then Rinuccini wrote a Dafne consisting of a prologue and six scenes.
Another Florentine nobleman, Jacopo Corsi, who took over the role of patron of the camerata when Bardi left for Rome, composed two numbers for Dafne, a tiny aria for Apollo and a unison coro finale, which have survived, but these are hardly in a nuova maniera.
Nor are the six surviving fragments of Peri's complete setting of Daf ne which was produced at the Palazzo Corsi during the Carnival of 1597.
THE EARLIEST OPERAS
Rinuccini's next favola for music, a Euridice with a happy ending, was composed by Peri (but included some pieces by Caccini which are duly acknowledged in the preface) for the wedding of Maria de' Medici to Henry IV of France and performed in the Pitti Palace on 6 October 1600.
Caccini also set the Euridice text at the same time and both works were published at once, though Caccini's was not performed till 5 December 1602.
While these, the two earliest complete operas that we have, differ radically from the festive intermedii in their dramatic unity and the overall employment of the nuova maniera di canto over sustained bass notes, there was still a mixture of styles.
Peri's prologue is a strophic solo with instrumental ritornello; scene I ends with a 12-bar ‘madrigalian’ chorus of nymphs and shepherds (composed by Caccini in both operas) which serves as refrain to brief solos by two nymphs and a shepherd, and the other scenes have similar finales, those to 2 and 4 also by Caccini.
In scene 2 the shepherd Tirsi appears, playing a short sinfonia on a triflauto — the sinfonia being in two parts, mostly in thirds, over the bass — and sings two stanzas.
(We learn from the preface that the orchestra included a chitarrone, a lira grande, a liuto grosso, and a gravicembalo on which the player was Jacopo Corsi.)
After a few bars of dialogue between Orfeo and the shepherds, Dafne returns with her tragic news which she recites in strikingly contrasted tones: which is followed by recitative conversation between Euridice, Orfeo, Dafne, and the shepherds.
The work ends with a more elaborate finale: two five-part stanzas (see Ex. 79) sung and danced by the whole chorus; an aria a 3 sung by three women ‘without dancing’; a short instrumental ritornello (melody and bass only given)‘repeated several times and danced by two soloists of the chorus’; two more stanzas of Ex. 79; another stanza of the aria but this time sung by three tenors; and a final pair of stanzas of Ex. 79.
Euridice was already compounded of all the rudiments of true opera: solo recitative and song, chorus and dancing, orchestra, and organized act-finale.
CAVALIERI'S RAPPRESENTAZIONE AND CACCINI'S NUOVE MUSICHE
Cavalieri also contributed a setting of Guarini's dialogue of Juno and Minerva to these wedding celebrations.
Eight months before, his Rappresentazione di Anima e di Corpo had been staged and published in Rome  — musically, it is arguable, a finer work than Peri's but not dramatic enough to be considered an opera; the allegorical personages were costumed, and there were dances, but the work was performed in the Oratorio della Vallicella and human interest and the sense of festivity, both indispensable to opera, were necessarily lacking.
Nor does Caccini's Euridice represent an advance on Peri's.
Caccini was always more interested in song as such and his most important work is not Euridice but his collection of solo songs, Le nuove musiche (Florence, 1602), with figured bass — which he describes in his preface as ‘bass for the chitarrone’.
The songs are of different types, the most important being solo madrigals which Caccini says should be sung with ‘una certa nobile sprezzatura’(‘freedom' or what we understand as ‘rubato’).
But he also includes strophic arias, sometimes with varied strophes (e.g. ‘Ard’ il mio petto’), and canzonette a ballo in which the singer is to attend only to ‘la vivezza del canto’.
The solo madrigals lean now toward declamatory monody, now toward coloratura song, often fusing both as in ‘Amarilli’, and in his preface Caccini has much to say about the types of graces — trilli and gruppi-which can heighten expressiveness.
MONTEVERDI'S ORFEO AND ARIANNA
What puts Monteverdi's Orfeo (produced at Mantua, 1607) in quite a different class from the operas of Peri and Caccini or the Dafne (1608)(again on Rinuccini's text) of a younger Florentine, Marco da Gagliano (C. 1575–1642), is quite simply that it is the work of an immeasurably more gifted musician.
The backbone of his work is the new recitative but he uses it with a power quite beyond Peri's so that it is not merely ‘expressive’ but when necessary, as in Orfeo's lament in Act II, heart-breaking.
And his librettist, Alessandro Striggio, son of the composer, provided him with many more opportunities than Rinuccini to break up the recitative with musically attractive relief: extended madrigalian choruses and strophic solos such as Orfeo's lilting ‘Vi ricordo’ in Act II (accompanied only by continuo instruments, but with ritornelli played by five viole da braccio, a contrabass, two harpsichords, and three chitarroni), his display piece ‘Possente spirto’in Act III (accompanied by organo di legno and a chitarrone, but in the four stanzas competing with brilliant concertante parts for two violini, then two cornetti, a double-harp, and finally a string trio), and his swinging ‘Qual honor’in Act IV (varied strophes for the voice over an ostinato bass).
These are all justified by the dramatic context Orpheus's happiness as he sings to the shepherds, his effort to impress Charon, his triumph as he marches off to fetch Eurydice — but they also gave the audience music to remember.
And he uses a very large orchestra of 36  players not only to play sinfonie and ritornelli more substantial than Peri's but for dramatic effect, as in the sudden change of tone-colour when Orpheus fatally looks backward.
For a ducal wedding in Mantua the following year Monteverdi wrote a second opera, Arianna, to a text by Rinuccini, and a dramatic ballet Il Ballo dell' ingrate, but nothing remains of Arianna except the heroine's justly famous lament which survives not only in its original form but in the composer's arrangements of it as a five-part madrigal in his Sixth Book (1614) and as a ‘Pianto della Madonna’ for solo voice and continuo in his Selva Morale (1640); it set a remarkable and long-lasting fashion for lamenti.
But Monteverdi's later operas, most of them lost, belong to another chapter.
THE MADRIGAL IN ENGLAND
The madrigal substantially appeared in England only in the 1580s when the English mania for the Italian reached its height — for instance, in the poetry of Spenser and Philip Sidney.
It is true that manuscript collections of madrigals had reached England earlier and that a minor conservative and non-dramatic madrigalist, Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder, had been in Elizabeth I's service during the years 1562 to 1578.
But English secular song continued the tradition of mainly note-against-note polyphony, as in the only printed collection of the period, the Songes to three, fower, and five voyces (1571) of Thomas Whythorne (1528–6), one of which, ‘Buy new broom’, is a solo accompanied by a consort of four viols.
Such ‘consort songs’ began to proliferate during the second half of the century and still flourished during the first decade of the next; the viol parts soon became more animated as in the masterly hands of William Byrd whose Psalmes, Sonets, and songs of sadnes and pietie (1588) were ‘originally made for Instruments to expresse the harmonie, and one voyce to pronounce the dittie [text]’, though he now published them ‘framed in all parts for voyces to sing the same’.
These were not genuine madrigals though they show madrigalian traits, nor are most of his Songs of sundrie natures of the following year.
But the 1588 volume does contain one tentative madrigal, a setting of Ariosto's ‘La verginella’, and a few months later appeared a collection which was a milestone in the naturalization of the madrigal in England.
This was Musica Transalpina, compiled by Nicholas Yonge, a choirman of St. Paul's, who had been accustomed to entertain his guests with the singing of ‘Italian songs’ from books ‘yeerely sent me out of Italy and other places’.
His collection consists of 57 madrigals with anonymous  English texts, including 14 by Ferrabosco, ten by Marenzio, five by Palestrina, two chansons by Lassus (‘Susanna fair' and ‘The nightingale’), and an English version of Byrd's effort (‘The fair young virgin’).
Next, in 1590, came the First Set of Italian Madrigals Englished, not to the sense of the original dittie, but after the affection of the Noate by Thomas Watson, next to Spenser the earliest of the Elizabethan sonneteers; they are nearly all by Marenzio but also include two fine settings, à 4 and à 6, of Watson's own ‘This sweet and merry month of May’ by Byrd ‘composed after the Italian vaine’at the poet's request.
Yonge also brought out a second Musica Transalpina in 1597 but by that time the English madrigal was well established and flourishing.
MORLEY'S CANZONETS AND BALLETTS
The lead was given both as composer and as publisher by Byrd's pupil Morley.
It was he who first anglicized the word, as he did also with canzonetti and balletti; his Canzonets.
Or Little Short Songs to Three Voyces (1593), Madrigalls to Foure Voyces (1594), First Book of Balletts to five voyces (1595), and their successors are the most Italianate of all Elizabethan compositions.
Morley unashamedly imitated both Italian texts and Italian music; indeed some of his balletts are modelled all too closely on the Balletti a 5 (Venice, 1591) of Giovanni Giacomo Gastoldi (d. 1622).
Yet Morley was much more than an imitator; he was a more gifted melodist than Gastoldi.
In his balletts he often breaks away from the Mantuan composer's genuinely dancelike and predominantly note-against-note style, keeping only the ‘fa-la’ refrain which is the hallmark of the balletto — but extending even that with great contrapuntal and rhythmic ingenuity.
‘Sing we and chant it’ is a true balletto, the opening of its second strain practically identical in every part with that of Gastoldi's ‘A lieta vita’(which in Germany as early as 1598 was seized in toto and provided with sacred words, ‘In dir ist Freude’) yet, as Joseph Kerman has pointed out, more sophisticated in its sense of dominant contrast.
‘Fire, fire’ however is really a madrigal with ‘fa-las’and ‘Leave alas this tormenting’is pure madrigal.
In his madrigals actually so called, Morley's technical debt is mainly to Marenzio and in his canzonets to Felice Anerio.
But he transforms whatever he touches; the English words alone would suffice to make the English madrigal different from the Italian, and the numerous monosyllables give a peculiar crispness to such genre-pictures as ‘Ho! who comes here all along?’ and the canzonet ‘Arise, get up my dear’.
WEELKES, WILBYE, AND THEIR CONTEMPORARIES
Morley excelled in the lighter types of madrigal and kindred forms; the supreme masters of the English school were Weelkes, who published his first book in 1597, and John Wilbye (1574–1638) who began the following year.
Even Wilbye did not disdain specific Italian models; his ‘Lady, your words do spite me’ takes off from Ferrabosco's ‘Donna se voi m'odiate’which had appeared in Musica Transalpina as ‘Lady, if you so spite me’: and once more the English monosyllables leave their stamp on the music.
Not even Weelkes maintained such a consistently high level as Wilbye in his two sets.
Although best known for such delicious things as ‘Sweet honeysucking bees’, his greatest work is to be found in serious madrigals like ‘All pleasure is of this condition’ and ‘Thou art but young’.
Weelkes also covered a vast range, from the dancing ballet ‘On the plains’ to the great picturesque ‘Thule, the period of cosmography’, the piercing chromatic anguish of ‘O Care, thou wilt despatch me’with its ironic ‘fa-las’, and the dazzling counterpoint of ‘As Vesta was from Latmos hill descending’.
‘Vesta’ was his contribution to The Triumphes of Oriana (London, 1601), a collection of madrigals by twenty-four composers compiled by Morley in emulation of the Italian Trionfo di Dori (Venice, 1592) to which Giovanni Gabrieli, Vecchi, Marenzio, de Monte, Croce, Striggio, Felice Anerio, Gastoldi, Palestrina, and others had contributed.
Morley, Weelkes, and Wilbye were the outstanding figures of the English madrigal school, but some fine things were also written by Bateson, Benet, Michael East, Kirbye, Francis Pilkington, Ward, and others — to say nothing of the Catholic exile, Peter Philips, who set Italian verse.
Orlando Gibbons published a masterly set remarkable for its general seriousness in 1612, and Tomkins a very fine book of what he preferred to call Songs in 1622, after which the English madrigal went into a rapid decline — as did the type of solo song which had flourished beside it, the ayre with lute accompaniment.
The English Ayre
French composers, notably Le Jeune, preferred in the 1590s to describe their chansons as ‘airs’ and the lute ayre was as definitely French in origin  as the madrigal was Italian — and as completely anglicized by the different language.
Its composers adopted the much older French practice of publishing in alternative forms: as part-songs and as solos with lute.
When Morley brought out his Canzonets or Little Short Aers to five and sixe Voices in 1597, he also provided most of them with a lute transcription of the lower voices.
And in the same year the First Booke of Songes or Ayres of foure partes of the greatest of all English lutenists, John Dowland (1563–1626), was printed ‘with Tableture for the Lute: So made that all the parts together, or either of them severally may be song to the Lute, Orpherian [a species of cittern, tuned like a lute]or Viol de Gambo’, a confused description which conceals the condition that the highest part must be sung.
This First Book of Dowland's raises the problem of which was the original form; some were undoubtedly composed as part-songs, others (for instance, ‘Sleep, wayward thoughts’ and ‘Awake, sweet love’) probably originated as solos to the lute, while others again (‘If my complaints', ‘Can she excuse’, ‘Now, oh now I needs must part’) seem to have been instrumental dances to  which words were later added.
On the other hand, Morley's First Booke of Ayres, or little short Songs, to sing and play to the lute, with the bass viole (1600), which includes that marvel of flexible English word-setting ‘Thyrsis and Milla’, and ‘It was a lover and his lass’, has no part-song version.
As You Like It was then a very new play and Morley's is not the only piece of theatre music preserved in these song-books.
Some of Dowland's ayres almost certainly came from masques; the Ayres (1609) of Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger (c. 1575–1628), the completely Anglicized son of ‘the elder’, include a number composed for Ben Jonson's earlier masques and one, ‘Come my Celia’, from his music to Jonson's Volpone; Thomas Campion (1567–1620), better poet than composer, was much concerned in the writing and production of masques; while Robert Jones and Philip Rosseter, masters of the lighter type of ayre, were also men of the theatre.
As with the madrigal, so with the ayre: a number of delightful things were produced by minor composers.
But Dowland towers above them as Wilbye and Weelkes above the other madrigalists, particularly in some of his later songs.
In 1610 his son Robert published a collection of foreign and English songs, A Musicall Banquet, including two from Caccini's Nuove Musiche; and two of the three by his father —‘Far from triumphing court’ and ‘In darkness let me dwell’(Dowland's supreme masterpiece of emotional declamation)— reveal awareness of the new style.
So also do some of the songs in Dowland's fourth book, A Pilgrimes Solace (1612) one of them actually to Italian words, ‘Lasso, vita mia’.
These and the religious pieces in the Solace are the swan-song of the English ayre; but for Campion's last two books (1617), there was little more to come.
Dowland was a European figure, lutenist to James I's brother-in-law, Christian IV of Denmark, from 1598 to 1606; he boasted of his European travels, his friendship with Marenzio and Giovanni Croce, and the fact that his compositions had been published in Paris, the Netherlands, and several German cities, for instance in Jean Baptiste Besard's famous collection of lute solos and songs, Thesaurus harmonicus (Cologne, 1603).
But the English lute ayre, though not unknown on the continent, stimulated no imitation there.
Nor did the Nuove musiche.
ITALIAN VOCAL FORMS IN GERMANY
In Germany solo song was neglected altogether and even the influences of villanella and madrigal penetrated only a few years earlier than in England, in the first place through Lassus and two Netherland protégés of his: Ivo de Vento (d. 1575) and Jacob Regnart (c. 1540–1599).
Vento composed Italian  madrigals for the Bavarian duke, his master, but his collections of rather old-fashioned German songs include only one, the Neue teutsche Lieder mit dreien Stimmen (Munich, 1572), that shows Italian influence.
On the other hand the titles of the Imperial Kapellmeister Regnart's two books of Canzone italiane (1574 and 1581) and three books of Kurtzweilige teutsche Lieder zu drei Stimmen, nach Art der Neapolitanen oder welschen [Italian]Villanellen (1576, 1577, and 1579) speak for themselves.
The first native German to follow this path was Lechner (c. 1553–1606), who had studied with both Lassus and Vento.
Encouraged by the three amateur musical societies which then flourished in Nuremberg, he published Newe teutsche Lieder, zu drey Stimmen, Nach art der Welschen Villanellen (1576 and 1577), Newe Teutsche Lieder mit vier und fünff stimmen (1577), and Neue lustige Teutsche Lieder, nach art der Welschen Canzonen (1586), in which German polyphonic song, no longer exclusively Tenorlied, is crossed with an Italian strain; he also wrote a few Italian madrigals.
But he was surpassed both in Italianism and in quality of invention by another Nuremberg composer, Hassler (1564–1612), who studied for fifteen months in Venice (1584–5).
Two of Hassler's earliest publications were settings of Italian texts, Canzonette a quattro voci (Nuremberg, 1590) and 33 Madrigali (1596); sometimes they lean heavily on specific Italian models: thus his canzonetta, ‘Io son ferito, Amore’, borrows musically as well as textually from Palestrina's ‘Io son ferito, ahi lasso’.
But in the latter year he also published Neue teutsche [sic]Gesang nach Art der welschen Madrigalien und Canzonetten in which the weight of German words naturally affects the music; when he sets translations of Italian texts he has also composed, the difference is startling:
The note-against-note style of the Canzonetten suggests the allemande, that ‘heavie daunce’, as Morley calls it, ‘fitly representing the nature of the people whose name it carrieth’, though sometimes gravely beautiful, as ‘Jungfraw dein schöne Gstalt’ is.
Nor are there any madrigalian extravagances in Hassler's madrigals; they make good use of antiphony between higher and lower voice-groups as in the openings of ‘Ach Schatz, ich thu dir klagen’ and ‘Fahr hin, guts Liedelein’; but they lack rhythmic spring.
That element appears, however, in his last collection of secular, including instrumental, works, the Lustgarten neuer teutscher Gesang Balletti Galliarden und Intraden (1601).
Many of these were written under the direct, sometimes very direct, influence of Gastoldi's balletti, ‘fa-la’ refrains and all —‘Tantzen und springen’, ‘Unter all'n auf dieser Erden’, ‘All Lust und Freud’while others such as‘Ihr Musici, frisch auf’are masterpieces of the  German madrigal.
One song, ‘Mein Gmut ist mir verwirret’, was soon given sacred words (‘Herzlich tut mich verlangen' and, later, ‘O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden’); indeed the Lustgarten sank deep into the consciousness of German musicians, both composers and amateurs.
Its examples were followed in one way or another in the various collections of Christoph Demantius (1567–1643), Valentin Haussmann (d. c. 1612), Erasmus Widmann (1572–1634), Hassler's pupil Melchior Franck (c. 1580–1639), and others.
A greater than these, or any earlier German composer, was to make his debut with a Primo libro de madrigali (Venice, 1611), but this 26 year-old pupil of Giovanni Gabrieli, ‘Henricus Sagittarius’(Henrich Schutz), was to work almost entirely in other fields and he belongs to a later
THE MADRIGAL IN THE EUROPEAN PERIPHERY
The madrigal reached the periphery of European musical culture but never struck root.
Dowland's Danish patron, Christian IV, sent musicians to study in Italy and two Danes, Hans Nielsen (c. 1580–after 1620) and Mogens Pedersen (c. 1585–1623), worked in Venice with Giovanni Gabrieli and published books of five-part madrigals there in 1606 and 1608.
Sigismund III of Poland actually enticed Marenzio to his new capital at Warsaw for a short period in 1595–6 and employed a number of Italian musicians, one of whom, Asprilio Pacelli (1570–1623), published a book of madrigals (Venice, 1601); but that was all.
There was little more in Spain.
The Libro de Madrigali (Venice, 1568) of Mateo Flecha the younger (1530–1604) includes one with Spanish text, and Joan Brudieu (C. 1520–1591) published a collection of eleven Spanish and four Catalan madrigals (Barcelona, 1585), while a few negligible composers set Italian texts.
Even the native polyphonic villancico died out in the 1560s, as the solo form with vihuela did a decade or so later.
MADRIGALIAN INFLUENCE AND MUSIQUE MESURÉE IN THE CHANSON
In France the position was more complicated.
There were no French madrigalists but, beginning in the 1560s, the native polyphonic chanson was given new life by the immensely popular example of Lassus, whose chansons are often shot through with madrigalian techniques.
Thus in the Musique (1570) of the finest master of the later sixteenth-century chanson, Guillaume Costeley (c. 1531–1606) one encounters madrigalian traits, for instance passages in ‘Puisque ce beau mois’ and in his masterpiece ‘Mignonne, allons voir si la rose’.
Still more Italianate are the three Livres de  chansons (1576–8) of-Antoine de Bertrand (d. c. 1581), whose harmonic daring carried him beyond chromaticism to consider the ad libitum use of microtones.
(Costeley, also, in the preface to his Musique, confesses to having played with the idea of third-tones.)
This was typical of the intellectual, experimental tendencies in French music at this time, the most important of which was musique mesuree a l'antique which owed its inception to a crackbrained idea of the poet Antoine de Balf, an associate of Ronsard and Du Bellay in the Pléiade, who in 1570 persuaded Charles IX to establish an Académie de Poesie et de Musique.
Baïf was a typical humanist and, like Girolamo Mei and Vincenzo Galilei, strove to probe into Greek poetry and music; for fourteen years the Académie propagated his ideas.
In Les Etrènes de poézie fransoêze an vers mezurés (1574)— he was also a spelling-reformer he published a collection of verse based on a conception quite foreign to the French language: that of quantitative metre.
And during the next thirty years composers associated with the Académie set his poems, including a translation of the Psalms, to music in which, as Philip Sidney put it, ‘every semibreif or mynom had its syllables matched accordingly with a long foote and a short foote’, not monodic but in harmony with each syllable sung simultaneously in all parts.
Within these doctrinaire limits the Chansonettes mesurees a l'antique (1586) of Mauduit, the posthumously published Le Printemps (1603) of Le Jeune, and the Meslanges (1610) of Du Caurroy do contain a few delightful things.
Both Le Jeune and Du Caurroy also composed chansons of the normal type.
To them also, and particularly to Du Caurroy, we owe almost all we know of French instrumental ensemble music of the period.
It is disappointing.
Du Caurroy's Fantasies a III, IV, V et VI parties (1610) are so old-fashioned — instrumental motets, sometimes with long-note cantus firmus, on plainsong or Huguenot melodies — and so lacking in rhythmic vitality that one suspects they were composed long before their posthumous publication.
THE INTERNATIONAL REPERTORIES FOR LUTE AND KEYBOARD
Contemporary French lute composers such as Antoine Francisque (e. 1570–1605) also neglected the fantasia; Francisque's Trésor d'Orphée (1600) consists almost entirely of dances.
Besard's Thesaurus, on the other hand, contains more than forty fantasias and nearly as many praeludia, as well as a great quantity of dances.
But then the Thesaurus was an international collection which included beside 38 of his own compositions, pieces by his teacher ‘Laurencinus Romanus’, Vincenzo Galilei, Ferrabosco the elder, Dowland, Diomedes Cato (a Venetian who settled at Cracow), two Polish religious refugees Jakub Reys (Polak/Jacques Pollonois), lutenist at the French court, and Bakfark's pupil, Wojciech (Albert) Dlugoraj — and various others.
Solo lute-music at this period of its highest popularity was quite international; among the most important of the numerous published lute-books — the manuscript collections are innumerable — are Sebastian Ochsenkun's Tabulaturbuch (Heidelberg, 1558), the four books of Giacomo Gorzanis (Venice, 1561–4), Galilei's (Rome, 1563), the four published by Matthäus Waisselius (Frankfurt-on-Oder, 1573–92), William Barley's A new Booke of Tabliture, an instruction book for orpharion and bandora besides the lute (London, 1596), and Robert Dowland's Varietie of Lutelessons (London, 1610) containing 42 pieces by composers ‘as well beyond the Seas as of our own country’.
Most of the lute repertory consisted of dances frequently pairs and sometimes groups of three (embryonic suites)— or arrangements of vocal compositions, though at the beginning of the seventeenth century Diomedes Cato and John Dowland were writing extended polyphonic fantasias, rich in elaborate imitation.
Much the same might be said of the keyboard repertory, particularly in Germany.
The German keyboard tablatures — Elias Ammerbach's (Leipzig, 1571 and 1575), those of Bernhard Schmid the elder (Strasbourg, 1577) and Jacob Paix (Lauingen, 1583), and the manuscript ones of Christoph Löffelholtz (Tübingen, Univ.
Bibl., Mus. ms. 40034) and August Nörmiger (1598, idem, 40098)— consist almost exclusively of vocal transcriptions and dances of various nationalities.
The specifically German element comes to the fore, however, in Lutheran hymn-settings as in the first part of Normiger's book and the ‘Celler Tabulatur’ of 1601.
The Imperial organist Luython composed ricercari for his instrument, but he was a Netherlander.
German ‘pure’ contrapuntal keyboard music was at first always for organ, not harpsichord, and stylistically modelled on the Venetians, as may be seen in the two fantasies and two canzoni francese in Paix's book and the various organ works of Hassler and his successor at Augsburg, Christian Erbach (c. 1570–1635).
When Bernhard Schmid's son published his Tabulatur Buch (Strasbourg, 1607), the contents were overwhelmingly Italian and included the intonazioni (preludes on the different modes) of the two Gabrielis, toccatas by them and by Merulo and his pupil Girolamo Diruta (1661–after 1625), and twelve ‘Fugen (oder wie es die Italianer  nennen) Canzoni alla Francese’ by various Italians.
Schmid took four of his six toccatas from the examples in Diruta's Il Transilvano (Venice, 1597), a dialogo on the playing of organs and harpsichords — including the method of making ornamented transcriptions for them.
VENETIAN INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC
It was the Venetians who led the way in extended instrumental composition independent of dance-forms and vocal models.
The keyboard and ensemble ricercari and the canzoni alla francese for ‘istromenti da tasti’ of Andrea Gabrieli were nearly all published posthumously when they were probably thirty or forty years old, that is to say not much more modern than the ricercari of Buus and Annibale Padovano (see p. 234).
His short intonazioni and longer toccatas are quasi-improvisatory preludes, two of the toccatas having imitative polyphonic middle sections.
Conversely Andrea will sometimes diversify his ricercari with sections in triple time: thus the ricercar primo tono of his Libro secondo ends with a short triple-time section on a version of the opening theme:
One of the ensemble ricercari del secondo tono is planned similarly but rounded off with a brief reference to the opening theme, while the ensemble ricercar del duodecimo tono is twice interrupted by identical (but  thematically fresh) 17-bar passages in triple metre.
At the same time, by frequently basing an entire ricercar on only one or two themes — inverted, diminished, augmented, drawn together in stretti, sometimes paired with a regular counter-subject — he contrived to give an extended piece musical cohesion replacing the mainly verbal cohesion of a motet.
Andrea's ricercari on chansons by Crecquillon, Janequin, and their contemporaries differ markedly from his actually so called canzoni alla francese on the same songs; these are ordinary ornamented transcriptions whereas the ricercari are free compositions on the successive phrases of the melody.
Merulo's Canzoni…fatte alla Francese (1592, 1606, and 1611) treat their originals, so far as one can trace them, with great freedom of keyboard texture.
His keyboard ricercari are early works (1567), mostly ‘instrumental motets’, but in his two books of toccatas (1598 and 1604) he developed further the alternation of quasi-improvisatory and ricercar-like passages and treated the material more plastically so that the two elements cohere instead of being sharply juxtaposed.
Both he and the elder Gabrieli followed in Cavazzoni's wake also by composing organ Masses.
The ensemble canzon soon ceased to lean on specific chansons and developed a style of its own, uncluttered by the ornamentation of the keyboard canzon or the contrapuntal science of the ricercar, a style which Praetorius characterized in his Syntagma as ‘fresh, gay and quick’(frisch, frölich und geschwinde).
It may be illustrated by the opening of Merulo's ‘La Zerata’(transcribed as ‘La Gratiosa’ in the 1592 book):
The earliest surviving book of canzoni da sonare was published by Merulo's pupil Florentio Maschera (Brescia, probably 1582); Banchieri, Gioseffo Guami, and others followed suit; and in 1608 the Venetian printer Alessandro Raverii brought out a notable collection of 36 four-, five- and eight-part canzoni with a generally unnecessary ‘Basso generale per l'organo’, by Giovanni Gabrieli, Guami, Maschera, Luzzaschi, and others, including the young Girolamo Frescobaldi (1583–1643) and the not long dead Merulo, who ends the volume with a five-part piece of fine thematic workmanship and an interpolated triple-time section.
Other pieces showing the variety which could now be accommodated under the title ‘canzon’ are a ‘capricio’in a number of short, sharply differentiated sections by Giovanni Battista Grillo and a composition for sixteen trombones by Tiburtio Massaino.
The canzoni by Giovanni Gabrieli in this collection are early and relatively unimportant works; already in the Symphoniae Sacrae of 1597 he had published canzoni in which the form was revolutionized by transference from the intimacy of private performance and enjoyment to music for ecclesiastical or state occasions.
As many as 12 to 19 instruments are employed, divided into antiphonal bodies in the Venetian choral style; specific instruments are prescribed — cornetti, violini, tromboni and in one version of a Canzon in echo for ten instruments duet sections with organ accompaniment alternate with tutti sections:
There is still a certain amount of imitation, particularly in the openings, but the texture is less polyphonic than in the earlier canzoni, and fast triple-time refrains recur.
Two graver pieces without such refrains are entitled ‘sonata’ and one of them, the Sonata pian' e forte, in which cornetto and three trombones alternate and combine with violino and three trombones, has become famous not only for its grave beauty but as one of the earliest printed instrumental compositions with dynamic markings.
In the posthumously published Canzoni et sonate (1615) the instruments are almost always specified.
Even in his very early and surprisingly few organ ricercari — notably the one del 8. tono on three closely worked subjects, and the one del 10. tono (of which the one del 9. tono is essentially a shortened version) where a canzon theme alternates with a motive worked in almost too facile descending sequences — Giovanni enters a different world from his uncle's ricercari; the last traces of the ‘instrumental motet’ have been erased.
DANCE MUSIC IN GERMANY
The Venetians almost ignored dance-music; contemporary German composers of ensemble music, following their keyboard and lute traditions, composed little else.
The instrumental publications of the first decade of the seventeenth century, by Christoph Demantius, Melchior Franck, Valentin  Haussmann consist almost exclusively of pavanes, galliards, Intraden (pavane-like processional pieces), and Polish dances.
Paul Peurl (c. 1575–after 1625) further extended the dance-pair in his Newe Padovan, Intrada, Dantz unnd Galliarda for four-part strings (Nuremberg, 1611), ten ‘variation suites’— padovan, intrada (in triple time), ‘dance’ and galliarda all being developed from metamorphoses of the same melodic opening.
Peurl also wrote four canzoni and these, with a few examples by Hassler and Aichinger, Schein and Scheidt, are practically all that Germany has to show in this genre.
ENGLISH MUSIC FOR CONSORT AND VIRGINALS
England ignored the canzona even more completely.
At most one can find traces of the style only in one or two string fantasias by such Italianate Englishmen as Thomas Lupo (d. 1628) and John ‘Coprario’(Cooper)(C. 1575–1626), hardly even in the instrumental pieces of Morley's Canzonets to Two Voyces or the textless ‘Air for three voices’(springing from his canzonet ‘Lo where with flowery head’) in his Introduction.
But the late Elizabethans and Jacobeans cultivated with the utmost fertility both a free form of ricercar, the fantasia or ‘fancy’, and the peculiarly English ‘In nomine’(see p. 240), as well as dance music and song-arrangements, both for consort (usually for viols, though also ‘broken’, i.e. for mixed instruments) and for keyboard (usually the small table-harpsichord known as virginals, or organ).
Only a very small proportion was published: Antony Holborne's Pavans, Galliards, Almains and Morley's First Booke of Consort Lessons (both 1599), Dowland's Lachrimae or Seaven Teares figured in seaven passionate Pavans…(1605), Rosseter's Lessons for Consort (1609), two fantasias which Byrd included in Psalmes, Songs, and Sonnets (1611) and John Adson's Courtly Masquing Ayres (also 1611).
Individually two Englishmen on the continent fared better; both William Brade (1560–1630) from 1609 onward, and Thomas Simpson (1582–after 1625) from 1610 onward, published in Germany a number of sets of instrumental dances, nearly all their own.
As for keyboard music, ‘the first musicke that ever was printed for the Virginalls’, the famous Parthenia containing 21 short preludes and dances by Byrd, Bull, and Gibbons, appeared only in late 1612 
While the soft-voiced viol consort was peculiarly suitable for domestic music, there was a standard mixed consort for public occasions, of which we hear in an account (1591) of an entertainment for Elizabeth I at Elvetham in Hampshire: an ‘exquisite consort, wherein was the lute, bandora, base-viol, citterne, treble-violl, and flute’.
A quantity of dance-music for it is preserved, imperfectly, in the so-called ‘Walsingham Consort Books’ of approximately the same date, and the combination is depicted accompanying the wedding masque in the Henry Unton memorial painting of a few years later.
It is the consort for which Morley and Rosseter published their Lessons and which supports the voices in the first seventeen of Sir William Leighton's Teares or Lamentacions of a Sorrowfull Soule (1614).
One composer — and arranger?— who appears prominently in the Morley, Rosseter, and ‘Walsingham’ collections is the otherwise dim figure of Richard Allison.
The repertory consists mainly of pavanes and galliards, with a few popular songs, such as‘Goe from my Window’ on which Allison wrote six subtle and intricate variations, and there are good grounds for the assumption that a large proportion of Morley's Lessons originated in theatre music.
They also inevitably include such universally popular compositions as Dowland's ‘Lachrimae Pavin' which seems to have originated as a lute solo, been turned into a song (‘FIow, my tears’), arranged for viol consort with six sequels in the 1605 book, and arranged for virginals by Byrd, Morley, and Farnaby.
Dances also figure largely in the repertory for consorts of five or six viols but fantasies were composed in quantity for viol consorts, and later, as in the case of Gibbons's nine published Fantasies of Three Parts (C. 1620), for consorts in which the highest or two upper instruments were violins.
The English took little note of the fantasy before about 1585; the favourite form was still the ‘In nomine’.
The 130 pieces in a ‘Booke of In nomines and other solfainge songs of v: vi: vii: and viii: parts for voyces or Instrumentes’ dating from c. 1578, some years later than the Mulliner Book, consist of vocal pieces without text and ‘In nomines’or other cantus firmus compositions, but includes only a single ‘phancy’for five parts by an Edward Blancks who is nearly as obscure as the ‘Newman’of the Mulliner Book.
Yet this has one interesting feature, an interpolation of seven bars in triple time; similarly one of Byrd's five-part ‘In nomines’ in the same manuscript ends with a dance-like section in triple time.
Such triple-time endings or interpolations are highly characteristic of the English fantasia and Byrd's finest examples, two of those in six parts, are both marked by them.
He was the earliest major exponent of the fantasy, for his three-part examples, the five-part, and the keyboard ‘fancies’ and ‘voluntaries’in ‘My Ladye Nevells Booke’must date from c. 1585–1590.
They are comparable with the Italian ricercari of the period, with regular fugal entries at the fifth and well morticed cadential joins.
Later Byrd evolved more decidedly instrumental types of theme and differentiated more sharply between the sections.
These tendencies were carried much further by the younger men, Gibbons, Coprario, the younger Ferrabosco, Thomas Lupo, and a number of others, who would base a short section on a popular morris-dance tune (as Gibbons does in a four-part viol fantasy) and use motives more clear-cut in rhythmic profile sequentially as Giovanni Gabrieli does.
The only fantasia in Parthenia is Gibbons's ‘of foure parts’, which is appropriate for it is one of the finest of all the keyboard fantasias.
The English keyboard repertory, preserved almost entirely in manuscripts and much smaller in quantity than that for solo lute, is no less impressive.
It is even more original and varied in type than the consort music, including not only fantasias, ‘In nomines’, stylized dance-music, arrangements of music from masques and of popular songs, but also miniature genre-pieces, essays in programme music and pure impressionism such as Byrd's ‘The Battle’ and ‘The Bells’, variations on ground basses, and sets of variations on popular tunes as distinct from simple arrangements of them.
The largest of  all the manuscript collections, the nearly 300 pieces of the so-called ‘Fitzwilliam Virginal Book’ compiled by a Catholic recusant, Francis Tregian, probably between 1609 and 1619, gives a very fair cross-section.
Next to Byrd, the composers most fully represented are two who, although by no means exclusively keyboard composers, are remembered for little else: John Bull (c. 1563–1628), a pupil of Blitheman (see p. 240–1), and Giles Farnaby (c. 1566–1640).
Farnaby is at his best as a miniaturist; his fantasias are of little account but such tiny gems as ‘Giles Farnaby's Dream’, ‘His Rest’, ‘Farnaby's Conceit’ and ‘His Humour’are unique, and he was also a master of the art of variation-writing.
It is above all in the sets of variations that the English virginal repertory differs from the consort repertory; Allison's ‘Goe from my Window’ variations in Morley's Consort Lessons are quite exceptional.
The principles of variation ornamentation, thematic reshaping, and so on— had long been in common use.
Composition on the conventional melodies-and-basses of the ‘Romanesca’ type was another form of variation, though a keyboard set such as Andrea Gabrieli's ‘Capriccio sopra II Pass’e mezo Antico' was probably a novelty; Byrd and Farnaby composed sets on ‘grounds’.
But the extended sets of variations usually on popular songs, but sometimes on dance-tunes or the notes of the hexachord, generally increasing in complication and technical difficulty toward the end, which are arguably the chief glory of virginal music, have been plausibly derived from the diferencias of Cabezon (see pp. 236–7).
Cabezon was certainly in England with his master, Philip of Spain, for more than a year during 1554–5 when it is improbable that he was not known to Blitheman who was in the service of Mary I. Perhaps also a copy of his belatedly published Obras de musica (1578) found its way to England, offering models of song variation.
Whatever the prototypes, such variations as Byrd's on ‘The Carman's Whistle’, ‘Sellenger's Round’, ‘The Woods so wild’, Farnaby's on ‘Woodycock’ and ‘Up tails all’, to mention only a few of those in the Fitzwilliam Book, are masterpieces.
Byrd's 22 variations on ‘Walsingham’ present special difficulties including cross-rhythm, but Bull seems to have deliberately trumped them with his even more brilliant and difficult 30 variations on the same tune, which Tregian placed at the head of his anthology: a veritable thesaurus of keyboard devices.
Bull was always, first and foremost, a virtuoso both of technical invention and obviously of performance, even in compositions probably or certainly intended for the organ where he appears as the direct heir of Preston and Blitheman.
Only when he essays Farnaby's type of miniature —‘My Self’, ‘My Grief’(styled ‘A Gigge’ by Tregian), ‘My Choice’does he curb his virtuosity.
When in 1613 he ‘went beyond the seas without licence’ and settled first at Brussels, then at Antwerp, he was in personal contact with  another expatriate, Peter Philips, and with the Amsterdam organist Sweelinck, both of whom figure in the Fitzwilliam Book.
THE KEYBOARD MUSIC OF SWEELINCK AND PRAETORIUS
The question of priorities with Sweelinck is not easily solved for, whereas his vocal works began to appear in print in 1594, none of his compositions for organ or harpsichord — by far the most important part of his output — were published while he was alive, and all but one of the five manuscript sources dating from his lifetime are English; in fact the Fitzwilliam Book is the earliest.
In his fantasias and toccatas it is not difficult to trace Venetian influences, particularly in the six fantasias ‘in the manner of an echo’ where he takes advantage of the two manuals of the organ to ‘echo’motives duly marked f and p.
In some of the others there is a clear affinity with Philips's two ‘Fitzwilliam’ fantasias.
(He wrote variations on the early pavane by Philips, dated 1580, in Fitzwilliam.)
And there can be little doubt that his song variations were suggested by the English ones; two of the tunes appear also in ‘Fitzwilliam’ under different names: ‘Est-ce Mars’(‘The New Sa-Hoo’) and ‘Von der Fortuna’(‘Fortune’).
But Sweelinck was no mere imitator, as one sees from his masterly variations on ‘Mein junges Leben hat ein Endt’.
His application of the variation principle to plainsong, Lutheran hymns, and Huguenot psalms goes far beyond the ‘organ hymns’ and versets of earlier generations, and differs from his secular variations in that the basic melody is generally preserved intact as cantus firmus in one part or another throughout.
The only comparable works are the four monumental organ pieces on ‘Ein feste Burg’, ‘Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam’, ‘Wir glauben all’, and ‘Nun lob mein Seel’, the last of which actually consists of two variations, that Michael Praetorius inserted in Part VII of his Musae Sioniae (1609).
Between them Sweelinck and Praetorius laid the foundations of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century German organ music.
By the second decade of the new century instrumental music in general had developed special properties rendering obsolescent the concept of composition ‘da cantare et sonare per ogni instrumento’ or ‘apt both for viols and voices’, while at the same time concerted secular music for voices was beginning to be overtaken in popularity by the vocal solo or duet.
Secular Song (c. 1610–60)
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE MADRIGAL
The waning popularity of polyphonic song, whether for voices only or for voices doubled by instruments, during the first half of the seventeenth century, is remarkable all over Europe.
There was of course no sudden switch to solos and duets with continuo or other independent instrumental accompaniment, yet by the mid-century the old forms of madrigal, polyphonic chanson, and Lied were obsolescent.
As the Roman polymath Pietro della Valle observed in 1640 madrigals were now not often sung, ‘nor is there occasion to sing them, since people prefer to hear singing freely by heart with instruments in the hand rather than to watch four or five companions singing with book in hand at a table like schoolboys (che ha troppo del scolaresco e dello studio)’.
However as late as 1668 another Roman, Mario Savioni (c. 1608–1685) brought out a book of five-part Madrigali morali e spirituali, explaining that they were to be sung each at the end of one of his previously published Concerti morali and adding that he had ‘taken care to unite together the aria and the madrigal so as to conform with the character of the concertos’.
The movement of the tide is well illustrated by the successive books of Monteverdi's madrigals.
The first four are normal, though the Fourth Book contains pieces, e.g. ‘Sfogava con le stelle’, with a lot of chordal recitation.
The Quinto Libro (1605) has an optional continuo part that becomes obligatory in the last six pieces (of which ‘Questi vaghi’ has g-part instrumental sinfonie into the bargain).
The Sixth Book (1614) is similarly divided, even in the pieces without obligatory continuo, and not only in the five-part arrangement of the ‘Lamento d'Arianna’.
In the extremely emotional ‘Sestina: Lagrime d'Amante al Sepolcro dell'Amata’ Monteverdi pours out his personal grief for the young singer Caterina Martinelli in passages of declamatory solo or duet which the other voices accompany.
As for the Seventh and Eighth Books (1619 and 1638), to say nothing of the Ninth, compiled eight years after the composer's death, they contain quasi-operatic ballets and experiments (11 ballo dell' Ingrate, Tirsi e Clori, Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda), declamatory or melodic solos or duets  over repeated or varied basses, with or without string ritornelli, elaborate vocal and instrumental concerti, and the simplest solo canzonette.
‘Con che soavita’ in Book VII is for a solo singer and nine instruments disposed in three cori — the Gabrieli style in miniature — while ‘Ohime dov’e il mio ben' is a romanesca (see p. 237) with two voices singing in close imitation above the bass.
Another enchanting piece in the same book, ‘Chiome d'oro’, is described as a ‘Canzonetta a due voci Concertata da duoi Violini Chitarone o Spinetta’; the voices duet (mostly in parallel thirds) over an ostinato bass, each of their five strophes being introduced by one of three ritornelli for the two violini over the same ostinato.
The Eighth Book, Madrigali Guerrieri, Et Amorosi, opens with an apostrophe to the Emperor Ferdinand III to whom the book is dedicated: ‘Altri canti d'Amor’.
This is, in effect, what had already been known for a considerable time as a ‘cantata’ for six voices, four viole, two violini, and string and keyboard continuo, in four strongly contrasted sections (solo and tutti) preceded by a sinfonia.
It is followed by a setting of Petrarch's ‘Hor ch'el Ciel e la Terra el vento tace’ which begins with a breathtaking suggestion of total silence by means of more than twenty repetitions of a single triad.
It would hardly be an exaggeration to say that there is more variety of treatment, as well as a greater display of creative power, in Monteverdi's ‘madrigals’ than in the similar compositions of all his contemporaries put together.
Yet they included gifted men, not only the Florentine pioneers of opera who for a time were still active as monodists — Peri's Le varie musiche (Florence, 1609), Caccini's posthumously published Nuove Musiche e nuova maniera di scriverle (Florence, 1614), Gagliano's Musiche (Venice, 1615) but younger composers: Sigismondo d'India (c. 1580–1629), Claudio Saracini (1586–after 1649), and Domenico Belli (fl. c. 1616) in the Florentine-Mantuan orbit.
It is noteworthy that the Roman Girolamo Frescobaldi (1583–1643) published his two books of Arie in Florence in 1630 during his fairly brief service there.
In Rome there were Stefano Landi (C. 1590C. 1655), Luigi Rossi (15981653), and Giacomo Carissimi (1605–74), in Venice Marc' Antonio Negri (fl. c. 1612), Alessandro Grandi (d. 1630), Biagio Marini (1597–1665), and Giovanni Berti (d. 1638), who all served under Monteverdi at St. Mark's, and three other composers who did not, Guglielmo Miniscalchi (fl. c. 1625), Carlo Milanuzzi (d. after 1647), and the blind Martino Pesenti (c. 1600–c. 1647).
Some continued to write polyphonic madrigals as well as monodic ones; d'India, for instance, published eight books of five-part madrigals during 1606 as against five of musiche (for Caccini's term was commonly adopted) between 1609 and 1623.
In the musiche he continued the solo madrigal tradition of Luzzaschi and Caccini, though with a heightened emotional expressiveness reflecting that of such contemporary poets as Giambattista Marino.
But in this, which  he achieved by bold leaps and chromaticisms of melody and harmony, he was far surpassed by Saracini and Belli (neither of whom composed polyphonic madrigals) whose shock effects are comparable with Gesualdo's of the same period (see p. 267), as in this passage from Belli's ‘Ardo ma non ardi’ from his Libro dell' arie a I e 2 V. per sonarsi con il chitarrone (Florence, 1616): or the opening of Saracini's ‘Tu parti’from his sixth book of Musiche (Venice, 1624).
Nor did Belli hesitate to give his chitarrone-player jagged leaps and, as he confessed, ‘lots of quavers’(molto serrati di crome).
CANTADE AND ARIE
By about the time when Belli published his Arie, this strophic form which Caccini had clearly distinguished from the solo madrigals in his Nuove musiche was overtaking the madrigal in popularity and quickly surpassed it.
Arie could be simple, tuneful canzonette, ‘little short songs’, as Morley defined them, ‘wherein little art can be showed, being made in strains…and every strain repeated except the middle; ‘Caccini's aria VIII, ‘Odi, Euterpe’ is a canzonetta with only the first ‘strain' repeated.
Or they could be extended strophic pieces developed from the old principle of the ‘conventional’ basses, the romanesca and the rest, as some of d'India's are.
But the repeated bass was now freely composed, as already in Caccini's aria III, ‘Arde il mio petto’.
It often marches steadily in even crotchets as in Monteverdi's already mentioned ‘Chiome d'oro’(which he styles ‘canzonetta’ presumably because of its light-handed tunefulness).
Indeed Monteverdi produced a classic early example of the strophic-variation solo aria over a marching ostinato he had come near it years before in ‘Qual honor’ in Orfeo (see p. 274)— in ‘Ohime ch'io cado’.
In Grandi's Cantade et Arie a voce sola (Venice, 1620) such songs are styled ‘cantatas’(cantade), probably the earliest use of the term, and the openings of the two strophes of his ‘Amor altri’ are typical:
The vocal lines of these early cantatas consist mostly of that kind of declamatory melody or nearly melodious recitative that was to be later known as arioso.
But they also begin to admit a clear differentiation between recitative, arioso, and song within a single piece.
D' India does so in ‘Torna il sereno Zefiro’ from his fifth book of Musiche (1623); and Berti distinguishes between recitative and arioso in ‘Occhi miei tristi’from his Cantade et Arie (1624), and between recitative and aria in ‘Da grave incendio’in his second set (1627).
In 1623 an elderly Roman organist, Paolo Quagliati (C. 1555–1628) included in his Sfera armoniosa a duetto da camera for two sopranos and violino obligato in three sections distinguished by different characters, different metres, and (obviously) different tempi: EX. 87(ii) is a triple-time aria of exactly the same type as those by Berti and d'India just mentioned.
Such works as these were the forerunners of the Roman cantatas of the 1630S, the leading composers of which were Landi, Luigi Rossi, and Carissimi.
THE CANTATA IN ROME
In 1619 Landi brought out an opera (see p. 311) and a book of five-part madrigals, and the following year a book of Arie a una voce; four more followed during the period 1627–37.
He favoured the strophic variation over a slow-moving bass, as in the bass solo ‘Superbi colli’ in the 1620 book.
Much more important as a cantata composer was Rossi, a childhood pupil of  de Macque.
He was enormously prolific; Alberto Ghislanzoni's thematic catalogue enumerates 263 solo cantatas, canzoni, and arias, and more than a hundred more for two or three voices.
Their variety of style and organization is equally remarkable, and it is regrettable that — owing to the fact that merely eight of them were published in his lifetime in miscellaneous collections of Arie spirituali (1640) and Ariette (1646)— we have few means of determining which are early works, which late.
‘Ravvolse il volo’ can be dated between 1630 and 1636 by a textual reference, and the famous ‘Ferito un cavaliero’, a lament for Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, is almost certainly a late work composed in 1655 in anticipation of the visit to Rome of Gustavus's daughter, Christina, a recent Catholic convert; one cannot imagine a Roman composer celebrating the Protestant hero at any earlier date.
Yet both the early Lamento d'Amore and the late Lamento della Regina di Svetia are in the same form, four recitative sections each ending with a brief arioso refrain — the Queen's cry of ‘Datemi per pietade un che m'uccida’— except that the later piece also has an introductory recitative describing the arrival of the ‘wounded horseman’ from the battlefield.
Another cantata which can be dated 1649 by its reference to the execution of Charles I, La Fortuna (‘Alla ruota, alla benda’), is much more varied and more typical in form:
Equally complicated are the Lamento di Zelemi, turca (‘Con occhi belli e fieri’) in 13 sections, four of which consist of an aria repeated as a ritornello, and ‘Hor che notte guerriera’ for two sopranos and tenor (representing Fortuna, Amore, and Amante), and two violins; the latter includes three recitatives, two arias, a duet, and two terzetti as well as three instrumental sinfonie.
One of the finest of all, ‘Gelosia’, published in 1646, opens with a great passionate outburst: which is followed by a nine-bar aria in triple time and a fast arioso; the whole scheme is then twice repeated, very freely.
Then again there are quite short cantatas, such as‘Pensoso, afflitto’, a short recitative followed by two arias, and ‘Se dolente’, aria-recitative-aria.
Some of Rossi's canzoni, e.g. ‘Io lo vedo’ and ‘Difenditi, o core’, are simple da capo arias; ‘Due labbra di rose’is a strophic duet canzone showing Rossi's purely melodic charm at its best.
The printed collections of 1640 and 1646 in which Rossi's cantatas and canzoni appear also contain works by the Mazzocchi brothers and Marco Marazzoli, all three of whom belonged, like Rossi himself, to the circle who enjoyed the patronage of the Barberini family (see p. 313).
The 1646 volume furthermore includes two pieces by another Roman, Carissimi, whose cantatas generally — and they number 130 or more — present the same problem of chronology as Rossi's.
Carissimi employed the same variety of forms and styles, and covered an emotional range from the deep tragedy of 11 lamento di Maria di Scozia to the rich comedy of 11 ciarlatano.
The latter is a good example of his more extended type of cantata with fewer but longer sections than Rossi's: The opening of the duet will also illustrate one of Carissimi's most striking characteristics, his genuine sense of key: The slow, uncertain supersession of mode by key had not yet generally revealed the possibilities of tonality for variety and dynamic structure; composers still treated a key very much as a mode, a tonal area within which they could move and from which they wandered uncertainly, and which helped to give unity to a composition.
A clear-cut modulation like this from F to B flat, and a little later through C to G before returning to the tonic was still unusual in the mid-seventeenth century.
All the movements of 11 ciarlatano, except two recitatives, begin and end in F major; indeed Carissimi's cantatas are nearly all firmly unified by key.
But two solo cantatas, ‘Havea la notte oscura’ in F major and ‘Sospiri ch'uscite’in G minor, venture into wider fields; in the former, for instance, one section begins in B flat and ends in C minor.
By the middle of the century chamber cantatas were being written all over Italy; the composers were as numerous as the madrigalists of the previous century.
But the Italian cantata never struck roots abroad even in the modest way the madrigal had done.
At least two notable cantata composers, the Roman Giovanni Felice Sances (c. 1600–1679) and Pietro (Antonio) Cesti (1623–69), far more famous for his operas, ended their careers in the  Imperial Chapel at Vienna, but they failed to transplant the chamber cantata there.
Even the term ‘cantata’ appears not to have been used by a German composer before 1638.
ITALIAN INFLUENCE ON GERMAN SONG
German secular music during the second decade of the century felt Italian influence, but it was the influence of Giovanni Gabrieli, not of the monodists.
The composers of the post-Hassler generation (see p. 283) went on publishing polyphonic deutsche Lieder of every kind in the old style.
Melchior Franck brought out a series of collections under fancy titles Recreationes musicae (1614), Delitiae amoris (1615), Lilia musicalia (1616)— and at last introduced fa-la refrains in 1621 in his Newes Teutsches Musicalisches Fröliches Convivium (Coburg, 1621).
The following year Widmann also introduced fa-las in his Musicalischer Studentenmuth (Nuremberg, 1622).
More progressive than these were the three collections of Musica boscareccia (Leipzig, 1621, 1626, and 1628) and Diletti pastorali (1624) of the Leipzig Thomaskantor, Johann Hermann Schein (1586–1630).
Schein had already employed the continuo in a sacred collection, the Opella Nova of 1618; in these two secular works it is optional.
Musica boscareccia is for three voices, two sopranos and bass, soli or ‘in ein corpus’.
But the bass is figured and Schein obligingly points out alternative methods of performance: two tenors or soprano and tenor instead of the sopranos; bass to be played by trombone, bassoon, or violone; soprano II to be replaced by violin or flute; or simply soprano solo with continuo — by which expedient the German solo song with continuo was born almost by accident.
Four sets which Thomas Selle (1599–1663), possibly Schein's pupil, published at Hamburg (1624–35) are modelled on Musica boscareccia.
Schein's Diletti pastorali are more frankly madrigalian and they suggest that he was acquainted with Monteverdi's Seventh Book of 1619.
So also was the greatest German musician of the century, Heinrich Schutz (1585–1672), who actually made a German translation, ‘Guldne Haare’, of Monteverdi's ‘Chiome d'oro’.
Later he borrowed from the Scherzi musicali of 1632 the ostinato bass and other details of ‘Zefiro torna’, and the concitato effects of ‘Armato il cor’, in his own Symphoniae sacrae II (1647).
But he employed the new Italian style in the sacred works which occupied him almost exclusively, so that his secular compositions are few  and for the most part negligible.
The real pioneer of the Italian monodic style in Germany was one of his pupils, Johann Nauwach (c. 1595–c. 1630), who like him had spent some years in Italy.
After studying the lute there, Nauwach came home and published a book of Arie passeggiate, solo madrigals for ‘Chitarrone et altri simili Instr.’
(Dresden, 1623).
One of these is none other than Caccini's celebrated ‘Amarilli’, in which Nauwach inserted ‘passages’ more suggestive of fingers on an instrument than vocal ornamentation, with the necessary additional bits of continuo bass.
His setting of Guarini's ‘Cruda Amarilli’ is modelled, much more freely, on d'India's in his first book of Musiche.
He also included four strophic Arien and continued in this simpler vein in his Teutsche Villanellen for one to three voices (1627).
Nine of the poems were by Opitz, and Schutz contributed a little strophic duet at the end of the volume.
Seemingly the first German to use the term ‘cantata’ was another pupil of Schutz, Kaspar Kittel, who had lived in Venice during 1624–9.
Kittel published his Arien und Cantaten for one to four voices at Dresden in 1638.
But what he understood by ‘cantata’ was the early form, strophic variations over a repeated bass, in two cases the ‘Ruggiero’, in one the romanesca.
Any suggestion of Italianism is stamped out by the steady march of the voices: Incidentally, one of  Kittel's Arien is a setting of the last three strophes of Opitz's ‘Nachtklag’, the first six of which had been set by Schütz as a madrigal, ‘Itzt blicken durch des Himmels Saal’ for five voices, two violins, and continuo.
THE NORTH GERMAN AND SAXON COMPOSERS
In the same year as Kittel's Arien und Cantaten, yet another of Schutz's pupils, his cousin Heinrich Albert (1604–51) published the first of eight ‘parts’ of Arien…
In ein Positiv, Klavizimbel, Theorbe oder anders vollst.
Instrument zu singen gesetzt (Königsberg, 1638–50) which enjoyed enormous popularity; by 1652 the first five Teile had reached their third or fourth editions and a number of separate songs had been republished in other people's miscellanies.
Albert, like most Lutheran composers, mixed the sacred with the secular and by no means all his songs are solos.
Some are reduced from earlier polyphonic forms, others were expanded into them (just as Selle promised to do in the preface to his Mono-Phonetiea, published at Hamburg in 1636, his earliest really monodic publication).
Albert employs a great variety of styles from recitative to the genuinely strophic, sometimes introducing violin interludes.
He had the advantage of being a poet himself and a member of a circle of respectable poets, of whom the best was Simon Dach, at Königsberg; he had wide musical knowledge, not only of the Italian masters of monody, as he reveals in one of his greatest songs, ‘O der rauhen Grausamkeit’: but of other foreign song, French and even Polish, from which he borrowed with due acknowledgement.
But Teutonic gravitas marks his most typical work and he is strikingly responsive to German verse.
He is justly regarded as the earliest master of the German solo song with keyboard — Positiv or Klavizimbel — accompaniment.
At the same time the clergyman-poet Johann Rist (1607–67) provided a focus for song-composition, comparable with Simon Dach, at Hamburg, a city which, like Königsberg, was untouched by the Thirty Years' War.
Rist deliberately cultivated a simple, popular style in secular particularly moralizing) and religious verse; he was a modest composer himself and in his earlier collections, from 1641 onward, he also enlisted the help of local musicians — including Selle in 1651 and 1655.
But Rist's influence spread  well beyond the so-called Hamburg school and touched such Saxons as Andreas Hammerschmidt (1611–75) in his three collections of Oden with instrumental obbligati (1642, 1643, and 1649) and Constantin Christian Dedekind (1628–1715) in his Aelbianische Musen-Lust (1657).
Both Hammerschmidt and Dedekind, and indeed Heinrich Albert, were far surpassed in variety and creative power by a young pupil of Samuel Scheidt, Adam Krieger (1634–66) who published in his lifetime little more than a collection of fifty Arien for one to three voices with string ritornelli (Leipzig, 1657), though posthumous Neue Arien appeared in 1667 (augmented in 1676).
At the heart of most of Krieger's work lies the foursquare, Lutheran-hymn-like strophic melody as in his earliest known song (which was to appear in a revised form, ‘Nun sich der Tag geendet hat’, in the Neue Arien):
But Krieger was open to other influences, including Italian operatic song (e.g. ‘O schone Schäferin’) and cantata (e.g. ‘Fleug, Psyche, fleug’); he varied symmetry and burst the strophic form (e.g. ‘Adonis Tod’ and ‘Ich bin verwundt’) with great skill and emotional power, and also commanded a lighter vein (e.g. ‘Rheinwein' and ‘Es kann nichts angenehmer sein’).
THE FRENCH AIR DE COUR
French composers of the period, with one exception, were firmly closed to outside influences.
They had found their own solution to the humanist problem of mating music with words in musique mesurée, the influence of which lingered on although it was no longer practised with doctrinaire thoroughness, and the air de cour with lute accompaniment flourished to the near exclusion of polyphonic song, though some of the published lute airs were obviously based on polyphonic originals.
The heterogeneity of French solo song at the beginning of the century is shown by the six books of Airs de différents autheurs published by the lutenist Gabriel Bataille  (1575–1630) during 1609–15; each book consists partly of his own compositions, partly of airs de cour and psalm-settings by Pierre Guedron (d. 1621), Le Jeune's successor as Compositeur de la chambre du Roi, Guedron's son-in-law Antoine Boesset (1586–1643), the elderly Mauduit, and others.
Boesset continued this series of lute Airs down to 1632 as well as reviving the four- or five-part airs de cour in nine books from 1617 to 1642.
They range in style from genuine musique mesurée (Guedron's ‘Lors que Leandre’), through songs influenced in greater or lesser degree by it (e.g. the same composer's ‘Heureux qui se peut plaindre’), to light melodious chansons, ballet airs, and dramatic recits like those composed for the court ballets.
These recits are the most interesting of Guedron's works; it was he who was responsible for introducing them in place of spoken dialogue, thereby taking the ballet de cour a significant step nearer to opera, particularly in the Ballet de la Délivrance de Renaud (1617)(see also p. 322, n. 44) and Ballet du Roy sur L'Adventure de Tancrède en la forest enchantée (1619).
There is no stylistic difference between a lute song like ‘Quel espoir de guarir’: and one of his ballet récits; indeed some of the latter turn up in the lute books, as Clorinda's despairing ‘Toy de qui la rigueur’ in Tancrede did with a lute accompaniment arranged by Boësset the following year.
But there is a considerable difference between this and the monody of Caccini or Monteverdi.
Guedron's most popular air, ‘Est-ce Mars le grand Dieu des alarmes’, in the Ballet de Madame (1613), inspired both Sweelinck and Scheidt to write keyboard variations on it and it appears in the Fitzwilliam Virginal Book in an arrangement by Farnaby as ‘The New Sa-hoo’.
Whereas Guedron had considerable sense of drama, Boësset had more talent for lyricism and the love-song, and it was his path rather than that of his father-in-law which was followed by the younger composers, of whom Francois Richard the elder (d. 1650) and Étienne Moulinié (c. 1600–after 1669) were the most gifted.
Nor was his popularity limited to France.
His songs were mangled and set to German and English verse, for instance in Heinrich Albert's Arien where the four-part version of ‘Du plus doux de ses  traits’ appeared with continuo in 1643 as ‘Unser Heil ist kommen’and in Edward Filmer's French Court-Aires with their Ditties (London, 1629).
ENGLISH SONG
Unlike the French, the English song-composers were still wide open to Italian influence — and to the new monodic style before the Germans seem to have been aware of it.
As already mentioned (see p. 280), Robert Dowland's Musicall Banquet of 1610 included Caccini's ‘Amarilli’ and ‘Dovrò, dunque, morire’and a solo madrigal, ‘Se di farmi morire’, by an early but unimportant monodist, Domenico Maria Melli, and his father succumbed to the new style in at least three of his last songs.
(In the Banquet the continuo parts were ‘realized’ in fully written lute parts.)
The composer generally credited with the introduction of the stylo recitativo into England was Nicholas Lanier (1588–1666), composer, singer, lutenist, Master of the King's Music, and deviser of masques at the court of Charles I, but there is some doubt whether what Ben Jonson said in 1640 that Lanier ‘spake in song’ in two of his masques in 1617 — was genuine recitative or only declamatory song.
None of this music for Lovers Made Men and The Vision of Delight has survived, but the earliest piece of Lanier's that we have, ‘Bring away this sacred tree’ for the Earl of Somerset's Wedding Masque (1613), is close in style to Guedron's recits (cf.
Ex. 94), and his setting of Walter Raleigh's ‘Like hermit poor’ is not so very much more declamatory than Ferrabosco's in his Ayres of 1609: while his ending is incomparably more feeble.
However during 1625–8 Lanier was in Italy, buying pictures for his royal master, and after his return  composed an indisputable recitative on the subject of Hero and Leander, ‘Nor com'st thou yet, my slothful love’ and a varied-strophe aria, ‘No more shall meads’.
Lanier seems to have reckoned on lute accompaniment and the credit for the earliest English publication with figured bass must go to Martin Peerson (c. 1572–1650) in his Mottects or Grave Chamber Musicke (1630).
But Peerson must be placed with other essentially conservative musicians such as John Hilton ‘the younger’(1599–1657) who were nevertheless conscious of the new trend, as Hilton shows in his Ayres, or fa la's for three voyces (1627) and solo songs, and still more in his dramatic dialogues ‘Job’ and ‘King Soloman and the two Harlotts’.
The most notable English progressive was Walter Porter (c. 1588–1659), who claimed Monteverdi as his ‘good Friend and Maestro’ and certainly seems to have been acquainted with the master's Seventh Book; indeed one madrigal, ‘Wake Sorrow, Wake’, can be dated to 1615, earlier than the Seventh Book.
His Madrigales and Ayres of two, three, foure, and five Voyces, with the continued Base, with Toccatos, Sinfonias, and Ritornellos to them.
After the manner of Consort Musique (1632) are fairly described by their title and there is nothing else quite like them in English music.
Like Lanier, Porter was in the royal service, as were the other leading composers of the Caroline period: Robert Johnson (c. 1580 C. 1634), John Wilson (1595–1674), and the Lawes brothers, Henry (1596–1662) and William (1602–45).
Much of their music was originally intended for plays or Court masques; a great deal of it consists of undistinguished melodic declamation, 56 and even the simpler tuneful airs in which they are happiest seldom if ever match the poems of Donne and Herrick, Suckling and Carew, which they set.
The best of them was Henry Lawes; even he was far from deserving Milton's great sonnet but he could manage both tragic and colloquial declamation with equal skill in dramatic monologue and strophic air:
It is ironical that the Court composers should have had to wait for the establishment of the Commonwealth before their songs were published.
John Playford issued his first musical publications, The English Dancing Master and A Musicall Banquet in 1651.
The first is an invaluable collection of popular tunes with instructions for dancing to them, which reached its eighteenth edition around 1728; the second contains pieces for viols and vocal rounds and catches, a peculiarly English form of musical amusement which had flourished briefly in James I's time (Thomas Ravenscroft's collections Pammelia, Deuteromelia, and Melismata, 1609–11), languished for forty years, and now took a very much longer lease of life.
In 1652 John Hilton edited for Playford a ‘choice collection’, Catch that Catch can, including many pieces from Ravenscroft as well as some delightful new catches by himself, William Lawes, and others, and in the same year Playford issued Select Musical Ayres and Dialogues by Lanier, John Wilson, Henry and William Lawes, and other former Court musicians.
In 1653 came the first of three books of Ayres and Dialogues by Henry Lawes; the others followed in 1655 and 1658, and beside them Playford's Breefe Introduction to the Skill of Musick for Song and Viol (1654) and instrumental music.
Thus, after the Civil War, the music of the Court and aristocracy was brought within reach of the ordinary citizens of the Commonwealth.
The Early Growth of Opera (c.1610–60)
THE ENTERTAINMENT OF PRINCES
So far as one of its most important components was concerned, early opera developed pari passu with solo song, but its evolution was controlled by other factors.
The musico-dramatic form known at first as tragedia rappresentata in musica, favola recitata in musica, favola rappresentata in musica recitativa, and similar designations (but not till around 1640 as opera scenica or opera musicale) had quickly escaped from the antiquarian dilettanti.
But for another thirty years it remained solely an entertainment for princes and wealthy aristocrats, mostly at Mantua, Florence, Bologna, Parma, and Rome.
During the period 1617–30 Monteverdi composed at least eight operas or quasi-operatic works, nearly all for his old masters, the Gonzaga dukes of Mantua, and all destroyed when the Imperialist army sacked Mantua in 1630.
Caccini was dead but Peri was still composing in 1628, when he contributed the music for the part of Clori to Marco da Gagliano's La Flora and produced a work of his own, Jole ed Ercole, both for a ducal wedding in Florence Orpheus was still a favourite subject: witness the Orfeo dolente (Florence in 1616) of Domenico Belli and La morte d'Orfeo, apparently the first opera produced in Rome, before the Papal court (1619), by Stefano Landi.
Landi wrote his own libretto and innovated by introducing comic relief in the unlikely person of Charon, who sings w hat is probably the earliest of all bu–o arias.
A more important new tendency appeared in another Roman opera (1626), La catena d'Adone by Domenico Mazzocchi (1592–1665), who remarks in a note to the published score that he has inserted a number of ‘mezz'Arie’ which ‘break the tedium of the recitative’(che rompono il tedio del recitativo).
No one has given a completely convincing explanation of what Mazzocchi may have meant by ‘mezz'Arie’.
But he does, for instance, insert a brief aria-like refrain four times in a recitative scene in Act III for Arsete, the counsellor of the enchantress Falsirena: The important point is that Mazzocchi feared the tedium of recitative, and the theory has been advanced that his score originally contained less of this element, the male alto hero's part being –full of canzonette' which at the singer's request were replaced with recitatives by another composer, the monodist and late madrigalist Sigismondo d'India.
As it is, the recitative is broken by melodious solo or ensemble ‘arias’, actually so called.
At the same time princely festive opera began to make its way abroad, only to be checked by war.
In 1627 Schütz composed Martin Opitz's German adaptation of Rinuccini's old Dafne libretto (see p. 271) for the wedding of a Saxon princess at Hartenfels, near Torgau, but the Thirty Years War was no time for the birth of German opera and Schütz's score is lost.
Two years before, an opera-ballet, La Liberazione di Ruggieros after Ariosto, by Caccini's daughter Francesca (1587–c. 1640), had been given in Florence for the benefit of the future Wladyslaw IV of Poland.
The prince was so impressed that he had a Polish translation made, brought a scenic engineer from Mantua for a ‘fisher idyll’ Galatea produced at the Warsaw court, and on his accession to the throne in 1632 built a theatre in his palace where a whole series of Italian operas specially composed by members of the Royal Chapel was given.
The first of these was by a Pole, Piotr Elert (d. 1653), but most were the work of Marco Scacchi (d. c. 1685).
This first important flowering of opera outside Italy, however, was cut short by domestic rebellion and foreign invasion before it could strike roots and even the scores, like Schütz's, have disappeared without trace.
OPERA IN ROME
Opera in Rome was given a fresh impetus in the 1630s under the music loving Barberini Pope, Urban VIII, and two Barberini cardinals, his nephews.
Even before their magnificent palace was completed by Bernini, they opened the theatre in it, the Teatro delle Quattro Fontane holding three thousand spectators, on 23 February 1632, with a fresh opera by Landi, Il Sant' Alessio.
For this the libretto was provided by another churchman, Giulio Rospigliosi, later cardinal and finally Pope as Clement IX.
Indeed Rospigliosi supplied libretti for a whole series of operas: including Erminia sul Giordano (1633) by Michelangelo Rossi (d. after 1670), Che soffre, speri (1639) by Domenico Mazzocchi's brother Virgilio (1597–1646) and Marco Marazzoli (1619–62), Il palazzo incantato (1642) by Luigi Rossi (1598–1653), Dal Male il Bene (1653) by Marazzoli and Antonio Maria Abbatini (c. 1595–1677).
All these were produced in the Barberini theatre.
Marazzoli also composed the last of the Barberini operas, La vita humana (1656), to a libretto by Rospigliosi's nephew, Jacopo.
The outstanding feature of these Roman operas was the splendour of the scenery and ingenuity of the scenic effects, which were devised by Bernini himself for Erminia and for Sant' Alessio when it was revived in 1634 for the entertainment of Wladyslaw IV's brother.
Demons and angels flew through the air; there were wonderful scene-changes; there was a great storm in Erminia and at the end of Sant' Alessio a great cloud descended and then opened to reveal the glory of Paradise.
Landi's recitative is sometimes perfunctory, with over-many repeated notes, but sometimes reaches fine expressiveness, particularly in the part of his (castrato) hero.
His score is also notable for its choruses, particularly double choruses, which are accompanied — in contrast to the merely continuo supported solos — by the orchestra (three violins and continuo for harpsichords, which are usually joined by arpe, liuti, tiorbe e violoni), not merely doubling the voices but sometimes playing independently: This orchestra is also employed in three unusually extended sinfonie to the Prologue and Second and Third Acts, that to the prologue consisting of 11 (slow) bars in quadruple time, a canzone of 32 bars with echo-effects of forte and piano emphasized by the scoring: 7 bars in triple time, and 21 in quadruple.
Just as Landi provided comic relief in La morte d ‘Orfeo, so he did again in Alessio with a duet for two frivolous pages who mock the saint.
But in Che  soffre, speri his librettist took a bolder step for which he needed other composers, the younger Mazzocchi and Marazzoli.
In Alessio Rospigliosi had already turned away from the heavily exploited areas of classical mythology and Christian epic to open up the unpromising vein of hagiology; he now struck an infinitely more successful one.
Che soffre, speri is the earliest commedia musicale.
It was performed on 27 February 1639, before an audience which included Milton and Cardinal Mazarin.
The subject was taken from contemporary life and the chief musical interest lies in the treatment not of the amorous gentry but of the hero's four comic servants and their sons, and the peasants at a fair, who sing partly in dialect: and in a quick recitative with many repeated notes which must have been performed quasi-parlando.
Here is Egisto conversing with his servants in the second scene: There is some realism in the handling of the fair-scene: the impatient cries of the chorus, ‘Alla fiera, alla fiera’, and the soloists selling combs and mirrors, cups and vases, straw hats The gentry sing their arie and duets, sometimes over ostinato basses, but the expansion of the purely musical and scenic elements at the expense of the dramatic, the recitative, which had hitherto characterized Roman opera, was not merely halted but reversed.
It was not till fourteen years later that Rospigliosi produced his second comic opera, Dal Male il Bene, of which Marazzoli composed only the  Second Act.
He had just spent seven years in Spain as papal nuncio and made the acquaintance of Caldéron; the setting is Spanish and the romantic element is stronger.
One of the two heroines, Donna Elvira, also anticipates a later operatic character in the words of an aria of genuine pathos, ‘Che faro?’
But there is also a notable comic character, Tabacco, servant of one of the heroes, with a female counterpart in the pert maid Marina; and the da capo form trio-finale of the First Act, sung by Tabacco, his master, and Elvira, already sounds the characteristic note of the comic-opera finale of the future:
THE FIRST PUBLIC OPERA-HOUSES
In the meantime an extremely important development had occurred in Venice.
England and Spain had had playhouses open to a paying public since the 1570s, France from the beginning of the seventeenth century, but the first such public theatre in Italy was opened only in 1637.
This was the San Cassiano in Venice, founded by the patrician family of Tron; it was specifically an opera-house and the first production, on 6 May that year, was an Andromeda by Francesco Manelli (c. 1595–1667).
The success was so great or the rivalry of the wealthy families so keen that during the next four years three more opera-houses were opened: the Teatro dei Santi Giovanni e Paolo, the San Moisè, and the Teatro Novissimo.
The Giovanni e Paolo and Novissimo were both inaugurated with operas by Francesco Sacrati (d. 1650), whose works, like Manelli's and those of Benedetto Ferrari (1597–1681), have all disappeared.
But the noble impresarios naturally did not forget their great maestro at St. Mark's.
Monteverdi had composed no  operas since 1630; now the Grimani commissioned from him an Adone (lost) for Giovanni e Paolo (1639) and the Vendramini inaugurated their San Moise the same year with a revival of Arianna.
In 1641 he produced two new works, Le nozze d'Enea con Lavinia (also lost) and Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria and the following year his final masterpiece L'incoronazione di Poppea.
MONTEVERDI'S LOST OPERAS
Owing to the terrible destruction of scores, the only dramatic work of Monteverdi's that we know between those of 1607–8 and the last two Venetian operas is a peculiar experiment ‘in genere rappresentativo’, Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda, performed in the Palazzo Mocenigo in Venice in 1624.
A tenor relates the narrative in stanzas 52–68 of Gerusalemme liberata, Canto XII, with a great deal of repeated-note quasi-parlando, while actors representing Tancred and Clorinda sing their direct speech.
A small ensemble of four viole da braccio plus continuo suggests the trot, canter, and gallop of Tancred's horse, the fall of night, the clash of swords, the fury of the combatants (by rapidly repeated chords, an instrumental effect which disconcerted the players although Biagio Marini had employed it seven years before), 2l and their infighting with sword-pommels, helmets, and shields (by another novel effect: pizzicato chords).
When he published the Combattimento in 1638, in his book of Madrigali guerrieri ed amorosi, Monteverdi claimed in his preface that with it he had created a new genus of music, the stile concitato (excited), whereas earlier composers had been content to express the molle (soft) and temperato.
Nowhere else does Monteverdi attempt such vivid realism; the sinfonia da guerra in Act II of Ulisse is feeble by comparison with the Combattimento.
But Ulisse, despite the great, deeply expressive monologues of Penelope and Ulysses in Act I, the melodic charm of the old herdsman's song, ‘Come lieto’, which ends the Act, and many fine things in the remainder of the opera, is uneven enough to justify the suspicion that another hand, perhaps Manelli's, had a share in it.
There is also doubt concerning L'incoronazione.
The earliest opera on an historic subject, it is compact with characters more substantial than those of Ariosto, Tasso, or classical mythology and fully realized in their music: Poppea and Nero and their unfortunate spouses, Seneca, even subordinate characters like Poppea's nurse (who has the most purely beautiful song in the whole opera when she sings her mistress to sleep in Act II, SC.12), and the maid and page who flirt so deliciously in Act II, SC.5 (‘Sento un certo, non so che’) and provide the comic relief like Iro in Ulisse.
Most of the characterization is effected by the recitative, which varies from the driest quick quasi-parlando — Monteverdi sometimes writes only a single sustained note to carry eight or nine syllables — to actual melody, with every nuance between and naturally plenty of scope for his stile concitato.
In Act I, sc.9, for instance, in contrast with Nero's growing anger, Seneca's dignified recitative flowers into a grandiose melodic phrase at the words
Per aggrandir l'Impero Si assolve de se stesso;
and then drops back into recitative with his contemptuous ‘Ma che una feminella…
‘. Conversely the arias — organized strophically, sometimes on da capo lines (e.g. Amore's, Act II, sc.
13), or over ground basses — make full use of the expressive vocabulary developed by the madrigalists.
Monteverdi's two-part vocal writing tends often to run in thirds, only briefly in the possibly unauthentic final love-duet, more characteristically in the coloratura of Nero's duet with Lucano (Act II, SC.6) as they rejoice over Seneca's death.
But there is no distraction from the interplay of characters by the scenic extravagances and choral interruptions of Roman opera.
Three years later, during the carnival of 1645, John Evelyn saw Ercole in Lidia by Monteverdi's pupil and successor at St. Mark's, Giovanni Rovetta (C. 1596–1668), at the Teatro Novissimo, with ‘variety of sceanes painted and contrived with no lesse art of perspective, and machines for flying in the aire, and other wonderfull motions…one of the most magnificent and expensive diversions the wit of man can invent’; and the San Cassiano had a chorus for a few years.
But the choruses in L'incoronazione (of Seneca's household, Act II, SC.3, of ‘Consuli e Tribuni’ in the penultimate scene) are almost nugatory and could have been sung by a handful of soloists, while the instrumental ensemble in the best source, the manuscript in the Biblioteca Marciana, Venice, consists mainly of only two parts — perhaps taken by only one player each — over the basso continuo.
(Ulisse is written for four such parts.)
The merchant-princes of Venice were not reigning princes or immensely wealthy cardinals; they economized where they could and, although astonishing spectacle was indispensable to the success of opera, the Venetians were adept at producing striking effects with relatively simple means.
It is possible that the young Evelyn, who had never seen a Court masque, was easily impressed.
All the same the Venetian opera-houses prospered, for two more were opened in 1649 and 1651, making six in all.
And this new form of entertainment was available not only to the ordinary citizens of the Republic but to the innumerable foreigners who came for commerce or pleasure.
The price of a seat was only two lire.
FRANCESCO CAVALLI
By far the most important of the Venetian composers, after Monteverdi, was his pupil Francesco Cavalli (1602–76) whose early operas and most of his later ones were produced at San Cassiano, beginning with Le nozze di Teti di Peleo (1639).
Here, as in his other earlier works, he tends to follow Roman models with plenty of ensembles and short instrumental pieces, e.g. Act I opens with a sinfonia infernale and includes two chiamate, one marked alla caccia, which could be for horns.
Similarly a chorus of cavaliers, referring to ‘corni e tamburi, e trombe’, has instrumental parts which could be for actual trumpets and drums but are more probably for strings imitating them, since in Act II when Chiron is supposed to play his lyre the music consists of a sinfonia di viole, and the passata dell'armata which ends the First Act of Didone (1641) and another chiamata alla caccia in the Third are equally ambiguous.
In Didone, Cavalli's third opera, he had the advantage of a libretto by Giovanni Francesco Busenello who next year provided Monteverdi with the poem of L'incoronazione; here already Cavalli showed his dramatic power, particularly in the expressive recitative.
But Didone has a peculiarity which was to mark later Italian opera, including L'incoronazione: the part of Jarba, Dido's rejected lover, who in the end saves her from suicide, is a castrato singing in a higher register than Dido herself; Nerone and Ottone are in the same predicament.
And both Jarba's aria in Act III and the final duet are accompanied by all the strings instead of continuo only.
Cavalli was extremely prolific; no fewer than 42 operas are attributed to him and 27 of his scores are preserved in the Contarini collection of the Biblioteca di San Marco.
In those of the 1640S he follows, though with less psychological insight and power of characterization, the way pointed by Monteverdi away from the ceremonial princely opera toward what one might call dramatic solo opera for the larger public: drama expressed mostly in expressive recitative monologue and lively recitative dialogue, with the brief ‘arias’ usually left to the minor characters.
But Cavalli did not work to a formula.
L'Egisto (1643) has an unusual number of duets, ‘arias’ for two persons, like those with which the shepherd and shepherdess lovers greet the dawn in the first two scenes; in ‘Musici della selva’, for instance, each melodious strophe (freely imitated in the two violin parts) climaxes in seven bars of recitative.
In Act II, SC.6, of the same opera Cavalli introduced the classic example of a type not new even in his own work and employed in so many later operas: the extended lamento over a ground bass, usually chromatic.
La Doriclea (1645) is notable for its number of choral scenes, which were clearly sung by genuine choruses — unlike the cori which were  commonly no more than ensembles of soloists.
However Cavalli's most popular work was on a libretto by Giacinto Cicognini packed with effective situations.
This was Il Giasone (1649) which shows him at the height of his powers in the melodious aria with violin imitations (e.g. Jason's ‘Delizie contente’, Act I, SC.2), in drama (e.g. Medea's conjuration, Act I, sc.
15), and in the comic (e.g. the stuttering braggart Demo's ‘S'il ballo, s'io canto’, Act I, sc.7)
Cavalli's comic vein was worked much more fully in La Calisto (1651).
But directly after Giasone he began a change of direction which was followed by most of his later operas and indeed by later seventeenth-century opera generally.
For L'Orimonte (1650) he turned to a new librettist, Nicolo Minato, whose texts differentiated more clearly between passages for dramatic/recitative and those for lyrical/aria treatment, as in very early opera.
This differentiation became more and more marked in the music of his later Minato operas: Xerse (1654), L'Artemisia (1656), and the rest.
Arias became more important, more numerous, and were given more often to important personages; conversely, recitative became more perfunctory, the secco element more pronounced.
CESTI IN VENICE AND VIENNA
It is not impossible that the change was influenced by rivalry.
A fortnight after the production of Giasone, another opera with a libretto by Cicognini had been given at the opening of yet another Venetian opera-house, Santi  Apostoli.
This was the Orontea of Pietro (Antonio) Cesti (1623–69), a newcomer to Venice who on the strength of this work alone was described by Salvator Rosa shortly afterwards as ‘now the glory and splendour of the secular stage’.
(It was from a manuscript music-book belonging to Rosa that Burney copied ‘Intorno all’ idol mio' from Orontea for his General History of Music.)
Cesti's great gift was for melody: sensuous and eminently singable.
Two examples, one from Silandra's ‘Vieni, vieni’ in Orontea, the other from Arsete's ‘Non scherzi con Amor’in Act I of his Florentine court opera, La Dori (1663): show (i) his construction of a long descending phrase pivoting on a descending scale and given cohesion by a motivic sequence (the latter already a well-known Venetian device),(ii) his ability to write a sheer catchy tune.
Both Giasone and Orontea were extremely popular.
They were not only revived from time to time in Venice during the next twenty years but performed in a number of other Italian cities.
And in 1656 Orontea was given at the archducal court of Innsbruck, where Cesti was already established and had produced his L ‘Argia (1655) for the visit of Christina of Sweden.
Indeed Cesti spent the rest of his life composing festival court operas for Innsbruck or Vienna, the most famous of which, Il Pomo d'Oro (1667, for the wedding of Leopold I), with its large orchestra including cornetti, trombones, and bassoon, its enormously costly production, its sumptuously printed libretto, is as far from popular Venetian opera as can be imagined.
But even before this, as a court entertainment Italian opera had reached not only Poland but France.
ITALIAN OPERA IN PARIS
It will be remembered that Mazarin, himself an Italian, had been present at a performance of Che soffre, speri.
When his friends the Barberini were obliged for political reasons to leave Rome in 1644 and settled in Paris he lost little time in entertaining them and the French Court with Italian operas.
These included a Venetian work of 1641, La finta pazza by Francesco Sacrati, which was partly shorn of its music but brightened with fresh ballets by a French composer and striking stage-effects by a celebrated technician Giacomo Torelli, on 14 December 1645, and Egisto in February 1646.
Then later in that year a composer already associated with the Barberini, the great monodist Luigi Rossi, was invited to Paris; the best Italian singers were engaged, Torelli prepared expensive spectacles, and Rossi's L'Orfeo was given before a small and highly select audience on 2 March 1647.
Hitherto musico-dramatic entertainments at the French Court had been similar to the Italian intermedii, though with an ever increasing proportion of dancing, as in the famous Balet comique de la Royne (1581) devised, but not written or composed, by an Italian known in France as Balthasar de Beaujoyeulx, and the more dramatic ballets de cour composed by Guedron.
Probably Rossi was suggested by the Barberini brothers on account of the preponderantly spectacular nature of his earlier Palazzo incantato, but in Orfeo he revealed genuine expressive power, above all in Euridice's arias in the second scene of Act II, the exquisite trio of dryads ‘Dormite, begliocchi’(are working of a movement from the serenata, ‘Horche in notturna pace’), the chorus of nymphs ‘Ah! piangete’ following her death, and Orfeo's great lament in Act II before the Bacchantes tear him to pieces.
Orfeo had a mixed reception, with predictable hostility on the part of Mazarin's enemies.
The wars of the Fronde broke out and the Barberini went back to Rome where their theatre reopened with the significantly named Dal Male il Bene.
But as soon as the Fronde was over.
the Court resumed its performances, notably in a Ballet royal de la Nuit (23 February 1653) with musical récits by Michel Lambert (c. 161O 1696) and other French composers, in which five roles were danced by a young Florentine dancer and violinist who had already gallicized his name as Jean-Baptiste Lully (1632–87).
The following year Mazarin commissioned Francesco Buti, the librettist of Rossi's Orfeo, to recruit Italian singers and write another work, Le nozze di Peleo e di Theti, for which a Roman composer Carlo Caproli supplied the music and in which the dancers included not only Lully but the 15-year-old Louis XIV who was full of admiration for him.
Most of the music is lost but it is clear from the libretto that it was a hybrid of Italian opera and French ballet de cour; as Prunières put it, ‘Instead of being self-sufficient, the ballet is justified by the comedy and the comedy draws the ballet into the dramatic action’.
The marriage was not always so happy.
When Mazarin invited Cavalli to Paris in 1660 to provide an opera with text by Buti for the young king's marriage, the master  encountered all sorts of difficulties and had to substitute a performance of his Xerse in the Louvre, with an overture and ballet music by Lully.
And when at last in February 1662 the real festival opera, Ercole amante, one of his finest scores, was produced to inaugurate the new theatre in the Tuileries, he had — despite his deliberate attempt to satisfy French taste with pomp and dancing rhythms — again to accept the insertion of ballet music by Lully, the success of which completely distracted attention from his unusually fine recitatives.
But by then Mazarin had died and Lully's royal patron had assumed absolute power.
Cavalli returned in disgust to Venice where he resumed his partnership with Minato in Scipione Africano (1664) and other operas on historical subjects.
Italian opera disappeared from France for many years.
FRENCH PASTORALES AND COMEDIES-BALLETS
The music of two short pastorales which have some claim to be considered the earliest true operas in French has been lost.
They are Le Triomphe de l'Amour (1654), a string of airs and instrumental pieces by Michel de La Guerre (c. 1605–1679) and La Pastorale (called ‘d'Issy’ because it was tried out there before being presented before the king)(1659) by Robert Cambert (C. 1628–1677).
Mazarin encouraged Cambert to compose a more ambitious five-act comedie en musique, comme on faisait en Italie, Ariane et Bacchus (1659), with a large orchestra; it was rehearsed but, partly owing to the Cardinal's death, not performed and the score of this also is lost.
The future lay with Lully who, besides composing and dancing in ordinary ballets, collaborated with Moliere in a series of comedies-ballets which began in 1664 with the Le Mariage force and culminated with Le Bourgeois gentilhomme (1670), in which Jourdain was played by the author and the Mufti by the composer.
Lully had already essayed recitative in French in a ballet, Les aisons (1661): and the comédies-ballets gave him plenty of opportunities to experiment further.
When he turned later to real opera, tragédie en musique (see pp. 373 ff.), he was by no means a novice in dealing with French declamation.
OPERA IN GERMANY AND SPAIN
The earliest non-Italian composers to attempt opera in their own language were German.
But we do not know what Schütz's German Dafne of 1627 was like, nor the Cleomedes (Königsberg, 1635) of his pupil Heinrich Albert, since they are lost, and the Seelewig (1644) of Sigmund Theophil Staden (1607–55) is merely a curiosity.
The prolific Nuremberg poetaster (: Georg Philipp Harsdörffer published some three hundred didactic Frauenzimmer-Gesprach-Spiele for the virtuous, yet at the same time entertaining, education of young women; for nine of these little plays Staden wrote music, mostly strophic songs, but in the one case of Seelewig the text was Gesangsweis auf Italienische Art gesetzt.
German musicians preferred to compose operas in Italian — or were required to do so.
For instance, when the Munich Residenztheater was opened in 1657, the new Hofkapellmeister, Johann Kaspar Kerll (1627–3) was commissioned to compose an Italian Oronte for the occasion; unfortunately his music, like that of his later operas, is lost.
(Italian opera had already appeared in Munich in 1653, very soon after the end of the Thirty Years War; indeed it was taken up by several German courts during the 1650S.)
The evolution of opera in Spain from court entertainments, play-music and so on, followed much the same course as in France — with Caldéron, who allowed ample scope for music in his plays, taking the role of Molière.
It was Calderon who provided the text of the earliest Spanish opera, Celos aun del aire matan (Jealousy even of air kills)(1660), set by Juan Hidalgo (d. 1685).
THE ENGLISH MASQUE
In England, likewise, the masque was the immediate predecessor of opera.
Masques were usually court entertainments, but Milton's untypical Comus (1634) with music by Henry Lawes was performed at Ludlow Castle.
James Shirley's Triumph of Peace (also 1634), with music by William Lawes and Simon Ives (1600–22), and William Davenant's Triumphs of the Prince d'Amour (1635), with music by both Lawes brothers, were the most  celebrated of the Caroline court masques.
Together with the customary songs, choruses, and ‘symphonies’, they introduce somewhat primitive recitative, e.g. Irene's opening words in The Triumph of Peace: Incidentally Irene was sung by a tenor: Nicholas Lanier.
The Commonwealth did not put an end to the masque.
In 1653 Shirley's Cupid and Death, with music by Christopher Gibbons (1616–76), Orlando's son, and Matthew Locke (c. 1630–1677), was presented before the Portuguese Ambassador and revived in 1659 with additional long recitatives by Locke.
Between those two performances the staunch Royalist Davenant ventured on the production of musical ‘entertainments’ in a private house (Rutland House, Aldersgate Street) before a small paying audience: The First Dayes Entertainment…by Declamations and Musick (21 May 1656), with costumes but no real action, the music by Henry Lawes, Charles Coleman (d. c. 1664), Henry Cooke (c. 1616–1672), and the violinist George Hudson, and in August of the same year The Siege of Rhodes, with music by the same composers together with Locke.
THE SPREAD OF PUBLIC OPERA
Davenant himself called The Siege ‘a Representation by the art of Prospective in Scenes, And the Story sung in Recitative Musick’, a variety he describes as ‘unpractis'd here; though of great reputation amongst other Nations’.
The Siege is commonly claimed to be the first English opera, though with what justice it is difficult to say since we have only the libretto and stage-designs.
Historically the most important aspect of Davenant's productions is that they removed English masque/opera from the Court to the field of public  entertainment.
The following year, 1657, Florence — the actual birthplace of opera — also acquired its first public theatre, the Teatro della Pergola, on the initiative of the Accademia degli Immobili.
(It was inaugurated with Il Podestà di Colognole ossia La Tancia by Jacopo Melani (1626–76), a comic opera with some broadly comic, as well as much beautiful music, e.g. Ciapino's aria in Act II where he imitates in turn the frog, cricket, lamb, owl, and cock.)
And before very long, by quite different means, Paris too was to enjoy a public opera.