

Higher education in further education
One of the major features of the growth of our education system over the last thirty-five years has been the enormous increase in provision of higher education.
By ‘higher education’ we mean all courses of a standard beyond GCE A Level or its equivalent.
Although the 1944 Education Act placed upon all local education authorities the statutory duty to provide adequate facilities for further education, defining further education as full-time or part-time education and leisure-time occupation for persons over compulsory school-leaving age, it made no reference to higher education as such.
This was understandable as at that time higher education was very largely concentrated in the autonomous university sector and the then teacher-training colleges.
Few further education colleges provided courses of higher education, the main ones being those leading to external degrees of the University of London and HND and HNC.
However, in the period up to the Robbins Report of 1963, there was a considerable growth in the provision of advanced courses in the further education sector, mainly in science and technology.
By the end of this period, Regional Colleges of Technology were offering full-time and sandwich courses of university first degree and post-graduate standard and were attracting students from the country as a whole and from overseas.
Ten Colleges of Advanced Technology (CATs) had come into existence and, from 1958, the Diploma of Technology (Dip.
Tech.) had been available, validated by the National Council for Technological Awards (NCTA), the predecessor of the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA).
Then, in 1963, the Robbins Report on higher education appeared.
Perhaps the most important document on higher education in the postwar period, it provided a detailed blueprint for the development of higher education into the early 1980s.
Taking as its basic premise the principle that courses of higher education should be made available to all those able and willing to benefit from them, it affirmed its belief that the pool of ability, especially among girls, who at that time were grossly under-represented in higher education, was sufficiently deep to  warrant an expansion in the numbers of full-time and sandwich students in higher education in England, Scotland and Wales from 216,000 in 1962–3 to 390,000 in 1973–4 and 560,000 in 1980–1.
At that time, in 1962–3, 55 per cent of students in higher education, or 116,000, were in universities, the other 100,000 being shared between the teacher training sector and further education.
Significantly, the Robbins Report recommended that the universities' share should rise to 60 per cent, or 336,000, in 1981, thereby leaving 224,000 for the public sector.
However, as we shall see, the proportions between the university and the public sectors have in practice worked out rather differently.
In addition, the Report made a number of other detailed recommendations which were designed to encourage an increase in technological studies.
Thus, it advocated that the Colleges of Advanced Technology should become technological universities awarding their own degrees, the National Council for Technological Awards should be replaced by the Council for National Academic Awards, the Regional Colleges of Technology should develop a wide range of advanced full-time courses, and that some of them might eventually form the nucleus of other universities or become universities in their own right.
Other recommendations concerned the expansion of the teacher training colleges.
They were to be renamed Colleges of Education; a new degree, to be called Bachelor of Education and validated by the universities, would be introduced for their more able students; they should be removed from the public sector and closely linked with the universities; and some of them should become universities in their own right.
In short, Robbins saw the university model as playing the major role in the expansion of higher education and its recommendations were essentially an attempt to convert an unco-ordinated provision of higher education into a system based on the university.
In retrospect, it is hardly surprising that although the government of the day duly accepted its general strategy for expansion, it rejected the university model as the main basis of that expansion.
Thus, within months of the publication of the Report, the government had taken action to implement some of its main recommendations.
Its planning figures up to 1980–1 were endorsed, the CATs were authorized to appoint Academic Advisory Committees to advise on how best to obtain university status and to assist in the planning of their future development, the CNAA was established in 1964, and the teacher training colleges were renamed Colleges of Education and were encouraged to work with the universities to introduce the new BEd degree.
However, the recommendation that some regional colleges and colleges of education should become universities was not implemented, nor was the proposal that the colleges of education should move out of the public sector to become closely associated with the universities.
Instead the government opted for a ‘binary’ system, whereby the provision of higher education was to be shared by the universities, the colleges of education, and new institutions to be called polytechnics.
Not that the binary system was a creation of the government for, as the then Secretary of State for Education, Anthony Crosland, observed in a speech in 1967, ‘I did not invent the plural or binary system which we inherited….
Alongside the universities we had the training colleges under local authority or denominational control; and we had a strong and growing sector of higher education within further education.
Indeed, 40 per cent of students in full-time higher education were outside universities.
Were we then to convert it into a unitary system entirely under university control?’
Clearly, the answer was ‘No’, and one suspects it would have been the same answer whatever the political flavour of the government in office at the time.
In any case, the decision to create the polytechnics emanated from a policy devised by a small group of senior officials at the DES who, among other things, were concerned to create a top tier of institutions within the public sector to replace the CATs which were in the process of becoming universities.
The government's position on the structure of higher education was articulated publicly for the first time by Crosland in his famous speech at Woolwich Polytechnic in 1965, in which he declared the government's acceptance of the need for a ‘system based on the twin traditions which have created our present higher institutions’.
He gave four reasons for deciding in favour of a binary system: the demand for vocational, professional and industrial based courses required a separate sector with a separate tradition and outlook; a ladder system with the universities at the head would inevitably depress and degrade morale and standards in the non-university sector; there was a need for a substantial part of the higher education system to be under social control and directly responsible to social needs; and, lastly, no other country in the western world downgraded its non-university professional and technical sector.
Whatever the merits of these reasons, and not all of them carry complete conviction, it must surely be true that no government, given that the enormous and growing cost of higher education was coming very largely out of public funds, would have been prepared for provision to have been largely concentrated in the ‘autonomous’ university sector?
Furthermore, the Robbins proposal that some colleges of education and colleges of technology be taken out of local authority control and made into universities would never have been acceptable to the local authorities and was politically a non-starter.
Accordingly, in 1966, the government issued its White Paper,A Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges: Higher Education in the Further Education System , outlining its programme of developing  higher education within the public sector.
The main instrument for this purpose was to be the Polytechnics and the White Paper provisionally recommended that 28 be established, to which two more were added in the following year, making 30 in all.
They were to be based on existing regional and other colleges already substantially engaged in higher education.
As a result, in the course of the next six years all 30 polytechnics were officially designated and the binary system of education was consolidated.
At this time, the colleges of education occupied a halfway house between the universities and the further education sector.
On the one hand, they were part of the public sector, in that they were administered under DES teacher-training regulations but not under further education regulations and two-thirds of them were under local authority control, the rest being denominational colleges.
On the other hand, they were members of university Area Training Organizations (ATOs) and their courses were exclusively validated by the universities.
However, as we shall see, this position was later to change.
The numbers of students at the colleges of education grew rapidly in the late 1960s, reaching a total of 114,000 by 1972.
Even as late as 1970, the official position as set out by the DES was that they would continue to grow slowly to about 130,000 by 1981, marginally below the Robbins projection of 131,400 for that year.
However, it was beginning to be apparent that the decline in the birth rate would radically affect these calculations.
The next landmark in the development of higher education in this country occurred in January 1972 with the publication of the James Report on Teacher Education and Training.
Although it proposed no major institutional changes, apart from greater co-operation between colleges of education, universities and polytechnics, it did recommend that the colleges should broaden their base by offering other courses alongside teacher-training, notably the two-year Diploma of Higher Education (Dip.HE), a development which is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Although the Report made  virtually no references to the need for a cutback in teacher-training, it seems certain that the James Committee discussed the possibility, or even the probability of such a development.
For various reasons, however, the Report was silent on the subject.
The subject was, however, broached in another landmark document on the future development of higher education, the government White Paper, published in December 1972, Education: A Framework for Expansion, in retrospect an ironically titled document.
It envisaged expansion of higher education considerably beyond that recommended by Robbins, whereby student places would be increased to 750,000 by 1981.
These places would be shared equally between the universities  and the public sector colleges so that each would eventually have 375,000 students, a marked change from the Robbins proportional allocations.
Of the 375,000 in the public sector, which included Scottish institutions as well as those in England and Wales, the polytechnics would be expected to expand to accommodate 180,000 students by 1981.
The White Paper also recognized publicly for the first time a stark fact that was becoming increasingly obvious: that with the steep decline in the birth rate the number of teachers in training would have to be sharply reduced to avoid a gross overproduction of teachers.
Accordingly, it announced the government's intention of reducing the numbers on teacher-training courses in the public sector colleges from the maximum of 114,000 in 1972 to between 75,000 and 85,000 initial and inservice places by 1981.
Unlike the James Report, which had envisaged the colleges of education remaining as a coherent sector, effectively separate from the universities and the polytechnics, the White Paper proposed that, for the most part, they be merged with the polytechnics and other further education colleges.
Although it did envisage some mergers with universities, the emphasis throughout was very much on strengthening the public sector of higher education.
Finally, the White Paper endorsed the James Report recommendation concerning the introduction of the Dip.HE.
Thus, the stage was set for the disappearance of the colleges of education as a separate sector of higher education.
In this context, it should be noted that the rapid demolition of the colleges of education which followed was made possible by a unique regulator placed in the hands of the Secretary of State; unlike the universities which are protected by a degree of autonomy and the polytechnics which are subject to a variety of controls and influences, overall teacher-training numbers and their distribution between individual institutions are directly controlled by the DES.
Accordingly, in March 1973, the DES issued Circular 7/73, ‘The Development of Higher Education in the Non-University Sector’, which required local authorities and voluntary bodies to put forward detailed plans for every one of the 155 colleges of education within the guidelines of the White Paper.
A strict timetable was to be adhered to whereby reorganization was to be completed by the end of 1974.
Unfortunately, this schedule was overtaken by events, as a major economic crisis and a continually falling birth rate reduced still further the need for more qualified teachers.
As a result, the reorganization only reached its final stages in the summer of 1977.
Even at the time that the White Paper was being issued in 1972, it was becoming clear that the rapidly declining birth rate would have very serious repercussions for the colleges of education; however, it was not until the decline began to steepen in the mid-1970s that the full implications were publicly announced by the DES.
The extent of  the decline may be measured by the figures for live births: 832,000 in 1967, 784,000 in 1970, and levelling off at just over 600,000 in 1975.
As the full impact of these figures was borne in on the DES, it reacted by successively cutting back teacher-training places in the colleges of education.
This happened no fewer than four times between 1974 and 1977 until, finally, at the end of 1977, the Secretary of State announced that instead of the 75,000 to 85,000 places indicated in the 1972 White Paper, the target would be 45,000.
The whole burden of these cuts fell on the colleges of education partly because, as we have seen, their numbers could be swiftly regulated and partly because they were still for the most part institutions predominantly concerned with teacher education.
Clearly, the difference between the original proposals put forward in the White Paper and the final solution in 1977 is enormous.
As David Hencke points out, it is possible to take two views of this.
One is the magnanimous view that the DES was caught out by economic circumstances and a declining birth rate and that circumstances combined to overthrow its carefully planned reorganization.
Another, less charitable, view suggests that  because of lack of ministerial direction — occasioned in part because there were no fewer than four different Secretaries of State between 1972 and 1978 and lack of consultative machinery between the DES and those most closely affected in the colleges, little attempt was made to anticipate events which should have been foreseen much earlier.
Consequently, the DES failed to devise a coherent strategy for teacher training and to work out its role in relation to higher and further education and its priority within the whole education programme.
Instead, it chose the easy way out of its dilemma by demolishing the colleges of education.
Whatever view one takes of this matter, the facts are indisputable.
Of the 155 colleges of education that existed in 1972, not one has remained untouched by the dramatic upheaval that followed.
Thus, by the end of the decade, the number of institutions in the public sector concerned with teacher training was substantially reduced, at least fourteen colleges had closed altogether, over sixty had merged with polytechnics and other further education institutions, a few had joined universities, and even those that remained ‘free-standing’, that is untouched by institutional reorganization, found themselves offering a diversified range of courses including teacher training, thereby fundamentally altering their academic role.
As a result of these developments, a group of new institutions has evolved, known generally as Colleges or Institutes of Higher Education.
Later in this chapter we examine in detail their major characteristics and the nature of the courses which they offer.
This major administrative reorganization threw into sharp focus the acute difficulties surrounding the management and financing of  Advanced Further Education as a whole, not least the role of the local education authorities in the government of polytechnics and other colleges.
As a result, a working group was set up in 1977 under the Chairmanship of Mr Gordon Oakes, the then Minister of State at the DES, to consider the management and financing of advanced further education.
The main aims of the Report, which was issued in March 1978, were to increase the accountability and co ordination of advanced further education and to permit more forward planning by the polytechnics and colleges of higher education.
However, the Oakes Report's recommendations concerning the financial management of advanced further education were rejected by the Conservative government soon after it assumed office in May 1979.
As we shall see, its policy of financial retrenchment has led to a series of major changes in the financing of public sector higher education, as advanced further education has increasingly come to be called.
These culminated in the establishment early in 1982 of the National Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education in England.
In the meantime, despite the massive run-down in the number of students on teacher-training courses, overall numbers in higher education in the public sector have grown steadily, at least until the time of writing.
Thus, in England and Wales in 1971 there were 311,000 students in advanced further education, of whom 204,000 were on full-time and sandwich courses, including 113,000 on initial teacher training, and 107,000 on part-time courses.
By 1981, the numbers of students had grown considerably to 377,000: of these 209,000 were on full-time and sandwich courses, including only 27,000 on initial teacher training, and 168,000 on part-time courses.
During the year 1981–2, the numbers of students, especially those on full-time and sandwich courses, showed a marked increase over the previous year, of more than 7 per cent.
These increases resulted from three major factors: the cuts imposed on the university student population and the resulting competition for places in public sector institutions, the difficulty which eighteen-year-olds are experiencing in finding jobs which leads them instead to enter full-time higher education, and the fact that the eighteen-year-old population is larger than ever.
Given the coming demographic changes which will lead to a steep decline in the eighteen-year-old population from the later 1980s onwards and the present government's stated intention of constraining expenditure on higher education, it is unlikely that this expansion will be maintained.
Having thus briefly examined the background against which the enormous post-war growth in higher education has taken place, we will now examine in detail those developments which have occurred in the three years that have elapsed since the first edition of this book appeared in 1979.
These developments are primarily concerned with the management and funding of public sector higher education and the arrangement  for validation of courses within the institutions, including some developments in course provision.
In addition, we shall consider the changes which have occurred in the major establishments providing public sector higher education, namely the polytechnics and the colleges and institutes of higher education.
The funding and management of public sector higher education
As we have seen, growing dissatisfaction in the 1970s with the arrangements under which public sector higher education was managed and financed led to the establishment, in March 1977, of the Oakes Committee, under the chairmanship of Gordon Oakes, the then Minister of State at the DES.
The committee addressed itself to two main interlocking problems: the central issue of the relationship between the individual local authorities and the polytechnics and other colleges, and the ‘pooling’ arrangements by which advanced courses were financed.
As we shall see, the latter system has been modified in recent years, but the basic principle upon which the ‘pool’ rests remains unchanged, namely that the cost of public sector higher education must be shared among all the local authorities.
This arrangement is dictated by the fact that the cost of running a very large establishment of higher education like a polytechnic is such that few individual local authorities can contemplate it if they have to rely solely on their normal sources of income, that is the rates and the Rate Support Grant.
It is for this reason that each authority is assessed for a contribution towards the ‘pool’ on the basis of its school population and non-domestic rateable value and is entitled to charge to the pool its expenditure on higher education courses.
In practice, this meant that a polytechnic or college of higher education could obtain a 100 per cent grant for that proportion of the establishment's work which fell within the definition of ‘poolable advanced further education’ as agreed by local authorities.
However, this system has created a number of anomalies and problems.
In the first place, it has meant that while financial responsibility for a polytechnic falls on its local education authority, it is effectively financed by all the authorities collectively, a fact which perhaps strengthens the institution's claim for more autonomy.
Second, it could be argued that this system removes any incentive for sound financial control at local level and constitutes a divorce between management responsibility and financial accountability of the kind severely criticized by the 1976 Layfield Report on local government finance.
Third, it has been a matter of concern to the DES that an authority could promote advanced courses secure in the knowledge that, once in  operation, the major proportion of the cost would be chargeable against the pool.
Finally, a number of local authorities without polytechnics or much in the way of advanced further education provision have considered it unfair that they should nevertheless have to pay sizeable sums of money into the pool.
This whole issue was considered by the Oakes Committee whose precise terms of reference were ‘to consider measures to improve the system of management and control of higher education in the maintained sector of England and Wales and its better co-ordination with higher education in the universities’.
The Oakes Report, which appeared exactly one year after the setting-up of the committee, made a number of recommendations of which perhaps the most important was that an independent national body be set up with specific terms of reference to include the ‘general oversight of the development of maintained higher education’ and the responsibility to ‘collect, analyse and present where appropriate in conjunction with the Department of Education and Science and the University Grants Committee information affecting the demand for and supply of higher education in the maintained sector’.
The Report envisaged that these arrangements might also apply to Wales, at least until such time as a decision on devolution were forthcoming.
In practice, the Labour government subsequently decided to recommend the establishment of two national bodies to be known as Advanced Further Education Councils (AFECs), one for England and one for Wales.
Each AFEC would be required ‘to consider and issue guidance on the programmes and estimates submitted to it by authorities…to allocate funds for recurrent expenditure’.
In other words, it would have to decide how much money should be spent by local authorities on advanced further  education and how it should be divided between individual polytechnics and colleges.
One of the important changes proposed by the Report was that the total amount of money for public sector higher education be earmarked at the beginning of each financial year.
The pooling system would continue but with two significant differences in the way in which it operated.
First, instead of the size of the pool being determined solely by the demands made upon it by the local authorities, the global sum to be spent on advanced further education would be determined by the AFEC in consultation with the DES after it received estimates of expenditure from the local authorities in respect of the provision of higher education within their boundaries, on the grounds that the local authority would behave more responsibly if it paid a proportion of the cost rather than reclaiming all of it from the pool.
Consequently, the local authorities would make a 5 per cent contribution rising in yearly increments to an absolute maximum of 15 per cent, the residual cost of 85 per cent being reclaimed from the pool.
However, where an authority considered that a particular course was essential to the national or regional interest but regarded the cost as excessive, it could propose to the AFEC that it covered the whole cost of that course.
For institutions offering a substantial programme of advanced work, it would be possible to submit estimates of expenditure through the local authorities for a programme of work three to five years ahead.
The AFEC would consider the programme in the light of such factors as potential student demand and competing provision and allocate a block of money through the authority to the institution with the specific purpose of running that programme.
It would then be the responsibility of the institution itself to decide upon the detailed allocation of resources within the programme.
In this way, the institution would be given more flexibility but at the same time would have to live with any mistakes it might make.
This system is closely modelled upon that which operates successfully between the UGC and the universities.
These sensible recommendations were also designed to harmonize relationships between institutions and their local authorities, in that the granting to institutions of considerably more discretion in the control and allocation of resources would help to avoid the kind of disputes that had erupted between them and the local authorities in the past.
We have dealt at some length with these important, if abortive, proposals because they throw a great deal of light on the complexities surrounding the financial control and management of public sector higher education and because they have influenced the subsequent debate concerning the need for some form of central control.
Having taken office in May 1979, the Conservative government made an early decision to amend the long-standing arrangements for meeting the increasing costs of public sector higher education by limiting the size of the ‘pool’ for the financial year of 1980–1, and an Education Bill was placed before Parliament giving the Secretary of State for Education the necessary power to predetermine the size of, or in the phrase that has crept into common usage, to ‘cap’the pool.
This policy was adopted by the government as part of its general economic strategy to cut public expenditure and meant that local authorities could only exceed a predetermined level of spending on higher education if they found the additional sums of money from the rates.
The size of the predetermined pool for 1980–1 was fixed at £375 million and announced in November 1979.
It represented in real terms an overall cut of about 9 per cent, though as allocations to individual local authorities were made on an arbitrary basis, some of them suffered much greater reductions.
Although it was probably inevitable that whatever the political flavour of the government of the day some form of national pattern of cash limits would have had to applied to expenditure on  public sector higher education, 4 the practical effects of this political decision turned out to be both complex and capricious, and had two important consequences.
It made the need for the establishment of some form of centralized and rational planning of public sector higher education even more urgent and, in the short term, it led the DES to set up a working group to overcome the important technical problems which the arbitrary capping of the pool had created.
The first initiative taken by the government in its quest for a rational means of financially managing public sector higher education was to ask the House of Commons Select Committee on Education, Science and Arts, under the Chairmanship of Christopher Price MP, to examine the matter.
The committee reported in October 19806 and came down in favour of setting up a national body, to be known as the Committee for Colleges and Polytechnics (CCP) which would devise a more rational system of national funding.
It also advocated that the local authorities should ‘maintain their presence in higher education’, adding that it would only be acceptable for them to do so if they could all ‘restrain themselves from excessive and unreasonable interference in the running of large, developed polytechnics with the skills and competence to look after themselves’.
However, it soon emerged that the DES had different ideas on the management of public sector higher education and by the spring of 1981 it had become generally known that it favoured the virtual cutting of the link between the local authorities and the polytechnics and the colleges and institutes of higher education substantially involved in offering advanced further education.
Instead, it preferred the creation of a national body for public sector higher education along the lines of the University Grants Committee which would directly control the polytechnics and colleges and which would be made up of nominees of the Secretary of State.
This proposal predictably caused considerable opposition, especially among the local authorities who countered by publishing their own proposals in a document issued by the Council of Local Education Authorities (CLEA) on 15 July 1981, entitled, The Future of Higher Education in the Maintained Sector: A Consultative Paper.
Later in the same month, the DES published its Green Paper, Higher Education in England outside the Universities: Policy, Funding and Management, in which it presented two alternative models for a national body: what it called Model A, which was closely modelled on the one advocated by the local authorities on 15 July, and Model B, which was the one favoured by the DES.
The CLEA model envisaged a small central body made up of representatives directly involved in the provision of public sector higher education.
The local authorities would be in a majority in such a body, a substantial minority group would represent principals and other teaching staff of the institutions, and  other interests, such as industry and commerce, would be associated appropriately with the body, though not necessarily given actual membership of it.
The body would exercise some collective authority on behalf of individual local authorities and would be able ‘to insist that the traditional discretion of individual authorities be waived in acknowledgement of overriding natural priorities’ agreed centrally by it.
It would work through the current pooling arrangements and would maintain basically unaltered existing relationships between the institutions and their local authorities.
However, it did see a need, if these arrangements were to be given full effect, for the local authorities ‘to enhance their powers over individual institutions’ by amending the existing Articles of Government.
Finally, Model A would recognize the intermixture of non-advanced and advanced further education provided by the great majority of establishments and would thereby permit a close relationship between the two levels of provision.
Model B, the plan favoured by the DES, would by contrast create a new sector of higher education consisting of about 90 major institutions of higher education in England outside the universities, including all initial teacher training.
These would consist of the twenty-nine English polytechnics, about thirty other local authority colleges, and twenty-nine or so voluntary and direct grant colleges funded directly by the DES.
These institutions would henceforward all be financed directly from Exchequer funds disbursed by a central body, appointed by the Secretary of State.
The body might consist of a chairman and some twenty members, academics and non-academics, with a significant weight attaching to industry and commerce.
The new sector, for which the body would have responsibility, would provide for at least 80 per cent of the advanced student population in further education, the other 20 per cent being provided in about 300 other institutions, each with a relatively small stake in public sector higher education, and excluded from the body.
For most of those institutions controlled by the body, it would be necessary to introduce legislation to confer corporate status on them and to determine the composition and method of appointment of their governing bodies.
The Green Paper concluded by inviting reactions to its two outline proposals by the end of November 1981, reactions which were very soon forthcoming.
Perhaps the immediate and justified reaction was that the proposals in the Green Paper were so sketchy as to pose an unenviable choice between ‘a crude centralist and an equally crude local authority solution’.
Certainly, given that in the words of one critic, the implementation of Model B, for example, would result in ‘a massive realignment of powers and institutions, raising profound questions of identity for the universities as well as the polytechnics’ the Green Paper says little or nothing about a national policy for higher education.
It concentrates  almost exclusively on the methods of financing advanced further education at the expense of the aims and philosophies which those methods should serve.
Thus, the relatively stark manner in which the alternatives were put led an influential body of opinion within public sector higher education to have substantial reservations about them both.
In broad terms, however, the alternatives were clear.
Model A would result in a national body dominated by local government interests, operating through the existing pooling system, and preserving the link between advanced and non-advanced further education.
However, some argued that it would be difficult to include the voluntary and direct grant colleges in such a body and that national planning would thereby be more complex.
Model B, on the other hand would effectively ‘nationalize’ the 90 or so major institutions and thereby remove them from local control.
Although it would break the link between advanced and non-advanced further education, it would make it possible to ‘develop a single coherent function for higher education outside the universities’.
In both cases, the total expenditure on advanced further education could be strictly regulated.
The reaction of the major institutions, particularly the polytechnics, was predictably in favour of Model B, as perhaps the lesser of two evils.
As we have seen, the CLEA proposals, far from freeing the colleges from the sort of petty local authority restrictions that had bedevilled relationships between them, wanted to enhance the powers of detailed intervention by local government by rewriting the Articles of Government which gave a degree of autonomy to the colleges.
In the circumstances, the latter's preference for Model B was understandable in that it might seem to offer the degree of financial and educational independence which their maturity now merited.
Certainly, the composition of Model B's national body, consisting of distinguished persons appointed by the Secretary of State, could be seen as commanding great credibility and providing ‘for the first time in higher education an experienced and well-qualified team capable of looking with detachment at both the demand side and supply side of higher education’.
More sceptical observers could be forgiven, however, for regarding Model B with considerable suspicion on the grounds that the proposed national body, being directly controlled by the government, would very likely be used as an instrument for imposing stringent financial cuts on public sector higher education.
It might also take a narrow vocational view of the role of the colleges and seek to impose academic judgments on them in a way which the local authorities had not done.
In other words, control by the DES might result in the colleges having less, rather than more, independence.
In the upshot, the Green Paper evoked critical reactions from such bodies as the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics, the Committee  of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, and the Confederation of British Industry.
Of more political significance was the fact that opposition to Model B from local government, irrespective of party, was shown to be very strong.
As a result, an intensive series of consultative meetings with ministers and officials was instituted.
These discussions were not, perhaps, made any easier by the change of ministers at the DES in September 1981 when Sir Keith Joseph became Secretary of State and William Waldegrave his junior minister with responsibility for higher education.
However, they were soon to show their hand and in October 1981 the DES announced that it had asked the local authorities to give urgent consideration to the possibility of setting up short-term machinery to deal with the management and funding of maintained advanced further education.
It accompanied this request with a paper entitled ‘Future Management of AFE and distribution of the 1982/83 AFE pool’, outlining the criteria which the short-term machinery would have to meet and stressing that the paper had been prepared ‘purely as a basis for further discussion between the Department and the local authorities’.
However, scarcely was the ink dry on the paper when, at the end of December 1981, the Secretary of State announced in the House of Commons that, ‘with the agreement of the local authority associations and after consultation with other interested parties’, he had decided to establish a new body to advise him on the distribution of the advanced further education pool and on academic provision in local authority institutions of higher education.
This new national body would start work at the beginning of 1982 with a two-tier structure, and a similar body would be constituted for Wales.
The upper tier would be known as the Interim Committee for Local Authority Higher Education, its membership consisting of the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, William Waldegrave as Chairman; Christopher Ball, Warden of Keble College, Oxford; and six local authority representatives, three from the Association of County Councils and three from the Association of Metropolitan Authorities.
The lower tier would be known as the Board for Local Authority Higher Education, its membership consisting of Christopher Ball as Chairman; six representatives of local authorities; six from the DES; six from institutions, made up of two from the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics, two from the National Association of Teachers of Further and Higher Education, one from the Association of Principals of Colleges, and one from the Standing Conference of Principals and Directors of Colleges and Institutes of Higher Education; and three others, consisting of one from the Trades Union Congress, one from the Council of National Academic Awards, and one jointly from the Business and Technician Education Councils.
In addition, the University Grants Committee, the Welsh Joint Education Committee  and the Confederation of British Industries each has an observer on the Board.
Finally, early in 1982, the new body was retitled the National Advisory Body (NAB), thereby dropping the word ‘Interim’ from its title, and John Bevan, previously the Deputy Director of Education for the Inner London Education Authority, was appointed its secretary.
A few months later, in May 1982, the Wales Advisory Board for Higher Education (WAB) was established.
It too comprises an upper tier, a Committee, consisting of eight local authority elected members, and a lower tier, the Board, with representatives from industry, business, educational and other interests.
The Committee's chairman is John Stradling Thomas, Minister of State at the Welsh Office, and the Chairman of the Board is Professor Robert Steel, Principal of University College, Swansea.
The likely effects of WAB's deliberations on public sector higher education in Wales are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
Given the enormous importance of the English NAB to the future shape of public sector higher education, we shall now examine in detail the problems which it faces and the circumstances in which it is likely to operate.
It has been made clear from the outset that the Board's remit extends over some 350 institutions; in other words, it is concerned not just with the 90 or so establishments substantially engaged in public sector higher education that would have come within the aegis of the Green Paper's Model B, but with virtually all those which make some provision for higher education.
This may have been one reason why the national body was, in the first instance, entitled the Committee for Local Authority Higher education and presumably why its membership includes a representative from the Association of Principals of Colleges, a body broadly representative of those further education establishments other than polytechnics and colleges and institutes of higher education.
Certainly, this broader remit seems eminently sensible, partly because the existence of strict demarcation lines between advanced and non-advanced further education is harmful to both and partly because the distinction between them will become more blurred as and when the provision of recurrent and continuing education is expanded.
In any case, as John Bevan has pointed out, it would have been educationally unsound and probably physically impossible to have attempted, as at one time seemed possible, to concentrate all advanced further education provision in a limited number of institutions within the remit of a grants committee like NAB.
He instances the case of two schools of art, run by the Inner London Education Authority, one of which offers 67 per cent of its work as advanced further education and the other which offers 51 per cent; both of them are regional and national centres providing courses at all levels; they thus exemplify the ‘seamless robe’ of further education and facilitate student progression between different course levels.
Much of the early discussion and disagreement following the creation of NAB was concerned with its structure and membership.
As we have seen, a two-tier structure has been established: the lower tier, the Board, possesses the more detailed and intimate knowledge of the working of the further education system and will make recommendations to the upper tier, the Committee, which consists very largely of local authority representatives and will decide what advice should be given to the Secretary of State.
Inevitably, there is concern among the institutions that their representatives have been excluded from the upper tier and are in a small minority in the lower tier.
As Birch has pointed out, the Committee, the upper tier, will have the major task of negotiating with the government the proportion of the total national expenditure on public sector higher education and of sharing it out among the institutions; in these very difficult tasks, it would ‘benefit greatly from the presence and advice of additional members of standing in higher education and in relevant fields of employment’.
The same criticism has been levelled at the lower tier, the Board, which with twelve of its twenty-one members coming from the DES and the LEAs, is regarded by many as unbalanced.
These criticisms seem valid and if NAB is to cope successfully with its daunting task of planning public sector higher education and negotiating with the University Grants Committee, then it would benefit from having more academic expertise and more representation from industry and the professions.
At the time of writing, the representatives of the polytechnics and the colleges have been persuaded, albeit with some difficulty, to send representatives to NAB.
Concern was also expressed in some quarters when it became known that Christopher Ball was to be appointed Chairman of the Board, on the grounds that as head of an Oxford College he would not appear to have the intimate knowledge of the further education system that such a post requires.
However, this concern may not be wholly justified as he has been an active member of the CNAA and is known to be a keen supporter of public sector provision and an advocate of breaking down the barriers between the two sectors of higher education.
Moreover, his stature and dispassionate approach should be of benefit to NAB and help it to establish credibility.
In the first year of operation, NAB has begun to set up the essential third tier of its structure, namely study groups to examine and report upon specific subject areas and aspects of its operation.
Thus, the first three study groups to consider subject areas, for pharmacy, art and design, and one or two areas of engineering, have already been set up.
Pharmacy was chosen for review because university cuts in the subject, announced by the UGC in 1981, were made on the grounds that courses were available in the public sector, and because the UGC has recently established a panel on subjects allied in medicine, including  pharmacy, with which NAB's working group can consult and co-ordinate some measure of trans-binary planning.
Art and design was selected because of concern about student numbers and over-provision of courses, particularly in the post-graduate field.
Both groups should have reported at the end of 1982, though engineering will take longer, and other subject groups will be set up in due course.
In addition, other study groups are being set up in three other subject areas, namely agriculture, architecture and teacher training.
One important aspect of the new sub-committees is their trans-binary nature, having members both from the university and public sector higher education.
Other study groups have been set up to examine the data base available for decision-making and to consider possible regional structures.
The regional structure working group is a particularly important one as, with so many colleges to consider, NAB has urgent need of a regional structure.
The working group is presently examining various regional models, notably the Regional Advisory Councils and the Regional Management Centres.
Given the considerable cost of setting up new regional machinery of its own, it seems likely that NAB will turn for help to existing structures and, of these, the RACs seem by far the most likely candidates, if only because they will serve to ensure the close involvement of the LEAs.
Should this come about, it will clearly require some modification of the RAC structure.
In so far as NAB has been regarded as an interim arrangement, despite the dropping of the word ‘Interim’ from the original title of the main body, questions about its future are bound to arise.
Early in 1982, William Waldegrave announced that NAB would probably have three years in which to prove itself, during which time discussions would ensue on other options.
One of these has already been put forward, by the CNAA early in 1982, termed Model C. In its response to the July 1981 Green Paper, the CNAA is critical both of Model A and Model B, regarding Model A as inadequate and lacking credibility both on academic and other grounds, and Model B as too exclusive in that it creates a division between institutions substantially involved in the provision of public sector higher education and those only marginally so.
Instead, it prefers a body encompassing all institutions offering advanced further education, along the lines of NAB, using a mixed system of funding.
Institutions doing mainly advanced work would be funded on a programme basis, while those with only small amounts would be funded in respect of individual courses.
In addition, because so many colleges are involved, regional groups would be formed to allow for more manageable national negotiations.
As we have seen, NAB itself may well move in the latter direction, and possibly the former also.
However, the CNAA's Model C would go further by uniting the functions of funding, academic planning and course validation under one body and envisages  the possibility of the CNAA itself developing into that body.
Such a proposal might well be interpreted by some critics of the CNAA as smacking of ‘empire-building’ and it remains to be seen if it will be given serious consideration.
Whatever final form NAB, or its successor, assumes, it will have clearly to determine its functions and purpose.
The new body has made it clear that, as far as possible, it intends to make public the reasoning behind all its major decisions, a decision influenced perhaps by the criticisms heaped upon the UGC for its unwillingness to make generally known the criteria upon which it based its 1981 decisions concerning cuts in university finances and student numbers.
It is to be hoped that NAB's more open approach will enable it to win consent from the public sector institutions for difficult and unpalatable decisions, though clearly some of its deliberations, concerning the possible closing of institutions for example, will have to be conducted in private .
In any event one of its major functions will be to ensure some form of trans-binary rationalisation of higher education by close liaison with the UGC and, to that effect, it is important that NAB should have included in its membership an observer from the UGC and that Christopher Ball should have been accorded similar status on the UGC.
However, much closer co-operation between the two bodies will be required in the next few years if rational decisions are to be made across the whole sector of higher education.
Perhaps the most important task facing NAB in the immediate future is to establish credibility in the eyes of those concerned with providing advanced further education, and in this regard the role of the DES will be crucial.
Fears have already been expressed that NAB may become a creature of the DES and be used largely to make more acceptable to the institutions harsh government decisions on resources.
These fears have been partly generated by the substantial representation which the DES has on both tiers of NAB.
However, given the important role which the DES should play in educational policy, such a membership is not perhaps unreasonable, and in any case, some guarantee of NAB's independence is given by the powerful LEA figures represented on it and by the stature of Christopher Ball, the Chairman of the second tier.
In the meantime, it is presently developing its overall strategy.
The current traditional system of approving individual courses is clearly inadequate: it neither takes into account the way in which institutions manage their total resources, nor allows a rapid response to fast changing circumstances.
NAB is, therefore, inevitably moving towards a system of national planning for public sector higher education, along the lines of the UGC in the university sector, involving the consideration of broad subject groupings, or programmes, or whole institutions.
It seems  likely that the institutions, their local authorities and the RACs will be asked to draw up development plans for advanced further education to assist NAB in its eventual formulation of a national plan.
More immediately, the government decision in the autumn of 1982 requiring a ten per cent reduction in real terms in the level of financial resources available to public sector higher education for the two years 1983–4 and 1984–5 has faced NAB with a considerable and daunting task.
It thereupon wrote to all institutions offering advanced work asking them to provide detailed information about student numbers and other aspects of planning forward to 1984–5.
The colleges were requested, in conjunction with their local education authorities, to submit academic plans in broad programme areas for their advanced courses in 1984–5 and to specify the programme areas which they regarded as of the highest priority.
This is a significant development in that it places on the colleges a responsibility to assess their own strength.
At the time of writing, these assessments are being digested by NAB which will have to make rapid and unpalatable decisions concerning the closing of courses, and possibly even institutions.
One direction in which it may move is to replace some existing degree courses by two-year diplomas, though if this comes about it is not likely to be before the late 1980s.
Such a move would be designed to accommodate an increasing number of students with declining resources and the two-year courses might well be based very largely on the colleges of higher education.
Predictably, this putative development has aroused considerable opposition within public sector higher education.
However, it is a very important issue whose educational implications require considerable deliberation.
Another problem facing NAB is that it does not wish to be seen solely as a negative force, acting on behalf of the DES in closing courses, but more constructively to encourage new, worthwhile initiatives.
It, therefore, persuaded the DES to withdraw Circular 1/82 which imposed a moratorium on virtually all new advanced courses, so that, under specific conditions, proposals for new courses can come forward for a start in September 1983.
A major subject area with which NAB will certainly have to get fully to grips is initial teacher training, and it has recently announced its intention of examining this area in time to make recommendations for 1984–5.
Moreover, NAB had not long been in existence before, in July 1982, the Secretary of State announced his intention of reorganizing initial teacher training, involving substantial reductions in secondary training in public sector institutions via the B.Ed.
and Post-Graduate Certificate in Education routes from 2,500 in 1981 to 1,500 in 1985 and 4,750 to 2,650 respectively — and some growth in primary training, from 4,000 to 5,900 in the B.Ed.
and 1,100  to 1,500 in the PGCE.
The effect of this major reshaping would be to require 16 institutions, consisting of seven polytechnics and nine colleges of higher education, to cease initial teacher training, and some of the colleges to close altogether.
This proposal aroused very considerable opposition from many of the institutions concerned and NAB itself made a reasoned case for some amendment, which appears to have made some impact.
Thus, the final decision, announced at the end of 1982, reprieved teacher training in one polytechnic and two colleges of higher education by increasing by 500 the total number of training places scheduled for 1985.
At the time of writing, the dust has still not finally settled on this matter as the Catholic Education Council has not abandoned the struggle to save De La Salle College of Higher Education, one of those scheduled for closure.
Whatever finally happens, NAB will sooner or later have to give detailed consideration to teacher education, for two reasons: it is responsible for advising on the funding of all public sector advanced further education, including teacher education; and major elements in teacher education courses leading to the BEd, for example, are common or closely interlock with elements in courses leading to BA and BSc.
degrees.
In this respect, NAB will also have to define its relationship with the voluntary colleges, many of which have a major involvement in teacher education.
Once NAB begins to move into the consideration of this area, it will have to co-ordinate its planning closely with that of the Advisory Committee on the Supply and Education of Teachers.
Finally, as the advanced further education pool is virtually certain to be reduced, in relative terms, in the next few years and consequently the survival of some institutions may be at stake, NAB's most difficult job is likely to be to steer public sector higher education through the stormy seas ahead with as little long-term damage as possible.
To that end, it is to be hoped that it will develop into an effective and credible body whose advice is taken very seriously by the DES and the government.
At the very least, it must surely be true that it is better to have NAB then no body at all?
Having dealt at length with the management and, to a limited extent, with the financing of public sector higher education, we shall now consider in more detail the ‘pooling’ arrangements that have obtained in recent years and the likely criteria upon which NAB's financial decisions will be based.
As we have seen the initial ‘capping’ of the advanced further education pool for the year 1980–1 was achieved on an arbitrary basis which undoubtedly created injustice for many institutions and evoked strong criticism.
As a result, the DES set up a study group under the chairmanship of Stephen Jones, at that time an assistant secretary at the DES and now Assistant Provost of the City of London Polytechnic, both to suggest a fairer way of allocating the 1981–2 pool and  also to come forward with longer-term recommendations, based on unit costs within the institutions.
Eventually, a new system was introduced, for 1981–2 only, which contained three components: a unit limit cost on claims, ‘rolling readjustment’ and ‘mitigation’.
One major principle of unit cost funding is that institutions would be treated equally according to some notion of the cost of their lecturers per student.
Although the principle seemed not unfair, the practicalities of introducing such a system proved to be complex, not least because for historic reasons unit costs vary very considerably between one institution and another.
The principle of ‘rolling readjustment’ is simply one of adjustment whereby the actual amount spent by an authority is checked a number of times in the course of the year against the claim made by the authority and its funding amended accordingly.
Finally, the process of mitigation operates on the simple principle that the maximum loss which an authority incurs on the pool should not exceed, say, a penny rate.
This criterion was introduced for the benefit of an authority like Kirklees which runs the large institution of Huddersfield Polytechnic but which has a limited population and therefore a relatively small rate basis.
It was on these three criteria, described by a member of the Stephen Jones group which concocted them as ‘the best that could be devised in the circumstances’, that the 1981–2 ‘pool’ allocation was based.
In the upshot, £418 million were allocated against the authorities' claim of £480 million, a reduction of 15 per cent.
For the year 1982–3, the Stephen Jones working group also put together a long-term system for the allocation of the pool based on unit costing and the 1982–3 allocation of £539 million was the first one to be determined by it.
The principle upon which it operates is that the pool is split into two components: the first is referred to as ‘common funding’ and accounts for the greater bulk of the pool; and the second is known as ‘further funding’and comprises an element of additional financing for those institutions which have a high historic unit cost.
The major element of ‘common funding’ derives from an institution's staff-student ratios which are based on slightly different norms for their provision of courses in art and design, laboratory-based subjects and non-laboratory subjects respectively.
The total amount of ‘common funding’ is set at such a level that a sum of money is left in the pool for furnishing the ‘further funding’element.
This is then shared out among colleges whose costs have been historically high, for a variety of reasons.
They include, for example, urban polytechnics operating on multiple sites, centres of excellence running high cost courses, and institutions whose cost efficiency has left something to be desired.
Further funding will cover, in part at least, the shortfall between the amount allocated to them from the common fund and their total expenditure.
It is intended that this system, which will presumably be the basis for pool  allocations for some years to come, will be refined during the next few years as it works out in practice.
This is being done by a joint technical group formed by NAB and the local authority Pooling Committee.
It would seem that the direction in which it will be refined is to move towards a system more or less completely based on unit costs, or common funding, and that the element of further funding has been included as a temporary measure to allow high cost institutions to adjust to the new system.
This system will be used in deciding on future allocations of the pool and the DES has already indicated that it would expect NAB to give advice about appropriate courses and rationalization, particularly concerning those which are expensive, those which are so specialist in nature that control of student numbers is required, and those where both university and public sector provision might be unnecessary or where rationalization is desirable for other reasons.
In this context, it is interesting but not surprising that, at the time of writing, the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics is reputedly putting pressure on NAB to persuade the government to introduce direct funding for polytechnics and larger colleges of higher education.
The move is occasioned by the fact that the 1982–3 pool allocations represent a cut in income of about 9 per cent for the polytechnics and as much as 15 per cent for the colleges of higher education, the difference between them being ascribed by the DES to the fact that it has to base its view on cuts on earlier data and the polytechnics have reduced their unit costs more sharply than the colleges in interim years.
In the years 1980–1 and 1981–2, however, some local authorities have helped their local institutions to bridge the gap between their budgets and pool allocations by funding them from additional rate-borne expenditure.
The CDP's fear is that the local authorities will be so hard pressed, because of government policy, that they will be unable or unwilling to help in the future.
It is for this reason that the CDP has advocated direct government funding, an advocacy which seems extremely unlikely to succeed as the government will surely want to try out the new system for a few years before sanctioning any radical alteration.
More recently, at the end of 1982, the government announced that the sum of £560.5 million would be available for public sector higher education in 1983–4, a figure which was somewhat higher than was feared and expected.
NAB has decided that the 1983–4 pool should be distributed so as to accord equal treatment to the polytechnics and the colleges of higher education.
For one year at least, ‘mitigation’ will be used to protect the more expensive institutions from any drastic changes in advance of the major planning exercise which NAB is now undertaking throughout public sector higher education.
Finally, although the majority of colleges and institutes of higher  education are local education establishments, twenty-four of them are voluntary colleges run by the churches and educational trusts, a situation which derives from their previous existence as voluntary colleges of education.
They also include a few ‘hybrid’ institutions, like Derby Lonsdale College of Higher Education, which are run jointly by local education authorities and the church.
The present formal position is that financial planning for the voluntary colleges is undertaken separately by the DES.
However, subject to agreement by the voluntary providing bodies, it would seem logical to include them in NAB's general appraisal of all courses of advanced further education which it is undertaking both to secure a degree of rationalization and also some reduction in unit costs.
The case for this development, which seems likely to come about, is strengthened by the fact that the voluntary colleges are already involved in their appropriate RACs and by the existence of the ‘hybrid’ colleges, that is those administered jointly by voluntary bodies and local authorities.
In the meantime, the voluntary colleges are being particularly hard hit by cuts in financial allocation from the DES, as they have no rate-borne funds to call upon.
Some of the smaller ones which concentrate very largely on teacher education, which is to be subject to substantial reductions, look particularly vulnerable.
Validation arrangements in public sector higher education
Having dealt at length with the management and funding of the institutions providing higher education in the public sector, we shall now turn to an examination of the validation arrangements which appertain to their courses.
The polytechnics now almost exclusively submit their degree courses to the CNAA for validation and the colleges and institutes of higher education are increasingly doing so, though a majority of the latter are still validated by the universities.
In addition, the Technician and Business Education Councils and a wide range of professional bodies validate courses leading to their awards.
As we pointed out in a tailpiece to this chapter in the first edition, the CNAA announced in June 1979 a modification of validation procedures for public sector institutions offering its courses.
In its document Partnership in Validation, it declared its intention of granting approval to ‘well established courses’ for indefinite periods, instead of for five years as had hitherto been the case.
By this means, such courses once approved could continue without a full revalidation subject only to periodic visits.
These new arrangements contain two important features: they allow institutions to propose variations from normal validation arrangements; and they make provision for the granting of  discretion to institutions to make modifications to approved courses within agreed limits.
The objects of the new system are to enable institutions to develop a greater degree of flexibility and autonomy, and to reduce the amount of paperwork both for them and the Council.
In its Partnership in Validation document the CNAA also declared its intention of improving its system of validation.
With this aim in mind, a new Committee for Institutions would be established which would receive the reports of institutional review visits and ensure that the CNAA's course validation work was informed by a knowledge of the institution concerned and, in particular, of its internal validation and course monitoring processes.
The Committee for Institutions would also exercise general oversight of the operation of the new procedures and be the body by which proposals for significant variations from the normal validation methods were considered and approved.
These various new proposals have now been put into effect and a Committee for Institutions has come into being.
Slow but steady progress has been made and the more flexible arrangements for validation outlined in Partnership in Validation are now in operation in a number of establishments.
However, to the CNAA's surprise, a number of institutions has indicated that they wish to take advantage of the new procedures by proposing special arrangements which would, in effect, provide for all their courses to be validated by a method other than the normal one.
Partly because of the volume of this response and partly because of the radical nature of some of these proposals, going well beyond those envisaged in Partnership in Validation, the CNAA has allowed a few of the suggested procedures to be tried out on an experimental basis and while this is happening has virtually declared a moratorium on other ‘special arrangement’ proposals.
In the meantime, the Council has established a Working Party to consider possible models for its longer-term development, both as a result of developments inspired by Partnership in Validation and also because of various other external factors.
The Working Party has submitted a report to the Council of the CNAA in which it has suggested three long-term models: the ‘integrated model’ involving joint validation of courses by the CNAA and the institutions; the licensing' model whereby institutions would approve courses but the CNAA would retain its powers to grant awards; and the ‘accreditation’model by which institutions, accredited by the CNAA, would award their own degrees.
However, the Working Party report was turned down by the Council on the grounds that its proposals did ‘not sufficiently reflect its value as an independent and impartial body for setting academic standards.’
Clearly, some re-thinking will be necessary but it seems both inevitable and desirable that there should be some loosening of the ties between the CNAA and the institutions whose  courses it validates.
As we have commented in previous books, the polytechnics in particular are for the most part anxious to redress the anomaly between themselves and universities whereby the latter are allowed to award their own degrees but they are not.
The case for self-validation for the polytechnics has been put very forcibly by Dr Birch, the present chairman of the CDP.
He argues that the polytechnics have a special task to provide courses which prepare people to deal constructively with problems of change in society and which require direct interaction with the world of practical affairs.
He contends that the style of operation of the CNAA is inimical to this task and that course validation takes too long and compromises in course design which arise from the resolution of the often marked differences within validating boards affect adversely the quality of the work of polytechnics.
Accordingly, he believes, as do many other polytechnic directors, that by giving their institution charters to award degrees and other qualifications within carefully defined limits, substantial savings in time and resources would result and their distinctive approach to higher education would be affirmed and would find its fullest expression.
On the other hand, there is also clearly a good case for the type of external validation operated by the CNAA, whereby course proposals are essentially considered by ‘peer groups’ made up largely of staff from institutions within public sector higher education, together with some members of the universities.
Such a system it is argued ensures broad comparability of standards both between courses in the public sector and also with those in the universities; it provides a guarantee to students, employers, funding bodies and the public at large that courses meet acceptable standards and that those standards are maintained; it enables institutions submitting course proposals to draw upon a pool of national experience accumulated by the validating committees; it stimulates academic debate between staff from different  institutions about curriculum development; and it provides a means of identifying and disseminating information about good practice and about innovations in teaching and learning in higher education.
Those of us involved in CNAA validation procedures would acknowledge that there are considerable advantages in the present system.
However, it can also be expensive, bureaucratic, time-consuming and somewhat inflexible.
The problem is how to preserve its advantages while giving the institutions concerned as much freedom of manoeuvre as possible.
Whatever the eventual outcome of this contentious issue, it is not likely to be resolved in the near future.
In the meantime, the numbers of students in public sector institutions undertaking CNAA validated courses continue to grow steadily.
In the academic year 1980–1, for example, 140,000 students were registered on 1,703 taught CNAA  courses and in the same year first degree courses were catering for 123,229 students, representing a rise of 6.2 per cent compared with the previous year.
Indeed, the only major area of falling intakes at undergraduate level was in teacher education, where targets for recruitment were reduced by the DES.
Part-time courses, which included 228 first degree courses, also recruited well and the first year intake showed an increase of 11 per cent.
Apart from the CNAA, the other main validating bodies of courses in public sector higher education are the universities, TEC and BEC, and a wide range of professional bodies.
The universities, which award both degrees and Dip.HEs are almost exclusively concerned with validating courses in the colleges and institutes of higher education and the only polytechnic courses which are university-validated are some of those which offer the Postgraduate Certificate in Education or in-service courses for teachers.
In 1981–2, for example, fourteen universities were validating degree and Dip.HE courses in forty colleges and institutes of higher education, including nine institutions which also had some CNAA-validated courses.
University-validated courses include both those leading to BEd and also to BA, BSc, and such degrees as Bachelor of Combined Studies; the latter have been developed, largely in traditional academic subject areas, as a result of the creation of the colleges of higher education and the diversification away from teacher education that has ensued.
The remaining colleges of higher education, approximately thirty in number, have their courses validated by the CNAA and, although the movement in this direction away from university validation has slowed down considerably, it is likely to continue for some time to come.
Finally, as we have indicated, other bodies validating courses in public sector higher education include the Technician and Business Education Councils, in respect of their higher diplomas and certificates, and the professional bodies.
The latter validate courses in polytechnics and also in a number of the colleges of higher education; they include courses leading to awards such as the Diploma of the Institute of Administrative Management; the Diploma of the British Association of Occupational Therapists; the Licentiateship of the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association; the Certificate of Qualification in Social Work; and the Bilingual Secretarial Diploma.
Developments in course provision
As is clear from the foregoing description of validation procedures, there is now a well-established pattern of course provision in advanced further education, both at degree and sub-degree level.
For example, as  we have seen, there are over 1,700 CNAA-validated first degree courses alone, including 228 on a part-time basis.
They cover virtually all the major subject areas and with such a wide selection available, relatively few new courses are likely to be added to the established pattern.
In 1980–1, for example, the only significantly new CNAA first degree courses that came into operation were in commerce and secretarial studies, and Archaeological Sciences.
Perhaps the subject area which has changed most in recent years, both in terms of student numbers and also in course provision, is teacher education.
As we have seen, the massive cut-back in initial teacher training has reduced student numbers from 113,000 in 1971 to 27,000 in 1982, with further reductions to follow shortly.
This dramatic reduction has been accompanied by a major change in course provision; during recent years, the three-year Certificate of Education course, followed for a minority of students by a fourth year leading to a Bachelor of Education degree, has been completely replaced by integrated three- and four-year courses leading to ordinary and honours BEd degrees respectively.
The coming of the ‘new’ BEd courses has enabled the colleges to devise courses which, at best, successfully integrate the study of the theory of education, professional studies and periods of school experience, and specialist options in a range of school subjects.
However, in the past few years, there has been a trend for the BEd degree courses to be regarded as the main vehicle for training primary school teachers, with would-be secondary school teachers undertaking the one-year Post-Graduate Certificate in Education course, which is also offered in a substantial number of public sector colleges.
Finally, mention must be made of the Diploma of Higher Education (Dip.HE).
We described its development at length in the first edition of this book and the past three years have witnessed a slow but steady increase in provision.
In 1980–1, for example, there were probably about 65 Dip.HE courses on offer in public sector colleges, of which 45 were validated by the CNAA and the remainder by universities.
Of the CNAA-validated courses, twenty were freestanding and twenty-five degree-linked, while as far as university-validated courses are concerned, the likelihood is that they are virtually all degree-linked.
In 1980–1, there were 6,148 students undertaking CNAA courses of whom 4,216 were on degree-linked courses and 1,932 on terminal courses.
Assuming a proportionally similar take-up on university validated courses, there were about 8,500 students on all Dip.HE courses.
It has become clear that some colleges are having difficulty in recruiting viable numbers of students, especially from those coming in at 18-plus, mainly because school-leavers with two A levels prefer to opt for degree courses.
It is for this reason that most colleges run their Dip.HE programmes as part of degree-linked courses.
Indeed, the annual survey for  1980, produced by the Association of Colleges Implementing Dip.HE Programmes (ACID) early in 1982, revealed that although the number of students entering Dip.HE courses rose in 1980, the proportion with two A levels dropped.
About 70 per cent of new entrants were over twenty-one, half of whom lacked two A levels, and fewer than a quarter were school-leavers with these qualifications or their equivalent.
The survey also showed that the great majority of diplomates transferred directly on to a degree course either in their own or another institution and that relatively few went straight into employment.
One of the factors which will determine the eventual success or failure of the Dip.HE is the extent of transferability which develops.
The DES has been anxious to promote a national system of transferability and, to this long-term end, it set up a working party in June 1977 to examine all aspects of a national credit transfer agency, under the chairmanship of Peter Toyne, formerly of Exeter University and now Deputy Director of the West Sussex Institute of Higher Education.
The working party instituted a feasibility study into the setting-up of a national information centre for credit transfer in higher and further education which was carried out between 1977 and 1979, and a further study was completed in 1980.
In its Report, the working group strongly recommended the setting-up of a credit transfer agency and, at the time of writing almost three years later, the DES has announced its intention of launching a pilot scheme in the south-west of England, to be known as the Education Counselling and Credit Transfer Information Service, or ECCTIS.
This will involve the collation of all courses in the region run by universities and further education establishments for use by staff, students and career advisers.
If the regional scheme is successful, it will presumably be extended to other parts of the country, in which case it will do much to increase the viability of the Dip.HE, though, of course, its implications go well beyond it, potentially to embrace the whole field of recurrent education.
Despite the recent growth in the numbers of students taking the Dip.HE, it is difficult to be optimistic about its future.
For one thing, some Dip.HE courses are effectively no more than the first two years of a degree course, with the added minor advantage that a student can if he wishes leave after two years with an award.
Moreover, a serious disadvantage is that a student enrolling for a Dip.HE course is not guaranteed, in every case, that on successful completion of the course he will secure a place on a subsequent degree course.
But, more important, what casts a large shadow over its future are the likely changes in the size of the eighteen-year-old population over the next dozen years or so.
Given that the numbers of eighteen-year-olds will decline sharply in the later years of the decade and assuming that the age participation rate shows no great increase, then there may well be spare capacity in  the public sector institutions offering degree-level courses.
As, for school-leavers at least, the entry qualifications for the degree-level course and for the Dip.HE are the same, then they are very likely to prefer the former.
In that case, the Dip.HE for such students will continue to be very largely the first two years of a degree course, though its provision may increase if credit transfer develops nationally and it becomes more common for students to undertake a two-year Dip.HE course in one institution and move to another for a third year.
In any case, the attractiveness of the Dip.HE for mature students who are not required to possess the two A-levels qualification will presumably remain.
Polytechnics
As we have seen, the policy for the polytechnics was outlined by the government in the White Paper, A Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges, issued in May 1966.
The official purpose of setting up these institutions was to meet the rapidly growing demand for higher education within further education without prejudicing opportunities for students following non-advanced courses and to make more rational and effective use of the resources available.
In the next six years, thirty polytechnics were officially designated and since then they have become the major institutions of higher education within further education, catering for about two-thirds of the full-time, including sandwich, students in advanced further education.
In 1981–2, there were 133,000 full-time and sandwich students in the thirty polytechnics, together with 65,000 part-time students and some 85,000 on short courses.
As we have attempted in our previous books on further education succinctly to summarize the chief characteristics of the polytechnics, we intend therefore to restrict ourselves to a discussion of the ways in which they have developed in the three years since the first edition of this book was written.
As originally conceived in the White Paper, the main characteristics of the polytechnics were that they were to be large, comprehensive, have an applied philosophy, be primarily teaching institutions with a brief to develop courses in new areas, and their courses were to be validated by the CNAA.
As far as their size is concerned, the 1966 White Paper envisaged that they would average about 2,000 full-time students each, together with a substantial number of part-time and occasional students.
By the optimistic view of the 1972 White Paper, they were to increase to an average of 6,000 full-time students each by 1981, making 180,000 students in all.
Although these figures have not been reached, the polytechnics have nevertheless become quite large institutions and now each caters for an average of over 4,000 full-time and sandwich students.
Recruitment  into first year full-time and sandwich courses in polytechnics increased by 15 per cent in 1981–2, totalling 54,000.
However, the future is very uncertain and it remains to be seen if this increase can be maintained during the next few years while the size of the eighteen-year-old population remains large.
When determining the size of the advanced further education pool for 1982, the DES allowed for a drop in the number of new students by 4,000 to 50,000, despite the fact that the local authorities predicted a further rise in intake, to 56,000 in 1982–3.
Given the increasing difficulty which the local authorities are experiencing in offering financial help to their institutions, especially to those polytechnics in urban areas where their parent authorities are under greater pressure from the Department of the Environment to keep rate increases down, it may not be possible for the public sector institutions, try as they may, to keep up their student numbers.
From the later 1980s onwards, when the size of the eighteen-year-old population begins sharply to decline, the numbers of students entering the polytechnics seem bound to fall, unless the age participation rate increases, which in turn looks unlikely unless the economic situation has markedly improved by then.
By describing the polytechnics as ‘comprehensive’, the 1966 White Paper meant that they should provide both degree and sub-degree courses; post-graduate and post-experience courses; full-time and part-time courses; and a wide range of short courses.
They have since then also covered a wide academic spectrum — including business and management studies, science and technology, the social sciences, the humanities, and art and design — so that in a sense the term ‘Polytechnic’ is something of a misnomer.
In so far as the polytechnics today do in fact offer a wide range of advanced courses on different bases of study, they can also be said to live up to the description of being ‘comprehensive’ in that respect.
However, during the past twelve years the balance between full-time and part-time students has shifted markedly in favour of the former.
In 1969, for example, the polytechnics contained 163,000 students, of whom 67,000 were full-time or sandwich and 96,000 part-time.
As we have seen, by 1981 there were 198,000 students in all in the polytechnics, but by then over two-thirds, or 133,000, were full-time or sandwich and only 65,000 part-time.
There are those critics of the polytechnics who regard this as a most unfortunate development and would go so far as to castigate them for betraying their primary purpose, which they see as providing for the communities in which they are located, something which of necessity can only be done primarily through part-time provision.
The reply of the polytechnics to this charge is that while they are fully prepared to maintain part-time provision at a high level, students are simply not coming forward in sufficient  numbers to make it possible.
They also point out that during the past five years or so the proportion of part-time students has remained roughly constant at about one-third of the total.
A similar picture emerges if one compares the proportion of sub-degree to degree courses.
According to Burgess, at the time of the designation of the polytechnics the proportion of sub-degree level work to degree work was of the order of 70 per cent; by 1974, this had fallen to about 50 per cent and today it is not more than 30 per cent .
Burgess and Pratt attribute this development, like that of the growth in full-time as opposed to part-time students, to what they apostrophize as ‘academic drift’.
This is the tendency for the polytechnics to emulate the universities by concentrating primarily on advanced course provision, especially degree courses, thereby rejecting students they would previously have accepted and transferring elsewhere many of the courses they previously offered.
As a consequence, their student body becomes increasingly homogeneous and tends to contain only the ‘normal’, that is university, proportion of the sons and daughters of manual workers, a process that Pratt and Burgess regard as running counter to one of the original intentions behind the setting-up of the polytechnics.
While it is indisputable that the proportions of both sub-degree and part-time courses in the polytechnics have declined, it remains to be proved that this is the result of policy on the part of the directors and their staffs; it would seem much more likely to be a case of students ‘voting with their feet’ by opting for full-time degree courses.
Nor does it necessarily follow that if polytechnics were somehow to promote part-time and sub-degree courses, that they would be taken up by large numbers of children of manual workers.
The third characteristic envisaged for the polytechnics, namely that they should have an ‘applied philosophy’, means that their courses should have a vocational orientation and be designed with specific career outlets in mind, thus distinguishing them from many university courses which are sometimes described as ‘pure’.
Another aspect of the applied philosophy of the polytechnics is that they should maintain close contacts with industry and business.
In these respects, it can certainly be claimed that the polytechnics have by and large measured up to their original specification.
The great majority of their courses, whether in business and management studies, the sciences and technologies or in the social sciences, prepare students for specific career outlets; thus modern language courses for the most part give attention to the practical application of the language with a view to the student's ultimate employment, for example as an interpreter, while courses in social science often include options in such areas as community work, social planning, industrial relations, and public administration.
In addition, a proportion of the courses offered are sandwich courses, either of the ‘thick’ or ‘thin’variety, though there has been some decline in the relative proportion of sandwich courses available over recent years.
For example, the CNAA Annual Reports show that of its first degree courses, the proportion of sandwich courses declined from 33.7 per cent in 1974–5 to about 26 per cent in 1980–1.
In any case, the merging of colleges of education with polytechnics and the development of the Dip.HE has led to a range of courses predominantly of general education, and to that extent the vocational orientation of the work of the polytechnics has been somewhat diluted.
Fourthly, the 1966 White Paper made it plain that at that time it was the government's intention that the polytechnics should remain primarily teaching institutions; as the DES notes of guidance subsequently indicated, research would be justified only in so far as it was of educational value to the teaching staff and of benefit to industry and business.
Understandably, this has been a bone of contention with many of the staff of the polytechnics ever since, who maintain that for teaching at degree level to be lively and effective it needs to be supported within the institution by an active research programme.
As a result of their continued advocacy, research for its own sake has been developed on an appreciable scale.
However, the volume of research varies considerably from one polytechnic to another and, in general, it has a very long way to go before it begins to approach that generated within universities.
None the less, it is clear that research in the polytechnics will continue to grow, if only for reasons of prestige, and the same trend is discernible in some of the colleges of higher education.
What is less clear, however, is how funds derived from such government-financed bodies as the Research Councils should be divided up between the universities and the public sector institutions of higher education.
As far as the introduction of new courses is concerned, the polytechnics, through the aegis of the CNAA, have certainly succeeded in developing undergraduate courses in areas of study in which they were not previously much, if at all, concerned.
Consequently, they now offer a very wide range of first degree courses, not only in science and technology, business management and art and design, but also in the social sciences and the arts, including such subjects as librarianship, politics and government, humanities and communication studies.
During the past few years, relationships between the CNAA and the polytechnics have developed in a number of ways, including the changes  in validation arrangements described earlier in this chapter.
The CNAA, in its desire to ensure that the courses which it validates are of a sufficiently high standard, has necessarily concerned itself with the resources and ethos of institutions as a whole and has not hesitated to pass judgment on them, going, some would argue, beyond the responsibilities laid upon it by its Royal Charter.
A case in point, which we discussed at length in the first edition of this book, is  Teesside Polytechnic where the CNAA's 1978 quinquennial review led to the most critical report ever issued by the CNAA on an institution: among other things, it criticized the local authority for its inadequate support for the polytechnic and the director for a failure in internal management.
As a result, it announced its intention to cease recognition of the polytechnic's courses after the 1979–80 academic year unless substantial improvements were made.
Inevitably, this decision led to a reaction from some polytechnic directors that it was quite wrong that a chartered body, through an adverse report, should have the power to induce the collapse of an institution.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of this argument, the CNAA's intervention seems to have benefited Teesside Polytechnic.
Following the 1978 report, Cleveland local authority made additional funding available to the polytechnic, accommodation was improved, following the retirement of the director a new one was appointed and steps were taken to improve relationships between the institution and its authority.
As a result, the CNAA was able to give the polytechnic a clean bill of health and withdrew its threat to cease recognition of its courses.
The CNAA has also found itself drawn into the dispute between Huddersfield Polytechnic and its local authority, Kirklees Metropolitan Council, where, in 1980, it felt itself obliged to write to both parties: to the council stressing the need to provide more funds and to the polytechnic strongly advising it temporarily to drop its intention of introducing new courses.
More recently, in the spring of 1982, it found itself drawn into a disagreement between Birmingham Polytechnic and its city council which proved unwilling to finance the short-fall between the 1982–3 advanced further education pool allocation to the polytechnic and its own estimated budget.
This may well be the precursor of other similar disputes and the CNAA's necessary concern at this situation arises from the fact that a major deterioration in the resource needs of the polytechnics inevitably casts doubt on their ability to maintain standards.
This more positive role adopted by the CNAA in recent years as a direct consequence of the financial cuts inflicted on polytechnics by the government and by the local authorities, cuts which if they go too deep are bound adversely to affect the quality of the work and thereby the quality of the courses validated by the CNAA.
As is clear from the foregoing account, perhaps the most complex and difficult task which faces many, if not most, directors of polytechnics is in establishing good and effective relationships with their local authorities.
Two instances where relationships have greatly deteriorated in recent years concern Huddersfield Polytechnic, as we have already noted, and the Polytechnic of Central London (PCL).
The dispute between Huddersfield Polytechnic and Kirklees Metropolitan Council which has continued for a number of years illustrates most of the tensions which may develop between a polytechnic and its local authority.
These include the natural desire for autonomy by the director who sees his institution as serving national and, indeed, international needs and the equally natural desire of the local council to retain control of what it has always historically regarded as its own institution whose main function should be to meet the needs of the region.
This inevitable tension which goes to the heart of the matter and which can be fruitful as well as sterile has been paradoxically heightened by the government's capping of the advanced further education pool.
As a result, the polytechnics have had to turn to their authorities for additional financial help which, in many cases, has strengthened the latter's hand in demanding more stringent control over the polytechnic's expenditure.
This is particularly so in the case of an authority like Kirklees which has a relatively small population and rateable base.
Finally, the situation has been worsened by local factors such as local government reorganization in 1974 which converted the former Huddersfield town council, seemingly better disposed towards the polytechnic, into Kirklees Metropolitan Council, and difficult personal relationships between the senior management of the polytechnic and leading local councillors.
The rapidly deteriorating relationship which has developed between the Polytechnic of Central London (PCL) and the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) in recent years can be ascribed to similar factors.
Despite the fact that the five polytechnics under the control of the ILEAPCL, North London Polytechnic, Polytechnic of the South Bank, City of London Polytechnic, and Thames Polytechnic enjoy corporate status, they are still subject to detailed financial regulation by the ILEA, a situation which PCL has certainly found petty and restrictive.
The dispute boiled up when the polytechnic incurred a substantial deficit in 1981 and was accused by the authority of lack of accountability and inadequate financial management.
As a result, the Rector, Dr Colin Adamson, was advised by senior ILEA councillors to resign ‘in the best interests of the polytechnic’; however, the corporate status of the polytechnic meant that only the governing body can remove him from office and it chose not to do so and he refused to resign.
In March 1982, matters came further to a head when the ILEA informed the polytechnic that it was withholding its block grant for 1982–3 until  the financial crisis had been resolved.
Since then, relations between PCL and the ILEA have improved, the block grant has been released and the appointment of a Rector to succeed Dr Adamson, who is retiring, is imminent.
The particular case of PCL throws into sharp relief the corporate status of the five ILEA polytechnics, a status long advocated by the Committee of Polytechnic Directors for all polytechnics.
The privileged position of the inner London five derives from the fact that they were founded by independent charitable institutions, later aided by the then London County Council and subsequently by the ILEA.
Having corporate status means that they are registered companies, run by governing bodies on which the local authority has a minority representation, and can employ their own staff directly and retain the income from short courses and consultancy work.
It is the apparent independence which this status confers that is envied by the CDP, although the experience of PCL will doubtless strengthen their conviction that such status should be accompanied by the minimum of local authority financial control.
There is no doubt that the great majority of senior staff in polytechnics would prefer much greater freedom from their local authorities, hence their support of Model B in the 1981 Green Paper and their disappointment at the form which the National Advisory Body has taken.
The case for such freedom is put in a recent book by Matterson.
In addition to writing very informatively about the internal management, control and validation of courses, and the accountability of the polytechnics, he advocates that the whole cost of higher education, including advanced further education, and the universities, be transferred to the national exchequer, under a new national body, the Higher Education Commission.
Although others have also advocated the centralization of the financial management of advanced further education, including, of course, the DES in the 1981 White Paper, it is unlikely to come about, at least in the near future.
As we have seen, the establishment of NAB, with its very strong representation from the local authorities, creates a new environment for the polytechnics, and the colleges and institutes of higher education, to which they will have to adjust for some years to come.
One major subject area within the polytechnics that has developed considerably in recent years is that of teacher education.
As the result of the demolition of the colleges of education in the 1970s and the mergers that took place between a number of colleges and polytechnics, the latter now have a major stake in teacher education.
Of the thirty polytechnics, all but seven now offer courses of initial or in-service teacher training, or both.
The effect of falling school rolls and DES cuts in teacher-training quotas has been some reduction in the numbers of students on courses; however, recruitment in 1981 was still considerable  and, in 1981, the polytechnics had 1,300 students enrolled on to teacher-training courses.
The strength of teacher education, both initial and in-service, varies greatly from polytechnic to polytechnic, depending on such features as its previous commitment to and its present attitude towards the subject, the nature of the inheritance of qualified staff from the mergers with colleges of education, and the character of the courses and administration which have emerged.
The future of teacher education in the polytechnics is uncertain and much will depend on national decisions concerning the size of the teacher training machinery, made by the DES on or against the advice of the Advisory Committee on the Supply and Education of Teachers, as well as local decisions concerning staff and resources made by the polytechnics and their local authorities in their search for economies.
Finally, it is interesting to note that the polytechnics as a group are considering the creation of a central clearing house for applications by making use of the computer facilities and expertise of the Universities Central Council on Admissions (UCCA).
The Committee of Directors of Polytechnics decided at the end of 1982 to discuss plans to deal with applications for the 1985 intake, involving the appointment of staff and the compilation of application forms and a polytechnic equivalent of the UCCA booklet.
The CDP has hitherto resisted such a proposal on the grounds that it would represent direct competition with university applicants who might thereby fail to see the polytechnics as a clear alternative and because it would restrict student choice to a limited number of institutions.
However, because of the increased numbers of applicants applying to polytechnics in the past few years, it will most probably decide to implement such a scheme.
Such a policy was first suggested over a decade ago when it seemed that a Polytechnics Central Council on Admissions, styled PCCA and doubtless pronounced ‘Pukka’, would not be inappropriate.
Colleges and institutes of higher education
As we have seen, the great majority of public sector higher education is provided in two major types of institutions: the polytechnics and the colleges and institutes of higher education.
The latter came into existence following the demolition of the colleges of education in the latter part of the 1970s and now number approximately 70 institutions.
Their principals have come together to form an association called the Standing Conference of Directors and Principals of Colleges and Institutes in Higher Education, whose 67 members are shown in Figure 5.1.
They make up a group of institutions which has been described as the ‘third force’ in higher education, alongside the universities and polytechnics, and are known variously as colleges of higher education, institutes of      higher education, colleges of education or just plain colleges.
This somewhat confusing diversity can best be illustrated by examining what has happened in a particular region, the East Midlands (Figure 5.2).
Here, before the recent upheavals, there were ten colleges of education: seven of them were members of the University of Nottingham Area Training Organization: one, Loughborough College of Education, was attached to Loughborough University of Technology; and two to the University of Leicester.
With the abolition of the ATOs and the drastic cut-back in teacher training, they have suffered a variety of fates.
Two of them, Nottingham and the City of Leicester Colleges of Education have been merged with Trent and Leicester Polytechnics respectively; one, Loughborough College of Education, has merged with Loughborough University of Technology; two, Bishop Lonsdale College of Education, Derby, and Northampton College of Education, have merged with other further education colleges in their towns to form new institutions known respectively as Derby Lonsdale College of Higher Education and Nene College; two colleges, Bishop Grosseteste, Lincoln, and Matlock College of Education, have remained free-standing and four, Kesteven College of Education, Grantham; Mary Ward College, Keyworth; Eaton Hall, Retford; and St Paul's, Rugby, have closed down.
As part of these changes, the number of public sector teacher-training places in the region has been drastically reduced, from over 8,000 in 1974 to about 3,400 in 1981.
Those colleges which have merged with polytechnics and other further education colleges are ipso facto part of a diversified institution, though in the case of Derby Lonsdale and Nene Colleges a proportion of their students are on non-advanced courses.
Of the two free-standing colleges, Bishop Grosseteste is endeavouring to diversify by offering courses of general education not directly related to teacher training, while Matlock has remained essentially a monotechnic institution, offering initial and in-service teacher-training courses.
As far as validation of the courses is concerned, this is being undertaken either by the CNAA or by the Universities of Nottingham and Leicester.
This complex pattern has been repeated, mutatis mutandis all over the country.
Figure 5.1 Colleges and institutes of higher education (based on information supplied by the Standing Conference of Principals and Directors of Colleges and Institutes of Higher Education)
Individual colleges and institutes vary both according to the proportion of advanced work which they provide and also the types of courses which they offer, depending partly on the nature of the institutions which went to make them up and partly on the way in which they have developed in the past few years.
When they first came into existence in the late 1970s, the proportion of advanced work which they offered and, therefore their claim truly to be regarded as institutions of higher education, depended on their inheritances from their previous colleges.
As a result, several general types of college of higher education evolved.
First, there are those like Derby Lonsdale College of Higher Education    formed from the linking of one or more colleges of education, which by definition offered only advanced courses in teacher training, with a college of technology which offered a considerable number of advanced vocational courses.
Another example is the West London Institute of Higher Education formed out of two former colleges of education, Borough Road and Maria Grey, and Chiswick Polytechnic, which to make confusion more confounded was not a polytechnic as we would understand it but, in effect, a college of technology.
The results of such changes are institutions which concentrate very largely on advanced vocational and general courses.
Secondly, there is a category of institutions formed by a single former college of education or by the amalgamation of two or more of them, such as Bishop Grosseteste College, Lincoln, and Crewe and Alsager College, Cheshire.
These institutions offer almost exclusively advanced courses.
As the result of a planned diversification, they now provide a blend of teacher-training and general education courses with, as yet, a small number of vocationally oriented courses in such areas as business management.
Thirdly, there is a group of  institutions where only a minority of students are on advanced courses.
These consist very largely of colleges of technology and technical colleges which offer only a minority of advanced courses and where most of their students are in the sixteen to nineteen age group and taking non-advanced courses.
Also in this category, however, is a group of establishments formed from the amalgamation of a college of education with one or more further education colleges, for example the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education consisting of the former Cartrefle College of Education, Wrexham; Wrexham College of Technology; and Kelsterton College of Technology, Connah's Quay, Flintshire.
This institution now provides a mixture of non-advanced and advanced vocational courses as well as general courses and would therefore be more accurately described as a college of further and higher education.
For reasons of status, however, the attribution ‘further education’ is generally omitted.
Figure 5.2 Higher education in the East Midlands
When the colleges of education existed as a separate sector of higher education, all their courses were validated by the universities to which they were attached.
Since reorganization, however, as we have seen, many of the new colleges of higher education have turned to the CNAA for validation, a process that has not been without its stresses and strains.
For the Council, the creation of the new institutions has greatly added to its work, while for the colleges the rigours of course submission and CNAA validation procedures have, in some cases, been traumatic.
Indeed, some of the colleges have felt that the Council is dominated by the polytechnics and, as a result, neither wholly understands the rather different outlook of the colleges and institutes nor entirely sympathizes with their aspirations.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of  this issue, there is no doubt that some of the new colleges and institutes have found the process of CNAA validation a long and difficult one involving years of hard work and intensive planning.
On the other hand, having been forced to question the validity of their courses, they have undoubtedly benefited from the self-examination required.
In the few years since they have been in existence, the colleges of higher education have had little or no guidance, from the DES or anywhere else, as to the directions they might follow.
In carving out a distinctive niche for themselves, a number of options have been open to them.
They could have concentrated on being almost exclusively higher education establishments, offering courses at degree and sub-degree level in teacher education, general education, and vocational subjects; they could have offered intensive courses of recurrent education for mature students; or, indeed, they could have attempted a mixture of all or most of these.
In practice, many of them have concentrated on offering degree level courses in general education, especially in the humanities and social sciences, and in teacher training.
The former development was probably inevitable as these were the areas of expertise of the staff of the former colleges of education and where the teaching facilities existed.
The development of sub-degree courses has also been inhibited to some extent because better staffing ratios, more generous accommodation and higher salaries have accrued from teaching full-time degree level students.
Moreover, to offer vocational courses such as TEC and BEC, where these were not previously available, would have required suitably qualified staff and appropriate facilities at a time of recession when money has been available for neither.
None the less, some of the colleges have made sterling attempts at innovation, including the provision of vocational courses, especially in business studies, and of part-time courses for mature students such as in-service training for practising teachers in further education.
Moreover, as we have seen, some of the colleges have provided a mix of advanced and non-advanced courses from the start.
In addition, some authorities have transferred to their colleges of higher education advanced courses previously located in other major establishments.
It is clear, therefore, that the 70 or so institutions which call themselves colleges or institutes of higher education comprise a sector of higher education which is more diverse than either the universities or polytechnics.
While each college is to a large extent sui generis it is possible to divide them into three main groups.
There are those which are not unlike the polytechnics both because they offer a very high percentage of advanced work and also because they are almost as big.
They have succeeded in diversifying their course provision well beyond teacher education and in this respect differ only from the polytechnics in making less provision in the areas of science and technology.
Secondly, there are those colleges which in America might be called community colleges: they offer a mix of both advanced and non-advanced courses to students with a wide range of ability and frequently provide a high proportion of part-time courses.
In many ways, they can be regarded as the post-18 equivalent of comprehensive schools.
Thirdly, there are the relatively few institutions which have remained very largely monotechnic, concentrating on teacher education.
Many of them are voluntary colleges run by the churches, and given the forthcoming cuts in expenditure on public sector higher education, they look particularly vulnerable to closure or merger with other colleges.
Funded directly by the DES, the voluntary colleges cannot turn to the local authorities to help them out and the churches lack the resources to do so.
Moreover, some of them are relatively small, having fewer than 500 students; and given the inevitability of cuts in teacher-training quotas and the DES ban on diversification into other full-time courses, their full-time student numbers are likely to shrink still further.
Finally, as some of them are geographically isolated, there is little or no possibility of merging with other institutions.
If, then, the future direction of the colleges of higher education looks uncertain, they nevertheless have a distinctive contribution to make to our educational system which would be the poorer without them.
They can complement the universities and polytechnics in three major respects.
The first is to promote liberal arts higher education, both at general degree and sub-degree levels.
As we have seen, they are actively engaged in developing the Dip.HE, which could be extended to become a widely available two-year sub-degree course in arts and social studies, alongside the TEC and BEC Higher Certificates and Diplomas in vocational subjects.
Secondly, they could further extend their provision of a mixture of courses, both academic and vocational, at non-advanced and advanced levels, thereby becoming what might more accurately be termed Colleges of Further and Higher Education.
Thirdly, they could progressively develop programmes of recurrent or continuing education for mature adults who wish to alternate work with education.
In these ways, they would become more local and less pretentious centres of higher and tertiary education which would be accessible to a much wider range of the population.
Education in art and design, agriculture and management
Education in art and design
Education in art and design is carried on in many different institutions ranging from polytechnics and colleges of higher education through specialist colleges of art to colleges of further education and technical colleges.
Courses are available at all levels and exhibit a considerable diversity, from foundation courses which provide a basic general education in art and design to CNAA post-graduate courses leading to master's degrees in such specialist areas as fashion and textiles, fine art, and graphic design.
The provision of art and design education has grown relatively slowly in the post-war period so that in November 1979, for example, there were only 34,707 students taking courses leading to recognized qualifications in art and design of whom 19,988 were on non-advanced courses, and 14,719 on advanced courses; these represented just over two per cent of all students in further education studying for recognized qualifications.
In addition, there is a much larger number of students taking recreational courses in art and design.
The field of art and design education represents a very broad spectrum of study and as far as it is possible to distinguish between ‘art’ and ‘design’the former is generally used to denote painting and sculpture and the latter is concerned with the production of graphic material, three-dimensional or textile/fashion artefacts by hand or machine processing.
Moreover, design for industrial production consists much more in supplying the needs of commerce, professional and public bodies, often quite small in size, than those of large-scale manufacturing organizations.
In general terms, the present structure of courses in art and design may be sub-divided into five main categories:(1) foundation courses,(2) non-degree vocational courses,(3) degree courses,(4) courses of teacher education, and (5) recreational courses.
We will now briefly examine each category, outlining the developments which have taken place since the beginning of the decade.
l Foundation courses
As the title implies, foundation courses are primarily designed to offer a preparatory training for students wishing to enter more advanced courses or to pursue an activity in art and design.
In this regard they are a vital element in the system and serve two very important functions: they provide a basic general education in art and design and thus constitute a valuable educational experience in their own right; and they are diagnostic in that they enable students to determine their abilities and select further courses of specialist study.
In so far as they have grown up in an ad hoc fashion, designed by the art colleges on an individual basis, it is difficult to generalize about them.
However, they are usually one-year, full-time courses, though some extend over two years, and entry is normally at seventeen or eighteen.
In some cases, however, the exigencies of timetabling for examinations and the demands made on students by applications for courses of further study can reduce the effective time available to the one-year foundation courses to as little as twenty or twenty-four weeks.
Entry qualifications are generally the same, that is five O level GCE passes or their equivalent, as those required to continue on to degree and other higher level courses, which is indeed what the great majority of students do when they have successfully completed their foundation courses.
Another form of entry is available in the form of pre-foundation courses which are offered by some colleges.
These are one-year full-time courses which are normally designed for sixteen-year-olds.
It is also the case that the great majority of students entering advanced courses in art and design have come from foundation courses, a few having come from school with GCE A level passes in art.
To some extent, therefore, A level art/design classes offered by the schools are in competition with foundation courses offered by art colleges; however, the two are not strictly comparable in that the former are considered by many to be less suitable as pre-entry training for higher level courses in that their diagnostic value is much less than that of foundation courses.
The latter, therefore, constitute a vital sector of art and design education about whose future there is a good deal of debate.
The basic problem is that, unlike other courses in this field, they have never been given into the care and custody of a national body so that there is no established basis for recognition, either as equivalent to qualifications at a similar level in other fields or as a stage leading to higher level courses.
Both the Inter-Regional Standing Committee for Art and Design Education (IRSCADE) and NATFHE have pressed for some form of national validation of foundation courses and the former organization, having collected views from the colleges offering the courses, has listed five future possibilities.
These are: that they remain  as at present, organized and administered on an ad hoc basis; that responsibility for them be given to the CNAA; that they become the responsibility of TEC; that they become the responsibility of a joint CNAA/TEC body to be set up; and that a new and independent validating body be established specifically for foundation courses.
IRSCADE, itself, has recommended that TEC and the CNAA get together to explore ways of establishing a joint validation procedure.
While it remains to be seen which, if any, of these options is adopted, it is not very encouraging that in recent years a number of offers of adoption have apparently been made by national bodies, only to be discouraged by the DES.
Non-degree vocational courses
Both in the number of students involved and the colleges and departments offering the courses, these form the largest part of art and design education.
The great majority of vocational courses are broadly those covered by the four Area committees of DATEC (the Technician Education Council's Committee for Art and Design).
These are graphic design, illustration, photography, film and television, audio-visual studies, and visual communication; fashion, textile design, and surface pattern design; industrial design, display and exhibition design, and interior and environmental design; and design crafts, general vocational design, and general art and design.
They include a wide range of full-time and part-time courses which vary considerably in length, level and objectives.
The courses may be broadly sub-divided into ‘advanced’, and ‘non-advanced’.
As far as the former are concerned, the term ‘advanced’ is applied to vocational courses in the sense that the level of work achieved is similar to that of other high-level courses, although the entry standards may sometimes be lower, and the majority of students taking them have already successfully completed Foundation Courses.
In addition to DATEC's Higher Certificates and Diplomas, there is a number of well-known high-level vocational courses like those leading to awards of a professional body, such as Diploma and assessment for Diploma membership of the Society of Industrial Artists and Designers (SIAD), one of the more influential bodies in this area.
Such courses which may relate to graphic design, fashion/textile design, interior design, and product design are usually of similar duration to those leading to CNAA degrees, that is three years full-time, and the numbers taking them have grown gradually over the years.
In 1982, for example, over 1,430 candidates from ninety-seven colleges were assessed for the SIAD Diploma membership, of which over 88 per cent were accepted.
Non-advanced courses lead primarily to DATEC Certificates and Diplomas and are taken on both a full-time and part-time basis.
In addition, there are a number of well-established and successful regionally validated schemes, such as those run by the East Anglian, Northern and Southern RACs, leading to the award of Certificates and Diplomas.
However, in contrast to the position in further education generally, vocational courses in art and design show a preponderance of students on full-time rather than part-time courses.
Full-time provision includes courses of one to three and four years' duration, some of which may be studied as separate ‘end-on’ courses and many of which provide opportunities for transfer of suitable students to degree courses.
Many of the full-time courses include opportunity for short-term release for industrial experience and some are organized on a more clearly defined ‘sandwich’ basis.
Part-time courses which are available for similar periods of study as for full-time courses usually involve an average of eight hours attendance at college each week, predominantly on a ‘day release’ basis.
There are also short intensive courses available on a part-time basis, designed to develop a particular craft skill or to bring practical or technical studies up to date.
For some years now, there has not surprisingly been a strong feeling among colleges and faculties and departments of art and design that a rational and nationally recognized structure for vocational courses is long overdue.
As long ago as 1970, the Coldstream-Summerson Report reflected the growing concern about vocational courses and suggested they be recognized so that they became design ‘technician’ courses along the lines of the definition laid down in the 1969 Haslegrave Report.
This initiative led in turn to the setting-up of a working party, under the chairmanship of Mr A.S.
Gann of the DES, to survey the provision of vocational non-advanced courses in art and design, to consider the extent to which that provision met employment needs and to propose a pattern for the future.
The Gann Report appeared in April 1974 and made a series of recommendations designed to fit non-advanced vocational courses in art and design into the general pattern of further education.
Its survey of the field showed that there were some 13,000 students taking these courses, mostly on a full-time basis, in 176 institutions including art colleges, polytechnics and other further education establishments.
Having concluded that it was not possible accurately to assess industry's wishes, the Report then proceeded to make a number of far-reaching recommendations.
First, however, it disposed of the concept of ‘design technician’ put forward by the Coldstream-Summerson Report, a concept which had evoked a hostile reception from the art colleges in 1970, on the grounds that the expression seemed to be in use only in the ceramics industry.
The Report stressed the need for a nationally recognized form of certification  and recommended the establishment of an autonomous body for vocational courses in art and design whose validating functions should resemble those of TEC and BEC, thereby enabling it where necessary to devise suitable courses as well as receiving submissions from colleges.
It then suggested a pattern of full-time study consisting of two courses, which were dubbed C1 and C2.
C1 was to be a two-year course for 16-plus school-leavers with suitable qualifications, leading to a certificate or diploma comparable in status to an OND, while C2 would normally be of two years' duration and would be for students not so highly qualified or well-motivated as those taking C1 courses.
Students who obtained a C1 Certificate and who did not wish to enter employment immediately should be able to undertake further studies; in some instances, this might be a Diploma in Art and Design course, but in most cases it would lead to a Higher Certificate of the validating body.
While C2 Certificate holders would normally proceed directly into employment, there should, however, be opportunities for some students to acquire credits allowing them eventually to obtain a C1 Certificate.
In summary, the Gann pattern of courses represents a rationalization of existing national and regional schemes, under the aegis of the proposed national body.
The Gann Report received qualified approval from the colleges, though in many quarters regret was expressed that it had not taken the opportunity to recommend a single validating body for all courses in art and design, and not just non-advanced ones, and that its proposal for two different types of courses was ‘elitist’ and a vain attempt to separate the sheep from the goats.
It was widely felt in the colleges that the Gann C1 and C2 groupings were an over-simplification of the existing situation, as the potential C1 students who possessed suitable qualifications and had clear objectives were in a minority.
Most students start with vague objectives or change direction quite  fundamentally during their first year so that a wider range of courses is required including some broadly-based and some of a more specialized nature.
In the upshot, nothing happened for more than two years, a fate common, it would seem, to reports on aspects of further education, until July 1976 when, in response to a parliamentary question, the then Minister of State for Education and Science, Mr Gerald Fowler, announced that the DES would reject the Gann proposal for an autonomous validating body, in favour of handing over control of non-advanced vocational art and design courses to TEC and BEC.
Responsibility was formally passed over to TEC in February 1977, and the Council established its committee for art and design education (DATEC) late that year under the chairmanship of Mr David Carter.
The establishment of DATEC was by no means universally welcomed in the art world, many artists and designers being strongly opposed to  links with TEC; the Association of Art Institutions, for example, urged the DES to recognize it as the appropriate organization to represent all aspects of art and design education.
On the other hand, the National Society for Art Education regarded the forthcoming introduction of TEC courses as an important development which would emphasize the needs of the design area to be better served by more appropriate courses and examinations.
DATEC issued its first major proposals in June 1978 which stated that students would be studying for awards conforming to the existing TEC pattern of Certificate, Higher Certificate, Diploma and Higher Diploma via any mode of study.
The major validation procedures would be carried out by four area committees covering graphic and visual communications; fashion, surface patterns and textiles; industrial design and interior design; and general art and design which takes in areas such as fine art study.
In November 1978, DATEC issued further proposals in which it affirmed its philosophy that colleges should have the maximum opportunity to develop courses which they consider to be most appropriate to educational, commercial and professional needs as they are able to identify and define them.
The structure of courses should be such that the majority would require a form of integrated study such as that described in the Grouped Course Scheme within existing TEC policy.
Alternatively, courses might be designed as unit-based programmes to reflect the character of particular subject areas and requirements for a flexible credit award system.
In both cases, assessment would be conducted internally and moderated externally in accordance with general TEC policy.
The minimum length of courses would be as for existing TEC courses at the equivalent level.
Steady progress has been made with the implementation of non-advanced DATEC courses and in January and May 1981 461 students were registered for Certificate courses and 2,866 for Diploma courses.
For various reasons, DATEC decided that, with one exception, no college proposals would be validated for Higher Certificate and Higher Diploma courses which would allow a start before September 1982; as a consequence, there are at present relatively small numbers of students on these courses.
DATEC hopes that there will eventually be a total of about 20,000 students on all its levels of courses, in some 170 centres, including a much higher number of girls than at present.
However, it may take some considerable time to reach this target; as the majority of DATEC courses are run in separate art colleges and these have been particularly squeezed by the current financial crisis, they are finding it particularly difficult to make the desired provision.
As is the case with TEC courses in general, the influence of DATEC on the art colleges has been considerable and they have been brought into curriculum development on a considerable scale.
Most of them  have chosen not to follow the unit structure common to TEC courses but have preferred a ‘grouped’ one as it is regarded as more appropriate in the art and design field.
Although DATEC has provided external moderators, who play a key role in maintaining standards, the colleges are also encouraged to provide their own assessors to assist staff where necessary and, as DATEC regards meeting industrial needs as a prime requirement, it has encouraged the colleges to appoint industrial assessors.
In general, DATEC courses seem to have got off to a reasonable start in the art colleges.
They have now been accepted by the CNAA as being equal and acceptable degree qualifications where appropriate and they do mark a major attempt at the rationalization of art and design education below degree level.
3 Degree courses
For little more than a decade, the high level qualification available to students seeking a first degree equivalent was the Diploma in Art and Design (Dip.AD).
Set up in the early 1960s, it was a three-year full-time course with four broad areas of specialization; fine art, graphic design, three-dimensional design, and textiles/fashion.
A national body, the National Council for Diplomas in Art and Design (NCDAD), was established in March 1961 to administer the award.
The normal minimum entry requirement was five GCE O levels plus the successful completion of, or exemption from, a foundation course, though exceptionally talented students could be admitted without the minimum qualifications.
Subsequently, a modest structure of post-diploma courses was created upon the basis of the Dip.AD.
This consisted of a small number of NCDAD approved courses, comprising a one-year Higher Diploma in Fine Art, Graphic Design, Textiles/Fashion or a two-year Higher Diploma in Interior or Industrial Design.
Within a few years of the introduction of the Dip.AD, it became apparent that all was not well and discontent in some of the art colleges culminated in the so-called ‘revolution’ of 1968 which centred on the then Hornsey and Guildford Colleges of Art.
The students and others were highly critical of the Dip.AD for a number of reasons, not all of them compatible: that it did not impart a sound technical training and failed to produce good design practitioners; that it was becoming so academic in content that it was losing touch with the market-place; that its status was popularly regarded as inferior to that of courses in other subjects which led to the award of degrees; and that instead of a network of inter-related courses imparting a wide range of studies, it offered only a small number of ladder-like disciplines.
The integration of the specialist colleges of art into larger institutions like polytechnics  also aroused apprehensions which added fuel to the flames.
In response to this unrest, the National Advisory Council on Art Education (NACAE) and the NCDAD set up the joint Coldstream-Summerson committee to examine the structure of higher art and design education and suggest improvements.
Its report, which appeared in September 1970, recommended that the structure of the Dip.AD be left relatively unchanged but that it be supplemented by the introduction of four-year sandwich courses, ‘directed more specifically towards certain categories of industrial and professional design practice’.
The government broadly accepted the Report's recommendations in July 1971 when it issued the long-awaited Circular 7/71 which also announced the prospect of some small expansion of art and design courses.
To that extent, the Circular received a cautious welcome in the art world, but nothing very concrete occurred until three years later when, on 1 September 1974, the NCDAD merged with the CNAA.
As a consequence, the Dip.AD and the Higher Diplomas in Art and in Design were replaced by the appropriate CNAA awards, but with no change required in entry qualifications.
Thus, Dip.AD courses were subsumed by those leading to the award of a BA degree with honours and the one to two years higher diploma courses to an MA degree.
In general, however, the content and character of existing Dip.AD courses remained unaltered.
Then, in 1975 and 1976, the CNAA's committee for Art and Design, which had been set up to monitor the existing provision, instituted a major review and renewal of approval of well over 100 BA honours courses.
By 1980–1, the number of CNAA first degree courses in art and design had grown to 196, catering for over 15,350 students, of whom the great majority were to be found in the four Dip.AD specialist areas of Fine Art, Graphic Design, Three Dimensional Design and Textile and Fashion Design.
However, a recent interesting development has been the introduction of multi-disciplinary courses such as that offered by the London College of Printing in Media and Production Design and by North Staffordshire Polytechnic in the history of design and visual arts with a chief study in ceramics.
The latter also offers a multi-disciplinary design course.
As yet, there is only a small number of multi-disciplinary courses on offer in England and Wales, but it is an important development which should be encouraged.
Another interesting development of the last year or two has been the introduction of courses in art and design, leading to the CNAA BA, by a few of the former colleges of education with large art, design and craft resources, which are now part of colleges of higher education.
They include Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education's course in Combined Craft Studies and the West Midlands College of Higher Education course in Visual Communication Studies.
There has been some concern expressed that these courses offered by the former colleges  of education have different objectives from those in art colleges, and might therefore lack professional competence, thereby creating ‘a dual standard within higher education’.
This concern highlights the problem of reconciling professional practice and standards with pedagogic demands in art and design education, an issue which is fundamental to its future development.
It is for this reason that the CNAA, in approving first degree courses, whose numbers have expanded two-fold since 1974, has been at pains to devise what it regards as more intellectually vigorous programmes than was the case with the Dip.AD.
Its Committee for Art and Design, for most of that period under the Chairmanship of David Bethel, the Director of Leicester Polytechnic, has been pursuing the Council's policy of achieving a balance between the main studies, on the one hand, and the history of art and design and complementary studies on the other.
As a result of its efforts, the history of art and design has been augmented by a wider range of what many would regard as more relevant options such as the History of industrial Design for would-be industrial designers.
As far as CNAA post-graduate studies are concerned, in the late 1970s the Council undertook a searching review, under the Chairmanship of David Bethel, of its then eighteen courses.
The review was regarded as necessary because the change from NCDAD higher diplomas to CNAA master's degree programmes had resulted in substantial increases in the teaching in art and design courses and what some regarded as a difficult switch from a professional to an intellectual approach.
The review was highly critical of some of the courses in art and design in the polytechnics and identified the lack of suitably qualified and experienced staff and the small number of bursaries available to suitable students.
Since then, there have been improvements in the standard and content of the courses concerned and by 1980–1 there were twenty-four of them in operation, recruiting 321 students.
Finally, art and design have increasingly been a part of proposals for courses leading to the award of Bachelor of Education degrees and Diplomas in Higher Education, a development which has posed the CNAA with some problems in guiding and assessing both the content and standard of such courses.
4 Teacher education courses
For the training of teachers in art, further education colleges have traditionally offered the one-year full-time course leading to the Post-Graduate Certificate in Education (Art Education), formerly the Art Teacher's Diploma (ATD) or Certificate (ATC).
For this purpose, nine institutions are currently recognized and approved by the DES: Birmingham, Brighton, Bristol, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Middlesex and Manchester Polytechnics and the former Cardiff College of Art, now merged into the South Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education.
In 1981–2, the nine centres catered for 425 students.
In recent years, however, following the merger of the colleges of education with polytechnics and colleges of higher education, a number of further education establishments are training art teachers for the school sector by such routes as a Bachelor of Education course in which Art and Design forms a substantial part.
In addition, the Dip.HE may form the first two years of this course pattern.
Thus the routes to becoming an art teacher have become more flexible, both in terms of the range of courses available and the stages at which students can choose a career as a teacher of art and design.
In general, the merger of monotechnic colleges of art and colleges of education with polytechnics and colleges of higher education has, in the words of NATFHE, ‘brought the education of art and design into a multi-disciplinary and multi-professional educational environment’.
Whether it is thereby improved is, of course, a matter of opinion.
5 Recreational courses
As we indicated in the introduction, we are mainly concerned in this book with courses that lead to recognized qualifications.
However, recreational provision in the field of art and design education is exceptional in that it normally caters for some 80,000 students, many times more than those on courses leading to qualifications, and has always been at the centre of adult education.
Most courses are held in the evening in evening institutes and include such subjects as drawing, design, painting, sketching, pottery, modelling, sculpture and photography.
Clearly, art and design education of this sort can provide adults with a great deal of stimulus and pleasure, thereby enriching their lives.
However, money for adult education in general has always been in short supply — as the 1973 Russell Report pointed out, only just over 1 per cent of LEA expenditure was devoted to it — and art education is no exception to the general rule.
Since then, due to the economic recession, recreational courses have been particularly subject to a series of expenditure cuts so that facilities have declined, courses have been curtailed or cancelled, and fees have been increased.
None the less, recreational courses in art and design continue to flourish in many areas and, as and when the economic climate improves, it is to be hoped that the colleges will be enabled to increase their provision.
It is in the very nature of the art and design world that differences of philosophy and emphasis make themselves felt.
One such fundamental difference is that between fine art at one end of the spectrum and design at the other; this has been defined in terms of objectives, so that whereas in design one is working towards a defined goal with aims that are clear from the outset, in fine art there may be no defined goal other than satisfying the artist's inner demands.
Clearly, the distinction is not always so apparent; sometimes artists work as designers, and vice-versa.
However, the differences are sufficient to make some lecturers feel that the linking of art and design is a marriage of convenience which would be better sundered, even to the extent of having separate departments.
Fortunately, such a divorce is highly unlikely to occur and would, in any case, be undesirable, if only because art and design constitutes a single spectrum.
The friction which has always existed between the two camps was made worse in the early 1970s when a number of colleges of art, some of them of considerable distinction, were swallowed up by polytechnics.
This led to fears in some quarters that the polytechnics as tough, pragmatic and workaday institutions were unlikely to create a climate in which art and design could grow and flourish.
Such fears are probably misconceived and in the years that have elapsed since the mergers took place there is no reason to believe that art education has suffered unduly at the hands of engineers and scientists in senior positions in the polytechnics.
Recent years have also witnessed changes in the overall structure of art education courses.
As we have seen, the CNAA validates courses at the highest level, with DATEC operating at the next level.
In terms of validation, therefore, the only area of uncertainty concerns the foundation courses which still lack a national validating body.
Thus, to a considerable extent, the pattern of courses in art and design has been ‘rationalized’ and brought more in line with the rest of further education.
Whether this rationalization improves the quality of the courses, still less solves the problems of the art and design world, is another matter altogether.
It will certainly do nothing to resolve the philosophical doubts of those who regard art and design as essentially different or yet others working in the art and design faculties of polytechnics who fear that the technological and scientific ambiance of the institution is inimical to the needs and style of high-level art education.
Indisputably, however, art and design education occupies an important place both in the life of the country at large and also in further education in particular, and its practitioners are only too well aware of the difficulties which they face.
The future is not without hope, however, and developments such as the introduction of part-time courses leading to professional qualifications, a relatively neglected area of art education, may offer some promise of success.
Education in agriculture
For the most part, agricultural education which includes education for horticulture, forestry, poultry husbandry and dairying is carried on in specialist colleges of agriculture and horticulture, together with some general technical colleges.
In November 1979, there were just over 23,000 students taking agriculture courses leading to recognized qualifications in over forty further education establishments in England and Wales; of these students almost 1,750 were on advanced courses, mainly full-time, and just over 21,300 on non-advanced courses, mainly part-time.
The range of courses presently available, both advanced and non-advanced, has grown in piecemeal fashion, largely in response to the technological revolution which British agriculture has achieved over the last 30 years.
At the non-advanced level, four main types of full-time course are available: the Ordinary National Diploma (OND), a three-year sandwich course in general agricultural subjects, designed to meet the needs of the ‘technician’; the National Certificate, a one-year course for those intending to work as practical farmers, growers, or farm secretaries; College Award courses which vary in length and in standard and are often of a specialist nature such as flower-growing or farm secretarial work; and BEC Diploma courses which are being introduced by a small number of colleges.
In addition, there is a substantial number of part-time courses at both craft and technician levels leading to awards of the CGLI and some of the Regional Examining Bodies.
As we have seen, in terms of student numbers, most activity in agricultural education is on a part-time basis; in November 1979, for example, almost 15,000 students were taking day release courses.
Although most of these are CGLI craft courses, as there is not the same clear-cut distinction between craft and technician functions in agriculture as there is in other industries, many of the Institute's schemes straddle the craft-technician boundary.
For students possessing the necessary qualifications, there are two main categories of advanced full-time courses; degree courses offered by a number of universities; and Higher National Diploma (HND) courses offered by some of the colleges of agriculture, which are science-based and concerned with the technological and managerial aspects of farming.
In addition, two agricultural colleges — Seale-Hayne, Devon in association with Plymouth Polytechnic and Harper Adams, Shropshire in association with Wolverhampton Polytechnic now offer CNAA first degree courses in Agriculture and Agricultural Technology respectively.
Also, these two and three other agricultural colleges offer full-time post-degree and post-HND courses, generally of one-year's duration, in such subjects as agricultural marketing farm management and farm mechanization.
As part of the general plan to reshape agricultural education to meet the changing needs of the industry and to bring it more in line with the rest of further education, the National Advisory Council on Education for Industry and Commerce appointed a committee late in 1970, under the chairmanship of Professor J.P.
Hudson, Director of Long Ashton Research Station, University of Bristol, to examine and report on both the provision of full-time courses below that of OND and also all part-time courses in further education.
In previous years, a series of reports had dealt with higher-level full-time courses, so that the Hudson Committee's work would complete the review of the whole pattern of agricultural education.
The Hudson Report, a very thorough and painstaking piece of work, was a long time in gestation; it was sent to the Minister towards the end of 1973 and was eventually published in July 1974.
The report concluded that the pattern of courses and examinations below the level of OND lacked clarity and cohesion and that, consequently, there was a need to rationalize their provision so as to offer students a recognizable ladder of progression within clearly defined educational stages.
To this end, it recommended the setting-up of an educationally independent national validating and examining body, serviced and administered by the CGLI, and composed of representatives of educational, industrial and training interests.
It also recommended that new entrants to the industry should be encouraged to attend short induction courses providing practically oriented instruction and information on opportunities in industry; and that craft education should be founded on two interrelated phases, normally completed within two or three years depending on whether or not full-time study is included, leading to a national craft qualification.
In broad terms, our membership of the European Economic Community was likely to quicken the pace of technical and economic change in the industry, thereby causing a further contraction of the labour force and a further substitution of capital for labour, though at a slower rate than in the previous decade.
It was necessary, therefore, for a higher proportion of an increasingly skilled work force to receive vocational education, with a need for management appreciation at all levels.
The Hudson Report received a general welcome from interested parties in agricultural education but, like reports on many other areas of further education, nothing happened for a long time.
It was not until August 1976 that the then Secretary of State declared his intention of accepting its argument for a single, national, validating agency.
However, it was not to be autonomous, as the committee wanted; instead, discussions would be held with bodies such as TEC and BEC with a view to using existing validation schemes.
This was not the most logical of arguments, it would seem, if only because the Hudson recommendations were concerned with craft courses, while TEC and BEC, the  latter of which in any case was only likely to be peripherally involved, were supposed to be operating at technician level.
However, the DES then began discussions with TEC, BEC, the CGLI, and a number of other unspecified bodies, as a result of which it issued, in March 1978, a consultative paper on ‘future validating and examining arrangements for courses of agricultural education at craft level’.
The document began by declaring that ‘while BEC and TEC must be closely involved with the new arrangements, it would not be appropriate for these Councils to assume responsibility for levels of agricultural education which are not their proper concern’.
Clearly, the intervening period since the Minister's statement of August 1976 had led to some clearer thinking.
Accordingly, the document proposed the setting-up of a new Committee for Vocational Education in Agriculture.
It would be established within the structure of the CGLI but would have a special relationship with TEC, BEC and other examining and validating bodies.
Once established, the Committee's major task would be to devise a unified pattern of awards at the craft level, in accordance with the spirit of the Hudson proposals.
For the Committee's guidance, the document attempted to define craft and technician education by suggesting that the dividing line between technician and craft courses should be fixed at a level below that of OND, so that National Certificate courses, for example, should become the responsibility of the new validating body.
The consultative paper was widely circulated and was received with mixed feelings.
While there was near unanimity that there should be a single validating body, it was felt that it should cover all courses below degree level, including OND.
The West Midlands RAC, for example, was typical in arguing that the attempt to differentiate between ‘craftsman’ and ‘technician’was based on a misunderstanding of agricultural practice which did not distinguish between them; it therefore advocated the setting-up of a separate National Council with responsibility for establishing a unified structure of agricultural education below degree level.
There was also widespread agreement on another major point, namely that the new committee should not form an integral part of the structure of the CGLI.
The next stage in this shifting argument  occurred at the end of November 1978 with the appearance of a brief DES statement entitled Agricultural Education in England and Wales: Validating Arrangements.
Having taken on board the two main objections to its March 1978 proposals, the DES reverted to its original proposal and in order‘to avoid multiple problems of interface with existing bodies’, it considered it essential that the new Committee ‘should be based within one of the major existing validating bodies’ which, however, should not be the CGLI.
It came as no great surprise to discover that, in the Department's view, the new Committee ‘could well function within the  structure of the Technician Education Council’.
Having decided that since the CGLI was not really concerned with technician courses, it was inappropriate for it to be the validating body, it seemed hardly logical to give the responsibility to TEC, which had no remit for craft courses.
However, the DES drew a somewhat dubious analogy with art and design education and suggested that the TEC should set up ‘a completely new committee’ along the lines of DATEC.
TEC was, therefore, invited ‘to undertake this responsibility and open discussions with the other interests concerned, with a view to reaching agreement as quickly as possible’.
TEC provisionally accepted the role allocated to it by the DES, but its acceptance was drowned in complaints from a number of quarters.
Particularly annoyed was the CGLI which said that the DES statement had included ‘some unwarranted and damaging remarks about the Institute’, a gaffe for which it received an apology from no less a person than the Permanent Secretary.
More important, the CGLI argued that the latest proposal from the DES would break undertakings given to it in 1973, when it agreed to provide the administrative services for TEC, that the latter would be confined to technician occupations and would not be used as an instrument of government policy.
In any case, the CGLI already catered for the overwhelming majority of the students concerned in all the relevant subjects.
This fierce reaction caused the DES to think again about its proposal, a process no doubt complicated by the change of government in the summer of 1979.
At the end of the following year, in December 1980, the CGLI submitted its own proposals for the constitution of the validating body and, eventually, in July 1981, the government's position was made clear in a ministerial statement to parliament.
In announcing future arrangements for the validation of sub-degree courses in agriculture and related subjects, it stated the CGLI had been invited to establish a National Consultative Group for the Co-ordination of Validation Arrangements in Agriculture and related subjects.
As the Group's terms of reference, scope, functions and core membership were closely based on the CGLI's proposals, then clearly the Institute might be said to have won the day.
The Group, jointly financed by the DES and CGLI, was duly established for a three-year period, and its remit is fourfold: to review existing provision; to identify any overlap or gaps which may exist; to identify an appropriate integrated and progressive pattern of schemes and awards; and to make recommendations to the appropriate validating bodies.
When formulating its eventual recommendations, the National Consultative Group will have to take into account two essential differences between agriculture and the rest of British industry: it is for the most part composed of relatively small-scale and highly efficient enterprises employing limited numbers of men and women working in relative  isolation from one another; and, as we have seen, the boundaries between the craftsman and technician in agriculture are shifting and difficult, if not impossible, to define.
Another analogous body which has come into existence within the last year or so is the National Consultative Committee for Agriculture Education (NCCAE).
As the DES decided in 1980 to discontinue its approval arrangements for OND by 1982 and for other courses by 1981, the Association of County Councils and the Standing Conference of Regional Advisory Councils agreed to set up a national committee, namely the NCCAE, to replace the role of the DES.
Based on the East Anglian RAC, its main function is to receive and consider proposals for new courses.
The impending introduction of the Youth Training Scheme, due to operate fully in September 1983, will have considerable implications for the agricultural industry.
Clearly, it will pose a number of problems: for example, how many young people will come forward for training in agriculture and can the industry absorb them; is it desirable to have one overall YTS scheme for agriculture and its related industries and, if so, how will it be financed; and what should be the content and organization of the programmes and should they take place on the farm or in the colleges, or both?
In response to the challenge of YTS, the National Farmers' Union has proposed a one-year Youth Training Scheme in Agriculture both to help reduce the effects of job shortages for young people and also to provide suitable first-year training for committed new entrants to the industry.
The scheme includes off-the-job training and further education of a minimum of three months, though it may extend to six months, either on a day or block release basis, together with work experience periods with employers structured to give trainees a wide range of jobs.
In the meantime, the Manpower Services Commission is encouraging the agricultural colleges to develop pilot schemes for YTS.
Finally, while the agricultural industry has greatly increased its productivity since the end of the war, it has accomplished this with a much diminished labour force.
Because of increasing mechanization, higher wages, and higher costs, the agricultural work-force diminished by about 60 per cent in the thirty years from 1946 to 1975, from almost one million to under 400,000.
Since then, a much smaller decline has occurred and in 1980 the work-force numbered slightly more than 350,000.
Because of the increasing use of complex machinery and sophisticated farming methods, many of those engaged in agriculture require managerial and supervisory skills and it is to this area of provision that the agricultural colleges should be turning in the next few years.
Education in management
Management education can be broadly defined as being predominantly concerned with the training of men and women for the higher-level supervisory and decision-taking posts.
It thus differs from business education whose concern is more broadly based in terms of areas of knowledge and the techniques relevant to business operations, though, of course, there is a good deal of overlap between the two subject areas.
It is convenient for our purpose to adopt the DES definition of courses in management education as being those which are primarily post-graduate and post experience.
A massive growth in management education took place in the second half of the 1960s, both in the further education and the university sectors.
The period since then, however, has been one of consolidation and, in some instances, retrenchment within further education, but the principal management qualification continues to be the Diploma in Management Studies (DMS), despite some changes.
This qualification can be taken as either a post-graduate or a post-experience course and is equally relevant to a young graduate starting a career in management or to an older man with some experience of management, who wishes to bring himself up to date with the latest practice.
It aims to provide the student with a basic knowledge of the background to industry, to raise his general level of understanding of management processes, and to acquaint him with the tools and techniques of management.
While the course leads to a national qualification, it is very flexible and can be studied on a full-time, sandwich, block release or part-time basis.
Until a few years ago, the DMS was awarded to students satisfactorily completing a course at a college approved by the DES Committee to offer the Diploma in Management Studies or, in Scotland, by the Scottish Committee.
However, the development of CNAA higher degrees and specialist management diplomas left the DMS in a somewhat isolated position and the two DMS committees decided to merge with the CNAA, a process completed by September 1976.
Accordingly, the DMS has now become the Council's diploma-level qualification in general management.
At present, about ninety further education colleges offer courses leading to the award of the DMS, of which forty-nine are main and forty-one extra-mural centres; of this total three centres are in Wales, four in Scotland and two in Northern Ireland.
Since the Diploma was introduced in its present form in 1961, probably more than 20,000 students have gained the qualification, making it by far the most popular post-graduate management qualification in the country.
The numbers of the students taking the course grew steadily until the late 1970s and in 1978–9, for example, there were 6,606 enrolled students.
Since then, however, there has been a decline in numbers and in 1981–2  enrolments totalled some 5,400.
While this is due in small measure to the axing of TOPS awards and the establishment of new courses leading to post-graduate diplomas which have attracted students who would otherwise have enrolled on a DMS course, the main reason has been the decline in the economy which has resulted in few companies being willing to sponsor students to undertake the course.
Since 1979, the CNAA has both allowed and promoted new post-graduate diplomas, mainly in personnel management and marketing, and, in 1981–2 there were twenty-three approved centres offering these courses with approximately 600 enrolments.
In addition, there has been some growth in part-time courses leading to CNAA master's degrees and to date twelve centres have been approved for this purpose, offering courses to about 350 students.
Taken together, therefore, these new courses and the DMS represent relatively little decline overall in the numbers of students in the maintained sector pursuing post-experience management education in the last few years.
The DMS itself, as the major vehicle of such provision, has been the subject of much debate during the last decade, principally about its nature and content.
While it has come in for a certain amount of criticism, it has also attracted much praise, especially from industry.
An interesting trend in recent years is that the balance of support for the DMS has moved away from the private sector of industry and business towards the public sector, especially among the large nationalized companies.
The debate over the most effective way to promote management education in general and to ensure effective provision in the public sector institutions led the Secretary of State in March 1971 to announce a plan for the creation of twelve Regional Management Centres (RMCs).
These were to be based on a number of polytechnics and other further education establishments which already possessed strong departments of management and in some cases the designation related to a single establishment and in others to a grouping of two or more colleges.
The RMCs would have four main functions: to be the focal point in the regions of further growth in the provision of full-time higher level courses; to provide a wide range of management courses to meet the needs of industry, commerce and the public service; to meet the needs of industry and commerce through consultancy and applied research; and to act as resource centres for further education colleges in their regions.
In other words, the basic premise behind the establishment of RMCs was that they should be centres of excellence, performing a co-ordinating role for the provision of management education and its development in their regions.
As a policy of institutional innovation, based on national provision and designed to promote a single subject, the creation of the RMCs is unique in British further education.
The twelve RMCs fall into two broad groups, those consisting of one institution and those of two or more colleges.
The first group consists of six RMCs: Kingston RMC based on Kingston Polytechnic; Southern Counties RMC on Portsmouth Polytechnic; South West RMC on Bristol Polytechnic; Welsh RMC on the Polytechnic of Wales; West Midland RMC based on North Staffordshire Polytechnic; and Yorkshire and Humberside RMC based on Sheffield City Polytechnic.
The second group also consists of six RMCs: Anglian RMC based on North East London Polytechnic and Chelmer Institute of Higher Education; East Midlands RMC on Leicester and Trent Polytechnics and Derby Lonsdale College of Higher Education; London RMC on the Polytechnic of Central London in association with City of London Polytechnic, North London Polytechnic, Polytechnic of the South Bank, Thames Polytechnic and South West London College; Northern RMC on Newcastle, Sunderland and Teesside Polytechnics; North Western RMC on Liverpool Polytechnic, Manchester Polytechnic, Preston Polytechnic and St Helens College of Technology; and Thames Valley RMC based on Buckinghamshire College of Higher Education, High Wycombe, Oxford Polytechnic and Slough College of Higher Education.
In some cases, the final shape of the RMC is different from that originally envisaged and some of them took as much as five years to come into existence.
While the single-centre institutions found it somewhat easier to adopt the mantle of RMC, inevitably some of the multi-centre RMCs found their development delayed by management problems, especially where they were composed of a number of colleges which had to negotiate a series of complex mergers before they could start.
These negotiations have in some instances resulted in changes in the original plans.
For example, in the case of the West Midlands RMC, which was originally planned to have consisted of North Staffordshire and Wolverhampton Polytechnics, it is now based only on the former; and, in contrast, the London RMC, which was originally to have been based on the Polytechnic of Central London, now encompasses five additional institutions.
In some regions, difficulties arose because some of the colleges comprising RMCs were offering considerably more management education than others, because of status difference between institutions, and because of internal stresses within colleges, some of which accorded management education a higher priority than others.
For these reasons, single-centre RMCs had fewer teething troubles and were, generally, quicker off the mark than multi-centre ones.
Another problem that has beset the RMCs is that, instead of being financed from special, earmarked central or regional funds, they have had to derive the necessary resources from the parent institutions.
Inevitably, this has brought them into competition for limited resources with the other activities of the polytechnics and colleges.
As we have  seen, the RMCs were designed to improve and co-ordinate the management education provided by a large number of neighbouring institutions in the regions, a role they have performed with somewhat mixed results.
An example of one of the more successful RMCs is the Anglian which in its first four years set about becoming a centre of excellence.
More recently, it has concentrated on building up working relationships with other colleges in the region both in respect of the DMS and the relatively new Certificate of Management Studies (CMS).
It has extended its DMS course and has introduced a successful master's degree programme; as a result the number of staff it employs has doubled during the past ten years.
However, during the past year or two, as a result of the cuts in funds available to the polytechnic at large it has found itself, like other RMCs, under increasing financial pressure.
The developments undertaken by the Anglian RMC during the past ten years are typical of the RMCs as a group.
A number of them, like the Anglian, have developed master's degrees programmes and Sheffield, East Midlands and the North West are all prominent in this respect.
They have made a major contribution to staff development by means of short courses and modular programmes in various areas of management education and have developed the Certificate of Management Studies on a significant scale.
The CMS is a one-year part-time course offered by the Business Education Council and, with about 1,000 students a year in over 70 approved centres, it is its largest post-experience course.
The CMS, which is intermediate between the DMS and courses for supervisors provided under the aegis of the National Examinations Board in Supervisory Studies (NEBSS), has been in operation for three years and has tended to concentrate on providing training for personnel in the employ of major public sector institutions like the National Health Service and local government.
In the last few years, the RMCs have also been used extensively by outside clients, most notably by the MSC's Training Services Division which has commissioned programmes for unemployed managers, especially those intending to set up small businesses.
Finally, some of the RMCs have also moved into the area of Open Learning techniques in order to make their part-time courses more widely available.
The way in which the RMCs have developed has been analysed most interestingly by Nancy Foy in a survey of management education undertaken on behalf of the Foundation of Management Education, itself a body which has put a great deal of effort into stimulating initiatives in management education.
She concludes that, on balance, the RMCs have done an excellent job and that the most successful ones have been based on colleges or groups of colleges which already had pockets of energy and entrepreneurial spirit and like the South West RMC were closely linked with the communities they served.
To promote their interests, and to provide a forum for the expression of opinions, the RMC's set up the Regional Management Centres Association (RMCS) in the mid-1970s.
However, some management education is provided in technical colleges which are not associated with RMCs and, somewhat concerned lest their work and status be eclipsed by nearby RMCs, they set up a separate pressure group in the form of the United Kingdom Standing Conference of Management Heads (UKSC).
However, partly perhaps in recognition of the hard times ahead for all purveyors of management education, the two bodies have settled their differences and in January 1982 established a common single body, the Association of Management Education Centres (AMEC).
As we have seen, therefore, in the ten years since their inception, the RMCs have made a positive contribution to the provision of management education.
Certainly, the need to provide high-quality courses in management education remains as pressing as ever.
As has been the case for years, one of the major difficulties in making such provision is the shortage of suitably qualified and experienced teachers.
At the beginning of the decade, the Mind Report concluded that the situation warranted urgent attention and recommended, among other things, a considerable development of in-service training.
The RMCs were seen as perhaps the major vehicle for such provision and it is encouraging that they are beginning to make a substantial contribution by developing a wide range of in-service short courses and workshops, which in some areas are showing signs of laying the foundation for longer qualification-based programmes.
How far they will be affected by the cuts in resources for higher education which are biting deeper and deeper remains to be seen.
Further education in Wales
While further education throughout the United Kingdom changed rapidly during the 1970s, Wales was the scene of particularly dramatic developments.
In addition to the changes which flowed from the reorganization of the colleges of education, the work of TEC and BEC, and the initiatives sponsored by the Manpower Services Commission, Wales was subject to two other particularly important developments.
First, there was the government's decision to transfer responsibility for all non-university institutions of higher and further education from the Secretary of Sate for Education and Science to the Secretary of State for Wales, as from 1 April 1978.
Second, there was, of course, the portentous issue of devolution which, had it come about, would clearly have had very considerable implications for the Principality.
In this chapter, we shall concentrate on those features of change and development which are particular to Wales and, in the process, endeavour to identify the characteristics of the organization and administration of Welsh further education which distinguish it from its counterpart in England.
The transfer of responsibility for all non-university institutions of higher and further education to the Secretary of State for Wales which is now more than four years old seems to have created no major administrative problems.
However, it has inevitably led to a fundamental alteration in the relationship between the government and the Welsh LEAs.
During this period, the Welsh Office has created a Departmental structure by which responsibility for Welsh education is vested in three divisions: Schools, Further Education, and Education Services, each division being supervised by an Assistant Secretary.
The Further Education Division is divided into two branches: Branch 1, which is broadly responsible for all teaching matters and for adult education; and Branch 2, whose remit includes the planning and development of both advanced and non-advanced further education, including course approval.
Clearly, further education is now well represented within the Welsh Office and the central authority in Wales is beginning to give a lead to its future development.
Inevitably, major developments in the administrative structure and financial management of further education in the country as a whole have applied to Wales, though often with considerable variations.
As we have seen, when the Conservative government came into office in 1979, it decided not to implement the Oakes Report proposal that an Advanced Further Education Council for Wales be set up.
Instead it capped the advanced further education pool for 1979–80 and set up a Working Group to examine the future management of the pool.
For that year and for the following one, 1980–1, there was a single pool for England and Wales.
However, as the government proposed to separate the Rate Support Grant systems for England and Wales, it decided that it would be logical to have separate pooling arrangements for the two countries; consequently, there has been a separate pool for Wales since 1981–2.
This is partly a reflection of the growing responsibility which the Welsh Office has assumed for education at all levels in the Principality.
In welcoming this decision on the grounds that a separate Welsh pool was a natural concomitant to a separate Welsh Rate Support Grant, the Welsh Joint Education Committee (WJEC), the RAC for Wales, pointed out that Wales faced a number of particular problems relating to the financial management of public sector higher education, including the need for bilingual provision, in English and Welsh, at Bangor Normal College and Trinity College, Carmarthen; and the fact that North Wales has no polytechnic and is attempting to provide higher level courses at the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education.
The next major development occurred with the issuing of the DES consultative document on the funding and management of public sector higher education.
The one relating to England appeared in July 1981 and that for Wales, entitled Higher Education in Wales outside the Universities: A Discussion Document, was published by the Welsh Office in August 1981.
In it, the Welsh Office stated that a solution for Wales had to take into account four major factors which distinguished it from England: the Welsh Office had been responsible for public sector higher education in Wales since 1978; the scale of the problem was quite different in that only eight local authorities and a small number of colleges were involved; the Regional Advisory Council for the whole of Wales, the WJEC, was made up of these local authorities; and it did not make sense, either on economic or educational grounds, to expect colleges in Wales to provide as wide a range of provision as would be expected in England.
The document then put forward three possible options: the setting up of a small central body, along the lines of Model A in the English Green Paper, which would have a majority of its membership from Welsh local authorities; a Model B type central body which would disburse government funds in Wales and would take from local authority control the colleges providing a significant amount of  higher education, including teacher training; and the direct association in Wales of the solution adopted in England through the setting up of a Welsh sub-committee of the main organization.
The document inevitably evoked much discussion within the Principality, and the WJEC, for example, responded by advocating a solution which it had been cherishing for some time, namely the creation of a small advisory body made up of representatives of three bodies: the Welsh Office; the Welsh Counties Committee, consisting of local authority representatives; and the WJEC.
It also pointed out that all these proposals had a major weakness in that none of them gave consideration to the university sector, which because of its involvement in the provision and validation of teacher-training courses and because of the different, smaller scale of Welsh provision, made its contribution more critical.
Not surprisingly, the Welsh Counties Committee was also in favour of the WJEC proposal.
In the upshot, however, the government decided on the first option proposed in its discussion document, namely the establishment of an advisory body dominated by local authority representatives, the Welsh Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education (WAB).
The upper tier, the Committee, chaired by John Stradling Thomas, Minister of State for Wales, consists of eight local authority elected members, one from each county, four representing the WJEC and four the Welsh Counties Committee.
The lower tier, the Board, is chaired by Professor Robert Steel, until recently the Principal of University College, Swansea, and consists of twenty members with representatives from local authorities, the WJEC, industry and business, the trade unions, and educational interests.
The unique position of the University of Wales in respect of higher education within the Principality is recognised by one of its representatives having full membership of the Board.
It is interesting that, both in England and Wales, the Board, which is the body that undertakes the detailed consideration of resource allocation and makes recommendations to the upper tier, has a chairman from the university sector.
WAB will be supported initially by advisory panels concerned with the apportionment of the ‘pool’, advanced course approval, and teacher training.
Significantly, the Welsh Advisory Board includes in its terms of reference to advise the Secretary of State for Wales on teacher training as well, an area not yet fully considered by NAB.
To date, the Board has had three meetings, while the Committee has only met once, so that it is still too early to be sure how it will operate.
However, its terms of reference require it to seek effective liaison with the university and voluntary sectors of higher education in Wales, and with NAB in England.
The Board and Committee share a Joint Secretariat based on the WJEC, the Welsh Office and the Welsh Counties Committee.
The last few years have also witnessed some change in the administrative  structure of the Welsh Joint Education Committee (WJEC).
Its functions differ from those of English RACs in that, in addition to acting as an association of local authorities, as an examining board, and as an RAC, it also has the responsibility for promoting the Welsh language and culture in education.
Its RAC function, as with the English ones, includes the operation of a course approval mechanism in conjunction with the Welsh Office Education Department, including in-service training for further education teachers in Wales.
Like most of the English RACs, it has recently streamlined its administrative structure and in order to oversee the wide field described above, as well as the coordination of non-advanced further education in Wales, it has brought several committees together to form a new Further and Higher Education Committee.
One of the advantages of such a committee is that its deliberations can range over the whole further education sector in Wales, including both advanced and non-advanced courses.
The WJEC is also unique in its function as an examining board, for while England possesses a substantial number of examining boards, for GCE, CSE and technical examinations respectively, the WJEC is the only one which examines at all three levels.
As one would expect, a substantial change in the pattern of further education establishments in Wales took place in the 1970s, particularly in respect of the provision of higher education.
In response to DES Circular 7/73, ‘The Development of Higher Education in the Non-University Sector’, the WJEC approved an outline plan for the Principality.
This plan was based on three major considerations: that in each of the new county areas stemming from the 1974 reorganization of local government boundaries, with the exception of Powys, there should be an institute of higher education incorporating colleges of education and major further education establishments, a proposal that was consistent with those submitted by the local authorities; that, with the exception of St Mary's College, Bangor, all the existing colleges of education should be incorporated into the proposed institutes, albeit with some change of functions; and that in order to strengthen the proposed institutes in Dyfed, Gwynedd and West Glamorgan, there should be a marginal redistribution of teacher training and advanced further education courses, involving also the transfer of student places into these areas from other areas.
In drawing up its outline plan, the WJEC was not content solely with commenting separately on the proposals made by its constituent local authorities but attempted to look at the needs of Wales as a whole, a procedure that was not always followed by the English RACs in respect of their regions.
The plan included anticipated target figures for the teacher-training and advanced further education populations in 1981, of 4,800 and 8,800 respectively, which involved considerable give and  take on the part of the individual authorities.
Inevitably, however, the teacher-training target had to be adjusted downwards as the DES successively announced cuts in teacher-training provision in England and Wales before, in July 1977, it finally settled on 2,900 places.
Moreover, the decision to establish institutes of higher education in every country except Powys did not materialize wholly in the form proposed in the outline plan.
In Clwyd, for example, the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education was formed in 1975 from the amalgamation of three colleges: Kelsterton College of Technology, Connah's Quay; Aston Technical College, Wrexham; and Cartrefle College of Education, Wrexham.
At one time, it was envisaged that the Yale Sixth Form College at Wrexham would also be incorporated into the Institute to form a comprehensive establishment catering for all those over the age of sixteen.
However, this move was over-ruled by the Secretary of State for Wales on the grounds that it was important to allow the Sixth Form College to retain its identity.
The neighbouring county of Gwynedd has as its establishment of higher education, Bangor Normal College; a largely monotechnic institution under the North Wales Counties Joint Education Committee offering teacher-training courses, it is giving increasing emphasis to teaching through the medium of Welsh.
The other former college of education that was located in Bangor, St Mary's College of Education, a church college, has been merged into the University College of North Wales.
By contrast with the north-east, Dyfed is not sufficiently industrialized to support an institution offering advanced vocational courses.
Thus, as envisaged in the outline plan, its premier establishment is Trinity College, Carmarthen which, like its counterpart in Gwynedd, is largely concerned with teacher training.
However, unlike Bangor Normal College, which is maintained by the three North Wales local authorities, Trinity College is a voluntary college of the Church in Wales.
As we shall see later, Dyfed also boasts two public sector national institutions, the Welsh Agricultural College and the Welsh College of Librarianship, both at Aberystwyth.
As in the north-east, both Gwent and West Glamorgan have established institutions of higher education by merging three colleges.
Thus, the Gwent College of Higher Education was formed in September 1975 from Newport College of Technology, Newport College of Art and Caerleon College of Education; while the West Glamorgan  Institute of Higher Education came into being in September 1976 from the merger of three long-established colleges in the city of Swansea: the College of Art, the College of Education, and the College of Technology.
As befits its largest city, Cardiff boasts the largest and most comprehensive institute of higher education in the Principality, with the  exception of the Polytechnic of Wales at Treforest: the South Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education which was formed by the amalgamation of the Cardiff College of Food Technology and Commerce, Cardiff College of Education, Cardiff College of Art, and Llandaff College of Technology.
In its original proposals, the City of Cardiff Education Committee envisaged that Llandaff College of Education (Home Economics) and the Welsh College of Music and Drama would also be incorporated into the Institute.
However, as it was formerly part of the University and wished to revert to that status, the former has merged with University College, Cardiff — with the exception of its Social Work courses and its Higher National Diploma in Institutional Management which have been transferred to the South Glamorgan  Institute — and the latter has remained a separate institution.
Finally, we come to the new county of Mid-Glamorgan, which inherited as its institution of higher education the Glamorgan Polytechnic, at Treforest, Pontypridd.
In April 1975, the Polytechnic was enlarged by being merged with the Glamorgan College of Education at Barry, twenty miles to the south in South Glamorgan, and was re-christened the Polytechnic of Wales.
The merger was welcomed both by the DES and the CNAA who praised it as being a model of its kind.
The merger increased the student population of the Polytechnic by about 15 per cent and, perhaps more important, it represented a significant departure from previous practice in that, for the first time, the validation of teacher training courses in the Principality was to be vested in the CNAA.
Indeed, by the beginning of 1977, the Polytechnic had already obtained CNAA validation for a Dip.HE/BEd. degree and five other similar courses flowing from the merger and was negotiating with the Council concerning a similar number of other awards.
It came as a considerable shock, therefore, when, on 24 January 1977, the Chief Executive of the Mid-Glamorgan County Council received a letter from the Welsh Education Office of the DES stating the government's intention of removing courses of teacher-training from the Polytechnic as part of the overall plan to reduce the number of teacher-training places in the Principality to 2,850 by 1981.
The plan also envisaged that the West Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education would lose all its teacher-training places.
Not surprisingly, the Polytechnic's governing body reacted swiftly and within two days launched an all-out effort to persuade the government to change its mind.
The Polytechnic's case for retaining teacher education was based on four main arguments: that it was the only public sector institution of higher education in the Principality which provided the full integration of teacher education with the remainder of the higher education system; that the proposals would leave the largest education authority in Wales employing the largest number of teachers, without involvement in teacher education; that the Polytechnic had already stopped recruiting for the Certificate of Education course, in line with the DES policy of seeking an all-graduate profession, and in September 1976 had attracted the largest number of teacher-training students with a minimum of two GCE A levels in the Principality; and that the Polytechnic was being called upon to make a disproportionate sacrifice because it would have to drop its Dip.HE/BEd. programme which was a basic component of a newly developed integrated system of degree courses.
Despite the powerful case which it put forward, the Polytechnic failed to persuade the government to change its mind and the Welsh Office went ahead with its plans to remove teacher-training courses from the Polytechnic.
The situation at West Glamorgan was, however, very different, as in the first half of 1977 the other Welsh teacher-training institutions mounted a rescue operation to save its courses.
This operation proved successful and, in July 1977, the DES announced not only that teacher training would continue at Swansea but also revised teacher-training figures for Wales whereby the number of places in 1981 would be increased by 50 to 2,900.
These 50 places would be allocated to West Glamorgan, together with another 250, consisting of 50 to be taken from the quotas of Gwent, South Glamorgan, Bangor Normal, Llandaff and St Mary's Bangor.
This decision, to cease teacher training at the Polytechnic while allowing it to continue at West Glamorgan seems to have been based on political rather than educational considerations.
According to Dr D.W.F. James, the then Director of the Polytechnic of Wales, the government's decision was a reflection of its desire not to rock the boat and was connected with arguments about the Welsh language, arguments which had already saved Bangor Normal College from merging with the University College of North Wales so that it could develop as a Welsh medium teacher-training college.
It may also have been the political considerations involved which led both the WJEC and the University of Wales to remain silent throughout the argument.
The summary way in which teacher education was disposed of at Barry also contrasts strongly with what happened in North East Wales: here, there was much lobbying to prevent teacher training based on Cartrefle College of Education, now merged into the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education, from contracting further; it is indeed ironical that on the same day, 26 July 1977, that Gordon Oakes, Minister of State at the DES, declared that Cartrefle should be spared the axe, predominantly on the basis of its geographical location, he should pronounce a death sentence at Barry.
Once the dust settled on these major institutional changes, the effect was to reduce the number of further education establishments in Wales from 53 to 47, while the number of local authorities was reduced from  thirteen to eight.
The 47 institutions have since become 46 with the merger in 1981 of the colleges of further education at Aberystwyth and Felinfach.
They are made up of the Polytechnic of Wales; three national institutions in the shape of the Welsh College of Music and Drama, at Cardiff, and the College of Librarianship of Wales and the Welsh College of Agriculture, both at Aberystwyth; six colleges or institutions of higher education; and thirty-six other establishments (Figure 7.1).
On the other hand, in the past few years the number of students in further education colleges in Wales has increased very considerably.
For example, in the twelve years between 1969 and 1981, the number of students on full-time and sandwich courses in Welsh establishments rose from 12,390 to 25,377, an increase of more than 100 per cent .
The position concerning part-time students is very different, however; in the same period, their numbers decreased slightly from 54,843 to 50,486.
Moreover, it remains a cause for considerable concern that the number of youngsters in the sixteen to nineteen age range who attend day release courses in Wales has been proportionally one of the lowest in England and Wales.
In the first edition of this book, we drew attention to the growing influence of the Manpower Services Commission, through its committee for Wales, over the provision of vocational training in the Principality including the initiation of such developments as the establishment of workshops like those in Clwyd, operating under the aegis of the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education.
In the past three years, the MSC's influence, as in England, has grown considerably; for example, the number of training workshops has grown to twelve, offering more than four times as many places as three years ago.
As in England, these developments have taken place in response to a massive growth in unemployment, from which Wales has suffered particularly badly.
In 1981, for example, with the exception of the West Midlands, Wales experienced the greatest loss of jobs of any region in Great Britain.
Substantial increases in unemployment have occurred throughout the industrial areas of South Wales, but the largest proportional increases have taken place in the predominantly rural areas of Dyfed and Gwynedd.
Inevitably, employment prospects for young people have deteriorated and school-leavers have made increasing demands on the Youth Opportunities Programme in Wales.
In 1981–2, for example, over 41,000 young people entered the Programme compared with 30,600 in 1980–1.
Although three-quarters of these youngsters joined work experience schemes on employers' premises, nevertheless the demands on the further education colleges have increased proportionately.
During 1981–2, twenty schemes of Unified Vocational Preparation were run in Wales, all of them sponsored by industrial training boards and the further education colleges.
In addition, during the same period    almost 3,900 people completed TOPS courses, a substantial proportion of them being in the colleges.
As in England, the proportion of TOPs trainees obtaining jobs on completion of their courses has declined and in 1981–2 only 38 per cent of them secured employment compared with 43 per cent in Great Britain as a whole.
The MSC Committee for Wales, under the chairmanship of Sir Melvyn Rosser, has also promoted a number of surveys to review the working out of some of its services, including a study of manpower services in mid-Wales as part of a wider examination of manpower problems in rural areas.
Finally, as in England, the MSC in Wales, together with the further education colleges, is busily making preparations for the introduction in September 1983 of the Youth Training Scheme, a programme which will greatly increase the pressure on the colleges, to provide suitable courses of further education.
Figure 7.1 Further education establishments in Wales
As with their counterparts in England, the Welsh further education colleges have been considerably affected by the work of the Technician and Business Education Councils.
In regard to TEC courses, for example, these are offered by over thirty Welsh colleges, and the Polytechnic of Wales and about half the Institutes of Higher Education play a major role in the provision of courses leading to TEC higher awards.
For a variety of reasons, most colleges in Wales have organized themselves into ‘consortia’ for the purpose of technician education, mostly clustering round a ‘senior’institution with a traditional responsibility for much of the higher technician work.
Because of links between technical and statutory qualifications in mining and other national common interests, colleges in Wales have joined with those in England in preparing standard units and programmes for TEC awards.
Particularly active has been the WJEC TEC co-ordinating panel set up in 1975 to co ordinate the work of the colleges and consortia and to promote a programme of in-service training.
In 1979, there were about 240 students on TEC Certificate and Diploma programmes and this number has now risen very considerably; in addition, Higher Certificate and Diploma courses are now in operation.
BEC courses have also grown in number in recent years and some of the Institutes of Higher Education, for example, offer full-time courses leading to BEC Ordinary National and Higher National Diplomas.
However, a report by HM Inspectors has drawn attention to the fact that the fall-out and wastage rate of students pursuing business courses on a part-time and full-time basis is alarming and that employers are not very helpful in supporting students to attend courses.
As very few allow them to pursue day release courses, the main provision is on an evening basis.
Establishments
As we have seen, there are now 46 further education establishments in Wales consisting of the Polytechnic of Wales, three national institutions, six colleges and institutes of higher education, and thirty-six major establishments.
The last group, the thirty-six major establishments, includes colleges of technology, technical colleges, colleges of further education, colleges of agriculture, a college of horticulture, a college of art, and three tertiary colleges, two of which are in Gwent and one in West Glamorgan.
These establishments are very largely concerned with the provision of non-advanced vocational courses and courses of general education, similar to those available in England.
The Polytechnic of Wales has grown very considerably during the present decade.
When it was designated as Glamorgan Polytechnic in 1970, it had about 800 full-time and sandwich students.
It was renamed the Polytechnic of Wales in 1975, and in 1981–82 had about 2,900 full-time and sandwich students and 1,368 part-time students.
More than two-thirds of its students come from the highly industrialized areas of South Wales and another 10 per cent come from Central and North Wales.
It is therefore, in terms of its student population, very much an indigenous institution, in marked contrast to most of the constituent colleges of the University of Wales who draw many of their students from England.
Despite this fact, the Principality itself is still reluctant fully to recognize the importance of the Polytechnic's contribution to advanced vocational education and to accord it the status it merits.
This may be due partly to the fact that, compared to the University of Wales, the Polytechnic is a relatively new arrival on the higher education scene, and partly because of the Welsh tendency, even more marked than in the rest of the country, to regard technological education as less prestigious than that in pure science and humanities.
However, during the past decade or so, the Polytechnic has made considerable progress and has continued to develop a wide range of degree, sub-degree and professional courses.
It has also played a central part in promoting management education in Wales: in 1977 it was designated as the Regional Management Centre for the Principality.
In its first few years, it has developed a wide scheme of work including long courses, short courses, research and consultancy.
It has also undertaken many activities within the Principality including the development of Certificate of Management Studies courses in other institutions.
Finally, the Polytechnic has established a wide-ranging programme of research within the institution and has maintained a proportion of its staff working for higher degrees.
The future of the Polytechnic and its development during the present decade is, inevitably, difficult to foresee.
It has become the  premier institution of higher education in the maintained sector in Wales, and especially since the transfer of responsibility from the DES to the Welsh Office in April 1978, it has occupied a unique position in that, compared to England with its large number of polytechnics and to Scotland with its three central institutions which are analogous to polytechnics, it is the only polytechnic in Wales.
However, it will inevitably be subjected to considerable competition from the recently established colleges and institutes of higher education, who to a large extent command support from the WJEC.
The three national colleges in Wales are, as we have seen, specialist institutions concerned respectively with music and drama, librarianship, and agriculture.
The Welsh College of Music and Drama which occupies impressive new buildings in the Castle Grounds at Cathays Park, Cardiff, was designated as a National Institution in 1970 and is now well established.
A relatively small college with some 300 full-time and 900 part-time students, it is administered by the South Glamorgan Education Authority and has a governing body which includes representatives of all the Welsh local education authorities, the University of Wales, the Welsh Arts Council, the Welsh National Opera Company, the BBC and Harlech Television.
As we have shown, it remained a separate establishment following the reorganization of public sector higher education in Wales and it is now widely recognized as a national institution offering full-time and part-time courses for professional performers of Music and Drama, together with honours BEd.
courses and a BA Performing Arts (Music) course which can lead to a number of professions which require music specialization including teaching and performing, and a Graduate Diploma course in drama for would-be teachers and performers.
The four-year honours BEd.
courses in Music and Drama, which as a condition of the College remaining separate are arranged in conjunction with the South Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education, are the only courses in Wales designated to train teachers of these subjects for secondary schools.
Among the one-year graduate Diploma courses is one in drama which is unique in that the Welsh language is the medium of instruction.
All the degree courses and the Graduate Diploma course in drama are validated by the University of Wales.
From September 1981 the music course for professional performers has qualified for mandatory awards, the Welsh College of Music and Drama being one of a small number of specialist music centres in the UK to be so designated.
The drama course for professional performers which does not at the present time qualify for a mandatory award, is fully accredited by the National Council of Drama Training as is the Acting Option of the Graduate Diploma course.
The College of Librarianship of Wales, at Aberystwyth, was established  as a separate institution in 1964 and is the only one of the schools or departments of Library and Information Studies in the United Kingdom which has such status, all the others being parts of universities, polytechnics, or colleges.
Under an instrument of government made by an Act of Parliament, Dyfed County Council is the College's maintaining authority.
It, in turn, delegates responsibility for the direction of the College, subject to its approval of financial estimates, to the governing body.
Although it is therefore clearly part of the maintained further education sector in Wales, the College has also developed very close working relationships with the nearby University College of Wales, Aberystwyth.
Thus, at the undergraduate level, the College offers a joint honours degree in conjunction with the University College leading to the Bachelor of Librarianship of the University of Wales, whilst suitably qualified librarians may undertake advanced study or research at the College, leading to a Master of Librarianship degree of the University or Fellowship of the Library Association.
The College has about 400 students, all of whom are full-time; like those in the nearby Welsh Agricultural College and Aberystwyth College of Further Education, and indeed the University College, they are all members of the Aberystwyth Guild of Students.
This situation is probably paralleled elsewhere in the United Kingdom only by the position at Loughborough where students at the University of Technology and the nearby College of Art and Technical College are all members of the Loughborough Students Union.
These relationships, which cross the boundaries of the binary line between the maintained and autonomous sectors of higher education in Wales, give the College of Librarianship a unique flavour.
It has also developed something of an international character; not only does it attract a proportion of its students from overseas, but it also has strong links with overseas institutions.
In addition, it runs an Annual International Graduate Summer School which offers courses in aspects of modern librarianship, set in a world-wide context.
The contribution which the College makes directly to the development of librarianship and allied subjects in the further education sector in Wales is however limited, if the evidence of the research interests of the staff and the published list of student projects are anything to go by.
If this is indeed the case, it is to be regretted.
For example, one valuable task to which the College could turn its hand is the gathering together and classification of material relating to further education in Wales.
Our own experience in writing this chapter has confirmed our previous experience that this material is in short supply and widely dispersed, and some of it will disappear altogether if it is not soon collected.
It would undoubtedly be of great benefit to future scholars working in this field if the College were to create a central repository of classified material on a sector of education of which it is, after all, a not insignificant part.
The third specialist further education establishment in Wales, the Welsh Agricultural College, is also in Aberystwyth.
When it opened its doors in 1971, it was the realization of a long-desired wish to provide Wales with a comprehensive system of agricultural education whereby a high-level institution would be added to the existing colleges of agriculture and horticulture.
As a truly national institution, the College has on its Governing Body representatives, in equal numbers, of all the Welsh local authorities.
The smallest of the three specialist colleges, it has just over 150 full-time students, of whom about half come from Wales.
The main courses presently being offered by the College are Higher and Ordinary National Diplomas, the specialist areas being animal production, crop production, farm mechanization, agricultural engineering, and farm business organization and management.
An important feature of these courses is detailed consideration of the role of British agriculture in the European Economic Community.
In addition, the College runs a one-year post-diploma degree course in beef and sheep production and marketing.
Thus, the major part of the College's activities can be described as intermediate in level between those of a typical college of agriculture and a university department of agriculture offering degree-level courses.
The College maintains close and constant links with the other seven Welsh colleges which run courses in agricultural education and students who obtain a National Certificate in Agriculture at one of them can transfer to the Welsh Agricultural College on to an Ordinary National Diploma course.
The fact that the college is situated in a campus-like setting  alongside two other further education colleges not only reduces the isolation which is characteristic of the great majority of agricultural colleges, but also enables its students to share residential, recreational, and sporting facilities and membership of student societies both with the College of Librarianship and the Aberystwyth College of Further Education and also with University College, Aberystwyth.
The link with the University College is further strengthened because the present Principal of the College, Dr David Morris, also holds the appointment of Professor of Agriculture at University College, Aberystwyth.
This dual role, which must surely be unique, is a most welcome example of cooperation between a university and a further education college.
Reference has already been made to the two former colleges of education within the Principality.
Trinity College, Carmarthen, the only independent college in Wales is an Anglican Foundation, dating back to 1848, and was fortunate in not having its student numbers substantially reduced during the reorganization of teacher education.
The College offers a variety of initial and in-service teacher-training courses, including Dip.HE, BEd.
and PGCE programmes.
All courses are validated by  the University of Wales and, as the college is bilingual, they may be followed in either Welsh or English.
In addition, the college offers two BA degrees, in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Studies and Studies in the Rural Environment respectively, validated by the University of Wales, and is hoping to diversify further.
In addition, since September 1981, it has offered a Preliminary Course in Art to students from the Dyfed College of Art.
The Normal College, Bangor, which was established in 1863, is also an institution which has made an important contribution to teacher education in Wales.
Maintained by the North Wales Counties Joint Education Committee, consisting of Gwynedd, Clwyd and Powys, it offers initial and in-service courses for teachers including Dip.HE, BEd.
and PGCE programmes all of which are validated by the University of Wales.
In addition, the College now offers three new BA degree courses in the areas of communication, administration, and outdoor education with environmental studies, which are available both in English and through the medium of Welsh.
Clearly, these developments have a dual importance for the College: firstly, they represent an extension of the Welsh medium and bilingual provision, an important aspect of the work of the College; and secondly they are part of the diversification process which is vital to the continued existence of an institution which presently has one of the lowest teacher-training targets in England and Wales.
In line with DES directives on admissions, the number of students admitted to teacher-training courses fell from 850 in 1971 to an estimated 240 in 1982–3.
However the balance has been somewhat redressed by recruitment to the BA courses and by in-service courses for qualified teachers which in 1982 raised its student numbers to about 385.
It is hopeful that it will gradually increase its student body to about 430 by September 1984.
However, the Normal College is geographically adjacent to the University College of North Wales, Bangor, which offers similar courses of teacher training and, in some respects, competes with it for students.
Moreover, as the University validates the Normal College's courses, it would seem to us that whatever the pros and cons of retaining a local authority based teacher-training institution in Gwynedd, a much more sensible long-term solution would have been to integrate both the Normal College and St Mary's College into the University College of North Wales when that opportunity arose after 1974.
As we have seen, the establishment of the four Institutes of Higher Education has been one of the major developments in Welsh further education in recent years.
With their creation, the institutional pattern is settled and seems likely to remain so for some years to come.
There have been some significant developments in the last few years including the introduction of full-time DATEC courses, which are provided for  South Wales by the West Glamorgan Institute of Higher Education.
However, the viability and success of the colleges and institutes as primarily institutions of higher education is open to question.
There are, at present, approximately 13,000 students on advanced further education courses in the Principality of whom probably half or less are in the colleges and institutions.
On average, therefore, they will each have about 1,000 students on advanced further education courses and many times that number on non-advanced courses.
For all of them, therefore, the majority of their work will be of a non-advanced character, a fact of life which is not reflected in their titles.
As we have pointed out previously, they would in our view be more accurately described as institutes of further and higher education.
In this context it is interesting to note that in 1976 the DES informed the WJEC that it was customary to use the title ‘College or Institute of Higher Education’ only for establishments where the advanced courses represent 60 per cent or more of the total provision, which is certainly not the case in all the Welsh colleges.
The DES was somewhat curtly informed that this was a matter for the LEAs concerned.
In the meantime, the colleges themselves are trying very hard to develop high-level courses, partly for the reasons of ‘academic drift’ we have discussed in Chapter 5, and are supported in this endeavour by the LEAs, who regard them as their prestige institutions, and by the WJEC.
However, it seems unlikely that in the foreseeable future they will attract sufficient students to make them viable as institutions predominantly offering courses of higher education.
The institutions we have just considered represent, however, fewer than one in four of the further education establishments in the Principality; indeed, more typical are the remaining 35 colleges which are concerned almost exclusively with non-advanced work.
In 1980–81, for example, there were 62,000 students in Wales following non-advanced courses, the majority of them in the 35 colleges, as compared with 14,000 on advanced courses.
Of the 62,000 in non-advanced work, 32 per cent were participating in City and Guilds courses, 17 per cent in GCE courses, 14 per cent in TEC and BEC programmes, and the remainder on other recognised courses.
Moreover, during the same year, of the 16 to 18 age group, 21.5 per cent were continuing their education in further education colleges as compared to 17.4 per cent in schools.
Of the former, 10.1 per cent were on full-time courses and 11.4 on part-time day release.
Among the 35 essentially ‘non-advanced’ colleges, two specialize in agriculture or horticulture and another seven offer courses in one or both of these two areas.
There is likely to be some rationalization of non-advanced provision in the near future — for example, it is proposed to incorporate Cardigan College of Further Education into Aberystwyth College of Further Education — resulting  in slightly fewer institutions.
Nevertheless, they will continue to play a vitally important role in post-16 provision, a role which may well increase if, for example, West Glamorgan puts into practice its stated intention of creating tertiary colleges.
The training of further education teachers
Another area in which Wales differs clearly from practice in England is that of teacher-training for further education.
As we have seen, in England this is very largely concentrated in the further education sector in the former colleges of education (technical) and in a number of polytechnics and other colleges.
In Wales, however, as a result of a request made by the WJEC in 1968, the major centre for such training is University College, Cardiff, in conjunction with the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology.
This centre, therefore, provides a range of courses both in service and pre-service.
The former, which are open to full-time lecturers in further education establishments in Wales, lead either to the Post Graduate Certificate in Education (Further Education) or to the Certificate of Education (Further Education) and consist of two periods of eight weeks' attendance at the Faculty of Education of the University College, interspersed with one year's supervised teaching and tutorial sessions in the student's own institutions.
All students are required to forgo four weeks of their vacation for each of the two eight-week in-college sessions.
A new course is mounted every year and both awards confer qualified teaching status for further education.
Pre-service provision consists of a separate one-year full-time  PGCE (FE) course for mature entrants.
As the syllabuses and teaching methods devised for the in-service PGCE course are also used on the equivalent full-time course, the latter has been accepted by the General Nursing Council as a recognized route for the training of nurse tutors.
Teacher-training for further education was, however, extended beyond its base in Cardiff when the University approved a scheme for the introduction of an identical course based on the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education.
The first course began in 1978 and has been recruiting satisfactorily ever since on an annual basis.
In the 1980–1 session, for example, it was catering for teachers of nearly twenty further education colleges within a radius of 100 miles of the Institute.
However, both at Cardiff and in North Wales, the courses have recruited mainly from teachers at the operative and craft level and little provision is made for the training of teachers of advanced further education courses.
Another marked contrast between Welsh and English practice is in regard to provision stemming from the recommendations of the 1975  and 1978 Haycocks Reports on the training of full-time and part-time teachers of further education respectively.
As we have seen, the response in England has been substantial; in Wales, on the other hand, there has been very little reaction to the reports and teacher training for further education in the Principality is generally less well developed than in England.
This may be partly due to the fact that teacher training for further education in the Principality revolves almost entirely around the University of Wales, which also validates all courses for the professional training of teachers, including those for primary and secondary schools.
We have already described the removal from the Polytechnic of Wales of teacher-training courses which were obtaining  CNAA validation and therefore outside the University's orbit.
It seems unfortunate, to say the least, that the premier public sector institution, in terms of the number of students on advanced courses, should, for a variety of historical and political reasons, have been denied any share in teacher training.
The Polytechnic must find it all the more galling that a situation has developed whereby an institute of higher education has become a sub-centre of the Faculty of Education at Cardiff for training further education teachers, a role that is denied to the Polytechnic because it has lost its involvement in the professional training of teachers.
Our review of the further education sector in Wales reveals a situation which has changed considerably during the past twelve years or so.
As we have seen, higher education in the Principality has assumed a quite different form from that which existed in 1970 so that we now have ten institutions of higher education made up of the Polytechnic of Wales, three national colleges, and six colleges and institutes of higher education.
The number of students on advanced further education courses has grown steadily since the beginning of the decade so that in 1981–2 there were almost 14,000 students on advanced courses, more than two-thirds of the almost 20,000 who are presently accommodated by the University of Wales.
During the period under review, there has also been some growth in the number of students on non-advanced courses almost entirely on a full-time or sandwich basis.
Across the whole sector, there has been a considerable diversification in course provision.
Had the referendum on devolution resulted in a sufficient majority voting in favour of devolution for Wales, then the Welsh Assembly would have come into being and would have assumed responsibility for the administration of all Welsh education outside the university.
However, this has happened to a considerable extent under the banner of the Welsh Office and, although clearly much affected by events in the United Kingdom as a whole, and particularly in England, the Principality  now enjoys a measure of devolution in educational matters.
The University of Wales occupies a unique position in the educational system of the Principality in that it validates all teacher-training courses as well as almost all the other advanced courses offered by the public sector higher education establishments, with the exception of the courses offered at the Polytechnic of Wales which are CNAA validated.
In 1980, for example, the University awarded its BEd.
degrees, initial and in-service, to more than 600 students, its Bachelor of Library Studies to 64 and its Dip.HE to 208.
In addition, it was validating 13 BA and BSc courses in seven institutions; these courses comprised six leading to the award of BA in Communication Studies, in six different institutions, and seven others spread over such areas as Speech Therapy, Dietetics, Art Education and Design.
The position of the Dip.HE courses offered by the colleges and institutes of higher education has been causing the Welsh Office some concern because some of the units in specific subject areas which make up the courses have been recruiting small numbers of students: in 1980–1, for example, between 30 and 40 per cent of them were enrolling fewer than eight students.
As the Dip.HE mainly forms the first two years of BEd.
courses leading to teacher-training qualifications, any application of strict criteria for advanced further education viability, such as a required minimum of twelve students per unit, would have wider ramifications.
Partly for this reason, no decision has yet been taken on this matter but it may well feature quite soon on the agenda of the Welsh Advisory Body.
In addition to validating courses in further education institutions in Wales the university has a big stake itself in teacher training, including a virtual monopoly of the training of teachers for further education.
It has acquired this position for a number of reasons including the fact that historically it was essentially the creation of the people of Wales themselves and has made a major contribution to the educational needs of the nation.
However, like Welsh national consciousness itself, the University has emphasized the cultural, linguistic and academic aspects of the country's life at the expense of the vocational and technological.
The latter have lacked an effective spokesman partly because the Polytechnic of Wales which, in other circumstances, might have been able to give a lead, is in an isolated position, being the only one of its kind in the Principality.
It is, therefore, unfortunate, if understandable, that the University has devoted relatively little attention to the needs of Welsh further education, despite its overriding position in the training of further education teachers.
In the view of the Director of the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education, there is an iron curtain separating public sector higher education in Wales from the University of Wales whose existence must be to the detriment of the young people of Wales.
Given the powerful influence over the whole of Welsh  education, until and unless the University shows a greater interest in and awareness of the importance of further education to the Principality, it will not be able to flourish properly.
However, it is encouraging that the University's Guild of Graduates has been giving serious consideration to the future development of higher education in the Principality, including advanced further education.
A working party of the Guild produced a draft report in December 1981, based on research undertaken by Dr Roland Wynne, Deputy Director of the Open University in Wales, and entitled Higher Education in Wales into the 1990s.
The report, which therefore predates WAB, will be presented to the University for its consideration and will carry considerable weight because its membership, which comprises a majority of university members together with representatives from public sector higher education, consists of men of influence.
Two objectives of the working party included the safeguarding of the university ‘as a chief higher education authority in Wales’ and the extension of its role as a premier validating body; and, significantly, the consideration of the relationship between the university and public sector higher education to ensure that the university participates fully in all aspects of higher education in Wales.
In reviewing the organization of higher education in Wales, the draft report recognizes the sovereign position of the university and concludes that it ‘may be forced in the interests of Wales as a whole to recognise other objectives as equally pressing’, such as the development of trans-binary relationships through more open discussion of higher education.
It also draws attention to the setting-up in Scotland, after the vote on devolution, of the Tertiary Education Council with the responsibility for advising on the whole of the further education sector there, and notes that no comparable body is able to do a similar service for Wales.
The report represents a step forward in thinking about public sector higher education within at least part of the University of Wales and it is to be hoped that its influence spreads widely throughout that body.
That it should do so is important to the well-being of the Principality as a whole.
The last few years have witnessed an unprecedented period of economic depression for Wales accompanied by massive youth unemployment.
At the same time, the size of the sixteen to nineteen age group in Wales has increased as the bulge in the birth rate in the mid-1960s, having passed through the school system, is now affecting the further education colleges.
Moreover, this is occurring at a time when few resources are available to enable them to deal with increased numbers.
In a recent report, 14 HM Inspectorate point out that numbers in this age group in Wales will remain high until about 1987–8, after which there will be a sharp decline.
Consequently, even if the further education participation rate remains the same, there will be an increased  demand for places, probably between 12 and 15 per cent more than three or four years ago.
One effect of the serious level of unemployment among school leavers has been an increase in demand for GCE courses in colleges, by as much as 20 per cent in some colleges, and also for college components of YOP programmes.
By contrast, the steep decline in apprenticeships has led to a reduced demand for part-time craft and technician courses.
All this is happening against a background of spending cuts imposed by local authorities upon their colleges so that the growth in demand has not been matched by an increase of the capacity of the further education system in Wales to meet this demand.
The problems are most acute in the non-advanced sector where many eligible applicants are unable to gain admission to courses leading to vocational qualifications.
The Report of HM Inspectorate concludes that the need is now paramount for careful planning to match the provision of courses more effectively to the needs of students and employers.
While, understandably, this mild recommendation was all they could make in the circumstances, there is no disguising the fact that, for the next five years at least, non-advanced further education in Wales badly needs the infusion of more resources.
Finally, in view of the crucial part which the further education sector plays in the educational and economic well-being of Wales, not least in the way in which it caters for the indigenous population, it is regrettable that too big a gap still exists between it and the secondary school sector and too few Welshmen and women, particularly perhaps among those who are Welsh speaking, recognize its many achievements in the past and the vital contribution which it will be called upon to make in the future.
Teacher education and staff development in further education
As we have seen, the number of full-time teachers engaged in further education has grown enormously in the last thirty years, from just over 4,500 in 1946–7 to about 80,000 in 1980.
The number of part-time staff has grown in proportion so that in 1978 there were about 140,000 part-time teachers in further and adult education employed by local authorities.
Although the numbers of part-time teachers have declined in the last few years as a result of financial stringency, their contribution to the colleges remains important.
As the further education sector has expanded its provision, so its character has become more complex and varied and the demands upon teachers in the colleges have grown.
For those teaching the sixteen to nineteen age group, for example, the development of pre-vocational training in recent years following the establishment of the Manpower Services Commission, the changing pattern of technician education as a result of the creation of TEC and BEC, and the growth in GCE work in the further education colleges have all placed new demands on them, including additional curriculum development and course assessment duties.
Higher education within further education has also grown apace and has taken the form of both vocational and non-vocational provision following the creation of the polytechnics and the merging of the colleges of education into the further education sector.
The number of mature students returning to study after years of work or undertaking retraining programmes in the colleges has grown and is likely to continue to do so.
Moreover, students in colleges encompass a wide age range and exhibit very varying academic abilities and communication skills.
All these factors are increasing the complexity of the work of further education teachers of whom, at present, under half of the full-time staff, and even fewer of the part-timers, are trained in the sense that they have successfully completed a full programme of professional teacher training leading to qualified teacher status.
In 1979, for example, of the 80,000 full-time teachers employed in further education only just over 36,000, or about 45 per cent , were trained in that they had successfully completed a course of professional training approved by the DES.
It is unlikely that  the situation is much better today.
While teachers in further education are not required to have ‘qualified status’, that is to have successfully completed such a course, it is none the less highly desirable that they should have done so.
The need for teacher education and staff development for further education is therefore urgent and is the subject of much debate and not a little progress.
We shall now proceed to examine these two aspects of the problem in detail.
Teacher education and training for further education
At present, the training arrangements for full-time further education teachers are concentrated mainly in five specialist centres.
Four of them are in England: the former Bolton College of Education (Technical), now the Bolton Institute of Higher Education; Garnett College, London; the former Huddersfield College of Education (Technical), now part of Huddersfield Polytechnic; and the former Wolverhampton Technical Teachers' College, now part of Wolverhampton Polytechnic.
These colleges have concentrated mainly on providing initial training courses leading to a Certificate in Education, which take two forms: a one-year full-time pre-service course for graduates, similar in structure to post-graduate courses which train teachers for schools; and a four-term sandwich course for practising teachers.
In addition, the four English colleges offer a two-year part-time course incorporating short periods of full-time attendance, also for practising teachers.
In Wales, training is provided jointly by University College, Cardiff and the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology who provide one-year full-time courses and sandwich courses.
In all, the two full-time courses in the five centres catered for just over 1,300 students in 1980.
In order to increase the availability of their training programmes, three of the English colleges and University College, Cardiff, developed a network of extra-mural centres which, effectively on a day release basis, offered two-year courses leading to a Certificate in Education; at their height, in the mid-1970s, there were about l, 000 students on these courses.
In the last five years, however, many of these centres, though still offering a two-year part-time programme leading to a Certificate in Education (FE), have become part of the provision which has stemmed from the 1975 Haycocks Report, whose recommendations we examine in detail below.
In addition to this provision, another major route to teacher training is provided by the City and Guilds of London Institute through its Further Education Teacher's Certificate schemes, Course No. 730, which does not, however, lead to a professional qualification conferring qualified teacher status.
Although the scheme was devised for part-time teachers, it is increasingly taken up by full-time  teachers who regard it as a basic or induction course.
In all, some 3,000 candidates take the course each year, of whom about one-third are full-time.
In addition, the Royal Society of Arts offers somewhat similar Teacher's Certificate courses in Office Arts and in the Teaching of English as a Foreign Language for about l, 100 and 2,000 candidates and the College of Preceptors operates a relatively small programme leading to its Associateship and eventually to its Licentiateship, a qualification which is recognized as degree equivalent.
Mention should also be made of the City and Guilds Course No. 926, its Instructor/Supervisor's Award, which has been introduced to help meet the need for suitably trained instructional staff for the MSC's Youth Opportunities Programme.
Since its inception, both YOP and the Unified Vocational Preparation (UVP) programmes have been recruiting skilled craftsmen and others to train young people, but the great majority of them have neither taught nor had any pedagogic training.
To meet their needs 926 was devised in consultation with the MSC and, following a pilot scheme, it has now become a regular part of the CGLI programme.
In 1981–82, courses were running in some twenty centres catering for about 800 trainees; they attended for about 80 hours, usually on day release, and their programme consisted of training in fundamental skills in four main areas: what are called Instructional Skills; Counselling and Caring; Evaluation; and Core Competencies.
Although this programme cannot do more than offer an introduction to the mastery of the skills needed by instructors, it is nevertheless of considerable importance in that it is a measured and significant attempt to provide the sort of training upon which the success of YOP and, even more important its successor, the Youth Training Scheme, will depend.
Given that the introduction of YOP has led to the appointment of many instructor/supervisors to further education colleges and that, with the coming of YTS, their numbers are likely to grow considerably, then some such programme on a national scale is urgently required.
The present totality of teacher education for further education staff has grown in an ad hoc fashion.
Attempts have been made to regularize the position and, in 1966, the Russell Report on the Supply and Training of Teachers recommended that, by 1969, a professional training requirement should be introduced for all new entrants into the further education colleges, a recommendation that was never implemented because of the urgent need for teachers at the time and the shortage of money.
By the early 1970s, however, the situation looked more favourable; the reorganization of teacher education following the 1972 White Paper and the run-down of initial teacher training made it seem feasible to redeploy resources to raise the quality of the teaching force in further education.
Moreover, the White Paper recognized that all teachers in further education should have a systematic introduction to  teaching and that opportunities for further in-service training should be improved.
Then, in October 1973, the recently established Advisory Committee on the Supply and Training of Teachers (ACSTT) set up a sub-committee, under the chairmanship of the late Professor N. Haycocks, to ‘consider and advise the main Committee on policy for the training of teachers in establishments of further education in England and Wales’.
Twenty months later, in June 1975, the sub-committee submitted its first report on the training of full-time further education teachers, known popularly as Haycocks I, to the Secretary of State.
Then, in March 1978, the Haycocks Committee issued its second report, known popularly as Haycocks II, on The Training of Adult Education and Part-Time Further Education Teachers.
Finally, in August 1978, the third and last product of the Haycocks Committee's deliberations appeared in the form of a discussion paper on Training Teachers for Education Management in Further and Adult Education, known, inevitably, as Haycocks III.
Haycocks I, on training of full-time education teachers was the most important report prepared by the Committee.
However, its appearance in June 1975 did not immediately bring about any action on the part of the Secretary of State.
Because of the prevailing financial circumstances, the DES did not officially publish the Report until the end of 1977, though inevitably its contents were widely known to interested parties by then.
Having recognized the urgency of the problem — that, as we have seen, there is no pre-service teacher-training requirement for new entrants to the colleges and under half of the existing teaching force have a professional teaching qualification the Report made six main recommendations.
First, all new entrants to full-time further education who have not had pre-service training and with less than three years' teaching experience should take a systematic induction training course.
This would consist of day release throughout one academic year together with a four-week period of block release and should become a requirement before 1981, if possible.
Second, about one-third of untrained new entrants should have the opportunity of an additional year's training on the same scale as they receive in their first year; together these might lead to a formal qualification.
Third, new entrants who have completed a full-time one-year pre-service course should be required to undertake an induction programme equivalent to one day's release a week for one term.
Fourth, opportunities for further in-service training should be more generous for further education teachers than for those in schools and, in any event, they should be at least on the same scale.
Fifth, release for in-service training should be increased to 5 per cent of the further education teaching force at any one time as soon as resources are available.
And, sixth, each further education college should have  at least one professional tutor who would normally be a member of the full-time staff.
In order to facilitate progress, the report recommended that regional bodies be asked to draw up and submit plans for their areas for the organization of in-service courses.
The DES accompanied the report with Circular 11/77, ‘The Training of Teachers for Further Education’, in which it declared the Secretary of State's support for the proposals in principle, together with the hope that an early start would be made on their implementation, ‘so far as this is possible within existing resources’.
The Circular considered that it should be possible to introduce the Report's recommendations for induction training gradually and also to make some progress towards in-service training, but with a target of 3 per cent of staff released at any one time, rather than the recommended 5 per cent.
Even then, it was doubtful if these recommendations could be fully implemented by 1981.
In the circumstances, priority should be given to the institution of systematic induction arrangements for teachers without previous training or experience.
Significantly, however, the Circular ignored the recommendation that opportunities for further in-service training should be at least as generous for teachers in further education as those in the schools.
Regional Advisory Councils were asked to draw up plans and report progress on their plans to the DES by September 1978.
In the light of these and subsequent reports, the Government would give consideration to the recommendation that induction training be made compulsory by 1981.
As far as the institutional structure was concerned, the report called for a rationalization of the present pattern to be based on a network of centres in each region, including an important role for the colleges of education (technical), particularly in developing pilot schemes for professional tutors, of whom there should be at least one in every further education college.
The setting up of a programme of staff development, including an introduction for all new staff to their role in the establishment, should be a normal activity of every college.
At the regional level, an appropriate body in each region, either a college or a committee, should secure the co-ordination of arrangements for validation and, at the national level, a forum should be established for consultation between those concerned with validation.
These latter were envisaged as being the CNAA and the universities.
In short, the Report sensibly placed the emphasis on decentralization and on making the most effective use of existing resources, a sentiment echoed in the accompanying Circular.
In the first edition of this book we described at length the reactions evoked by the Report, its strengths and weaknesses as we saw them, and the developments that occurred in the year or so following the publication of Circular 11/77.
Accordingly, we shall now concentrate  on describing and analysing the developments flowing from Haycocks I that have taken place in the past three years.
As we have noted, Circular 11/77 asked Regional Advisory Councils to draw up plans for the training of full-time further education teachers and to report progress to the DES by September 1978.
In practice, a number of RACs had anticipated this request and had already begun work on the development of schemes that were consistent with the report's recommendations.
However, it was not until June 1980 that the DES received all the reports from the nine English RACs and the Technical Education Committee of the Welsh Joint Education Committee (WJEC).
These responses showed that there was a wide range of existing provision and that the proposals to meet the Haycocks recommendations also varied considerably.
Thus, some RACs had already reached the standards of provision suggested in Haycocks while others still fell considerably short of doing so.
In general, the plans which were submitted broadly followed the Haycocks formula of giving prominence to an induction period followed by one year of in-service training with the possibility of a second year of study leading to the award of the Certificate of Education (FE).
However, considerable variations in the structure of the first and second years of part-time training were envisaged and in particular in the availability of the second year.
Much would clearly depend on the availability of resources, as some RACs stated that they had insufficient to meet even the targets for induction contained in Circular 11/77 while others indicated that all the targets would be met with existing resources.
As for the subsequent opportunities for in-service training recommended by Haycocks, these too met with a variety of responses.
As we have seen the DES in Circular 11/77 contended that the Haycocks target of 5 per cent release of further education staff for this purpose was too optimistic and that 3 per cent was more realistic.
In the event, some RACs adopted the higher target of 5 per cent while others did not think it possible to achieve even 3 per cent within existing resources.
Finally, the RAC's responses were interesting in that they revealed the wide variety of provision of training that already existed, carried out within institutions and provided by major regional centres, and also suggested that this diversity would continue.
In any case, the DES realized that it would have been unrealistic to insist on the receipt of fully-fledged regional plans before giving its blessing to well-founded initiatives being undertaken by institutions in the context of developing regional plans for the training of full-time staff.
Consequently, since the appearance of Circular 11/77, it has approved a number of new courses which have been validated by the CNAA.
In order to monitor and facilitate this process, the Council set up a Further Education Board in 1979 which, among other things, produced a set of guidelines, which has been formally approved by the Council, for colleges submitting courses for validation.
The guidelines include a list of entry qualifications which for the most part are similar to those granting entry to the Council's teacher-training courses for would-be school teachers; in that respect, they do not accord with NATFHE's belief that formal entry requirements are less important than the achievement of terminal standards.
Certainly, a case could be made for granting entry to all full-time teachers in further education, who if they do not possess formal qualifications at least almost invariably have considerable industrial or business experience.
By the end of the academic year 1981–2 a total of sixteen main independent centres for the provision of two-year part-time programmes leading to the Certificate in Education (FE) had been validated by the CNAA.
These included all four of the former English colleges of education (technical), some of the extra-mural centres formerly attached to the colleges, and other institutions which were moving into further education teacher training for the first time.
As a result, the numbers of further education teachers undertaking these courses grew from 795 in 1975 to 1,207 in 1981 and there is reason to believe that the demand for places exceeds the present supply.
Although the regional arrangements for co-ordinating this provision vary considerably, there are three major forms which they take.
The first is where the whole of the programme is provided by and taught at a major centre, as in the case of Bristol Polytechnic; the second is where the first year is provided extra-murally at a number of associated centres, while the second year only is provided at the main centre, as the case of Portsmouth Polytechnic; and the third is where both the first and second years are provided at the main and associate centres as at Plymouth Polytechnic and Cornwall Technical College, Camborne.
This development is significant for two reasons: it increases considerably the national provision of courses for further education teachers leading to a professional qualification; and it gives the polytechnics and colleges of higher education a large and growing stake in an enterprise that has hitherto been very largely confined to the colleges of education (technical).
The former have moved into this field partly because, with the publication of the Haycocks Report, the time was ripe, but also partly because in many cases, having absorbed colleges of education whose role in initial teacher training for schools has greatly diminished, they wished to redeploy the resources into further education teacher training.
Such a redeployment has not, however, been easy, as few of the former colleges of education staff have had much experience of further education and were not fully turned to its needs, particularly in respect of curriculum development.
There are three significant features of the way in which these courses  have developed.
Firstly, the proportion of teachers who, having successfully completed the first year, stay on into the second in order to obtain the Certificate in Education (FE) is proving to be extremely high: for example, of the 1,128 candidates for the first year courses being offered in 1979–80, no fewer than 1,024 moved into their second year in 1980–1.
Secondly, recruitment to the programmes seems to be very largely confined to teachers of non-advanced further education, responsible for courses at craft or technician level or below.
The fact that few staff from polytechnics and colleges of higher education have enrolled on these programmes raises the difficult question of how to meet their training needs, and this is one of the matters being discussed by the Further Education Teachers' Sub-Committee of ACSET.
Thirdly, these regionally based programmes of initial training also provide a route to the obtaining of a professional qualification for an increasing number of people outside the formal further education sector, such as nurse tutors, education staff in the armed forces and in prisons, and industrial trainers.
We have dealt at some length with Haycocks I and its aftermath because of the relative importance of full-time teachers to the further education colleges.
However, part-time teachers also make a very significant contribution and it was to the consideration of their needs that Haycocks II was addressed.
It is perhaps significant that whereas Haycocks I eventually produced a DES Circular, this one was issued only as an ACSTT Report, endorsed by the Advisory Committee as a whole and over the signature of the Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
The Report began by identifying some 130,000 part-time teachers in further and adult education who were at that time employed by local authorities and although nobody knows how many are employed over the country as a whole at present, even after the severe reductions of recent years they are likely to number more than 100,000.
Clearly, therefore, they constitute, and will continue to do so, a very important element in the teaching force.
At the time of Haycocks II, various types of training were available for part-time teachers of which the most widespread schemes were, as we have seen, the CGLI Further Education Teachers Certificate Course No. 730 with its annual intake of approximately 3,000 candidates and the Royal Society of Arts and College of Preceptors courses.
In addition, there were already in operation three regional training schemes approved by RACs in Yorkshire and Humberside, the East Midlands, and the North West.
As this provision catered for only a small proportion of part-time further education teachers and, with very few exceptions, led to no formal qualification, it in no way constituted an adequate or unified system of training.
To rectify this state of affairs, the Report recommended a unified scheme, on a regional basis, within which both  common and specialized units would cater for the various needs of part-time teachers.
To meet these needs, a three-stage pattern was anticipated: a first or induction stage, providing a brief initiation into basic teaching skills, which all part-time teachers would be expected to undertake; a second stage involving more advanced training in pedagogical skills, which the majority would be encouraged to complete; and a third stage, for those anticipating more substantial service, which would lead to the award of a Certificate in Education.
In addition, suitable arrangements should be made for new part-time staff joining the further education service to have some introduction to their place of work, and further training should be provided to enable experienced part-time teachers to upgrade their subject knowledge and skills.
Special provision should be made for the 2,000 or so full-time adult education staff, including LEA organizers, along the lines suggested in the first Haycocks Report.
The RACs should again be asked to draw up and submit plans to meet the needs of part-time teachers in their regions.
Finally, the national forum recommended by the first Haycocks Report should perform the same function for courses for part-time teachers.
The reactions to Haycocks II were, on the whole, very favourable, though there were two main criticisms.
Firstly, there was some feeling that the report had tried to deal simultaneously with too many different groups of teachers and, in doing so, it had failed to get to grips with the needs of adult tutors; by assuming that they were similar to those of part-time teachers it had failed to recognize the large managerial element in their work.
Secondly, some critics argued that the three-stage modular structure of part-time training recommended in the report might reduce flexibility in provision.
Despite these criticisms, the report stimulated initiatives based on its recommendations and in the first half of 1981 Her Majesty's Inspectors carried out a survey of Haycocks II provision in the nine English RACs.
This revealed that astonishingly rapid progress had taken place, such that the greater part of the county had in operation schemes based on the Haycocks II model, so that the majority of the population had access to some training on these lines.
In practice, the overwhelming majority of those involved in Haycocks II provision was still being drawn from general adult education.
However, the survey also revealed that a number of problems had become apparent.
Firstly, although some of the schemes were designed for staff right across further education, they were attracting only a handful of teachers of vocational subjects, while the remaining schemes did not take their needs into account at all.
Secondly, although a number of regions were providing courses for trainees which had had initially beneficial effects, there was a general shortage of such courses and also of the skilled resources necessary for the development of well-founded schemes.
This resulted in variations between courses and problems of  comparability, criteria and standards which were unlikely to be resolved without some such national machinery as was suggested in Haycocks II.
In the meantime, a modest contribution towards this desirable goal has been made by the Advisory Council for Adult and Continuing Education (ACACE) in the form of a discussion paper on the evaluation of approved schemes.
Finally, some of the courses that were being provided did not meet the criteria laid down in the report and were clearly less effective than those which did.
Nevertheless, the survey concluded that ‘a very considerable qualitative and quantitative momentum’ had been built up in the training of part-time teachers for general adult education in the local authority sector and that this was beginning to spill over into vocational teaching.
The further development of Haycocks II provision is another matter currently under consideration by ACSET's Further Education Teachers' Sub-Committee.
In the meantime, the University of Nottingham Department of Adult Education, with the blessing of East Midlands RAC, is offering a two-year part-time course, due to start in January 1983, leading to a Certificate in Education (Education of Adults).
The course is designed for part-time teachers of adults in a wide range of organisations and educational establishments such as further education colleges, the Workers' Educational Association, the Services, prisons, hospitals, libraries and voluntary organizations.
It is linked to the existing East Midlands regional scheme for part-time teachers in that applicants are normally required to possess a regional Stage II Certificate, or the CGLI FE Teachers' Certificate.
This is the sort of initiative which, if it proves successful, may well be emulated by other universities and public sector institutions.
The third and final product of the Haycocks Committee's deliberations, Haycocks III, appeared in August 1978 in the form of a discussion paper on Training Teachers for Education Management in Further and Adult Education.
The paper which, unlike Haycocks I and II, was not considered by the main ACSTT Committee because it arrived too late before it concluded its five year term, was circulated by the DES to interested organizations for discussion and comment and a large number of responses was received.
The paper began by reviewing provisions made by a wide variety of bodies including the Further Education Staff College, the only institution which is exclusively concerned with education management training for further education staff; by universities; by further education colleges, including the Regional Management Centres and the colleges of education (technical); by individual local education authorities; and by other national and regional bodies like the RACs, the CGLI and the Local Government Training Board.
Having identified what it described as ‘a number of sound developments in this field’, the paper then concluded that there was a need to improve both  the quality and quantity of education management and suggested various ways in which this might be done.
Thus, the subject should be given particular emphasis within programmes of post-initial in-service training for further education teachers; consideration should be given to the possible inclusion of an element of introduction to the subject at the initial teacher-training stage; and emphasis should be given to the provision of short courses.
Finally, RACs should be asked to consider what the paper inelegantly described as ‘resource availability and future coordination in respect of training for education management’, and consideration should be given to setting up a national advisory and consultative group.
Haycocks III met with a mixed response so that although there was a general welcome for the appearance of the document, virtually all respondents were unhappy with the nature and content of the paper as it stood.
The National Association for Staff Development (NASD), for example, characterized it as ‘a meagre preliminary to what should be an urgent discussion of a markedly neglected topic’, and the Regional Management Centres Association (RMCA) found little sympathy for the discussion paper on the grounds that it reflected a traditional approach to staff development.
Many respondents, like NATFHE, thought that the paper did not provide a clear lead for the improvement of training, while others indicated that important issues had been missed, though there was little agreement as to what those issues might be.
In the upshot, relatively little has happened in the field in response to Haycocks III.
Some colleges already undertake their own training of senior management staff and the Further Education Staff College at Coombe Lodge has for years been catering at the national level for the management needs of senior staff by providing residential conferences and workshops, most of which are over-subscribed.
In general, however, Haycocks III has been regarded as the least important of the three reports and the difficult financial climate of the last few years has meant that its recommendations have been given a low priority.
Currently, the ACSET sub-committee has established a Working Group which is considering the management training needs of further and adult education staff and it is likely that a new document to complement and extend Haycocks III will be forthcoming before very long.
Judging by the progress reports submitted by RACs to the DES on teacher training for further education, the area where least development has taken place is further in-service training.
A recent DES survey, for example, shows that little more than 400 further education teachers were seconded by their local authority to courses of one year or more in January 1981.
Most of these teachers were undertaking courses leading to higher degrees in education offered by universities and more recently by a few public sector institutions, and in-service BEds or  Diploma courses.
However, as secondments became more difficult to obtain, there appears to be a shift in the direction of part-time courses.
Finally, an interesting possibility that is currently being mooted is the introduction of courses leading to BEd.
degrees for the initial training of would-be further education teachers.
During its final meetings in 1978, the Further Education Sub-Committee of ACSTT considered the implications for the major centres of further education teacher training of the DES decision to phase out the Certificate of Education as a qualification for teaching in schools.
It expressed the view that opportunities should be provided for suitably qualified students to obtain a degree, although it was acknowledged that many would not be prepared to take the longer course this entailed and some would not be considered suitable for admission to degree studies.
In the meantime, all four major further education teacher training centres in England — Huddersfield and Wolverhampton Polytechnics, Bolton Institute of Higher Education, and Garnett College have been developing proposals for pre-service courses leading to a BEd.
degree.
One such proposal from Wolverhampton Polytechnic for a course lasting three semesters, for holders of Dip.HEs and HND qualifications, has already received approval and validation but is not yet running, and the other three institutions are hoping to submit course proposals for validation in the near future, one to a university and two to the  CNAA .
The total numbers of students involved would be of a hundred a year and if the courses are to start they will require the approval of the Secretary of State.
However, given the resource implications involved in financing students for two years, this is not likely to be forthcoming in the near future.
In general, therefore, the past three or four years have witnessed a considerable and commendable increase in the provision of teacher-training opportunities for further education teachers.
The biggest initiative has been the virtual nationwide provision of two-year part-time course for full-time teachers leading to Certificates in Education (FE), but there has also been a growth in Diploma and higher degree courses and there seem likely soon to be additional initial BEd.
courses.
However, this progress should not disguise the fact that more than half the teaching staff in further education still lack a recognised teaching qualification, an unhappy state of affairs at a time when their task as teachers grows ever more complex and when the overlap with secondary schools becomes more and more marked.