

From The Duel RUPE, 1911
Fried artichoke hearts stood arranged around hard-boiled eggs which had been tinted pink and yellow and scarlet and blue in honour of Easter Day.
There were bottled pimentos, both the saffron and the vermilion kind, and a majolica green bowl of paler grey-green olives on the table, with big-bellied carboys in straw jackets of fruity ruby red wine from last summer's grapes already unstoppered, and a domed, dense-grained wheel of bread.
The first tomatoes of the year, firm and cushiony, with tucks where they plumped out around the bottom of the stalk were quartered in their own juice on a dish with oregano and slender crescents of a veined purple onion, sliced with the first stone pressing of olive oil.
Nunzia had spread one of the lawn threadwork cloths from her dowry under the food she offered as accompaniment to the centrepiece of her family's hospitality — a kid killed for the feastday of the Lamb in honour of the resurrection.
The gathering would be large: a capretto was a rare treat.
Caterina and Rosalba, working at Sabina's side in the cool of the pantry's shade, were pinching pouches of dough to seal in the stuffing of cream cheese, pepper and chopped basil and lining up the results on a white tea towel powdered with coarse rice flour.
They greeted Tommaso unselfconsciously, not like a grown-up visitor of the opposite sex with whom they should use manners.
But he bowed his head, and made Rosalba, practised in modesty, worry whether she should curtsey in response.
Curtseying was not a country custom, and besides, even had they been in town, she wasn't sure she should to one of her brother's friends, whom she'd known since he was a boy.
Still, she wondered, had she seemed uncouth, a country girl who didn't know how to behave, by not returning his compliment?
Or had he inclined his head like a peasant, before a padrone ?
In which case, it would certainly be wrong to return his gesture, in any way.
In her confusion, as she  continued the preparations for the meal, she looked over to him to ascertain that she had not given offence.
His returning look reassured her.
She longed to please, Davide noticed with sympathy commingled with impatience.
He was trying to summon back his bubbling feelings of well-being and brotherly love, but gradually everything seemed to combine to stifle them.
What could be wrong with him, that his friend's bowing should irritate him so, that Tommaso's frank fond greeting of his mother should seem to him so casually proprietary, that his instant engagement in argument with his father, as he drank down the dash of grenadine cordial he was offered before they began eating, should strike such a false note?
In his mounting misery at the loss of the goodness he had earlier recovered, Davide drifted through the meal, unable to participate in the rising arguments, to find a happy role as ally or adversary.
Davide's father was remonstrating, ‘What'll it cost?
A fortune.
Why don't they spend it here?
Here, where it's needed.
For the love of God, an aqueduct's been promised since I can't remember how long.
My own father used to talk of it.
The land was requisitioned years ago.
But nothing happens.
The cisterns run empty by July if we're lucky, and who cares?
No, forget it.
Forget those godforsaken southerners, those peasants.
Let's go, let's cover ourselves in glory — in Africa,’ and his usually mild tones rose in indignation.
‘Africa!’
From what Davide could follow, he agreed with his father, rather than his friend; but when he tried to voice an opinion he sounded to his own ears savourless and dull, eager to agree with authority, fearful to break out across the frontiers of duty and obedience and honour.
No one paid attention to him.
So he fell silent, and in his speechlessness, found himself associated with the women who were, as expected, attending to, not participating in, the discussion.
Ranged with his mother, his sisters, he was cowed; he felt, not just some months' Tommaso's junior, but a child again, like his little brother Franco, also quiet and busy with his food, as if he had not yet made that transition from the mother's arms to the father's side that should duly occur at thirteen.
Tommaso was saying: ‘You all go to America, you think the pot of gold lies there, but you're wrong, you should wait around.
Things are changing in Italy, even in Italy!
We will be our own masters yet!’
‘That's what they teach you in military service, is it?’ remarked his father, from one end of the table.
‘I see the mailbags from the United States Post Office every day, with the money our people are sending back.
It makes me think of going there too, getting away from this cesspit where nothing changes and finding dollars in America.’
‘Beh!’ his neighbour interposed, chewing as he spoke.
‘Why aren't you content here?
You're not a labourer, breaking your back in the fields all day.
You're a solid man, here.
You have something.’
Luigi Pittagora rejoined, ‘You remember that great man, Carlo Cafiero, a Neapolitan?
How fat he was?
You couldn't get fatter than he was in gold, and he wanted to give it all away to the revolution; he was Malatesta's friend, and Malatesta parted him from his money, sweet and easy does it -all they got for their pains was years of exile and prison, and a few dead policemen.’
‘Umberto the King was shot,’ Tommaso added under his breath.
Davide's father heard him.
‘That's why the people in the League talk more sense, in my opinion.
They don't want riots and bloodshed.
They want justice by fair means.’
He pointed a finger at Tommaso.
‘I recommend you to reflect on their ideas, young man.’
Boldly, Tommaso went on, light dancing in his pale eyes, ‘That's some good that came out of America, at least: the assassin from New Jersey, here's to him!’
He drank up, laughing.
‘And they burned the debtors’ bills!
And the title deeds of property!’
Rosa registered this, her grandfather's only interjection.
‘Imagine, after such action, what muddles, what chances for further, stupendous villainy!
Anyone could rush in then, with trumped-up documents, forgeries, lies.’
The elder Talvi shook his head.
‘Cafiero, that rich son of a pig, he came this way, tried to make the peasants rise on his own estates,’ Davide's father was talking, ‘but he found them hard to excite down Acquaqueta way in spite of everything.
His mind gave way, poor fool.
You know, he died indoors, worrying that he would enjoy more than his fair share of sunshine if he went out.’
‘Sunshine!’
Nunzia sniffed.
‘Moonshine, more like.’
With patient system, her daughters helped the men to food, sliced the big loaf for them, arranged the shining vegetables and heaped bowls of glazed yellow and green earthenware, steaming and fragrant; and then removed the dishes, stacking them quietly so that the men should not be interrupted in their flow.
Yet even the padding, gliding, stooping bodies of his sisters, assisted by his mother, at the change from the hot food to the offerings of the first cherries, became visible and eloquent to Davide in his exclusion from the conference between the other older men and Tommaso.
He noted his mother's fluttering glances across at her daughters, and he winced, as the understanding pierced him that the men were oblivious to him.
He almost laughed aloud.
What vanity, to imagine that Tommaso was continuing his  exhibition of savoir-faire acquired in Naples for his benefit.
Then, almost assuming his mother's shape, he observed that Tommaso's broad back shifted in rhythm to Caterina's movements, that he swivelled on his angled chair, sometimes on one leg, sometimes on two, to keep her not in his sights but outside them.
Davide caught his start when she leant over to give him a clean plate, how he set his chair straight and then, after a falter, flowed on, hammering the air with his clenched hands as he made his points, as if determined not to notice her.
And Davide saw, too, how or.
the other hand he accepted the ministrations of Rosalba with pointed gratitude, looking up at her when it was her turn to bend over him, though she did not need to bend from the waist, wand-like as her sister, but rather leaned her plump body forward to adjust some dish, brush off some crumbs with a dithery movement that suggested — again he felt a stab of pity, followed by impatience — that her own body was always in her way.
Tommaso's gaze flickered over her, appraisingly, and he had made no such reckoning of Caterina, as Davide grasped.
It was hardly necessary.
His mother was aching at the evidence before them both; her ache transmitted itself through her flesh like a smell, and he absorbed it.
The feasting for the day of Christ's resurrection painted bright patches of colour on the faces of the men; their voices rose, their limbs spread, they called out compliments on the food to the women who made it; Davide's uncle praised Nunzia to her father, singling out her good humour, comparing it favourably to his own wife's melancholy, to which she in her turn, hearing herself commented upon, tossed her head, and set her jaw.
Again, he addressed the assembled men, stabbing the air with a fork, ‘There you are, a sourpuss.’
Davide's father, catching sight of the Easter cake, the swelling mound of almonds and millet, scented with rosewater and baked to the colour of the golden fields of August, called for silence by tinkling his wine glass, and Rosalba, who was holding the serving dish out from her body with both hands, stood and stopped in the door at the hurly-burly her proffering excited.
She took the men's cheers as somehow directed at herself, at her person, not at the food alone, but unlike the chorus that might greet the appearance of some women of the town, they did not place her in danger, and she allowed herself a small smile in acknowledgement, and came forward to set the dish down.
Sometimes, overhearing the heckling and the comments in the street, she had wondered, What must it be like, to have a man think so dirty about you?
And then thrust the thought from her.
For a moment, as she had stood there, Davide noted how she truly recalled the virgin  martyrs he had dreamed of, with her Easter cake as emblem, like the twin mound of her breasts St Agatha bears on a dish in heaven.
The women cut their own slices smaller than the men's, as they were accustomed to do, though Rosalba picked at the crumbs fallen from the baking pan.
Rarely did the family eat so much, break so many eggs for a single meal, or stay so long at the table; the pleasure of idleness rocked her limbs, the restless noise of her own worries grew still and their voices faded in her head.
She was paying attention to the men's talk, to the discussion of money, the fall in the price of wool, and the cunning of a certain local landowner's brutal conditions.
‘But his wife is so ugly, it doesn't matter how rich he is!’ said someone, laughing.
Over in Gioia del Colle, a child had been born with a lucky mole, said another.
Then Davide's father brought up the Socialists' opposition to the war, which Tommaso scorned; and the talk of money resumed.
Several joined in to complain about the tribute required by the deputy in Riba.
He was new, he was worse than the one before.
Rosa's mother made a rare interruption: as annual leaseholders, they too owed tithes to the landowner.
‘That measuring device they use, it gets bigger every year.
No hens lay eggs that size.’
Then she laughed, ‘We'll have to start keeping ostriches next.’
‘You poor things,’ murmured Tommaso's mother, looking glad however that the Pittagoras suffered some misfortune.
‘Then we can ride them,’ put in Tommaso, and he imitated the motion, clinging on to a bucking animal.
‘And make hats for your sweet girls, so they look like ladies, beautiful ladies, cosmopolitan ladies, ladies of elegance and city manners.’
And again he mimed, this time a mincing gait, and sketched in the air a picture hat, with a spray of feathers, sweeping down.
Davide wanted to burst out, ‘You hypocrite, stop making up to my sisters and playing the shining knight, I saw you go to communion today, and it made me sick.
How could you?
When you don't even….
You looked like….
I saw you coming back from the communion rails, with your eyes down and your hands folded, as if you weren't putrid inside, but I know.
I know .’
He flexed his hands under the cloth, and shouted irritably at Rosa, ‘You'll never make a city woman, thank God,’ and then, seeing her face fall, wondered at it.
My sisters belong here, he told himself fiercely, like almonds, like cherries, like the percoco , which blends the sweetness of the almond and the apricot together, much better than those whores he's talking about.
Sentimentally, his father called out to Caterina, down at the end of the table where the women sat.
She came, he sat her on his knee, and  bounced her, then ordered her off, shouting she was now too high to bounce.
‘Sing,’ he said, ‘sing for us.’
He sat her down next to the piano, and tinkled out an arpeggio to announce the performance.
She straightened, took up a position at his side, adjusted her feet in a v like a ballerina in first Position and, holding out the panels of her skirt, nodded to him to begin.
Rosalba soon joined in, their mother too, and gradually, quietly, all the women, while the men appreciated them.
Among them, only Davide joined in the singing with his rich, sweetly melodious voice, underscoring with its surprising deep timbre the quavery piping of his sister's soprano.
‘In cherry-picking time, in cherry-picking time,’ Caterina began,
‘We go and gather cherries.
I take my little basket, I take my little basket, To pick sweet red cherries, Cherries from our garden.’
Her voice rose now, to the accompaniment of the others, as she began the chorus.
She lifted her skirts on each side a little higher, holding her elbows out to frame her shape like the handles on an amphora, and resumed,
‘We spread our petticoats wide, And we point our little shoes….’
She pointed one foot forward, then the other, changing back and forth like Columbine at the ends of a puppet master's fingers.
‘And we pull our waists in tight….’
She brought her hands to her waist and, keeping her elbows out, pushed one forward then the other, as she twisted from side to side; her face alight, she directed her radiance at the audience, finishing with the invitation, that issued from her lips as a command:
‘Will you dance with me?
Will you come and dance with me?’
The men applauded; asked her to do it again; there was nothing she could do wrong.
Her father began to play softly, to himself.
It gave Caterina an integument of steel, that praise and love of men which Rosalba could never command; the blandishments and consolations of her mother would never clothe her in such silvery bright armour as the admiration of men gave Caterina.
So when Tommaso showed interest in her during those Easter holidays, she noticed him; while Caterina remained unaware, for she had always the effect of spreading pleasure, and did not remark his response to her, his alert shoulders, his greedy pale eyes tensing for a moment, then flicking guiltily away to contemplate her sister.
If Cad had become aware of him on that occasion, as she soon would, when she became their go-between, she would have taken his attachment as her due: she counted the giving of delight as nothing for she accomplished it without intending it.
So Tommaso's glances did not confuse her.
But his gaze touched Rosalba to her undefended depths.
Davide, called by his father to the piano, took up a sheet and set it on the mahogany lyre stand.
His father struck the first chord and Davide began,
‘One day, one happy day You appeared to me, And ever since that day I've lived in trembling — Trembling with an unknown love, With a love like the heartbeat of the world, Mysterious and haughty, Both torment and bliss in my heart….’
He went red to the temples as he forced a ff on the last phrases, and shyly stuck a hand on his heart in emphasis; while all fell silent and lowered their eyes, wondering at that excruciating delight which Alfredo experienced -Rosalba especially, Cati indifferently.
As the heat of the afternoon penetrated even the cool heavy shutters and stone floors of the farmhouse, the feasting guests gradually reduced their assault on the table, and drowsiness floated in with the warm air, caught them in a soft hug and lulled them to sleep.
Nunzia peeled herself an orange, paring the skin close to the flesh so the padded white endodermis was stripped from the juicy red-flecked flesh, and yet not so close that the fruit spurted juice.
Her father-in-law watched her, sleepily, admiringly, then asked for one too; she handed him the fruit whole.
He smiled, but did not take it.
She raised her eyebrows to heaven, took the fruit back, and handed him crescent after  crescent, the babying he desired at her hands.
Davide took a third orange, and the sharp vegetable knife his mother had been using, and cut into the rind, sliding his eyes sideways to get the attention of the children, of his little brother Franco, of Caterina, and his cousins before the heat pushed them as well over the edge into sleep.
He sliced round one side, then the other, removed two saucer-shaped pieces of rind from either end, made a transverse cut across the middle and gradually lifted the fruit from the peel, put it down and held up a pair of spectacles to Caterina's face, two owl eyes of orange peel on a single stem.
She held it away from her, against Franco's face; then turned it upside down:
‘Look!’ she cried, ‘You're an elephant!
You've grown a trunk!’
She giggled, ate the pieces of orange Davide was giving her, licked her fingers, and dangled the spectacles in front of Tommaso.
He put them on, and peered round the room, hunching his shoulders, shamming the old scholar.
He said, to Caterina, ‘No one as pretty as you will ever wear glasses.’
Rosalba felt a pang run through her, but did not flinch openly.
It was true after all, Tommaso was only saying what was obvious to everyone.
‘As a family,’ she put in, ‘we've all got very good sight….’
Heads were lolling, one uncle was snuffling in sleep already, from an easy chair in the corner.
She could tell from her mother's slow, encouraging smile, it was time to rest in her room, before resuming the clearing up when the fresh evening fell.
From The Duel RUPE, 1911
‘Oh God,’ Caterina groaned, ‘you're not getting out of bed again .
How will I ever get to sleep tonight if you keep on mussing up the bed like this and wandering about?
What's the matter now?’
Rosalba's voice whispered meekly from the door.
‘I've got to go again.
My tummy's in a twist.
I've got terrible rumbles.
Can't you hear them?
I keep on having to go, I can't help it.’
‘Oh, you're such a baby,’ Caterina tossed fiercely in the bed, ‘Tummy rumbles!
Bah!
You're making the room even hotter by moving about so much and you're waking everybody up, not just me.
Why can't you control yourself?’
‘How can Can you, when you want to go?
I'm sorry.’
Tiptoeing, she eased the door open and passed out of their bedroom into the kitchen.
From the other side, their mother's voice rose in the darkness.
‘I knew it,’ said Caterina, flying out in fury at her sister's disappearing back.
‘Now you've woken up Mamma, and I don't believe you need to go again.
Why would you be the only one who's ill?
We had dinner hours ago, and any way how could you get ill when all we had is stuff we've always had?
God in heaven, you'd think we'd been eating leftovers.
And in this heat!
You know that's for idiots.
Not in this household, we know what we're doing, we're not fools.’
She was hissing now, into the night, her sister's white nightdress out of vision from the bed where she was sitting up.
‘Oh, Mother of God!
What now?’
Her mother's voice called out, ‘Give us some peace!’
‘Mother of God in heaven,’ Caterina muttered, ‘I give up,’and she swung herself crossly onto the floor.
The air outside was hot, like milk straight from the udder, soft, sweet.
‘I knew it,’ she said, finding Rosalba sitting on the stone bench under the wisteria in the courtyard.
‘Stargazing.
Why?
What in all the world…?’
But seeing her sister's  eyes turn from contemplating the deep indigo square of sky above the courtyard, and come to rest on her face in grief-stricken entreaty, she faltered, shrugged, and with impatient gestures, moved her over to make room on the bench where she dumped herself down.
She was, in spite of her exasperated commotion, deeply attached to her elder sister.
‘My tummy is hurting,’ Rosalba pleaded, ‘it really is.
I keep on having to go, I promise.
But you go back to bed, I'm all right.’
Caterina tutted, ‘Don't be such a worm, you don't have to lie to me.
I don't care whether you're faking.’
‘I'm not though, I swear.
I'm all in a knot, I've got the runs, I can't keep anything in.
But it's not because I'm ill,’ she added, with a note of self-importance and pleasure that Caterina could not help noticing.
‘Listen.’
Her tummy duly rumbled, trilled and exhaled acridly.
‘Oh — yuk.’
Caterina held her nose.
‘You're disgusting.’
‘I didn't ask you to come out with me, did I?’
But they were both laughing.
In the starlight, her sister's colourless face seemed itself a pale round wafer of a moon, her expression, the anxious brows rising to meet each other, mimicked the moon's own self-dramatising look of melancholy; Caterina felt like snapping her fingers in front of her sister's nose, or pinching her fat ribs hard, to wake her from her indulged state, but she restrained herself, and instead, in the most solicitous accents she could muster, coaxed Rosa into telling her the matter.
The eyes of the round and woeful moon closed sighingly for a moment, and Rosalba took a deep breath, as if setting herself afloat on the night in her white nightdress, irresistibly reminding Caterina again of the great orb sailing in the sky like a big soft round pillow.
Then, opening them again, she resumed her earlier apologetic furtiveness and, like a nocturnal animal twitching before a predator, begged her sister not to laugh, not to make fun of her, not to comment straight away or say she was an idiot or slap her down, but please, please, to let her have her dream about him just for a night.
She would discuss it in the morning, and see sense then.
‘But just for now,’ she pleaded, ‘For tonight, let me be with him in my thoughts, Cati dear.’
Caterina knew of course, but pressed her unkindly.
‘And who's ‘him’?’
Rosalba produced ‘Tommaso,’ with some difficulty, as if the name were itself ablaze.
She was whispering.
She went on, ‘Did you see the way he looked at me that time?
Did you notice?
He was looking at his food, or at Mamma, or Papa, when he was listening- and he does listen now, doesn't he, like a proper grown-up man, making conversation.’
Rosalba's voice grew worried and high as she remembered the Easter meal.
‘But every now and then, his eyes slid over to look at me, almost as if he didn't want them to, but couldn't help it.
And he has pretty eyes, you shouldn't say that of a man, perhaps.
They're a bit like a cat's, they look as if they're lit up, from inside, pale green like a cat's.
Oh God, they made me feel so funny, melting, so warm inside.’
Rosalba pressed her sister's hand, and Caterina felt it dry and hot, clasped in hers.
Fear spread cold over her body, like a dead poultice.
She looked at Tommaso Talvi in her mind's eye, she adjusted her image of him to fit with her sister's, she inventoried his features, beginning with the eyes, and redrafted them in order to see them as ‘pretty’, she scanned his caffelatte pallor and his big hands, grasping the bread she had cut for him, she looked at his mouth, the purplish fullness of his lips and the strong teeth that showed when he grinned, as he had done, often, but without laughter, when the men were disagreeing about the possibilities of change, the chances of the election on returning the Socialists, of bringing about improvements for the labourers now that the franchise had at last been widened to include some people who weren't bosses, like her father, a music teacher with a sense of honour, of justice.
Everyone was clamouring, as they ate and drank and the girls went round the table, serving and taking the finished platters to the sink where Sabina was busy wiping and stacking.
Caterina had not really understood the argument; but she now reconstituted her father's impassioned argument for contracts.
He had been furious that the men and women picked for fieldwork in the morning had to bribe the bailiffs to make sure of a place in the cart.
Tommaso had called for action, for striking a blow.
Her father had gone on smoking and gesturing with a nod or a headshake; he had protested that votes were the only way, not force.
She remembered too that her mother made a terrible clatter with the plates on purpose, Cati knew, because she said afterwards she was scared of such talk, she never liked it when the men got angry, as she put it, what was the use?
Besides, you could never know for certain whose side everyone was on, and the wrong word might get about.
Then the conversation had turned to the Libyan campaign.
Tommaso was sure he would be sent there as soon as his training was over.
‘Training!
They call cleaning the floors training!
I've had more shooting practice out here in the fields with Davide than I'll ever have in Caserta!
And with live ammunition!’
He'd grinned, he'd chuckled at her brother, who was sitting very quiet throughout, rather flushed and excited-looking though.
And Davide  had smiled back at his friend, with a confused look.
Tommaso had turned away, and spoken then of his glowing belief in the new war's future.
He had brought his fist down on the table, leant forward and, speaking quietly, as if swearing an oath, had promised, ‘There'll be lots of men in this war, and there'll be money too.
Both will give us power!
Forward!’
He repeated the word, ‘Forward!’
Cati imagined Rosalba leaving her home with him, marching away with her back to her and her destination ahead unknown; and she cringed.
‘Money for us, here?’
Davide's father had shaken his head.
‘War never brings any liberty, any equality.
You're mistaken, you're young, you haven't seen things, Tommaso.’
‘No, no, by the filth and misery of the Madonna, no.’
And he was painting a vigorous picture of the Noonday of the future, sketching it with powerful sweeps of his arm and bunching of his fists, until Davide's father cut in, ‘And do they recommend that you use such language?
That you tip back on your chair like that?
That you sprawl, in the presence of ladies?’
Talvi had grinned, his wolfish, loose, laughterless grin, and brought his chair up straight again, clamped his knees together, thrown back his shoulders with an emphasis that was, Caterina now felt as she pieced it together, insolent.
That was in the early part of the meal, before the cakes, before the singing, when tranquillity returned.
‘Oh, Rosa,’ she breathed, with a little groan, ‘Not him.’
She squeezed her sister's hand.
‘Why not?’
Rosalba asked her, beseechingly.
‘Davide brought him, Davide likes him.
He's his friend, has been for years.’
Caterina pondered this.
‘I'll ask Davide why he likes him.
Perhaps he'll explain.’
Rosa cut in with a squeal, ‘No, don't mention it to anyone.
No one.
No one.
Davide is against him, he came and told me afterwards to be careful.
Please don't say I've been telling you this.
I'm so frightened the feeling will go away, it's too fragile, and I do so want it not to break.
Please.
I feel that I'm in a rainbow, that the rain will stop, the light will change, and it'll vanish and I'll never be certain it was ever there.
I never ever thought, my darling, that it would ever happen to me, that a man, a real man, a man with….’ she gave a little, happy gurgle, ‘shoulders, and legs and eyes and things to say…would look at me….’
The sensation of cold which had spread over Caterina earlier now rolled greasily about her.
She shivered, though the air under the stars was still soft and warm.
Presentiments of parting locked her tongue.
She, in whom a natural clear spring of charm flowed vigorously, who  expostulated, articulated and knew her own mind with commanding grace — in private, not in public of course (before others who were not family, such confidence in a girl would seem an outrage)— could not speak up now and tell Rosa what she felt.
She was assailed by contrary, half-formed forebodings: Rosa was making an error of judgement, she was imagining things, or, even if she weren't, Tommaso was like a dustdevil, twisting this way and that.
But setting her misgivings about Tommaso himself aside, Caterina decided that she had been quite wrong to think that it was she who had caught his attention.
Her assumption was shameful, and it had misled her too.
Taking her sister's hand, she found there was nothing else for it, but she must press to the point.
‘Could you marry him?’ she asked.
The cry that escaped from Rosalba made Caterina's throat tighten; she dropped Rosa's hand from her grasp, and thought she might weep in sympathy with the funny sound, half-sob, half-gasp, that issued from her sister.
‘Oh darling,’ she said, ‘Rosa, please, please, don't be unhappy.
I'll help you, I will.’
The night, which had appeared inky, its dusting of stars within reach, like fireflies signalling under trees, had now, with the passing hour, grown lighter, and the blazing pinpoints receded, as if powered by their own fires, into the dim pools of the most distant sky.
Caterina could see Rosalba clearly, all colour drained from her countenance.
She shivered again, shut off her morbid drift, touched her sister's colourless starlit flesh, and felt, to her relief, its hectic human temperature.
‘What happens, Rosa, when you get married?’ she asked, nestling against her bulk.
Rosalba stroked her sister's hand.
‘You live with a man, you look after him, take care of his things, his property, if he has any, like Mamma takes care of Papa, of his clothes, his stomach.
You have his children…you become his woman, you belong to him.
It's wonderful to belong…to belong to a man.’
‘No, I mean, what happens, you know, when…?’
Rosa chuckled, then declared solemnly, ‘I suppose you're old enough by now.
I knew when I was ten, or even earlier.
I think I've always known.
You know Franco has a little tap hanging down under his tummy?
You remember Davide's — you don't see it any more now, he's too old.
That's the thing a man has, only a man's is bigger: he kisses you, you've seen people kissing, of course you have, but when they kiss when nobody else is looking, the man puts it inside you.’
‘Where?
Show me.’
Caterina looked down her front, under her nightdress, examining her body for entrance points.
‘In there, in the navel?’
She jabbed a finger at it.
‘Why doesn't the food come out if you can get in?
That's why the baby's attached to the navel when it's born; he puts it in and the baby comes out.’
She nodded, sagely, at the symmetry of this.
‘It's the other way round, stupid.
The baby's navel's attached to the mother, not the mother's navel to the baby.’
‘Show me where he puts it then.’
Rosalba, recovering from her amusement, became conspiratorial: ‘Are you sure you want to know?
You might not like it.
’ She bent to mouth into her sister's ear.
Caterina pulled her head away, looked at her sister in disbelief, and whispered back, ‘That's where your pipi comes out.’
‘The same place I go spinning,’ reminded Rosalba, rather wearily.
It was tiring to have a sister like Cati.
‘You must have got it wrong,’ Caterina was saying.
‘God couldn't possibly have organised things like that.
I wasn't born like caca, out of Mamma's bottom.
I know I wasn't.
It's revolting.’
She'd forgotten about whispering now, and her voice was rising in remonstration.
‘I think you're horrid to tell me lies too, and make out that when you're married you're going to get up to horrible…such disgusting…with that man who looks like a fish with cold yellowish eyes and greeny-yellow skin….’
‘He hasn't,’ said Rosalba, but then caught herself, seeing her sister's need, and admonished her.
‘Wake up, Cati, for crying out loud.
You've seen Micia have kittens-Mother of God, she has them four times a year.
You've seen the sheep's afterbirths, lying in the fields after the lambs are born.
Well, we're no different.
That's nature, and we're part of it.
How can you grow up here and not know all this?’
Caterina clapped her hands over her ears.
‘I don't want to hear this.
I'm not a cat.
I'm not a sheep.
I'm not an animal, I'm, I'm a…soul, I've got a soul, inside, and it makes us different, that's what the priest says, and I believe him.
I'm not natural, not like animals are natural.
Nor are you, Rosa.’
She was begging her.
‘Rosa.’
‘I shouldn't have told you,’ said Rosalba, taking her sister's head against the fall and swell of her warm body.
‘Darling, darling, I was only teasing….’
Caterina twisted and beat on her sister's back with her fists.
‘Tell me the true story then, and stop being so horrid.’
‘The truth is,’ Rosa began, in her most teacherly tones, ‘that when you want a man, and you look around and you can't see the one you like, you go into the kitchen, and you take a pound of the whitest flour, a pound of  the whitest sugar, a pound of the most refined fat you have, and a flask of rosewater and a handful of raisins, another of currants, half a pound of almonds ground to paste, a squeeze of lemon-juice, a pinch of cinnamon and a sprinkle of powdered clove.
Making sure your hands are clean and cool, you rub all the ingredients together between your fingertips until you have a soft, crumbly dough, like a semolina.
All the while you imagine as hard as you can what he would look like, your dream lover.’
Caterina giggled.
‘If you're rich — not like us — you shake in some rubies for his lips, some sapphires for his eyes — or topazes, if you like them yellowy —’ Caterina shifted, resisting ‘— some diamonds for his fingernails and so forth, all the treasures you like, to make him beautiful as the sky, as the sea, as the earth, and then you murmur the secret formula….’
‘What is it?’
‘I'm not telling.’
‘You don't know it, that's why.’
‘It goes something like this,’ Rosalba replied, improvising,
‘By garlic and mushrooms,
By weasel and hare,
By starlight and moonlight,
My darling!
Appear!’
‘What nonsense!
Nothing but nonsense!’ said Caterina.
‘You just made that up!
Go on,’ she continued, as Rosalba seemed to pause.
‘You've made me lose track of the story, silly, with your endless questions.
Now be quiet.
You don't say the magic formula until later.
First you mix the dough, then you pat it into shape, like a figure in a Nativity crib, with all his fingers, and little fingernails, you make them with a toothpick, and his face, not forgetting ears and nostrils and eyebrows, and you put in his navel, making a little indentation, and you roll some dough for his thingamajig.’
Caterina drove an elbow into her ribs.
‘Ouch!
What was that for?
And then, only then, when you've stood him up on the kitchen table, and he's all bejewelled and perfect, a knight crusader just like you've dreamed, do you mutter the magic words.
Like the statue of the Virgin who put her arms round the young man and put his wedding ring on her finger to be his bride for ever, this pastry man, so scrumptious, sweet-smelling, so delicious to taste, comes to life as you speak and puts his arms around you and you put yours round him….
And that's it!’
She clapped her hands together, as if dusting off the flour.
‘Yes, and then…what about the baby?’
‘I tell you one thing, and you don't want to know.
Then I tell you another, and you go on asking question.
Really….’
Rosalba harrumphed, and pulling Caterina up with her, swayed to her feet, one hand on her stomach.
‘My tummy knots have gone!’ she exulted.
In her new, unanticipated access of confidence, she pushed Caterina ahead of her to bed.
Cad allowed herself to be pushed, reluctantly.
‘Tell me another, Rosa, please.
Tell me the story of the Queen of Sheba.’
‘No, I'm going to sleep now.
I'm tired.’
‘Please, Rosa, tell me again, about how she walked in the water, but it was a mirror and they looked at her, she didn't know it was a mirror, she thought it was a stream.
They tricked her.
Please.’
‘No.’
‘Please.’
‘No.’
Laying herself down beside Cad again in the hot room under the single sheet, she instructed her sister carefully, how she was to find Tommaso Talvi in town the next day, to come across him as if by accident, and then, if no one was listening, she was to give him a message.
From The Duel RUPE, 1911
He said he would be back at the Ascension, if he could find a ride; failing that, at Pentecost.
So Caterina reported to her sister.
Failing that, and she gave a little giggle, Rosalba's face was such a picture of attention, at the Assumption.
‘He also said he was going to try and get a bicycle, and that he would give us a ride on the handlebars.’
Rosalba laughed, and covered her face.
She would never be able to get on a bicycle, she couldn't possibly, she'd fall off, and make a spectacle of herself.
But perhaps, U it was securely held, by Tommaso, perhaps.
She looked up, her face expectant still, interrogating her sister, wanting more.
Franco put in, ‘And he bought us ice creams!
I had mine in a cone, with wafers stuck in the top that I used to eat it with, but Cati sat down and she had hers with a spoon, out of a glass, sitting up on one of those stools….’
‘Oh,’ said Rosalba.
‘Ohoho.’
She sounded as if she were panting.
‘If you'd been there, he'd have got you one too, I know he would.’
‘But I wasn't, was I?’
Rosa's lip wobbled.
‘I see,’ said her mother, ‘Tommaso, the hero of the hour!
Throwing money about like dung on a field.
I'd like to know where he gets it.’
Rosa's look cut her short, and turning stoutly to the children, with quite uncharacteristic toughness towards her mother, she demanded, ‘What's it like?’
Caterina's tongue travelled slowly across her lips, trying to recapture the taste of her first ice cream.
‘It's a bit like snow, except it's sweet.’
‘You can't bite it,’ put in Franco.
‘I tried to, but it's hot when you bite it, it burns your teeth and your tongue.
Ouch!
Ouch!
You have to blow,’ he puffed to demonstrate, ‘to cool it down.
But it's good if you lick it.
You have to take little licks.
Tommaso showed Cati how to.’
The child imitated the sipping movements his sister had been schooled by Tommaso to make at the cafe, like a small bird at a fountain.
‘I had pistachio and strawberry,’ she said.
‘Green and pink.’
‘I had cherry and vanilla,’ said Franco.
‘It made my mouth bright red.’
He stuck out his tongue and squinted down to look at it.
Rosa's fingers were twisting the ends of her belt.
‘We'll all go in and try this miracle,’ her mother said, now gentling the eldest of her daughters.
‘Did it turn your mouth green?’ said Rosa to Caterina, ignoring her mother's placatory offer, ‘Or did it make your lovely lips pink?’
‘Oh Rosa,’ said Caterina, squirming under her elder's nastiness, ‘I didn't want to tell you.’
She hadn't, either; she had sensed, in Tommaso's treat, something that she could not identify, but that she wanted to smother, keeping it from her sister's knowledge: so she pinched Franco really hard on the arm until he cried out, ‘What was that for?’
Though she still knew she was obscurely to blame, that when Tommaso lifted her onto the bar stool with his big hands which almost met under her rib cage, the current was live in the air around them, and Rosa would not have liked it.
‘You should have come with us.
Anyway,’ she added, ‘he said he hoped we'd go for a walk with him, soon.’
Rosa looked hopeful, then puzzled, then downcast, then bright again.
Her mother was adding, ‘Rosa is older than you, she can't gallivant about like a girl, showing herself off in bars.
It's not the custom.
Cati, my little wild lion cub, you'll have to act like a woman soon.
You will refuse to accept ice cream from a man again.
Or anything else.’
Cati made a face, seized her brother's hand.
‘Only when Franco has to be a man,’ and looking at him carefully, she burst into a fit of laughter.
‘Not till then!’
Rosa muttered to Caterina, ‘You're too young to understand.’
As she gathered up the bedding and cushions she had hung out of the windows to air before the evening earth began to exhale dew, she wondered whether she should fetch out her best mantilla, the white lace her mother had given her for her first communion, which she never wore because it seemed so showy, and hadn't worn even yesterday for the Easter Mass.
She could tell her mother she had begun a novena to the Madonna of the Spasm in the Cathedral; she might come across Tommaso then, somewhere in town, in the square, by the bocce game, and ask him if he would get her an ice cream too.
She saw herself, her head a foam of lacy white like the shining tumbleweed caught in the evening light as it floats through the air, handed on to the bar stool, her little feet — her good point — showing beneath the hem of her skirt where it rode up as she adjusted herself.
She saw the bar, with  its gleaming mahogany counter and polished brass fittings; the enamel levers of the soda pumps, the array of ratafias and rosolio liqueurs behind the bar, and the new wooden chest, like a coffer with brass hasps in which the aluminium pails of pastel ices were kept in ice brought by dripping cart from the icehouse in the harbour at Dolmetta, where the fish were packed and then chipped off the block.
She had been to the bar many times on errands, to fetch tobacco for her father, or give one of his fellow musicians a message about a rehearsal, but to sit there, how different, how enfranchised that would be.
Young women of conspicuously marriageable age never sat there.
And to eat there — how she longed to, to drop the few years that made her different from Cad, to lose the ripeness and rotundities that would always make her different from Cati, who was, really, almost boy-like with her stringbean limbs, yet not quite boyish either, angelic rather; she was not afflicted with the need Rosa felt, the gap opening inside her, where a longing for something other than what lay within her sights sat in occupation, banging her drum and marking out a new rhythm and new steps for Rosa's spinning wants, calling down the corridors of Rosa's body to her innermost inguinal life, till her blood rang to the beat.
‘I don't care which one Tommaso likes,’ Davide's mother told him.
‘He'll never lay a finger on her.
No matter he might stop being a soldier if something changes in that family to bring him back (though I can't see that happening, the Talvi are the kind who never have a change of heart).
No, he's the sort who'll run around all his married life, you can see it.
He's godless, where he comes there's trouble.
You can see it in his eyes.
His funny eyes.
Looking at him, I can see why the ignorant give credence to the Evil Eye.
I really can.
And he's probably an anarchist.’
(Hard as Davide might try and interrupt, and put his mother right on one or two aspects of the matter, she wasn't having it.)
‘He has no manners, eats like a peasant, talks like he needs salt on his marrow, and is as free with his smile as a tinker cheating you at a fair on a saint's day.
I don't care how different he is underneath ,’ she cut through Davide's protests, ‘how much bluster it is, blusterers make poor husbands, never could make a woman happy for more than five minutes, and anyway, Caterina can do better and I'll see to it that Rosalba does better too.
It's different for your father to have certain ideas.
Your father is a saint.
He wants well-being and justice for everyone and everything because he's too good himself to see what ruffians and cowards and cheats most people are.
Your father's too lenient to people like Tommaso.
He sees him as an idealist, likes his ‘spark’.
He talks of the ‘undefeated ones’ in the midst of so much defeat.
But to my mind the boy could begin by  showing more respect altogether to people like your father who have been listening to what the League says about the problems of the land and the bosses and the conditions of the men and women who work on it.
I know he's an inspiration to a boy like Tommaso.
But that doesn't put Tommaso himself on a straight path.
The boy is trouble, believe me.
And besides he repels me, so clumsy and big with his cat eyes.
And I'd think he'd repel any true woman, who had any sense.’
She looked sternly at her son.
‘It doesn't matter that he's not perbene by birth.
I'm not a bigot.
But it matters that his soul isn't perbene .’
‘It's not true,’ Davide began, but words would not come to his help.
‘I know you have good instincts, Mamma, but in this case, you don't understand….’
‘Don't I?’ she shook her head with grim significance.
‘And doesn't Our Lord heal what is shattered or faulty?
Why hasn't He put His hand to Talvi, then?
For women, it's different.
It's a cross and a blessing to be plain….
It's virtue's face.’
They would all be returning to town in the autumn to meet some sons of good families in Riba; she'd been saving for years, money from the pigeons, money from the cheeses, the almonds, her mother's money when she died — may she rest in peace and perpetual light shine on her — she'd hidden it from that villainous landlord who'd strip everyone of their surplus if he knew how much they'd hoarded, but they'd never find out, the folk were far too tight to let anyone know, and he, Davide, must not breathe a word.
There'd be dozens of suitors for her children, anyway, this was a little trouble, it was bound to happen now they'd grown up.
Grown up!
She looked as if she were about to cry.
Davide gaped, ready to utter words to console her, but already her mood had shifted, and she was running before another wind.
How could she make sure of her Rosalba, the other was too young, but Rosalba?
She mustn't let her out of her sight, not until Tommaso's leave was over and he was safely back in Caserta.
If he came sniffing round, Davide was to take him off somewhere.
Else she'd call in their father, who mustn't be alerted.
That would be a catastrophe, a scandal would surely follow his knowing anything and he mustn't be allowed to suspect any danger at all, not for the moment, otherwise they'd probably murder the boy.
‘Surely not, Mamma?’
But no, she wasn't attending.
‘I could sink my claws into his flesh too,’ she was saying instead, ‘even thinking of making advances to my family!’
She seemed again on the verge of tears, which quickly turned to rage, as she spat out, ‘His smile!
It's manic, it's evil, it's some devil's work.’
Davide put his arms around his mother, to restrain and comfort her.
Rosalba had questioned him about Tommaso, about his family, his prospects.
She was struck by his energy, she said, the vigour of his point of view, his grown-upness — he makes you look like a boy still, she had said to Davide, mocking him with the sharpness she was showing all of a sudden.
‘I like hearing him talk, about everything, the war, the League, the future of Italy.’
‘But if she really loves him?
If it's the bolt of lightning, the thunderclap?’ he asked his mother, as gently as he could, trying to make her laugh.
‘Love!’ she responded crossly, pushing him away.
‘Love lasts, what, a couple of weeks.
Thunderbolts go out, phut, like candles; marriage goes on.
Has to go on, forever.
Don't talk to me about love.’
Davide hung his head in mourning.
His mother sometimes sounded like the Talvi parents, so harsh, so unhopeful.
‘But you think like that, and that's why….’
‘Yes…?’
She was sharp.
He persisted, ‘That's why there are other women….’
It was a glimmering he had, but no more than that, and she cast him down from the height of her knowledge.
‘There will always be ‘other women, Men if you let love’ as you call it come first, come before money and manners and being perbene , before breeding, and education.
Men need those ‘other women.
You have probably already….’— she looked viciously at her son, for a moment, making him flinch from her temper-'Women do not need more men than they have to put up with.’
She struck an attitude, held it, hand on hip, chin set, then slumped, threw her arms wide and laughed.
‘Except our sons,’ she said, ‘our beautiful sons.’
And she hugged him tight, tight, as she had not done since he was much younger and liked to squeeze her back until she protested that she couldn't breathe.
But his arms were limp today, though he did not resist her.
Tommaso did not call again at the farm that leave, and after the Easter holidays, Davide went back to Rupe for the short summer school term before the dog days drove most people indoors to keep cool, and some venturesome spirits down to the coast, to the white sand beaches at Dolmetta and Tirrani, where sea bathing was just becoming popular among adults.
The Pittagora women did not yet swim, and airless midsummer found them sequestered in their shuttered, marble-floored apartment in Rupe, emerging only before the sun gathered strength to go to market or to Mass, or after its heat had dimmed in the evening to stroll under the acacia trees with the rest of the town's gentry, while their servants sat in doorways on wooden chairs, commenting aloud.
Tommaso had not come back at Ascension, though some others who'd been called to military service at the same time walked into town one afternoon.
Rosalba baked special almond biscuits, hoops of crumbly nuts and fine sugar, intending to wrap some in coloured papers and offer them to Tommaso's mother as a gift for the feast; but could not, because, as she was about to set off, she realised that she did not know her well enough to call and give her a present.
Had she mentioned her plan to her mother, she knew she would have snapped, ‘It's impossible, it's not the custom.’
Rosalba was watched, too; from time to time, Nunzia stroked her hair, as she used to do, with soothing caresses for the daughter who worried her, but now she murmured, ‘Still waters, shall I drop a penny in your depths, and make a wish for your thoughts?’
Rosalba would force the sweetest smile she could, but feel its sickly insincerity work on her features like a tic, till her mother's hand would fall to her side, and she'd sigh, ‘You used to tell me what was on your mind.’
She kept Rosalba busy.
In her maternal view, industry was the best remedy for longing.
And Rosalba roused her heavy, hollow limbs and submitted to the tasks, finding in the repetitiousness of domestic labours a lulling routine that could still for a time the kind of sickness she had contracted.
As she worked the crochet table-mats her mother had ordered, the intricate sequence of stitches could blot out for a moment or two the scenes that daily since that Easter feast she had staged between herself and Tommaso Talvi.
She had failed to see him again; her family, her brother Davide too, had conspired, she knew, to keep her from going into town until Tommaso had left again for his training barracks.
Then her hands would grow hot and she would pause, wipe them with a moist cloth so that she should not smear the finespun white cotton thread as she worked, and her thoughts of Tommaso would return; they were very sweet to her, often enough, though when her daydreaming grew extravagant she would fall again into hopelessness, and fear that none of it might ever come true.
As she dipped the hook into the web, looped the stitch, drew out the thread, augmented the next stitch to move round the circle of the mat, and repeated the process, sitting in the cool dark room, she considered feats of courage and cleverness.
Inside her she felt a power she could never manage to express; it was trapped inside her like water under the ground and she was the only one with the dowser's twigs who knew where it lay and could bring it to the surface.
She thought again of the clever pastry-cook who baked her man to her liking, and of La  Carmellina, who lost her true love when he climbed a cherry tree into the clouds and found himself in the lair of the sorceress Zenaida — Zenaida, who had been robbed of sleep by the curse of another fairy, and had stolen Carmellina's love away and changed him into a songbird.
Only his song could do the trick, and float the witch into a dreamless sleep, and so she tied him to a perch by a silken ribbon and put bells on his bird's feet.
Rosalba imagined Tommaso as a bird: and saw his pale green eye staring at her from a flurry of golden feathers as his vivid wings beat.
Undaunted, Carmellina had followed in her true love's footsteps; she had put a kitchen knife into the bodice of her dress, and hitched up her skirts when she got to the foot of the cherry tree, where fallen blossoms lay from Zenaida's struggle with her captive.
She began climbing, until she too reached the sorceress Zenaida's hideaway in the clouds.
She tiptoed forward, pushing open one door.
Nothing.
Then another.
Nothing.
Then another.
Zenaida the sorceress jumped on her from behind, one hand at her throat, the other yanking at her hair; she screeched, and the bird flapping over her head screeched with her, but Carmellina could tell from the look in its pale green eye that it was her true love under a spell from the wicked enchantress, and she fell to her knees and clutched the skirts of Zenaida (what was she underneath?
A donkey?
A goat?
Her feet felt sharp and heavy and round; her toes like horn), and implored her to set her any task, she'd undertake any ordeal, in return for restoring the bird to human shape and then setting him free.
Zenaida threw her head back and laughed; she had very big, yellow teeth too, donkey's teeth, strong enough to haul with; and Carmellina abased herself before her to trick her, until her face was on the floor at the dirty and rank hem of Zenaida's dress, like the pilgrims who drag their tongues along the ground during the Tomb ritual before Easter.
Zenaida at last spoke, deliberating what she should do; Carmellina clutched harder, she knew how much bosses love flattery and crawling.
She whimpered and covered herself with injuries, saying she could eat shit if that would please the sorceress, eat the sorceress's own shit, and drink her piss too, if it pleased her.
So Rosalba dipped the hook, looped the stitch, drew out the thread, and laughed all by herself in the cool dark room.
For at last the witch was weakened by Carmellina's guile, and hoisted her to her feet, and pulled her over to the window and pointed down the stony path that led to one of her lair's doors, and to the Indian fig cacti growing there in bat-eared monster shapes, and said, ‘I've always fancied a new little number, made to measure, of stuff woven from prickly-pear skins, bit  of red for excitement, but mainly green, it's so elegant, don't you think, with long sleeves and a full skirt sweeping around me, with a bit of a train….
Ahah!
You said, ‘Anything ’, and are you flinching now?’
Carmellina stammered, how would prickly pears be woven ?
Each fruit bristled with invisible barbs, a pin-cushion of spider's craft and cunning, a defence against predators more efficient than a carapace.
The sorceress was relentless.
‘You'll have to work that out for yourself!
If you want your precious bird back again as a man.
And if you want him back,’ she added with a final hoot, and a swish of her sluttish robe, ‘you have till the next full moon, and no longer!’
So Carmellina's calvary endured a month, of which Rosa followed every moment, eking out her days of pain with love.
The brave young woman, with hands blistered and bloated and bleeding from the venomous hair-fine spines of the prickly pear, opened the fruit, dried it in the sun, and spun it to a fine thread on a spindle.
For thirty days and nights she did not sleep, and throughout she was supported by the bird, who sang to her as well to rally her spirits — and to keep her awake.
Once Zenaida was well and truly snoring, Carmellina would slash his jesses with her knife so that he would stay by her, and he would peck at her shoulder if her head began to loll; he would then whistle and coo to divert her and hasten his salvation.
When she touched his soft feathers with her poisoned and fiery hands, she could feel the warmth of his body beneath them and the strong beat of his shrunken heart.
Once she had picked clean the bat-eared tree of the Indian fig, and spun its armoured fruit, she had ten hanks of pale green yarn with a red fleck; and she could begin to weave.
Back and forth flew the shuttle, clackety clack went the treadles of the loom, up and down sluiced the heddles, and the cloth grew until she had sufficient yardage for a gown; she plied the scissors, cut out a pattern, sewed the seams and hemmed the border, and she was nearly faint with pain from the cactus pricks festering in her hands and halfway up her arms.
The bird brought her food, dropping it into her mouth so that she should not have to stop for the nourishment she needed in order to have enough strength to carry on.
And at last, Rosalba sighed, smilingly, as she dipped and looped and drew out the thread herself, there was the dress for the sorceress.
The moon was sailing in the sky, making her woebegone grimace, when she brought it to her, and Zenaida was torn, you could tell, between disappointment that brave Carmellina had fulfilled the impossible ordeal she had set her, and pleasure in the work of the  dress itself, the fine weave, the dashing shape, the fall of the supple cloth, the nimble stitching.
She put it on….
What then?
Rosalba stopped crocheting.
Did Zenaida burn up, poisoned herself by the robe of prickly pear?
Had she had time to free Tommaso from his changed shape?
Had Rosalba, no, Carmellina, broken the spell which held Zenaida herself captive?
Did she put on the magic dress, the dress made of pain and courage and become herself transformed, into a human woman, lovely and gentle, whom some other wicked creature had once enchanted too?
And then what?
Rosalba saw Zenaida beautiful, glowing in the soft green dress she had made her, with the almond eyes and slender limbs of Caterina….
What then?
Rosalba prayed, often, these days while she waited for Tommaso's return to Rupe and the walk they would take together, as he had told Caterina they would, and she applied herself to acquiring those skills at crochet, at knitting, at pattern cutting and sewing that Fantina learned from her sisters, who were themselves taught by Auntie Rosa, later, in America.
Rosalba prayed to the Madonna of the Spasm in particular, the statue in the church in Rupe who had once wept real tears in sympathy with someone who had prayed to her with a heart full of sorrow too.
The tears had been caught on a piece of gauze, and sealed in a cut-glass phial.
On certain feast days, the gates of the inner sanctuary where the reliquary was kept-were opened, and it became visible, in its tabernacle behind the statue; when they were shut, visitors had to peep through the bars: the grille was shiny where hands had gripped it on either side to get a glimpse.
Rosalba was drawn to her above all the other Marys in the province, far and above the Madonna of the Kneading Board, who had been washed ashore with the face of Our Lady in its grain, and who was her mother's favourite, and hung in replica above her bed.
Rosalba felt that if only she could stop blinking and concentrate totally on the sweet and grieving countenance of the Madonna of the Spasm, she would catch the fleeting flutter of her eyelids and twitch of her lips as she granted Rosa's prayer.
Beyond the trials, there would be no more pain.
The Madonna wept; Rosa knew she wanted the sufferings of her children to come to an end.
She and Cati were born into the same family, went to the same school, heard the same sermons on Sundays and feast days, and often confessed to the same priest; but Cati liked to cover herself in guilt, a kind of protective clothing that her elder sister had once inspected, tried on for size, and then discarded.
When Rosa looked at the Madonna of the Spasm, she did not see the immaculate mother, the  tower of ivory, the fountain sealed, the spring shut up, the enclosed garden of the Madonna's perpetual virginity.
She did not beg her, as Cati did — Rosa had heard her — to help her be good, help her to be pure, and never have dirty thoughts or put her fingers in dirty places; instead she fixed on the amber doe's eyes that had gushed, above the hilt of a sword, which was studded with bright glass stones and stuck out from the statue's brocade costume.
It was made with a slit for the blade to pass, like the slits at the back in angels' tunics for their wings, and was changed according to the seasons' calendar.
The Madonna wore blood-red purple during her son's Passion, but put on gold and silver for his Resurrection and Ascension and for her own glorious Assumption, when Tommaso would surely come back for the holiday.
Rosa looked at the weapon piercing the heart of the Mother of God, around which her finely carved wooden hands, so lithe and brown they too might one day reach out and clasp hers, fluttered as if poised either to grasp it and draw it from her or plunge it in deeper.
Rosa would have envied Mary her powers of passion, the open expression of her grief and her love, if she had not been so certain that the Madonna was entirely on her side.
Mary protected women-of strong feeling; she had known their experience of suffering, from the inside, and she still knew it; women's passions, not just the Passion of her son, were her province, devotion like Carmellina's her special knowledge.
Her smooth clean hands would one day reach out, one to take Rosa's face gently by the chin, while the other smoothed her hair, and her eyelids would drop in assent: Mary had gone against the grain, against the world, against custom , thought Rosa, as she dipped in the hook, looped the stitch, drew out the thread in the dark room.
She could have been stoned, people would have mocked her as she passed in the street, as they jeered and booed that girl Serafina when she started getting bigger and everyone knew who'd done it but they couldn't do anything about it, not even kill him, because he was the son of a nobleman -Rosalba shuddered, remembering the way Serafina had thrown up her chin and turned and screamed at her tormentors, ‘And which one of you is so good that you can point at me!’, then dropped her head and run away down the street, holding her heavy breasts as she ran.
(In some of the harsh villages of the hinterland, the sheets of the bridal night were still unfurled on the morning after; the spots on them displayed heraldically from the balcony of the house.)
Serafina had left, later, with her mother, got a job as a wet nurse in Riba.
Or so they'd heard.
Rosalba closed her eyes, and beseeched heaven, not for the first time, ‘Dear Lady, Lady who has known tears and cares and the love of God on earth, please help  Serafina and give her lots of milk so she can make money and give her strength and stop people being unkind to her.
And dear Lady, Mother of God, please don't let it happen to me .’
There, another one finished, Rosa said to herself, turning the delicate crochet lace in her hand and gently pulling the knotty circles this way and that to make the mat lie flat.
With a good heavy hot iron, it would stop belling out here and there, she thought, and she experienced a flash of pleasure at the quickness and deftness of her work.
On an impulse, she moved to the glass, set in the doors of the tall heavy dark wood ambry in which the family's best crockery and linen were stored.
She put the mat on her head: its frothy white edge undulated on her dark hair, and in the dusk in the secluded room the effect flattered her plump dark face.
She looked at herself, practised an attitude, widening her eyes and sucking in her cheeks, then another, chin up, head to one side, Madonna-like in pious ecstasy, then shaking her head to dismiss the bridal vision she had attempted, plucked the lace mat from her hair and added it to the pile with the others she had finished.
She needed to be disenchanted too, from this shape in which she was held prisoner.
Come next year, after the closed season of Lent, would there be a wedding?
She pushed the thought away, terrified of damaging it by careless anticipation.
There were so many women, Serafina wasn't the only one, who had men, different men, all sorts, and children, different children, all sorts.
She'd heard her mother talking with her cousins, exchanging notes.
A mother of twelve, just had another still-born, stifled by the caul, he came out feet first and upside down facing up, the cord was around his neck, marks of sinfulness, twelve children with how many men?
Five?
Six?
Who could tell?
And one of the little girls was heard to say, ‘Mamma's last-night husband.’
A man she'd probably never see again.
The grackle heads of the gossips would bend closer together, the voices grow sharper; they'd review the ingredients of love philtres used by witches in those barbaric, remote communities.
Women elsewhere, different women, living by another code provided them with a common and inexhaustible theme.
But all the messages that the parliaments of women busily exchanged among themselves stuck at one figure whom their spate of stories, their laughter and malice, couldn't break down or wash away, a special kind of other woman, a figure so pitiful and so ludicrous that even jokes couldn't make her situation spicy, and yet she outnumbered all others, because so many men had gone away alone, to America, both North and South.
Rosalba was never ever going to be one of them; never, never.
She'd a hundred times rather change last night's husband  on a daily basis, be reviled as a witch in the parliament of women, she'd like to have dead babies in succession — she winced at this, ‘Please, no’— but pressed on rather than be that nothing, that unbeing, that sump of ribaldry and pity and contempt, the woman-who-had-never-had-a man, the zitella , the old maid.
Old maid.
No.
Above all, Lady, she entreated, Mother of God on earth, I will do anything, I will crochet a hundred table-mats and wash my hands between every row, and never ever have an ice cream.
I will offer up these sacrifices, they're nothing I know, but what can I do, I want to do something, give me a cart load of prickly pears and I'll do it, I'll spin them into fripperies for sorceresses, but please please don't let nothing happen to me.
Make something happen.
Something, to me.
The Snail Hunt 2
DOLMETTA, MAY 1931
His turnout exceedingly elegant, the father was walking on over the hard curd-white earth down the double track of the carts towards the small port on the coast ahead.
He kept to the shadows, though the breeze blew freshly, and now and then stopped to wipe the chalky dust from his shined shoes with his handkerchief.
Rows of olive trees, mixed with almond, lapsed rhythmically on either side of him, like the falling pages of a book; according to the frugal practice of local husbandry, vines were planted underneath them.
In this ‘promiscuous culture’ the triple-canopy growth freckled the earth with green shadows — from the clear young lime of the fruit trees to the mineral and ancient duskiness of the olive.
The road he followed marked the seasonal migration of sheep from the treeless limestone plateau further inland to the watered valleys around; it had led across this terrain since the Romans had farmed there.
They'd hardly been the first, he reflected.
It mattered to him that the people of the south were of ancient lineage, far beyond anything that could have been imagined by the Americans he had known in New York, back in the Tens and Twenties.
He tapped with his cane on the track as he walked, remembering the contempt in which he and his fellow Italians had been held.
Little they knew, he thought.
They were descendants of Iapyx, a son of the great Daedalus's, who'd had the good sense not to fly.
He'd never become a household name, unlike his famous younger brother, Icarus, but instead, remaining grounded, had prospered.
He had sailed to Ninfania from Illyria, in a big double bass of a galleon, with a prow carved like a volute, and it brought him to the shore in the harbour he then designated Ribaris, after the peak where the Ark had come to rest, once all the waters of the flood had drained out of the plughole of divine fury.
No matter others called the place of safety by a different name; the sober lapyx, who knew not to dare too much, drew on his family tradition to found the  new city, Riba.
It was Daedalian blood that accounted for the native handiness and wit and industry of the people of Ninfania, the father had always thought.
As for Daedalus himself, he had been busy too at the time inventing the Greek alphabet in Cumae, on the other side of the peninsula.
Davide Pittagora had been born in Rupe, ancient Rubi, a great centre of vase-painting, not quite as cosmopolitan as Taranto on the coast, for the Ionian port could attend a wealthier class of customer, but a distinguished artists' colony, up in the fresher air of the hills, away from the hot sandpaper winds that blew the trade into Riba and her sister harbours, Dolmetta, Tirrani, and, further south, Brindisi.
The quivering line of Southern Italian black figure vase-painting, so different from its counterpart on the Greek mainland in its general insouciance and amiability, was being drawn in Rubi more than two thousand years before Davide was born.
In Ninfania, the to and fro of peoples — of troglodytes, Iapygians, of Greeks on their heels, and Romans on theirs-had sown in the pale chocolate-coloured fields a different harvest of pots and glass and coin, and bequeathed to the Ninfanians another occasionally profitable and effortless trade, the traffic in antiquities.
And after these peoples, others had come: now and then, Davide passed, in a clearing in the grove, a stone hut, white and conical in shape, like the turbans of the Saracens who were overlords here long ago and who built these shelters for summer days when the heat in the grove swelled too burstingly to bear.
The fieldhands used them; animals sometimes broke into them; and lovers used them for trysts.
The antiquity of the land where he was born gave Davide intense pleasure, it expanded the stretch of his memory far beyond the circumscribed round of his life.
As a boy, he had liked to scrape around in the fields; he had eavesdropped when the whereabouts of discoveries were discussed, and walked with the farmers when they ploughed an old olive grove to turn it over to fruit trees.
He and Tommaso had stumped and foraged, lit upon the occasional coin, too worn to be of value, the odd shard, or metallic fragments until with experience they learned that not all finds were booty.
But the dealers were alert to new traces, if only because a single coin — the bronze ears of barley on the local currency of Rubi, with Demeter's garlanded head on the obverse — might lead, like a broken twig, a crackle of a dry leaf, to greater treasure; the boys could earn a lustrous fizzy drink from the new carbonator, or a cigarette in the cafe, with a promise to show the location of the trivial find.
Davide had turned up a coin, one afternoon, when he was mooning around; it was a common enough type, the professor told him in the museum at Riba, where he took it for an opinion.
‘Keep it,’ he said, ‘it's nice, but it's not rare.
It'll remind you that Ninfania wasn't always like this’— and he waved at the window to the town outside, beyond his closed shutters.
He came from the Po valley, but he had caught malaria during his stint in the south and had the southern malaria victim's sallowness.
His gaze took in nothing of the scene in the street below; it spoke only of the generic, accumulated ills of the Noonday of Italy, of violence and crime, poverty, disease, ignorance, and superstition.
Davide was disappointed: he'd hoped to sell the coin for a lira or so.
The professor, noting the youth's failure to appreciate his find, told him with impatience to look at it more carefully.
‘You peasants understand nothing.’
He tutted, irritably, his dry tongue against his palate.
‘I am not a peasant,’ said Davide.
The professor shrugged, casting an eye over Davide's good jacket, to inform him that his information was unnecessary.
Davide paused.
‘I'm a Greek,’ he said.
‘Unlike Your Excellency.
Men from the north do not share our ancestry.’
The older man chuckled.
‘Good,’ he said.
And he held his palm over Davide's hand for a fraction as he returned the coin.
‘My name is Pittagora,’ Davide continued; always quick to redden, he felt the blood surge in his face.
‘And would you believe me, young man, if I told you I descended from the Emperor Carlo Quinto?’
The tone was teasing, and his head, with its odd parchment look, the hair dull from living under a fedora, the skin dun from fever and staying within walls to keep cool, nodded at Davide, to humour him.
‘Charles the Fifth, who was born less than a thousand years ago?…
Come now, it's improbable, isn't it?’
Davide drooped his head, looked at the coin, insisted.
‘That is our name, and has always been our name.’
‘Yes, yes.’
On one side of the coin, there was an image of an ear of barley, plump kernels sprouting whiskers, each one finely raised in relief Ninfania had been arable before, not pastureland and orchards only, as today, but covered in fields of grain, a cereal basket of the ancient world, an Egypt.
But Hannibal's wars with Rome brought down the devastating armies of the empire, and what war had not spoiled, the mosquito finished off.
For centuries, there had not been enough grain in the province to feed its people; then the speculators from the north  and the west had overrun the plains and seized the common pastureland to make their profits in cereals; the great erratic storms of the Ninfanian hinterland burst over the thin fields and washed away the soil, turning the sheep runs of centuries into enclosed wasteland.
Davide ran his finger over the knubbled ear, and it began to seem to him a charm to bring good luck, prosperity, the ease he hoped to find, if only he could leave for America.
He turned the coin over.
The other side showed the same ear of barley, in reverse, a template to cast the image; if you pressed candle wax into this side of the coin, you would get an impression of the other face.
The coin looked as if the minter struck it on a single die, punching the image in the metal in repoussé , so hard that the inverted ear on the reverse would appear on the other side, and could be read the right way round in shallow relief when the coin was turned over.
But the professor showed Davide that the coin was too thick to receive the impress all the way through as goldleaf does, that the engravers had struck both sides independently, with two different dies.
Why, he could not say.
The method was called inchuse , enclosed, sealed.
The coin was both medal and seal.
‘It's unusual, rather than beautiful,’ he said.
‘An enigma.’
The museum man placed his fingertips together and nodded at Davide as he took trouble to explain, and the colour flowed back from Davide's cheeks and he slipped the coin into his pocket, with its two faces that were neither mirror images of one another, nor replicas, but a false double, an inexact repeat.
Corn once grew here, he thought, but all we have left is the memory of it, and we cast an image from that memory.
But this can only ever be an after-image, a look-alike, inside out.
He kept it for a talisman, taking it with him in his pocket when he married Maria Filippa, and on the boat when they crossed the ocean to New York.
It was hard to recognise Ninfania's antique greatness now.
How deep the corruption had travelled since then, Davide thought, and sighed.
Yet, when one of the local farmers, grinding the bony soil of a resisting field, felt the earth give way and drop him into a narrow grave, and discovered there a store of gravegoods disposed around the human remains, the interval of the centuries seemed to close.
The seed corn left to accompany the dead could sprout again — as a boy, he had heard reports of successful experiments on damp rags in the dark — the coins for the ferryman, fallen among the collapsed lips and tongueless jawbones of the discovered dead, could be buffed and brightened until  the curls in the hair of Demeter, caught up in rich ropes under a garland of corn floating with ribbons, gleamed glossily again, and the Cupid on Riba's emblematic ship, facing out to sea with his drawn bow over the whorl of the prow, stood out in silver against the duller ground.
When a vase emerged unbroken — especially the tall storage amphorae for oil and water-when its millennia-old husk of mud and chalk was scraped away, it appeared to Davide like a living body released from the torpor of an unnatural sleep, from a kind of illness, its rounded shape tender, pointing a foot, like an absorbed peg-doll, its intactness a triumphant resurrection.
The matrons with their marked brows, hooped earrings and prominent noses had hardly altered, though the scarlet and mulberry cloaks painted in the tombs had vanished from all but the youngest and luckiest women among Davide's kin, for a single death in the family charred them all, turning young and old into sable-winged crow-women — in churches, at the threshing, at the well, as if flocking in the turned field.
Davide recognised his own people in the mourners of the tomb wall-paintings, women who strode forward in sandals, arms linked in a chorus line to send off the dead with exuberant and noisy rites.
Keening by the side of the corpse, the professional nacarena still howled her tale of the deceased, spinning it out from scraps of information the family had told her, and then delivering it bound and knotted into a customary warp of praise and lamentation with the reassuring catch-phrases that were always used, to level the pleasant and the unpleasant, the cherished and the despised into a democracy of death, making each death absolutely regrettable, knitting up into the web of the dirge the separate individuals of the community.
The mourner's story patterned the life of the deceased so that grudges and shortcomings were obliterated by the larger, traditional design.
This sound, tautening to the pitch of a screech, interrupted Davide's growing up; it had frightened children like him as they played in the streets, but sent a shiver through them that also excited them.
‘A death!
A death!’
Or rather, in the preferred euphemism, ‘A vanishing!
A vanishing!’ they exclaimed, hearing the nacarena's voice pour through the pulled blinds from the house marked with black crosses and hung with newly dyed banners of death; women's voices, giving birth to the eternal soul, were louder than the priest's obsequies, the relatives' rosaries, and the lullabies they sang after the first birth, the entry into the mortal transit.
Still men did not know what women did when they were alone together.
The villa with its ceremonial painted chamber, uncovered by chance a quarter of a century ago on the Marchese's lands, had been  walled up again.
It had made the Marchese a small fortune when he sold it to the deputy of the English connoisseur in Naples who was going to ship it away in boxes; it was being stripped from the walls when the Government heard of it and came and sealed up the villa again, but not before one of the intermediaries had sliced enough off the top of the deal to pay his passage to America, promising to send after him for his family.
He sent word, but never sent for them.
This was a land where the pursuit of illusion possessed the artists; where awkward tries at perspective were made, and revellers in scenes of feasting were shown sitting up on one elbow, on daybeds with legs disposed for the first time in recession.
Zeuxis's painted vine provoked the wonder and the applause of all his audience when it attracted birds to peck at the plump fruit.
His colleagues struggled to outdo him in lifelikeness, in art that was a pure conjuring trick on the sense of sight.
How generous he was to acknowledge his own defeat, when he asked one of his rivals -Parrhasius — to draw back the curtain and unveil the portrait underneath, and was told by the artist that the curtain itself was painted.
With such Daedalian skills, Davide's forebears committed themselves to fabrication.
In Crotone, the former Croton, one of the many rich colonies on the coast to the south, on the Ionian sea to the south of Rupe, Zeuxis painted his most famous commission, for the sanctuary of Hera on the promontory.
He made a likeness of Helen of Troy which convinced all who came to sacrifice there that the Trojan War had been well fought; and for this famous portrait, Zeuxis had lined up the young women of Croton, and taking an ear from one, the set of chin from another, the legs, the arms and stomach and so forth of others, he had assembled his divine beauty.
Though he deceived the beholder into taking his artifice for reality, Zeuxis practised an idealist art.
Not for him the cynical moralities of Pauson, who presented humanity worse than it is, or the fidelity of the painter Dionysus to observable particularity: he was beauty's slave, and beauty is made, he knew, not found.
Beauty does not lie in our path, thought Davide, as he walked on; it is up to us to make it, to find the harmonious balance, and the pleasant story.
And it is hard work.
An aria should sound exactly as the word describes, as light and inevitable as the air itself; but to achieve that!
No, happenstance will never make for beauty.
He shook his head and resolved, reality will never do.
Although the story of Croton's lost Helen admitted that no single girl of the southern peninsula in those days was entirely beautiful enough, it was still recalled by the attending spectators at the Sunday  promenade, by the old men and women no longer in the marriage stakes, by the servants whom custom forbade from parading — as if the cost of new or spruced-up clothes did not make it impossible for them to take part anyway.
The story was an ancient warrant that the girls of those parts were the beauties of their day, that there'd been no break with the proud Greek tradition.
‘Ah!
Caterina!
As beautiful as Crotone's Helen!’ the old men nodded in the summers, when his youngest sister would pass by the terrace of the circolo, the club, on her way to fetch something Nunzia was having cooked at the baker's oven.
But Davide, as he grew up, saw the break as irreparable, and struggled not to see it.
It wasn't to do with the women, they still resembled their ancestors well enough.
No, he knew the loss was deeper.
As he got older, his impatience, with Rupe and its littleness, its brutality, its poverty, could not be appeased; you could see for miles around from its position, and you could see nothing.
Even the heyday of tomb-robbing was over; his scavenging couldn't be called by such a piratical name and the local labourers could not be inspired to sift the soil scrupulously when they could break it with a pickaxe so much faster, and the mounted overseers might take a crack at them with a rifle butt if they dawdled.
Besides, hearing of cases brought by the state against thieves who passed their finds to dealers on the black market and failed to report to the Commission on Antiquities ended his youthful enthusiasm for archaeology: Davide was law-abiding by temperament.
The hunters had forfeited their title to the past, and now they were bringing to its remains less care than their wives and mothers took with rinsing, smoothing, and conserving for re-use scraps of brown paper or lengths of string.
He had grown to loathe the laying waste of his homeland, the ruffians of the Work and Freedom brigades, the landowners in their carriages, the tenant farmers on short leases, and the dayworkers they beat and drove likewise.
The beasts were beaten too, the soil was drained.
The violence droned in the air, like an airborne illness, its eruptions did not produce conclusions, only more sickness.
He had longed to get away.
He left for America in 1913.
He had studied law at the university in Riba, but did not wait to take his degree; he had no money except Maria Filippa's dowry.
He wanted to set up a new-enterprise in New York, a law firm advising immigrants.
But Davide was not made of the stuff of American uncles.
The headaches, which in Italy had been tolerable when eased by a siesta or a day or two's absence from the office, or the  circolo, where he picked up most of his cases, had become unbearable in New York.
The city's manners were too fast, its rhythm too syncopated.
The swelter in summer squeezed on the planes of his skull like a knight's helmet overheating in the sun, before the Saracens taught the Christians to wear veils, and the winds of winter bit into his brows like braces screwed onto scaffolding to keep it rigid, and set pain skirling through his body.
For long bouts he had lain in the dark, stuffing his mouth to prevent himself screaming.
He had longed to come back.
Once home again in Ninfania, his health improved.
The family moved to Riba, to an apartment in the palazzo Papa San had bought in the new town, the building Davide now looked after for him.
In Riba, the law was keeping pace with the increasing size and gradually growing prosperity-of the town.
The blue vein in Davide's temple beside the scar where the bullet had entered throbbed and swelled to give warning when one of his bone crunchers was on its way; lying quietly stretched out in the shuttered bedroom of their apartment, he was able to defend himself, as it readied to pounce, testing its grip on his nerves as a cat tests its claws on the obliging furniture; he could slip under the velvet cloth of numb unconsciousness, without plunging his family into squalor and even starvation and illness as he had risked doing-as he had done — on Crosby Street near the Bend in Little Italy.
From The Duel RUPE, 19 12
It was not until the following Pentecost, in early summer, that Rosalba heard Tommaso Talvi had at last come back.
That Saturday evening she joined the passeggiata, with her hair pulled flat against her skull to smooth its crinkles and bring out its sheen, and the gold medallion of the Madonna she had received for her first communion hanging bright against the new pale shawl she had crocheted herself.
But as she perambulated the piazza under the eyes of the card-players and the widows in the shadowy doorways of the houses bordering the conventional route at this hour! she caught no sight of him.
She tried to see if he were concealed among the group hanging around near the circolo, but without lifting her eyes to scan them like a strumpet.
Keeping her glance averted, her smile modest, she practised the art of scrutinising without seeming to look.
Twice, with a thump, she spotted him, in the set of a man's shoulders, the tilt of a head, a patch of uniform, then found it was someone else.
She began to be uncertain whether she would be able to recognise him; she tried out her set of mental snapshots, but they were dim and amorphous, as if they'd rubbed in the wallet of her fantasy for too long.
Her step, which had begun in unaccustomed buoyancy, began to shrink; soon, she was trudging round and round with dispirited tread, and her hanging head became so weary that her neighbour, Elisabetta, holding her by the arm, dug her elbow into Rosalba's ribs to bring her to.
Rosalba tried to respond, turning to her friend and patting down a curl or two round her face; then she adjusted the combs which held her friend's hair behind her ears, where she wore small gold hoops.
Like Rosalba's medallion, they formed part of her dowry.
When Rosa had completed her gentle grooming, they resumed their circling of the square, hand in hand; and Tommaso came out of the cafe where he had bought Caterina and Franco ice cream, and lit a cigarette and puffed smoke into the evening sunlight.
She had never seen anything so accomplished as the movements he made, or so perfect as the oval of his lips as he exhaled.
Her fingers tightened in Elisabetta's hand.
Elisabetta was asking her something; it was about the fireworks last year in the city, off the old harbour wall where they had reflected in the sea.
Would they be able to go this year again, as she hoped?
She had liked especially the tableau of the Assumption, when the rockets launched the Madonna into heaven.
On Elisabetta's other side, another friend interrupted with some news about the church funds.
Rosalba paid no attention; she looked at Tommaso, and her gait grew sprightly again, and she began organising her projected future, laying her plans.
So Caterina the next day ran into Tommaso on an errand as if by accident and muttered to him; she was twisting her limbs and quite red with fear, but he followed her as she ducked awkwardly into the church and knelt in front of the Madonna of the Spasm in the votive chapel.
She choked out Rosalba's message, that he should meet her there, in the same place, tomorrow, that he should come, as if to light a candle, and she would be there, doing the same thing, early, before the morning Mass.
The child crossed and uncrossed her legs as she gabbled, as if she were dancing to go to the lavatory.
Tommaso laughed.
As she rose, her eyes, which had flicked from side to side, looked him in the face for the first time.
He said, ‘This isn't a good place to meet, too many people come here, especially during the vigil of a feast.
Tell your sister she must think of somewhere else.’
Caterina searched his expression, then gasped out, ‘Where?’
Tommaso bent down to her cheek and placed his lips against her ear.
She tensed; very softy he blew into her ear, until she quivered as his warm breath passed through her.
He said, ‘Tell your sister she must send you to me with a message, and I'll be there.’
‘Where will I find you?’
Caterina now faced the weeping Virgin determinedly and moved her lips as if praying; she quailed when she realised that she would have to act the go-between again and seek him out alone once more.
Tommaso described, rapidly, one of the many round stone shelters scattered in the olive groves outside the town, on the road which led to the sea from the farm where he had visited them last Easter.
He gave her precise directions, and made her repeat them.
‘You're sure now you know the one I mean?’
Caterina nodded.
She moved to leave, the gloom in the chapel oppressed her, she felt the glass eyes of the Madonna on her, grievous, welling, over her stabbed breast.
Tommaso took her arm, his hand circled the whole of hers between finger and thumb, and squeezed as he said, ‘No, she shouldn't come, not there, it's too dangerous, someone might see.
She must consider her honour.
I want you to come, instead.’
He paused.
‘You can give me another place to meet her at night-time, a more private place, which she can choose and no one will be able to find out.’
And seeing that someone had joined them in the chapel, he pinched Caterina's cheek, and lightly slapping her shoulder, said aloud, ‘Away with you, find someone else to pester.’
He roared with laughter, shaking his head for all the world as if Caterina were some naughty imp and he an indulgent uncle.
The tingling of Tommaso's breath in her ear persisted as she made her way home; though she could see no one around her, she felt eyes at her back, sucking out her secrets like cupping glasses burning against her skin.
When she turned, there was no one, but she hurried on, though she no longer knew what she should do, what she should tell her sister, if she should report this request for an assignation somewhere more secret than a church, more private than a byre.
The wrong he had proposed weighed in Cati's stomach like undigested food; Rosalba couldn't possibly do what he asked, it would be madness, if she were found out, God knows what would happen.
Besides, when she, Cati, thought that she would have to go again to find Tommaso and arrange a further tryst, she was swept by apprehensions she could not quite name.
A different uneasiness, different from the lump of indigestible fear that her sister's rashness inspired, became lodged in her, more fluttery, indistinct, and nauseous, as if someone had shut out all the air in a bedroom with the closing of the shutters.
His ring of bone around her upper arm, the sound waves of his whispering, thrumming gently through her, raising her scalp, warming her ear, the laughter when she first began to speak, his glassy greenish gaze.
He was cruel, she thought, that was it.
He would do her harm.
She stopped on her journey, and sat down in the street under one of the sparse trees, to try to let the queasiness ebb away.
It was still hot, though the evening was falling, and she lay back against the warm wall, and closed her eyes.
With one hand she cleared away from under her the sharp stones of the unpaved road.
She was clutching one in her hand; its edge dug into her palm.
She was glad she had the stone, when he came into the byre; she was waiting for him as he had asked her to, she had made her way across the orchard in the fresh blue morning and let herself in through the  wooden door by lifting it off its hinges, since the bolt had rusted fast long ago, and she had looked up at the full moon of the sky in the chimney hole at the centre of the round shelter's roof, and with her stone which was sharp as a shearing knife with a bright, honed blade the marks of the whetstone were still visible in pale striations like scouring tracks — she scraped her name into one of the stones on the interior, as many others had done before her, in tall shapely capitals, the only letters she knew.
Except that it wasn't her name that she carved into the yielding stone, but her sister's.
She wrote ‘ROSALBA’, for indeed it was Rosalba who was there, holding the kitchen knife in her hand as Tommaso came through the door.
She was frightened, and she sank to the ground.
There was straw and an old woven blanket some herdsman had left there, with a heap of tools; it smelt savoury and sharp inside, like the smell of a birth; she was melting, the light blinked around him, and there was sheepskin under them; her name, which she found carved on the stone, carved by him during vigils while he waited for her there in the days before she could come, was edged in light.
There was an R for Rosalba.
No, it was a c, for Caterina.
He came through the door, and he was laughing, he took Rosalba in his arms and kissed her and they went down on to the sheepskin with soft cooing giggles and sucked and licked and flowed together in the nest like a mother cat and her kittens.
He came through the door and he backed Cati against the rough wall of the hideout and rammed his pelvis against her stomach and pinned her down with one hand flat against her chest and with the other drew his belt through the loops of his soldier's jacket and slashed her across the face with the buckle doubled against the leather.
He said to her, softly, purring in her ear as the blood flowed into her eyes from the wound in her head, ‘Get down on your knees.’
She fell forward, on her hands; there were thistles growing on the hard chalky earth in the shelter, there was no sheepskin.
He said, ‘This is for your sister.’
He came through the door, and he shut it behind him again quietly and turned and gave Caterina a peach.
No, it was a candle from the statue of the Madonna where they had met, and then he put his arms around her, each one was long enough to cradle her on its own, and pulled her against him, he was warm and firm like newly-baked loaves, and the taste of his tongue was sweet and salt at the same time.
He said, ‘Think you're a lady?
You're a piece of shit, you're a she-goat, and the place you need it is where you shit, because that's what you are.’
She did not know which sister she was, and she took her knife, it was lucky its blade had been sharpened recently.
Stars  winked from the metal as she faced him across the byre.
When he came into her she stuck him like a pig and ripped him from his abdomen up to his breastbone.
There, in contact with the bone, there was a scraping sound, and her strength failed.
He was all soft and scummy inside, and greenish, like his eyes, and she stood up and pulled the two halves of his torn torso together like a shirt she was going to button up so she should not see the spilling of his innards.
And she lay beside him, her limbs intertwined with his, his furry legs lacing her smooth ones, their matted wetness mingling, and he was murmuring, ‘My sweet one, my darling, Cati.’
His mouth was like two halves of a peach when you part them and see the rose-edged pulp inside, before you bite it.
The droning in her head came nearer, like a colossal bumble bee, then veered away, lightening the pressure on her head, lessening the leak of fluid from her wound; Franco appeared, looming above her as if he were grown up.
She heard him from very far away, crying out her name, which was, Caterina.
She was glad, she had not wanted to meet Tommaso in the byre.
That was what Rosalba had to do.
Franco's hands took hold of her and shook her, he seemed to be moving in oil, and she responded sluggishly, like a loaded boat tugged into harbour, rolling as it was edged towards the berth.
She could make out, in his pert pointed child's round face, lines of anxiety.
‘Can't you get up, Cati, please?’ he was calling to her.
The head bent over her was ringed in blackness; the huge singing insect dive-bombed her again, and she closed her eyes and said to her brother, ‘Tommaso, Tommaso.’
Rosalba was holding a wet cloth on her face, and so Caterina found she was home again; her mother was taking off her shoes and rubbing her feet.
The droning in her head swelled and faded, swelled and faded repetitively, and a black halo edged her vision as if she were only allowed to behold her world circumscribed by mourning bands.
‘You fainted,’ said her mother.
‘I used to faint when I was a young girl, just like that.
It's nothing; it's being a woman.
We'll sew some metal in your hem and you'll stop fainting; flesh needs iron to be strong.’
Caterina shuddered.
‘I was there, I was near here…and…
’ She reached for Rosa.
‘Were you with me?’
‘You're confused now, sleep.’
Rosa adjusted the cold compress on her forehead, and settled back on a chair against the wall, watching Cati as she lay.
‘Rosa,’ Cati whispered, as soon as their mother had left the room, ‘Don't go and see him, please don't go.’
Rosa's head jerked up.
‘Shush, not so loud.
What did he say?
Tell me everything, every word.
When you didn't come back, I thought….’
‘Promise me you won't get into trouble.’
A wail caught in Cati's throat.
‘You're going to get into such trouble!’
And she turned her face to the pillow and sobbed.
‘Shut up, stupid, of course I'll be careful.
You're such a baby, you don't know anything.
You think I'm the first girl ever to meet a man in secret?
Tell me everything, come on.’
Rosa advanced on the patient and leant over her, urging.
Cati shrank from her anticipation of pleasure.
She said, ‘I led him into the chapel of the Madonna, just like you told me.
He was playing cards, but I think he'd finished.’
‘No one saw you?’
Cati swallowed.
‘At the end, yes, someone came into church, too.
But he pretended I'd been bothering him for something, he was clever about it, it seemed real.’
‘And before?’
‘I don't think so.
He didn't follow me into church straight away, and he knelt down, as if he was saying his prayers.’
‘So what did he say?’
‘He said, he'd like to see you,’ Cati hesitated, the singing in her head sent waves of sickness through her.
‘In private.’
‘In private!’
Rosa's eyes widened, glowed.
‘Aahah.’
And her chuckle, turning into a sigh, came out as happy, pent-up breath.
Caterina shut her eyes and twitched.
‘So he'll find me tomorrow, there, by the Madonna?
Darling Cati, thank you, don't be so frightened, please, people have done it before, what harm can come to me?
He wants to see me, it's good news, there's no reason for you to get upset like this.’
Rosalba took the rictus which passed over her sister's features as assent.
Cati's eyes opened, gummily, and she watched Rosa as she smoothed the bed, patted her hand, wetted the cloth again and adjusted it gently on her brow.
She opened her mouth to speak, but could not force the sounds out, could not manage to say to Rosalba that Tommaso had wanted her to give him a different rendezvous, somewhere where they could be alone.
Rosalba never went to the trysting place, because Caterina could not bring herself to tell her sister about the assignation Tommaso had proposed in the byre.
Nor could she bring herself to go in her place, as Tommaso had asked.
Instead Rosa waited in church before the eleven o'clock Mass, in the side chapel of the Madonna of the Spasm, and tried to pray through the  minutes that seemed to haul themselves onwards through time as if anvils were strapped to their feet.
Tommaso did go, to the trullo , in the olive grove, with a light step.
He expected Caterina to be there to tell him that Rosalba absolutely refused to meet him in such compromising circumstances and considered him a blackguard and a monster even to suggest such an assignation.
He took a shotgun with him, to bring home a few birds, as he walked, should he see any.
He would be seeing Caterina again, with her sweet face like a ripe apricot and her almond eyes, and he laughed when he remembered her childish stumblings as she tried to repeat the message to the letter.
There was something of her brother in her, the light bones and small feet and surprised eyebrows, and Tommaso liked Davide immensely, his gangling generous friend, even though he was a kid by comparison.
He liked his family, their ways, their hospitality, their large, excitable company, the father's outspokenness.
They had prospects, their land must yield well, could be made to yield better.
But they were weaklings, and disorganised.
He would help fructify their holdings, bring them up in the world where they should be.
Where he should be, with his cradle boon of green eyes like a magician's, and his stature that no one in his family had ever had before, his strength and resolve.
His officer had recommended him, noticing he was not like everyone else, that he never buckled, and, in life's battle of wills, could stare down any enemy, overcome any weakness.
Rosa in the chapel with her head bent over her hands, her legs stiff from kneeling, thought, We will go away together, somewhere different from here, to Africa, he said, he wanted to go there, and I will take care of him, we are like each other, we are both…and she hunted for the word because she did not want to use the word ‘misfit’, and found ‘changeling’.
Franco arrived for Mass with their mother.
Rosa took her place in church beside them and her little brother tugged at her sleeve, and asked, showing gappy teeth like a crone, ‘Are you going to join the sisters, Rosa?’
He hunched his shoulders in glee.
‘Has the Madonna called you?
Have you got a heavenly vocation?’
He rolled his eyes to heaven in mock devotion, and intoned, ‘Give me a husband,ora pro nobis .
A nice big husband,ora pro nobis ?’
Rosa reached out to grab him, but he danced away, ‘You'll have to join the sisters, they've got moustaches too….’
Tommaso sat down on the straw inside the hut.
It was cool inside, and lovers had carved one another 's initials in the white limestone of the interior.
He read the letters interlaced with hearts; he lit a cigarette, exhaled slowly, watching the smoke nudge across the roof until it found its way out into the sky through the circle in the roof like a full moon; he lifted the door open, and looked across the olive grove.
The crickets had begun singing.
As he stepped out, they flung themselves out of his reach, all at once, silently, before resuming their sawing song.
He heard the bell go for the High Mass, and knew now that Caterina wouldn't be coming; so he left the byre.
As he made for the road, the crickets hopped from him, all around, as if he'd launched them.
When he was younger he used to trap them; they were dry and husky to bite, but inside, they made a tender morsel.
Shrimps of the field, Davide had called them.
A brace of partridge whirred into the air.
He took aim half-heartedly, but they were away before he even squeezed.
In those days he hadn't yet eaten shrimp, but Davide had been to the sea, often, and reported.
He wasn't sad.
He had half-expected Caterina to fail to turn up, and he wasn't sure what he would have done with the girl if she had come.
He couldn't touch her, she really was too young; he imagined the pale peach cheeks of her child's cunt and the runny sweetness inside, and thought he might duck back to the hut and toss himself off.
But he stopped, adjusted himself so that his cock lay comfortably upright against his stomach, and made himself walk on; he knew his spirit grew stronger on retention, that he sapped his vital energies when he jerked off.
He had no time for the cant of the priests about sin, but he knew, as he lay in the barracks hearing the grunts and panting of his companions, that he was honing himself for a superior form by refusing his body.
To have a woman was different, her juices mixed with his and later the recollection gave him zest; but alone it was cowards' sport.
So he walked back into the piazza, while the church bells rang out with a dud sound, for the priest never had learnt how to stop the bell cutting its own resonance on the return of the clapper, and the musicians of the town who could have taught him were all adversaries of the church, like Davide's father.
‘Demon anarchists,’ cursed the priest, throwing all his enemies into a single pot.
If they chose to greet him in the street, he did not acknowledge them.
At the thud of the bell another bird rose, wings whipping.
A plover.
Tommaso recognised its badger markings and the flap of its wings as it climbed; he stuck the gun to his eye, tracked the bird, and fired; the plover's wings flew back and spread fanwise, in a cancan of swirling feathers, then it spun and came hurtling down.
Tommaso strolled over.
The bird's darting eye sought his frantically before it glazed; he thought as it twitched about on the hard dry clods that he might break its neck to bring its death throes to an end.
There  turned out to be no need.
He picked it up, felt the warm light body under the plumage like a child's small fist in a soft mitten.
There was very little blood from the peppering of shot, and a good plump feel to the breast, so he was well pleased.
He was becoming a good shot, in spite of the lack of practice in the army.
It wouldn't matter, though, one way or the other, later during the fight in the quarry with Davide.
At the close of Mass on feast days, Rosalba usually liked the lingering and the chat, the exclamations over new babies, new ribbons, new illnesses, old illnesses, the mutterings about swindles and scandals, policemen and bosses, the rumours of change, the curses and complaints.
But today, she could not take part, she pleaded illness, she invoked Caterina, who needed her at home, she said, for she was still poorly.
And so she scurried away.
Tommaso was coming towards her.
She tried to turn; she felt her face, flushed already with her wasted waiting, and by Franco's teasing, turn a deeper red.
Her heart emptied itself out, you could have tolled her and she would have sounded hollow and cracked.
He came abreast her, and smiled, showing his disconcerting teeth, and said: ‘I have something for you.’
He opened the buckles on his bag, and took out a bird, a small grey plover, its crest still dancing over its open eye, and held it out to her.
‘For your family,’ he said.
Rosalba wanted to say to him, ‘I love you, I'll cook it.
Just for you.
I love you.’
She felt choking in her throat, and tears pop from her eyes onto her burning face.
She said only, ‘Thank you.’
Her fingers closed tenderly around the soft grey feathers of the bird, the other hand found her own breast and covered it, in a gesture of self-offering.
Franco appeared at her side, frolicking.
She shooed him, and he skipped away, but not without hooting behind his hand.
She could think of nothing more to say, because she wanted to say so much and it was all forbidden.
She wanted to ask, Why had he not come?
Above all, she would have liked to ask, When could they meet again?
She would so like to speak to him of all that was inside her.
But her jaw had locked, as if she had been bitten by an animal that kills its prey by robbing it of the ability to eat or hunt, pant or lick, or even howl.
From The Duel RUPE, 1912
‘Are you sure you gave him the message right?
Why didn't he come?
Why did he leave me there?’
In the bedroom Caterina and Rosalba shared in the apartment in Rupe, smaller than their room in the farmhouse, Rosa questioned her sister, whispering, the night after Tommaso had made her a gift of the bird in the street in sight of everyone coming out of Mass.
‘I thought he was laughing at me, that he didn't want to see me, but then he stopped me and he made me a little bow, just like a real gentleman, and gave me a present, as if he did care.
Oh Cati, tell me again, what did he say when you saw him?
What did he do?’
She prodded Caterina in the bed beside her, but her sister remained hedgehog-tight.
Rosa flung herself over to the other side of the bed.
‘You're a hopeless go-between.’
Cati said, ‘I've told you, he gives me the shivers, I think he made a spell and did things to my head.
He's dangerous, I know he is.’
She had spoken too long to pretend any longer to be asleep, and so she twisted and touched Rosa's back, softly, with a hand on her shoulder to make her face her.
‘Rosa,’ she began, ‘Think of someone else, I don't know….’
She mentioned, haltingly, one or two other names in the town.
‘They'd be better for you.
Besides, you know Mamma doesn't like Tommaso.
Look what happened when you lied about the bird.’
Cati sounded snivelly, and Rosa smiled beatifically and shook her head on the pillow, in possession of a rare wisdom.
The more of a villain or a lout Tommaso Talvi appeared to others, the sweeter she found her task of siding with him, of divining the exceptional qualities in him, of standing by his side.
This was the proper enterprise of the loving wife, to defend her man; the men performed their acts of authority and occupied the seats of visible influence, but you didn't have to be especially keen-eyed to see that behind the card-players and the drinkers, the officials in their pompous uniforms, the clerks with their  mounds of bureaucratic forms, the farmers and the peasants, women were standing.
Without the services of their women, how would they survive the day-by-day attrition of factions and envy and corruption and ambition, the quotidian burden of poverty and grind and illness?
Women were used to such things, they could bear it more easily without giving way.
(Who ever heard of a mother falling so ill she could not take care of her household, whereas everywhere there were men drunk, mad, gaoled, old, worn out-who had become as children again to their wives?)
She thought of Africa and its special ordeals with greedy excitement; she set herself against its vast and glorious horizons.
She would be drinking coffee as if it cost less than water, wearing alligator shoes made to fit her pretty feet, and watching at Tommaso's side a parade of half-naked girls with bracelets round their legs, whirling to a drummer's flying hands, while a group of handsome, grinning soldiers stood by.
These images came to her from the metal engravings of the conquest of Libya which had appeared in the illustrated journals; she did not remember the different countries of the Italian empire in question, for all of Africa — Libya, Somalia, Eritrea alike — beat out a rhythm of adventure and spoils and heroism.
The pictures showed her overseers standing by ant-files of ‘natives’ doubled over as they hacked the roads of progress through mountainous desert; more grinning Italians cheered soundlessly under the joined twin arcs of a new bridge.
A gang of black workers wearing white loincloths faced the camera gravely, looking as if it were something they might be given to eat.
On other pages, she had seen a village of huts set in the lee of a bluff, where mothers — Italian mothers with babies on their laps — were sitting in the sun on chairs, just like at home.
They would achieve great things together, Rosa swore to herself, she would help him bring about his vision of converting the army to the cause of justice and equality.
‘I should like to go to Africa,’ said Rosalba drowsily.
Caterina cried out, ‘Don't go away, Rosa, please.’
Rosa said, ‘Perhaps he'll take me to Africa!’
Cati put out a hand again and touched her sister's flank, ‘Rosa, you're dreaming.’
‘I'm not!’ said Rosa, ‘I'm wide awake.’
‘You know recruits never take their families.’
Rosa stared, unmoving, at the ceiling.
She would make up dreams to fit her life with Tommaso, no matter what.
She willed her eyes to remain open until she felt her sister drift away from her into sleep, and then she prodded her; Caterina groaned, but did not wake.
Rosa  slipped out of their bed, and, imagining herself on water, trod as lightly as she could; her feet left moist imprints on the coldness of the tiled floor which shrivelled up as quickly as she made them, until she too vanished through the door.
She liked the nights in the country better; the mixed smells of the town contained more human corruption: the health of animal dung's pungency was missing in the ammoniac whiffs from the town culvert, and the touch of the air was never quite as lively as in the yard.
Besides, there was safety in the farm enclosure after the gates had been barred at night, whereas in the street below their apartment the way lay open in either direction, and presences palpitated unseen in the arches of the carriage doors under each house.
She stood still for a moment and looked up and down the street; it seemed to shine; the light the sun had poured onto the packed dirt of the road glowed back pewter under the stars; there was no longer any moon, it had set earlier that night, and the dimensions of the scene had expanded, creating a vacancy which made Rosa feel her pulse quicken, as if she too were growing, becoming less stubby, less compact, stretching upwards and turning silvery herself like the leaf of an olive when the breeze lifts it and shows its metallic underside.
She was in her night clothes, but, unnoticed by Cati, she had kept her dress on underneath.
She lifted her nightgown over her head; her feet were still bare, she wanted to make contact with the ground.
She waited, she felt sure he would come; it was the custom.
He had given her a token, and he must come to add speech to his gift, according to the rules of gallantry.
But he must come soon, or else she'd have to go back in, for her mother might wake and sense her absence and go in and check.
The sweat that had begun in anticipation of what she might encounter in the street now ran in fear of her mother's rage; Nunzia's eyes had gone hard and wrinkled like black olive pips when Rosa had produced the plover, and she had clucked impatiently with her tongue when Rosa lied and said her grandfather had shot it and presented it to her.
She'd snatched it away, and it fell on the kitchen floor, where blood had trickled from its beak.
Sabina had intervened between them: rescuing the bird from her mother, she cupped it, appreciatively.
‘We'll wrap it in cabbage leaves, overnight, with some peppercorns and a little laurel and thyme,’ she had said, evenly.
‘Then tomorrow, you can take it down to the oven and tell them to put it at the bottom, so it -cooks really slowly, to keep it moist.’
From the yard where the cart was kept, Rosa heard the Small splosh in the bucket after Sabina had placed the bird between her legs and slitted it to pull the guts.
Rosa had been crying then, with the pieces of the plate her mother had tried to smash over her head in front of her at the table, and her mother had put the back of her hand to her daughter's cheek, as if to test her for fever.
She had said, and her eyes had softened now, ‘Be careful, darling, there's no jewel as precious as you know what,’— with a finger pointing to the belly of her daughter.
‘An honest woman is above rubies, and an evil one — her feet go down to death, her steps take hold on hell.’
‘Shush, Mamma,’ Rosa had said, and then Sabina had come in again with the bird — it would make only a bite to eat.
‘What heat down there,’ Sabina blew out, as she sat down and stuffed the handful of down she had pulled from the plover into the bag of feathers Nunzia kept for plumping pillows.
When we returned together to Ninfania, you and I, in the late Fifties, there was litter in the streets of southern Italy, and it made them look more unfamiliar to you than the new buildings put up after the war and the bombing.
But at first you didn't realise that was what it was, that it was the novelty of ice cream wrappers and sweet papers and carrier bags and plastic bags strewn about that had changed the appearance of your childhood home, where nothing was ever discarded, but all returned into the cycle of sustenance.
The innermost southern shore of the peninsula had been the chosen land of Pythagoras, your namesake, perhaps your ancestor, the apostle of eternal return: it was in the market square at Crotone on the Gulf of Taranto south of Riba that he exposed his thigh and showed that it was golden, and so was honoured by the inhabitants as a special favourite of the gods, quasi-divine himself.
Did he have a birthmark there?
How could a birthmark, even tawny, convince the onlookers in the piazza two thousand years ago that it was gold, the metal of the gods, the stuff of ichor which flows in their ivory veins?
Some pragmatists have suggested that the philosopher was suffering from jaundice.
But even superstitious southerners can tell illness from health, and besides, the yellowing of that disease hardly gleams with imperishable health like gold.
The symptoms fade, moreover, whereas Pythagoras rejoiced in the peculiarity of a golden thigh until he died.
His followers were frugal.
They wouldn't eat anything living — who knows who the scrappiest fowl might have been?
For reasons nobody knows, they even included beans among prohibited foods.
Although southern Italians ate meat when they could afford it, gratefully, and  quantities of beans when they could not afford it, it still gives me pleasure, at least, that the philosopher who established the doctrine of migrant souls taught in my mother's homeland, where corks and bottletops might renew their lives as children's toys, magazine pictures provide wallpaper, and tins turn into percussion instruments.
In Ninfania, no one threw away the feather of a bird or the peel of a fruit or the seed from a melon, let alone such durable items as the buttons and hooks and eyes from a worn-out item of underwear — I've seen you still snip them off an old bra, even today, and drop them into a little box in your sewing basket.
All things were returned into the rushing stream of change.
The very poor even sold the combings of their hair, to hawkers who came by crying for it, and passed it on to the dollmakers in Naples where it would stuff the turban of a king or tassel the tail of a donkey for a Nativity crib at Christmas.
I didn't mind the new litter in Italy; trash in cities makes me feel comfortable, as increasingly its absence from the streets indicates money, lots of it.
In London, you can index the mean income of the households by the state of the gutters outside; in the area where the archive of Ephemera lies in boxes, waiting for its eventual home, there's a kind of mangy green lozenge next to the local church where the derelicts hang around, propping themselves up on the park bench in a drift of beer cans and double strength cider bottles and blown crisp packets.
I sometimes join them, if their smell isn't too gamey, and exchange the time of day during my lunch hour, just to make sure that I still have the use of my voice if I've been feeding the archive into the computer all day.
I've even considered picking up litter in different parts of London — or even different parts of the country — to include in the archive, as historical specimens of the varied treatment meted out to ephemera: the flyers with the coupons torn out, worth 15 pence off the next purchase in high-street supermarkets; the junk-food cartons, the ketchup sachets and tiny envelopes of pepper and salt outside the fast-food places, and, by contrast, the pristine copies of Vogue , the printed dress boxes, emblazoned with trademarks and royal coats of arms, tossed into the dustbins of Kensington.
But provenance, as yet, hasn't been demanded for ephemera, except of course their immediate origins, the publisher, the manufacturer.
Maybe the day will come when Mark will ring me from the museum and tell me that it's been decided that I must add to the catalogue the pedigree of the wrapping or package in question: Ice lolly wrapper ‘Captain Marvel’, Walls, 1985, found, Whitechapel Road, EC, condition: poor.
It'd add to the lengthiness of the business of cataloguing, but it would enrich the archive's use, I think, increase its importance as a socio-historical source.
You looked at the streets of your home province and you exclaimed, ‘We used to be a spotless people, sweeping, polishing, tidying, setting things in order.
When I first came to England with your father, I was shocked at the women's laziness here.
And you still can't get a good daily woman now to clean, not for love or money.
To think that I would live to see such squalor, here, in Italy.
We were corrupt before, there were dishonest people, black marketeers, hoarders, bad priests, but dirty-never!’
But I felt at home; and I made a splendid collection of Italian cafe napkins, their corners printed with emblems of the past glory of Ninfania: the Cupid stringing his bow to let fly his darts from the prow in the cafe of the old harbour, and a selection — even I was defeated by the variety — of ice cream wrappers: ‘Cooky Delight’ and ‘Bikini Manhattan’and ‘Magnum Astoria’and ‘Desiree’, ‘Party Craze’and ‘Magic Cola’, ‘Oasis’and ‘Grand Carre’, ‘Card Game’and ‘Tiffany’.
There is no language barrier in the snacks market.
‘My father used to bring us ice cream,’ you told me then, for the first time, ‘When we were all asleep….’
Rosa saw no one from her hideaway in the dark arch of their carriage door and so she stepped out into the gleaming street, which felt good and solid, under the warm soles of her feet; her heart was thumping, but that too felt good.
She loved to be alone, to be brave, to go out into the arms of her destiny fearlessly, like a knight into the lists.
She got to the other side, making for the piazza, and again hugged the shadows.
Surely he would come down the street from this direction, she would soon see him, turning his head from left to right to make sure nobody was there to witness their assignation.
She heard a footfall, she pressed herself back, keeping an eye on the street; in a doorway, further on, a silhouette detached itself for a moment, and she saw a man throw his head back and shake it as if intoxicated, while holding his arms extended, and she fancied she heard him speak to his own fidanzata of that evening, she imagined him murmuring about her hair — as dark as a raven's wing, perhaps?
With the light in it blue like the shadows pooling in the sea on either side of the moonlight's path, when the fishermen go  out?
She thought she heard him praise the tinge of blood rising in her cheek, like the breast of chaffinches, and smell her skin like peach blossom and orange together.
For it was in such fashion that lovers talked, Rosa knew, from the Mass on certain feast days: King Solomon became languid with love as he searched up and down for his beloved, whose breasts were like a young doe and her belly a heap of wheat.
Then she saw the woman's arms reach out from the doorway and pull the man back to her, and take him with her into the shadows again.
She stepped out herself then, hoping to get nearer; she would like to see what he was doing to her, for she had no clear idea, in spite of the expert descriptions she provided for Cati in their vigils.
The Virgin bent her head to the dove in pictures of the Annunciation, and it pierced her through the ear, bringing her the Word that was life itself, down into her womb; that was what Rosa wanted, Tommaso's mouth next to her ear, until she, like the woman with her lover in the doorway, would wriggle and gasp.
She had to cross the road again to get back to their apartment; now that her eyes were used to the darkness it seemed as bright as day out of doors, and her blue cotton dress incandescent white.
The nightie she was still carrying over her arm became a beacon; so she ran, holding her breath.
Did the lovers see her?
She couldn't tell, she hoped he had remained pressed against the woman, unconscious of all else.
But maybe he did see Rosa run heavily for the door of her home; maybe he was one of the men in the cafe who knew, who corroborated Tommaso's insult later with their laughter, and made it impossible for Davide to ignore it and fail to issue his challenge.
Your father did what was expected.
When the moment came, he could not do other wise, though it wasn't really in his nature at all to pick a fight with anyone.
You didn't like being woken in the middle of the night for ice cream, but you sat up and ate it in bed before it melted to please your father.
He stood smiling, licking his own with relish, and wiping the ends of his moustaches where the ice dung to them, and you and Lucia, befuddled from your interrupted sleep echoed his gurgles and grunts of pleasure at the taste; he'd brought back a tub, filled with a variety of ice creams: ‘A macedonia !’ he'd call out, a fruit salad of ices.
Immacolata tried to  refuse one time, pleading her figure; but Talia, who could eat anything without putting on weight, she was so lithe and quick, tucked in to her heaped cornet, running her tongue happily round the sides to catch the melting drips of rose, green, cream.
In the morning, you'd never be quite sure if you hadn't dreamed of his presence in your bedroom, laughing, holding out his dripping gifts.
Rosa too woke up the next day unsure whether she had walked in the street below in a dream, but the mud between her toes showed her that she had indeed left the house.
She stole into the kitchen to find Sabina and beg some hot water in secret, before the others found her out; Sabina giggled and her eyes flicked from side to side as Rosa described how she must have sleep-walked, how dangerous it was, how someone could have accidentally woken her and she might have fallen down, without being able to put out a hand to stop her fall, and died.
Sabina nodded energetically.
‘What a fall that would have been!
I know the falls that can happen to young girls; it's an amazing thing, when you think how supple their bodies are, how round and well-padded — yes, my little signorina Rosalba, what terrible falls can happen!’
She tested the water with her elbow, pushing the sleeve up, as she had done when the girl she was teasing was a baby, and then dipped the scoop into the cauldron and ladled it into a bowl for Rosa to wash the dirt of the road off her toes.
But as she bent to give her the bowl, she lowered her voice, and whispered in Rosa's ear, ‘Be careful, you're not a child any more, you mustn't forget that.
Gallivanting at night — really.
I trust you, you're not a fool, you know what could happen if you got up to some mischief out there,’ and her fingers described general obloquy with a sweeping gesture of abolition, ‘and then you'll never get a husband either.
Unless…’ her voice dropped lower, ‘you get me to take you to La Lavandaia to be made good as new, but you wouldn't like that, my little lady, the cutting and the sewing hurts like the devil….’
Rosa took Sabina's arm and pinched her, hard, her teeth set in fury.
‘Be quiet, you horrible witch, just stop your filthy talk, what are you saying?
I was walking in my sleep, I told you, I'm not responsible for what happens in the night….’
And tears rolled down her flushed face as Sabina helped her wash between her toes, hastily, so that the evidence should be put away before the others joined them for a piece of bread and a glass of hot milk.
And when Rosa heard Caterina getting  up next door, and coming towards the kitchen, she gave Sabina another hard pinch on the thin part of her arm, just to make sure she knew there wasn't to be another word.
That was understood, and Sabina rubbed her arm to ease the bruising, then began to attend to Catti, puffy from sleep, like a bird with its feathers fluffed up to keep warm; and then, with a sidelong look at Rosa, began humming,
‘I've got a wonderful little girl She knows how to cut and sew-one blouse every fifteen days-My little girl don't eat very much — Just a mountain of bread a week!’
Cati, her mouth full, repeated, ‘Just a mountain of bread a week!’ and giggled.
‘My little girl don't drink very much —’
Together they sang,
‘Just twenty bottles for lunch — She's got such a tremendous nose You could stuff a loaf of bread in it — She'd got such beautiful bazooms, You could fill….’
Cati fell silent, and watched Rosa, who didn't wait to hear Sabina's voice rise to end the verse, but, shaking with sobs, fled to her room, and there hurled herself face down on the bed.
Unconcerned, Sabina went on, as she worked at the stove,
‘You could fill a two litre jug — Oh! what a daughter, Oh what a daughter!
A pain in the neck for the man who takes her — Oh my daughter!
Oh my daughter!’
‘Really!
This isn't the street, Sabina,’ said Nunzia, coming in and kissing Caterina on the top of her head.
She looked around for Rosa; and sighed when Sabina indicated, with a jerk of her head, that she was in her room, and fuming.
‘Let her be,’ said her mother.
‘It will cure itself, let's hope.’
But Cad took in their neglect of her sister, and she put down her piece of bread steadily and stood to leave.
‘Yes,’ said her mother, ‘Ask her to come back; there's no use crying.’
As Cati left, she continued, to Sabina, who was sprinkling flour into a basin and whirling it into a dough with her fist, ‘But you can only wait for the storming to pass….’
She sighed.
‘I cried too, when I was her age.
Though I can hardly remember why, now.’
Cati went in to Rosa, who lay gripping the down coverlet, to cram it into her face and muffle her sobs; she climbed up next to her, and stroked her head, and tried to cradle her with a thin arm across her shaking shoulders and felt herself going dry in her throat and choked up too; Rosa twisted, her red face glowered up at Cati.
She hissed, ‘Go away, you don't understand anything.’
‘Oh Rosa,’ Cati began, ‘I do.
I do.’
‘No you don't, you can't.
Everybody loves you, and no one loves me.
They just tease me, because I'm….’
And all of a sudden, she wasn't crying any more, she was angry, and she took hold of Cati's hair and pulled.
Cati accepted the pain without squealing; and Rosa subsided.
When her sister became quieter, Cati began again, ‘There's no one like you, Rosa, please don't go away and leave me.
I can't understand anything — not without your telling me.
I'd die without you.’
‘Huh,’ said Rosa, straightening, and pulling herself up.
‘Well, you're no good to me, you just get in my way.’
Cati's heart twisted, then withered inside her, like a paper taper set to the fire.
If the child in the cradle on whom Carabosse lays her curse after the other fairy godmothers have given her everything that makes a girl lovable could have understood the ordinary life she was forfeiting, she would have renounced their fairy boons; given the choice, Caterina would have rejected her charms too, in order to be closer to her sister, to be more like Rosa.
But she faced the impending loss of Rosa's love, it seemed to her then, without the benefit of such a choice.
In her insouciant assumption of the pleasure she gave others, Caterina was trapped: she expected that overflowing fountain of love, and when it was staunched, the guilt took her in its fist and squeezed.
She had failed to spread light and warmth to do what her sister needed, and she must put aside her own terrors, and her own interest, and help her sister towards her heart's desires.
It was unfair that Rosa appeared to others to stumble through the day with her heavy clumsiness when Cati knew the brilliant forkings of her sister's spirit in intimacy, the bright patterns she could weave out of the darkness, that made her something rare and starry.
Caterina judged then, as she watched Rosa pin her hair, that the ease with which she, Caterina, won applause — when she  danced and sang the cherry song, or strewed flowers before the host in the procession, making a little reverence to the monstrance on every third step backwards — was undeserved, the effect of some trick she did not want to perform but that came to her naturally from some evil in her, the same evil that had inspired her bad thoughts of Tommaso and prevented her doing as her sister, her beloved sister, wanted.
She would go that afternoon to fetch water from the fountain, she liked doing that anyway, and nothing could come of it to hurt her, there were always plenty of others there, and she'd give Tommaso a sign, so that he'd come, come at night to find her, that was the way it was done, she'd seen it, becks and smiles under half-dosed eyes as the water brimmed in the young women's jars.
She knew snatches of song that Sabina sang about girls caught outside after hours.
It worked out as she hoped; Tommaso was hanging about outside in the square with a group of other young men, smoking and strolling around to join the girls drawing the evening water at the fountain; he came near her; to her surprise, she saw he wasn't smiling, not like the others, who were laughing and exchanging remarks, between themselves, grinning strenuously as they play-acted contempt for the young women they wooed.
Tommaso bent close to her, and said, ‘You didn't come.’
And she took a breath sharply at his directness, and shook her head in fright.
‘I couldn't,’ she said.
‘Aaah,’ said Tommaso, ‘I see.’
He straightened, and she heaved one jar out of the basin, but he took it from her and she felt his strength give the heavy vessel sudden lift; she put it down and thanked him.
He nodded, with a half-bow.
‘Always at your service, beauty.’
Rosalba would have twitched at such words, but Cati was so used to them, she only wavered because she was wondering how to give him her message, and she thought he was going to turn.
So her eyes fell on the water jar.
He understood, and helped her lift it onto her hip.
No man, however enslaved to beauty, would ever carry it for a woman.
There was a riffle of suppressed laughter at this permitted intimacy, but Caterina pressed on, for Rosa must not cry any more, not like that, must not cast her off, not like that.
And she gave Tommaso Rosa's message, ‘Come.
Come tonight.’
From The Duel RUPE, 1912
When he did not speak, but just jerked his head as if a fly had buzzed near his ear and irritated him, when he did not greet her, not even by name, let alone with the caressing words she had so often uttered in her games of make-believe, Rosa began, murmuringly, ‘I didn't know when to come down, I wanted to be sure no one was awake….’
He nodded, and his grey-green eyes seemed to grow darker as he scanned her, below him, looking up at him, his gaze travelling quickly over her face to her breasts; she brought an arm up involuntarily, to shield herself from his looking.
‘Is it all right.
I….’
She wanted to ask him, Do I please you?
And her suppliant's face, round and even in this twilight, thickly flushed in the hectic way that he had seen before, repulsed him and made him take her by the arm she had raised and move it like a detached limb back to her side.
He held it there, and with the other hand cradled one of the globes of her breasts and jounced it, like a buyer testing a melon's weight in the market.
‘Yes, it's all right, it's tremendous,’ he said.
She moved her free arm to stop him inspecting but he put his head on one side.
‘Now, now,’ he said, ‘Let's be a kind, dear girl, your lover wants to get the feel of you, let him, if you're as sweet as you seem to me to be.’
Sharp whey-like sweat came off hum as she smelt his closeness; he was walking her backwards into the recess of the arched double doors of a neighbour's carriage entrance, sticking to her awkwardly, like children playing at dancing, standing on each other 's feet, and when he had her against the door, he took his hand from the underside of her breast, and fingering her nipple, made it rise, then tweaked it till it stood up higher; twinges darted from her breast to her groin, and Rosa closed her eyes with a little gasp.
‘You like that?’
Tommaso released her other hand, and took her other nipple between finger and thumb.
It too rose, and pinching hard  until she gave a moan, he kissed her, until she opened her lips to his, when he snapped shut and bit her lip; her eyes flew open, he looked at her and smiled, raising his eyebrows.
‘You like that too?’
‘I…’ she began, bewildered, the pain in her lip did not send the same honeyed message to her body, ‘I don't know….’
She wanted to say, Please say something to me, please talk, but he had her still by her nipples and was pulling her towards him, then pushing her back.
She tried to take his hands away, and he raised them both, and patted the air, as if to say, ‘All right, all right , I was only doing what you wanted.’
She stepped sideways, she didn't want to pull away from him but all the same this time she would have liked to wake up from her somnambulism to find herself back in bed with Cati, dreaming of sweetness and lovers' words, but he pressed close to her, and said, ‘You can't go yet, not yet.
We haven't done anything, together, yet.’
It was the first time she heard him use ‘we’ and ‘together’; the words entered her consciousness like comets, blazing.
He picked up her hand and put it on his cock; then placed his own hand over hers and made her squeeze; it was hot, even under the rough material of his trousers, and rolled about clumsily over the squidgier sack of his balls; but he was panting, making stirring motions with his knees against her legs, working with his free hand at his waistband, until he freed himself from his flies and had wrapped her hand around his naked cock; he spat on his hand and worked the spittle onto the skin, and when he made her hold him again, she felt the wetness on her fingers, and drying fast as he pumped himself up and down over her hand, pinning her hand under his.
He shuddered, and groaned aloud, and the sperm hit her dress, on her stomach near her navel; it soaked through the cotton like the spreading warmth of pee, reminding her of when she wet herself as a child, and gave off a quick raw smell.
She looked at him, for a moment all sarcasm wiped from his features, the eyelids calm as a corpse, arranged for a laying out, the unusual pallor of his skin like mica in the dark, but the seraphic vision lasted only a fraction of a moment, and the glint came back into his eyes and the twist to his mouth, and he said, slapping her on the side of her breast with a playful cut, ‘Fantastic.
We're two of a kind, my girl; you like it almost as much as I do — and no damage done, either.’
Rosa often went to the washplace with Sabina to help her and she was glad that she could pull her blue cotton dress out of the basket and slosh it into the water before anyone else could examine it for stains; not that the stain spoke openly of its origins; it could easily have been milk, thought Rosa.
Her secret was kept, her secret, which made her feel aglow inside.
As she laid the wet dress on the stone coping of the basin and rubbed soap into the fabric at the waist, she unfolded every motion of the tryst Tommaso had kept, and exultation filled her so she felt it might fly out of her mouth in a huge whoop.
She rebuked herself for her timidity, for her first dismay that he had not shown more of the lover's courtesies she had imagined from the fairy tales she told herself; he had been too eager, obviously.
She tutted aloud as she remembered she had nearly quailed altogether and quit him when he caressed her so directly and bit her; but he was masterful, and had knowledge, and her love burst into ever greater intensity at the thought of that expertise.
She wondered, laughing as Sabina jogged her, for she had halted in a daydream, what it would be like to encourage him, to overcome the scruples he so kindly showed by not exploring her body.
She determined she would show him how generous she could be, next time, how to her the priests' talk was cant, and she'd defy all for love of him.
She pushed the dress back into the running water of the stream above the basin, where the soap did not film the water, and mourned the disappearance of his sweet milk; his pleasure had frightened her, it was true, at first when he did not speak and did not ask or explain.
But she was glad of that too, for she might have felt she was honour bound to refuse — she could hardly have consented without shame — but this way, he had given her the most intense pleasure, which crossed her back and forth in waves of shock and fear, redoubling upon themselves and increasing in strength.
Heroism presented itself to her still as sacrifice; but she turned her mind in pity to the heroines who had suffered atrocious torments to keep their bud for the eternal bridegroom; surely, and the paradox hit her humour with satisfying logic, the most excellent act of selflessness for a virgin was to surrender up her state?
The grail itself was sin, none other than sin itself; what greater obeisance to Love itself than to part with all?
And with that thought, she wrung out her dress, and flopped it into the basket that Sabina had already filled with a heap of the family's washing.
She heard nothing of the gossip exchanged at the laundry that morning, and answered only absently to pieces of news she was given.
When Sabina heaved the basket of wet washing onto her head, Rosa took up a smaller one, which the older woman indicated, and obediently wedged it onto her hip -daughters of good family should not carry burdens on their heads, like maidservants.
Together they  made their way to the patch of thorn bushes which was Sabina's preferred place for drying.
Suddenly, she found herself shivering.
She struggled with the cold fear that had laid its hand on her: she had gone with a man, without protesting, without a single pledge from him, and not a word of kindness, not a promise for tomorrow; she looked at Sabina's back in front of her, the pinafore tied behind over her gathered skirt, and imagined her husband's hands around that still sturdy small of her back, and wondered had she let him do that, do what Tommaso had done, before they were married?
Of course she had, everyone did, that was how it happened; but then, yes, it was also how Serafina….
There entered her mind a memory of the feast day of the Madonna della Bruna; it fell in July in the time of the fierce lion sun, as they called it in the hills, and yet the shrine attracted crowds from all Ninfania and all around.
They had been once, all together: the procession had suddenly swirled past them, the men shouting and sobbing around the towering carnival float with the Madonna swaying at its apex in a white satin gown embroidered with gold.
She was in all her bridal finery, although her son was already born, poised stiff on her arm in a dress of the same stuff, and both of them were wearing starburst crowns on their heads.
Mary tottered up on her perch from side to side but nothing wiped the mild, sweet benignity from her doll's face as she dropped the dew of her mercy down from heaven on the mortal exiles below wailing and weeping in the vale of tears.
Inert, mute, untouchable, she seemed uncanny and prodigious to Rosa, who wanted her to protest the hectic fury all around her, to come alive and give a sign, as, below her, the volunteers hauling the lumbering shrine on their backs on poles criss-crossed and tethered grew more obstreperous and howled and the crowd pressed up and obstructed their laborious way ahead; after three turns around the piazza they at last reached the platform in the middle, only a little distance from the Duomo they had left, and the sweat-streaked bearers put down the skewed tower on which the Madonna stood, and tumbled to their knees.
The priest blessed them, then gave the word, and with a roar, knives unsheathed, the front ranks of the crowd rushed the dais and slashed at the wood of the Virgin's triumphal car and, shouting aloud, carried it off in fragments; she continued to look upon it all unmoved from her  new perch, and someone came back glorying in his spoils — was it her uncle, or her mother's father?— with splinters for each of the family and a chunk the size of a brick for himself.
Caterina refused hers, Rosa remembered, she had turned her face in dismay into her mother's waist  under the crook of her arm.
Franco put his in his mouth and chewed it up, he was teething at the time.
But Rosa had accepted hers, as an amulet it was as well not to neglect.
She stopped for a moment, as if the basket were overburdening her, and put it down.
Sabina turned.
‘A stitch?
You should walk regularly, swinging from side to side, not scurrying, with little steps.’
Rosa said, ‘It's nothing,’ and picked up the laundry and set off again.Her legs moved, her feet went forward one behind the other, but she felt winter come down on her and numb her to the bone.
A man had once weighed his daughter in the huge scales used in the port for the cargoes coming off the ships from the East, he had promised that the suitor his daughter chose would take her weight in gold for a dowry, she was so virtuous.
And probably beautiful too, thought Rosa.
But without her virtue, even if she had been beautiful, she wouldn't have been worth the weight of her little toe in dross.
Rosa thought of the Madonna, and thanked her, thanked her with a welling passion of gratitude such as even she had never felt towards her before that Tommaso had not taken advantage of her total willingness and that she was still intact — no one would be able to say anything against her.They could examine her if they wanted, those witches could paddle inside her to make sure.
And another wave of chill wrapped her; yes, she had been left untouched, though she had cleaved to his seal like hot wax and his pigment had painted her stomach the colour of the moon.
Suddenly the cold around her began to burn, as an unknown and unsuspected rage lapped its edges and she felt for Tommaso sudden furious rancour.Contempt joined that rage too in turn, as she thought of his condition, the future of a conscript, the birth of a Post Office clerk's son, who was in any case a stranger in the south, with God knows what dangerous notions in his head.
He should value her, a woman of substance: she had, if not a sack of gold weighing sixty kilos, at least one of the most handsome trunkfuls of linen, drawn-thread-work and crochet table-mats in Ninfania.
And a loathing for him seized her.
He should have wooed her, he should have talked to her, made love to her with sweet-talk.
Then, remembering, she almost gagged at the feel of his slimed cock under her hand, and the raw acid smell of his seed.
Nothing but a beast, dumb and rude and mute and savage, she called him under her breath; a man who could only talk men's talk, who had none of the graces a nobleman would have, but of course Tommaso Talvi would never make a nobleman.
However could she have imagined it?
She shook out the clothes over the scrub with more alacrity than she had shown at the washing, she was released from her error, she had escaped, just.
She declared to herself firmly that the incident was a little misadventure, with no consequences.
No matter that it had been a failure.
Her mood of derision held that afternoon and evening, when Tommaso came by and stood in the shadow under the balcony of the house opposite, watching the house.
The night before, Cati had fallen asleep sitting with her mother and Rosa on the balcony in the cool of the evening; when her mother had given her a gentle push to rouse her; she found her slightly feverish and put her to bed.
So, just as Caterina had wanted, she remained dead to the world through the night.
Her sister's escapades were none of her business, she told herself.
She was better the following day, however, entirely recovered, it seemed, and when, from the balcony, she caught sight of him skulking, she quickly volunteered to fetch the dish Sabina had prepared from the oven in the piazza.
He stopped in front of her, and nodded, in salute.Then, addressing her formally as if she were a grown woman, he asked to accompany her.
In silence they walked to the communal oven, and back, and she almost ran with the tray steaming with fragrant tomato and garlic to try to alert Rosa so she could prepare herself for his appearance.
But he followed closely behind her and presented himself to her mother with another of the staccato nods he had learned on the parade ground.
Nunzia was flustered.
‘Have you got your papers yet?’ she asked.
His long hands hung clumsily from the short sleeves of his jacket, like a scarecrow's stuffed gloves from its straw body.
He seemed to gulp the air before speaking, like the fish his complexion called to her mind.
She noticed her own brusqueness, but could not help herself; she was looking forward to the army clearing him out of Rupe.
He was an anarchist, she could tell, even though her son shielded him by denying it.
His kind of wildness understood nothing of the law, nothing of the limits obscure people like themselves had to submit to, he would lead her family and others into a similar misapprehension of the way things are and always have been: they wouldn't grasp the impossibility of change, the need to keep still like an animal avoiding a hunter on its tracks.
But Tommaso Talvi was the type to jaw about whatever new scheme had taken his fancy and then jeopardise everybody around with his big boasting empty talk.
Her husband might want justice, but he wanted it through the proper channels.
Her elder daughter came in with roses in her cheeks where  she had pinched herself, in order to give her swarthy complexion colour, as her mother had once shown her.
Nunzia noticed a look pass between them.
She saw that Talvi's frizzled up as it met Rosa's, like a brand which is doused, and she also saw that Rosa did not notice, but went on as if a bubbling sulphurous spring rose inside her.
In the bedroom, Cati hugged herself and preened, ‘Rosa, Rosa, Rosa, she's got him where she wants him.’
Everyone would know he'd become Rosa's suitor, now that he'd been to the house and paid a call after meeting her secretly at night.
Caterina knew this was the way things were done; she glowed at her own craftiness at bringing it about.
Tommaso began saying, ‘I expect to hear any day now….’
Rosa's insides turned over, all her carefully fostered haughtiness resolved itself into a small sweat on her upper lip and a moistness in her palms.
She thought, Now he'll say what he was going to say last night, except that I made it hard for him, I was so unloving, so unresponsive.
He greeted her, his eyes falling on her again for an instant and then skittering away.
It flashed through her, He's asking himself, Was it really me, last night in the dark?
And before she set the thought aside, she too responded in kind, and wondered, Was it him?
Had the encounter taken place at all?
Perhaps she had been sleep-walking, and had not been responsible.
Perhaps she had not been there at all, in the street, but a phantom instead had taken her place, looking like her, feeling like her inside too, but not her, for she, Rosa, had been in her bed, dreaming.
Perhaps she had made it up altogether, and there had been nobody, no phantom, no sleep-walker, nothing.
He was no longer scanning her, after his ordinary greeting, and she plumbed his manner for significance, without success.
‘Mamma,’ she said, ‘offer our guest something fresh!’
She was behaving with unaccustomed grandeur, slipping on a manner of authority and calm that would have made her mother laugh, if she had not wanted to cry.
The heat of summer was beginning to gather its strength, and the day outside hummed with the gorged drowsiness of the flies.
Tommaso said, quickly, that he could not stay, that he had just had something to drink, anyway, in town.
Reproachfully, Rosa dipped into the deep pot of olives and served a scoop of the waxy jade pebbles on to a dish and set it near Tommaso.
A vinegary smell pricked the still air for a moment, then faded.
He remained standing, ill-at-ease, as if he had been called somewhere and was awaiting release.
But Rosa motioned to him to sit, and sat herself down, opposite him at the table, expectant.
The silence continued.
Only the beads in the doorway rustled, as Nunzia's  disapproval distempered the air.
Rosa ignored her, she wanted to speak so much she felt the words swelling her up inside like leaven in dough, pushing it up out of the mould until it has doubled and doubled in size.
She could make all the speeches she would like Tommaso to make, a hundred times over, and yet his awkwardness under her mother's severity filled her full of pity too, and her chivalrous love returned to warm her and fortify her, suturing the cut that had opened in her earlier at his muteness the night before.
But custom, who holds all things in her grip, especially the train of courtship in the Noonday of Italy, demanded that he take the initiative in wooing and she remain wordless, especially in company.
Rosa cast an eye at her mother's frowning back where she attended to some task and tried to exchange a glance of impatience with Tommaso.
But he only looked at her blankly, and gave no rueful half-smile in collusion.
He was tugging anxiously at one earlobe, and the silence continued to hang between them, though Nunzia slapped and stirred at the range.
He stayed on, though it seemed he was on the point of departure, for moments together, stuck to his own indecisiveness like an insect on the tacky strips of paper designed to catch them.
She could sense his muddle, and it touched her.
She recognised that he wanted her to forget what had happened, but that it also leapt vividly before his eyes and had a hold on him too.
He was already in so far he could not find his depth, and he wanted to turn and strike back for the shore, but, like an unpractised swimmer, found that the distance he had come was too great for him to return.
At last, he spoke, and asked when Davide was expected, for he was about to receive his marching orders, and he was hoping that her brother would be back as expected, for the summer holidays from the university, so that they could meet before he left.
Rosa made a little game out of answering, so pleased was she to be entertaining him with her talk.
She could have said, Any day now, and left it at that.
Instead she chattered about the law and the law exams and found Davide's last letter from Riba, and showed Tommaso the flourishing strokes of her brother's handwriting, and asked him if he too wrote with such tails on his p's and g's and such loops on his l's and d's?
She went to find him a pen and paper to write something for her so she could see, she could even be able to tell his character from his writing.
(Would he seize the chance to give her a message, without her mother seeing through her ruse?
Would she be able to read it?
They usually had to wait for their father to come home to decipher Davide's news aloud to them.)
He took the sheet and wrote, in a smaller and  slower hand than Davide's, his name and the single word, ‘Avanti !’
‘Forward!’, and gave it back to her, with a serious air.
She folded it, and kept it.
When he saw her smiling so happily at this offering, he scowled.
She had become so attuned to the seisms of his feelings she could see that he wanted to hit her.
But he had repented of his impulse as swiftly, she knew, aghast at himself that he could consider treating her so roughly, a young woman from the family who were his friends, almost his own kin, his people.
The queasiness which had first compelled him to come back to the house that evening clawed him again, and kept him in the chair under her fond glances and bids to intimacy.
He did not know what had possessed him the night before, yet, gradually, the sweetness she gave him began to dissolve his confusion; his vivid spurt of pleasure returned to him and he looked across at her and asked, ‘Will you be coming to the passeggiata next Saturday?’
Her heart tumbled inside her then, like a bird shot out of the sky.
In the bedroom, Cati hugged herself again with delight as with pent breath she waited out the meeting ‘Rosa, Rosa, Rosa, now you have someone to love you, yes you do.’
The Snail Hunt 3
DOLMETTA, MAY 1931
The Noonday Gazette had arrived with the water cart that morning, children were still working the spigot to fill the tall earthenware jars from the big barrel mounted in the muletrap, while the carter stood by to keep count of the charge.
Their mothers, lifting the heavy vessels onto their heads to carry them home, clicked at the young ones' improvidence, as they splashed and squirted spray at one another by thumbing the tap's mouth — mistakenly, or so they cried out when scolded.
Davide took his usual place in the shade of the circolo's front room, on the cathedral piazza abutting the wharf, overlooking the scene outside through the coarse cotton lace jalousy.
The chimney stack of a small steamer, the slanted gaffs of fishing boats returned from the morning catch, the furled booms of others, moored and idle, bisected his segment of sky; framed by the blind like a holy picture fringed with handmade paper lace, it could have been the setting for a miraculous landfall of a saint's body.
He knocked on the wall for the boy from the cafe next door to come in, and indicated his usual order with a nod; to the other company, he raised a slow hand, palm over his breast but not touching it, and bent his head over the paper.
The front page was taken up with the Leader's activities: a photograph showed him pumping along a line of soldiers, his elbows thrust back, his chest puffed out, its outline blurred by hoary growth; Doric-square, his famous chin jutted up and outwards, as he took a salute of volunteers for Africa at a little trot.
He had been long absent from the public balcony of the Roman palace which he had made his stage, and he was now proving that he wasn't in chronic decline, as rumour held, with a pox contracted years ago, but had merely suffered a passing dose of ‘flu.
Davide turned the page, passed over columns of marriages and deaths, noted the substance of wills wonderingly, and came across a report that caught his attention.
‘The grieving relatives of the late Don Antonio Beatillo, who died on February 20 last year, Year  IX of the glorious Fasces, RIP, gathered together yesterday in the noble family's residence at Italico and amid scenes of bitter sorrow issued a statement, jointly signed by all the agnatic relatives of the late illustrious savant.
After much deliberation and in great sorrow, the family of Don Antonio Beatillo, learned laureate and doctor, glory of the Faculty of Philosophy in the University of Naples, have resolved themselves to appeal against the last will and testament of their beloved and revered father, made in January last year, as being composed by the deceased when not in his right mind.’
Davide skipped the list of signatories and went on: ‘The late Don Antonio's interest in the thought and teachings of Pythagoras led him, the family allege, into heresy, and ultimately in his last days, into dementia praecox , aggravated by the debilitating epilepsy from which he had suffered since his middle years.
‘In his last will and testament, the celebrated philosopher, author of Pythagorean Mysticism and the Ninfanian School , left his entire estate, the noble house at Punta del Giorno, the farms and their sheep folds in the hills at Crotone, Metaponto and Matera, the vineyards that fringe the banks of the Sauro gorge, to none other than himself, when he should return in his next incarnation to take up residence on his territories again.
‘In the meantime, Don Antonio instructed his bankers to maintain the houses in readiness for his return.
In accord with the seasoned moves established during his present lifetime, his households and their servants should travel and provide for his needs.
His considerable fortune should meet this expense, he declared.
(Over 20 million lire, it is believed.)
He expected a celebratory meal on re-entry into this life, and a litre of his own wine from the most recent good vintage.
If he had not returned in twenty years his son, Don Benedetto, should inherit his lands and administer his fortune in the normal way.
This most unusual of last wills and testaments concluded, ‘Till we meet again, giving the usual words of farewell a renewed vigour of meaning,’ noted the reporter in the Noonday Gazette .
The family had not paid much attention to the terms of the eccentric patriarch's last wishes, as the stipulation that all his possessions should be held in readiness for his return merely put the houses and their produce at the usual disposal of his family, while removing the problem of his personal presence and authority.
The wives of his sons, under their black lace mantillas, smiled with relief that they could now administer the populous households without attending to their princely father-in-law's caprices.
But in the isolation that their riches had  brought about, and in their serene acceptance that privilege was their due, they did not anticipate for a moment the press of people Don Antonio Beatillo's idiosyncratic will would bring to their door.
They hardly imagined that there were so many indigent, yearning, crooked, canny inheritors on the earth.
The reincarnations of Don Antonio Beatillo pursued his family like horseflies at a carthorse's eyes, and they were hard put to flick them away.
Davide had been asked to act as legal counsel for three candidates from Rupe, four from Corrado, and for some five others who appeared but wisely did not divulge their place of origin.
Some claimed to be Don Antonio Beatillo himself, reincarnate; others, more crafty, urged the claims of babies discovered, they said, in the local limestone caves, foundlings dropped from the sky, with tokens proving their selfsame identity with the magnate, recently deceased, much lamented (RIP) who owned all that land down in the valley of the Dragon Torrent.
In all cases, they had purchased an ill-afforded shoeshine for the occasion and begged someone — the mothers of the infants, Davide supposed to spruce up a suit of clothes, by dangling a magnificent future before them, and then wrapped their proof in a newly-washed blanket.
Hunger looked out of both pairs of eyes.
Davide saw how they fastened their hopes on his powers of persuasion in the courts where identity and responsibility are conferred.
He had not taken the cases: he read now in the paper that a bigger fish from Rome was representing the family's appeal against the terms.
So he was glad he had refused; he had never shown much aptitude for the law anyway, for its necessary feints and tricks.
He had never really shown an appetite for work in any form.
When it came to make-believe, he preferred opera, for in opera a knave in disguise is quickly discovered, and is unambiguously a knave, nor is the matter of a song a lie from start to finish.
Even the villains speak truly of their villainy, like Iago in Otello , but he, Davide, would have had to make false speeches to client and judge, had he taken the fees for claiming some rickety starveling was the landowner scholar come back to earth.
Had it been a lark on the dead man's part?
The talk of the south picked at the Don's motives — naivety, malignancy, folly, even hitherto unsuspected Anarchist sympathies had been suggested.
Davide hit the paper with the flat of his hand, distracting the others from their journals.
He commented aloud, with a delighted laugh, ‘You know, I'm more and more convinced that the illustrious Don, the genial thinker, wasn't taking a revenge on his family, or plotting the downfall of the house of Beatillo, or shaking the structure of property and power in  these parts, or thumbing his nose at you-know-who.
I think he meant every word of what he wrote.
He thought he was going to come back.’
Davide paused, marvelling.
‘Someone like him, someone with everything, someone for whom life was so sweet, so flawless, how could he die?
How could he?
He considered himself beyond death!’
And again, David's genuine laughter filled the room; the others listened.
Pittagora was rarely so communicative.
‘Ah, even princes die,’ said one communicant at the morning ritual of black coffee, with a dash of caraway and a twist of lemon-peel.
‘Death with his scythe,’ echoed another, and swung his torso, mowing.
‘Do you remember,’ put in another, ‘the Prince of San Severo, in Naples?
He didn't want to die either.
He was possessed with the desire to discover the very secret of life itself.
He distilled an elixir.’
‘Yes,’ put in a fourth, an old man with gold in his mouth and gold on his groomed fingers, ‘from the bodies of his servants.
He extracted their blood and their vital juices and boiled them up with mercury and potassium and other, secret ingredients.
Then, using some ancient formula he had recovered, he injected the concentrate he obtained back into their veins.
‘I have seen them,’ he added solemnly.
‘In the vaults of the chapel of the Palace of San Severo.
I bribed the sacristan to take me down.
And I was frightened, I tell you, when I was left alone in the crypt, with a single candle to light my way, and discerned gradually, as my eyes grew accustomed to the dark, the subjects of the Prince's experiments, standing upright, sentinels at each wall of the chamber, with glittering eyes and teeth.
He had changed everything, every particle, every organ to white gold!’
‘Beh,’ said Davide.
‘If they were gold, they'd not have lasted undisturbed so long.’
‘You can scoff,’ said the visitor of San Severo, ‘but I've seen them with my own eyes.’
He tapped those rheumy orbs with emphasis.
‘There's plenty seen with men's own eyes that's never been heard of in heaven,’ said Davide.
He was quoting Maria Filippa, though to her face he usually took issue with her credulity, as he called it.
‘Granted, granted,’ the old man gestured with his gracious ringed hands, ‘Gold, silver, where's the difference?
Even tin — imagine, just imagine, my dear and most esteemed Advocate, one of those medical illustrations, those écorché figures showing the skeins of muscle, the ropes of veins, in three dimensions, and then transmuted into metal, so that the tissues and channels and ducts and gristle’— the speaker's  hands traced intricate forms in the air in his morbid enthusiasm —‘look as if they have been made out of silver wire.’
He dropped his hands and shuddered.
‘It's all long ago.
Terror and terribilitas !’
‘But still, princes all must die,’ another voice chimed in.
‘Yes,pulvis es, et pulverem reverteris ,’ echoed another.
‘He didn't practise on himself, did he?
Where's his silver corpse, I'd like to see that!’ interposed another, younger, courageous spirit.
‘Nor did he succeed in restoring his servants to life,’ Davide said drily.
‘True, true,’ another took up, ‘preservation is not resurrection, no, no.
The Prince didn't turn himself to silver.
He tried the process out on others who couldn't say no.’
He almost stopped before he reached the end of the sentence, flicking his black eyes over the company to make sure no strangers were present to overhear, report, misrepresent his little blow against hierarchy.
Hierarchy, catch-word of the Leader, never to be spoken of without the implication of obedience, uninquiring, instant obedience.
There was a tap at the window, through the curly apertures in the lace; Davide started, turned, and saw the knobbly tarsi of a cockerel with the talons attached, crooked and stiff like arthritic hands; above, the solemn face of a child informed him that it was a gift from the little one's grandmother, in gratitude.
Davide beckoned the girl in.
She came, shyly; her knees under the hem of her dress seemed huge, like boles, for her limbs were emaciated with rickets and sallow from malaria.
She handed him the woebegone bouquet, the bird's head dangling, its coxcomb a broken-stemmed blossom; he took it, bowed his head, and pinched the child's cheek as he showed his teeth gritted in greedy affection, the expression that says to children, ‘Aahah!
You're good enough to eat!’
He laughed at her look of long-suffering, and let her go.
‘Tell your Granny that Signora Maria Filippa will be very honoured to be able to cook us her beautiful and renowned hunters’ chicken dish tomorrow.
But tell her too:never again.’
He chuckled, as the child's face changed.
‘I'm not angry, but enough is enough.’
He would have liked to add, In America, they are trying to put an end to all this nonsense, to all these gifts.
They've made it illegal.
Of course, it still goes on, but it's against the law.
That was one good thing about the Americans.
It was disquieting how many aspects of America he found praiseworthy, once he had returned home.
He had mediated between the child's grandmother, a laundress, and the priests of the Cathedral of San Corrado whose garden adjoined the laundress's yard.
When the grassy and aromatic undergrowth of spring where she spread out her work to dry had balded and turned to dust in the  summer, she hung out her clothes in the enclave at the back of her small house.
The priests had a mulberry tree, which last year had come near to ruining the woman's trade, spattering the linen of the town with a roan signature, as the pulpy fruit fell from its higher branches, or was dropped by feasting birds or even wasps; in fact, she did not know how so much staining happened, but it was the devil to scrub it out, and she risked wearing out the cloth itself with ammonia or other solvents.
Davide had seen the priests, who had shrugged and thrown up their hands indolently at the laundress's problem.
He had mentioned to them the possibility of a deal and even the likelihood of profit, and proposed that one of the laundress's sons come with a ladder and pick the tree clean this autumn, before the mulberries matured to that soft ripeness that threatened any laundry hanging near.
If he'd provide the ladders, the baskets, and do it for nothing, the reverend fathers would give their consent.
They were lazy, smiling at their own Christian charity.
‘Not the baskets,’ said Davide.
‘You must provide them, as you will be keeping the fruit for sale.’
They thought it over and suggested a percentage to the labourer if he provided the baskets and made the sale.
Davide haggled; he got him five per cent, and knew that the man would be able to claw back some more, as well as keep some of the harvest.
So the laundress was grateful; she had killed a rooster for him.
This was the work he did in Rupe; seignorial business, not the punishing labour of properly suits in the city.
‘My Granny says, she would like this back, please.’
The child held out a cloth, and took the fowl and wrapped it in the napkin, and handed the package back to Davide.
Again, he bowed his head to the child, and when she'd run off, he tapped again on the wall, and when the boy from the cafe appeared, he handed him the bird and asked him to keep it in his cellar for coolness until he returned from Riba on the train that evening, after he had collected the rent.
With such small settlements of difference, Davide could cope; but he did not like his work.
When he thought of the law, his chosen profession, his head filled with the savour of dust; he could taste it on his tongue, mousey and dry, and smell the foist of the archives where he had to pore over the huge books of cases, statutes, precedents.
The law seemed to him a mountainous cloud, compacted of these rank and ever increasing hyphae, sprawling over the buildings in which her exigences were met, pouring herself into every drawer, lying on every shelf, saturating every ledger, every record with her must, coating all like a mould and growing by eating that on which it grows.
She wasn't blind, like the stiff-backed goddess of Justice whom he remembered from the  pediment of the courthouse in New York, beside the flagpole flying the Stars and Stripes.
The law he knew was hundred-eyed, prying, and wakeful.
When he was a young man, before he went to America, the law's cloud billowed over everything, fomenting quarrels to her advantage until anything the litigants had to spare, peasants and rich men alike, was swallowed up.
Davide had no stomach for such greed.
Southerners say, ‘When two people fight, the third rejoices,’ and that third man was usually a lawyer.
The lawyers walked at the elbow of the landlords: a dispute about a ditch, a border, rights of way, and the landlord stood by, the peasants fought, the lawyers on both sides charged, delayed, charged some more, until the double ruin of plaintiff and defendant delivered up both sides into the proprietor's hands.
In the old days, before the Leader, thought Davide, the law swelled up through chronic feuding and the only respite came in the prelude to the great feast days, when families had no more money to pay lawyers' services because the priests were taking it instead.
It was pinned in banknotes on the robes of the local thaumaturge as his statue — or hers was carried through the village, or dropped into the collecting pouches the sacristan poked into the pews.
Often, the giver would toss in the money with nonchalant munificence, hoping to cut a handsome figure by making a public demonstration of wealth, and of contempt for that wealth.
‘Why don't you keep it?’
Davide would say, when he was first starting as a lawyer in Riba, on his return from America, and could speak up against the potlatch inclinations of his clients.
‘Put it in a bank, it will grow.
Use it for some land, maybe here, in the city, as an investment.’
This is what Sandro had done for him.
But the winegrower, the sheep farmer, the cowherd, the undertaker, the teacher, or the cobbler would grip the table and dig in.
No, they would rather lick stones for salt than let that villain, that coward, that son-of-a-jackass and a sow get away with….
The law had them in her cloudy embrace and was spilling out of their eyes and lips her deathly must.
Davide's client snapped finger and thumb together at any ignoble suggestion of peacemaking, at such a dishonourable way of going about life, and insisted on justice.
Only a civil suit, at the very least, could wipe away the stain on family honour.
Public reparation, whatever the cost, must be made.
Justice!
And Davide could almost fancy he could smell again the stale vaporous emanations of the law in the room as he began to take down details of the wrong that had been done.
But litigation was better than private settlement by witchcraft; though of course they weren't mutually exclusive.
He waved a hand at the company in the circolo, this  time higher, but still with the palm towards his breast in farewell, and laid a tip for the boy on the varnished wooden table.
In the shade of the buildings on the square, he began walking to the station.
The train wasn't late, and he got in, choosing as was his habit a seat on the side with a view of the sea, for the track ran along the Adriatic and he liked to have it in sight, the elating expanse, ringing bright in the sun.
In one of the first cases he had taken, in 1923, it must have been, the year after he came back — Fantina was still a baby — a widow had accused her neighbour of killing her cow out of spite.
You could see the blood in her neighbour's yard, she said, though she had tried to cover it up with dirt.
But her wickedness could not be concealed, the earth had turned red to cry out against it.
The neighbour denied the killing, of course.
She talked darkly of witchcraft, of wolves with eyes like opals, and fiery breath which left scorch marks on the ground; and countercharged.
She accused the widow of stealing her husband's love away from her by dosing the milk of the dead cow and giving it to him to drink.
It was the widow's custom to leave a jug of milk for them each night after milking, she gave it as a gift in thanks, she said, for their support of an unfortunate woman on her own.
Her neighbour scorned her: nothing is given freely, she said.
At the time, Davide found the two women funny; they shrieked at one another and squealed like animals at the slaughter themselves.
The neighbour who denounced the cow's owner for casting a spell on her husband gripped the dock with her hands till her brown knuckles went white.
She was lean, dark-skinned, and ancient and wizened as the baccala , the salt cod pegged out in the harbour to dry.
She was, in terms of the law, the better witness, did not rail or curse as wildly as her opponent and rival — the widow, at one point, fell to the ground in convulsions, twitching and flailing.
The husband agreed that he had been bewitched; he spoke like a somnambulist, in tones of grief.
A poor figure of a man, no one could see why anyone would fight for him.
He had sores on the backs of his hands which he picked with his black, horny fingernails.
Both Davide and the plaintiff's lawyer chuckled afterwards that he was definitely on to a good thing.
The widow had lost; she had to pay the costs and the fine and she began falling behind in the rent to the landlord since she no longer had a cow and its milk to sell.
She had to give up her land, Davide remembered, and move out.
The man she had spellbound stayed behind; her enchantments had been pitted against an energetic opponent, who exulted when she left, cursing her as she trudged away pushing a small cart with her possessions.
If she had found a man, life  would have turned out differently for her, he knew.
Women left behind by the emigrants, ‘widows’ who had not heard from their husbands for decades, daughters growing up without fathers, without grandfathers, without brothers -once they too were old enough to leave — were hungry for men, everyone knew that, and the law made its profits from the devils — Greed and Lust and Envy — that scampered among humans playing a deadly tag in which all the players are caught and brought down, one by one.
The widow's case inaugurated Davide's career in justice.
Was it better to turn to the law than settle by other means?
Davide was still committed to preferring it to the alternatives, the vendettas, the feuds, the bloody score -these ways were for barbarians, for people like Sicilians, or Neapolitans, people whose own blood was all mixed up with Spaniards'.
Cruel people, not like the Ninfanians.
And duelling?
Was the hazardous code of the duel a greater injustice than the unfairness of the law?
He fingered the warning vein in his temple; it was a warm ripple under his touch.
He wondered when he would die and if it would be soon, as people said he must.
But they had been saying so for years, for more than a decade now.
Perhaps they were wrong; perhaps the spoke of the wheel on which he was clinging would never be swung over so hard by Lady Fortune that he would be prised loose and fall, limbs sprawling, like the figures on the rose window of the cathedral, while others — Tommaso, where was Tommaso now?— rose up to be garlanded at chance's whim.
The Leader, so he told his people, had lifted this distempered fog, this old corruption of Italy, and shone a bright blazing torch into the darkness of the bosses' law, sweetening it as if it were a malarial swamp, squashing the mosquito lawyers and owners and priests breeding in it.
He was purifying the system; he was scouring the channels of their old faith; he was the surgeon removing the decaying parts, the foul growths, and lancing the boils of the former regime's putrefactions.
‘I believe in action,’ he shouted from his palace balcony, his roar rustling on the radio, as if the radio were bristling at him, ‘in violent action against the old ways.
They brought poverty and degradation to the people of my country!
I believe my violence will cure their ills!
Heroic surgery is what is needed!
I am that heroic surgeon!
Weakness will not bring about change, only strength, only strong measures will bring the new world into being!’
That was the year the city's deputy was found beaten to death, in a village near Riba; the landlords had paid a gang to kill him, just as they did in the old days, before Davide left for America.
Though now-as  then — no one dared say it aloud.
The deputy was a Socialist, he had been speaking out against the old work conditions that were being reimposed.
That was in September 1921, just after they came back from New York.
There were outcries throughout the province, and in Ninfania again there were running battles against the gangs, in the old quarter of Riba, in some of the hill towns which had a tradition of dissent.
In his own Rupe the league had protested bitterly.
But the Leader had indigent Ninfania in the grip of golden promises; he had bought the proprietors and the landowners with his forecasts of authority and profit, and he had bludgeoned the powerless.
His men had taken power in the province that summer of 1922, just around the time Fantina was born, a few months before the Leader reached the capital on his famous march.
Davide began to enjoy his work even less than before; he applied himself to property transactions.
Conveyancing provided a certain tedium that he found soothing.
The new law's brutal surgery, the promises — the menaces — the indomitable energy, inspired in him a profound torpor.
Maria Filippa understood his lassitude, condoned his inertia; and for that he felt an overwhelming gratitude, because he knew other wives who would have grown impatient with such a husband, who had begun so promising, so full of the future and then…what with headaches, lack of nerve, had found he no longer had the energy, the stomach for getting on.
‘I've seen them — women like that monstrous Gabriela — push their husbands to ingratiate themselves with the Leader's henchmen here, I've seen the feasts they've laid — like traps — very effective traps — those men, they're nothing but walking bellies with fists-they grab, hit, grab, swallow, hit, the scum, I wouldn't lower myself to share a table with them.
The bosses looked bad enough in the old days; but now, they're looking good.
The old landlords were gentlemen, at least, they knew the courtesies, crooked and greedy as they were.
This new lot have come up because the landowners are fools.
Though they knew how to live.
But these ruffians, these cheats and thugs.
…They could make a woman feel a lady.
The new bosses are so lower class, so uncouth, such vulgarians —’ Davide would put a finger across his lips, but without emphasis, for he loved to hear her anger, it healed his own affliction, the binding fatigue which came over him when he contemplated his work, and made his legs drag across the shiny floors in the clanging corridors of the new Law Courts, Town Hall and Police Headquarters in booming Riba, concrete inside, dead white marble outside, sprouting confident towers of glass and statuary of muscular naked  giants, Order clubbing Chaos, Force cracking Cowardice's skull underfoot.
Davide had also known the old proprietors, Maria Filippa's ‘gentlemen’, and he didn't share her feelings about the past.
It was strange how she loved him for that business with Tommaso so long ago, how she had such a feeling for the intricate conventions of the old code, and saw him as a man of honour, a duellist.
Yet, when he had found America so barbaric, she had demurred.
He could see that, even now, she hankered to go back.
She was right, of course, there were many things about New York…
Davide sighed, and passed a hand over his moustache to adjust the angle.
It seemed surprisingly hot in the carriage for the time of year.
Davide did not seek to change Maria Filippa's nostalgia for her idea of the past, his own old-fashioned style gave him stature and beauty in her eyes, he knew.
Davide sheltered her, as a woman should be sheltered.
If he could not haul the family out of their genteel poverty, he could at least protect his women, his wife and his daughters, from the knowledge that he and so many others shared, mute and unrecognised, in the offices of the law, in the architects' and developers' bureaux, in police and magistrates' waiting rooms, in prison officers' canteens, in teachers' common rooms, camps.
You could keep it from the women, the hidden story of the cells and the cemeteries, of the club and the castor oil bottle.
Everybody knew it, they knew it too, but if it weren't told, it could lose its power to injure.
If it were quarantined, the contagion would stop.
So he dreamed, so he resolved.
How could he report to his girls the tortures he knew happened in the city prison?
The bodies that disappeared into unmarked graves?
The threats to children to silence colleagues who, far braver than he had ever been, asked the uncomfortable question, or asked any question at all.
Far better to leave them in innocence.
He thought of Fantina's little face, and groaned that her eyes might see the sordid, futile world that he had to enter to work and survive.
Far better to let them grow up safe than expose them by making himself conspicuous.
He thought of Lucia's mobile mouth, her often oblique wit, and dreaded that she might start to question, and come to the wrong person's notice.
Ignorance was a rampart to keep out danger, and danger to women was specially acute.
The things they could learn could damage their nature in its essence.
Knowledge was not a womanly way of life.
That was one of the aspects of America he didn't like; and Maria Filippa had agreed, it seemed to him, after he had made it clear.
The women knew too much; they weren't protected from ugliness and  squalor.
From the earliest youth, those city girls were like old women, they talked dirty, and they thought dirty and they probably…
Davide sighed; with Tommaso Talvi he had been hungry for experience, but now, he wondered what had impelled him then to want so much, everything, travel, influence, money, work, before he had ever touched a woman; when now he sang arias of extreme emotion, when he grieved and sobbed his passion in La Forza and Boccanegra and La Traviata , he thought of young men in the future bursting their hearts for his daughters.
He wondered, what would it be like to fall in love with Immacolata?
With Talia?
With Lucia?
With Fantina?
Then, he could soak in the vivid feeling of the song until the sweat stood out in gobbets on his forehead and his veins swelled in his neck like vines and Nunzia and Maria Filippa listening would wring their hands, invoking the protection of all the saints against that winged demon Fate flapping at his back.
In the city one morning, as he turned the corner of the street into the shade of the acacias on the main boulevard, a woman ran out and plucked him by the sleeve, pulled him into a doorway and snatched his hand to kiss it.
She was about his age, and in the chronic torpid state that overcame him daily as he faced work, he could not make his embarrassment at her gesture connect with his limbs.
He submitted tongue-tied, and shivered with repugnance when he felt the warm wetness of her face.
Yet, at the same time, her lips on his hand, and her cheeks, where tears had fallen, brought to mind other openings and liquids in her bowed body.
His impulse to clutch at her and lift her skirt and dabble with finger and thumb in her recesses led to a quick shame, and he was so appalled that he could not push her from him either but let her, still attached to his hand, mutter her compliments, in disjointed phrases falling pell mell.
At last, he pulled his fingers from her bent face, and with the other patted her shoulder to make her straighten and look up at him, which she did.
And he knew her then, from the stationery shop on their street.
She gave the children change from small sums in leaves of pink blotting paper; the girls like it, had made it into lampshades for their bedroom.
Immacolata said it glowed prettily, the light was flattering, and this recollection passed across his mind at the same time as he registered the woman's contorted face, her blotched cheeks and veined eyes, and began to hear what she was saying:
‘He's a good boy, he's done nothing, they've taken him away, I know he always comes home or sends me word if he's going to be kept.’
She was dry-eyed now, but her voice on the edge of wailing made Davide clutch  her and pull them both deeper into the courtyard shadow of the entrance where they stood.
‘Please, can't you do something for us; we are nothing, the least of things, why should anyone pay any attention to us?
Go to the Police Station and ask for him, please, perhaps if someone like you shows that he knows he's missing they will do something.
Make them, please.
I've no learning, no education; I daren't tell my husband, I pretended Gregorio told me he was going away, but it's not true.’
She had refused to get up, now held his legs in a hug, and her face against his thighs, turning now one cheek then the other into the material of his trousers, just below his crotch, and he was dismayed that she might smell him, that his buttoned flies, however spick — and they were freshly laundered — might carry some old aroma all the same, for he knew how bodies animate and inform even the most lifeless paraphernalia, how Maria Filippa marked her hairbrush, her pillow, her section of the wardrobe, as surely with her scent as a roe leaves spoor for a hunting dog in a forest.
When the ironing was being done, if he came in, holding out a shirt or a collar for special attention before he put it on, he caught, sometimes, among the warm bread-like goodness of pressed linen and cotton, fragrant from soap and water, the stab of pungent humanity, a momentary trace as the heavy iron stamped the armpit of one of his daughters' blouses, the ferrous, lively whiff of blood lingering around the soft white squares of cotton they wore during their time of the month.
She sensed his fear and, perceiving that he had placed this construction upon their encounter, pressed herself closer to the soft protuberance of his cock, touching his balls with her cheeks, one side and then the other, wheedling the while.
He had a moment — it was more than a moment, it was minutes together — when he wanted to cup a hand around her head and for all that they were still almost in the street, open his trousers and feel her tongue lap him and her lips close on him.
But the moment passed, for there was something in her grasp of his legs that was so awkward, so inexperienced, and the pitch of her entreaties remained so anguished that he knew she was only doing what she imagined might persuade him to help her; and a wave of self-loathing washed over him, that a woman like her could think of a man like him in such a light.
So now he lifted the woman from the stationery shop to her feet.
Her eyes were black, and fear bruised them, like fallen plums.
Shaking his head, angry, he quietened her, until at last she dropped her hands and stopped gabbling and turned back into her shop.
Davide had not uttered a word of consolation.
How could he?
He had none to give her.
Yet in Ninfania, blandishments were the stock-in-trade —‘Of course your son will return,’ he could have said.
‘Of course we will manage something, together, you and I. And many others,my connections, your connections….’
But the phrases had not formed.
Davide, after returning from America, had lost his bump of locality for his native place; when the plan showed a turning one way, he missed it, or found he wanted to walk back where he had come from, or go in another direction altogether.
He was not clear about it, had no notion of his objective or destination; he knew only that he had once felt filled with high sense of purpose, that aimlessness had not then been his condition, but a starry conviction.
Tommaso, Rosalba, Caterina, and everyone on the periphery had stood like markers on the map, pointing out the course he must follow, the way to the quarry, to fight with Tommaso.
And he had felt so light, so sure-footed, so approved, so anchored.
Now he'd lost that sense of fitting the rubrics which his kin and his province drew up for the proper conduct of a man like himself.
He could meet the woman in the shop, pass through the curtain in the back make sure her husband was out, and fuck her, that's what was being asked of him; then help her, drop a word in the police chief's ear, shrug his shoulders and wave his hands at the severity of the charges, promise on his professional honour that such a boy was hardly a threat.
A worm turn and bite the foot of the great Leader?
Inconceivable.
A cognac paid for here, a box of chocolates for the Party wife there, a hint that he might fix that plot of land for someone….
It wasn't so hard to do, the signposts were all in place and legible, yet he could not get his bearings.
Lethargy squeezed him the whole of the rest of the day, after his encounter with the mother of the vanished boy.
It oppressed him like the static heat of the big sun — the lion sun — when nothing stirs.
He gazed at the newspapers dully, he convinced himself he must be ill.
He could do nothing, nor could he apply himself to thinking about her case.
Only on his way home at lunchtime did he at last rouse himself enough to make a detour, and stop by at his brother's apartment and invite Franco to come home with him for lunch.
Franco was surprised, he was hard at work, had just reached an important moment in a piece he was composing and didn't want to be interrupted.
But something in his brother's petition alerted him, and he pushed aside the quire of his new score.
‘I've just reached the moment when Susanna is getting into the bath — couldn't you have chosen another time to visit?
The elders are in position behind some bushes, and she is singing a sweet romantic song of youth and yearning.’
Franco began to hum, as he followed  Davide out.
‘It's based on a country tune, you know the one.’
Davide nodded.
There was a pressure on his head, not the usual warning throb of a migraine, but a weight, as if a giant hand were spread and bearing down to push him under; he shook himself, and, leaning close into his brother's side, struggled to describe the morning's incident.
Franco tensed.
He said, ‘There's been picketing at the Town Hall, some rioting, the blackshirts moved in.
Haven't you heard?’
Davide shook his head.
‘I forgot, you've become an ostrich, of course, like all the rest.
But you can't have missed this can of worms, even from a foot deep of sand.
It's quite a story, and a lot of people don't like it; that woman's son must be one of them.
What a little fool.
What does he think he can achieve?
He should stay home, like me, and write opera, preferably buffa .’
They were walking in the street, hugging the shade, yet Davide's face was reddening, the sweat damped his shirt to his back, his pants to his groin, his feet to his socks.
‘Our Leader doesn't like to be told that his election was a fraud, that actual grievous bodily harm was perpetrated to bring him victory, that people weren't telling the truth when they said they wanted him, only him, when they said their hearts beat as one with love of him.
He doesn't like that at all— yet that's what our heroic opposition managed to say, and not among themselves alone.
That might have been all right, just.
But no, our hero goes and says it in parliament.
They've already given him a taste of the castor oil, a bout of gaol, a bit of a beating, just a tickle, a caress of their united methods, but still, you know, you'd think it was enough, it has kept so many others from singing.
But this hero won't be quiet, and when our Leader wants to pass thousands of new laws in a matter of half an hour or so, he jumps to his feet and objects.
What's more, he says he's sent his objection in several copies, abroad.
The Leader is sad, very sad, he's near to tears that the opposition spokesman is so unkind about him and spreads such cruel lies; his friends are even sorrier for him, they don't like to hear him insulted and misunderstood.
They hear him when he says, ‘The revolver is the only way to stop a mad dog,’ they hear him, for sure, and the next thing, what do you know?
The hero is not at home to callers, not at home in the office,in absentia at parliament.
Funny, he's not abroad either.
No, no one 's seen him.
He's just not there any longer; and it's as if he'd never been, for none of the things he said are heard any longer either; it's a bad dream, and the Leader doesn't have to sleep through it any more.’
Franco had his arm around his elder brother's shoulder, his mouth close to his face, his other arm gesticulating gracefully, as if conducting an invisible band of players.
His words combined with Davide's torpor to close around him like an iron lung, though the sweat brought on by his pace was now increased by terror.
Franco had always had this power to part the curtains on a scene he did not want to see.
‘How do you know all this?’ he whispered, with constricted voice.
‘Because…ah, no, I mustn't say.
Let's just leave it that music has wings, that song floats free even through prison bars.
Isn't that poetic?
I think so.
‘This is a country, my dear gentle brother, my dear monkey who sees no evil, hears no evil, speaks no evil, a country of cowardice and brigands, and no one in between, except, and the hero was such an exception he had to be….’
Franco gestured at his head with two fingers and thumb cocked, ‘But the bad dream isn't quite over for our beloved Leader,’ he hit the words hard, for the benefit of a passerby, who smiled and nodded in assent.
‘Our beloved Leader — our glorious Leader —’(this repetition for the benefit of another, who responded, ‘Long live the Leader!’)—‘has brought to his attention that someone who can still see this nation of the blind has noticed a certain car hanging around the hero's house, filled with big bad men.
And the police, who are true servants of justice — it surprises you?
But it's so trace it by its number, and when they find it, ooh, aah, my God in heaven, the upholstery is all bloody, and worse!
It belongs to the beloved Leader's comrades, that stout-hearted and fearless pair of white knights, the decorated killers, the implacable, the irresistible duo,’ Franco dropped his voice till almost inaudible, ‘Dumini, Volpi, famed for the elimination of their country's enemies abroad, and for their service in the nation's gangs — and gaols — and not least, for their closeness to the beloved, glorious — Long may he live!— Leader of the people.’
Davide was shaking his head, his teeth almost chattering.
Franco released him from his embrace, tapped him on the chest and dropped his tone of ghastly jocularity.
As they went up the stairs to the apartment on the first floor of the block, he gripped Davide by the arm, and said, ‘For God's sake, and for your children's, don't touch the case.
Let the woman alone.
Don't interfere.
Her son's got mixed up in it, probably demonstrated yesterday with the Socialists outside the Town Hall.
Wrote the hero's name on a wall somewhere.
She shouldn't have approached you.
She could compromise you.
And if they look into you — you could be in deep water.
Her boy will be back.
Or he'll vanish  without a trace.
Either way, there's nothing you can do.
You know now not to play the hero, don't you?
Don't play your: old tune, will you?
You learned what happens.
Do you hear me,nothing can be done, by you, or by anyone else.’
Davide was walking now down the street which intersected with the woman's shop; she still gave sheets of pink blotting paper for change, and a photograph of her son was pinned up on the shelf behind her till; the news was that he was in the army, but Davide was ashamed to inquire what that report concealed.
He never went into her shop.
He was keeping to the awnings, and a passing squall, just as he had foreseen on his departure from Dolmetta that morning, approached from the interior and sailed grandly overhead, steeping the baked stones of the port in a blissful freshness for an interval; the snails would be coming out, he thought.
Even so, his head hurt, it felt as if the planes of his skull were pinching and thumbing his eyes from behind, in the sockets, as if to pop them out.
So he turned into Gambrinus's and sat himself down at a small ironwork and marble table, and asked for some water.
The worst of it was that his headaches made him so angry; it was a symptom of the poison that was killing him by degrees.
Lead dripped into the centres of affection and hardened them, producing spasms of derangement; then the nervous system learned to skirt the new obstacle, and Davide's habitual mildness would return.
He would groan when he realised, afterwards, how he had raged at Maria Filippa.
She stood by him, she never reproached him for his failings, and at times he felt even worse because she was so forbearing.
His failings were many, he knew; though she would not hear of them, ‘You're the father here, and the father must have respect’— she would say, sternly, to forestall any apologies he might begin in front of the children.
He put his head in his hands as the waiter brought over the glass of water; he sipped it, and dabbed some on his temples to cool them.
The waiter hovered, noting his client's discomfort, but Davide shook his head, ‘Just a passing weakness.
The heat.’
He waved inconsequentially towards the outdoor light, where the small rain was falling.
When he had returned home that day, after leaving Franco, Maria Filippa had placed a dish on the table, filled with warm fresh taralli .
‘Immacolata has learned the recipe in her Domestic Science period at school, with some improvements,’ Maria Filippa said, raising her eyes  to heaven at the crudeness of the teacher's version, so that her eyebrows, already high in her forehead, jumped into her hairline.
‘Imagine,’ she went on, ‘No cinnamon!
No rosewater!’
Davide ate one of the sweet ring-shaped biscuits, then another, and a third, and would have laughed at her dear comical face and appreciated the baking, if his head hadn't maddened him.
But all of a sudden, observing the sparkling powder of fine sugar, he pushed the plate away, and accused her, ‘You weren't expecting me now, were you?
I've come home before you wanted me to, haven't I?
These biscuits were for somebody else, weren't they?
Since when do you spend money on the best sugar?
While I'm out you steal your lovers in here and entertain them, with sweet biscuits, almonds and sugar, just perfectly warm, oh yes, I know your tricks, women's tricks.
When there's no one else there to see.
Cinnamon!
Rosewater!
Stuff for kissing and cooing over, side by side, here, in my house, how dare you?
You women are all the same— a man just has to turn the corner of the street and the next thing, they're all eyes and lips and tongue and sucking me’— he tripped, changed ‘sucking him towards them.
Whirlwinds, water spouts, twisting and entangling and spinning us to destruction.
You are nothing but a….’
There was Maria Filippa, however, looking at him through her glasses which had misted up in horror and grief at his outburst, gulping the air like a fish; she was not like his sister Rosa, not one of those girls he had to protect from their own compulsions, but his own beloved and burdened wife, so reserved in bed that he even regretted her modesty himself, and so far from the whore he was about to call her, he shuddered from head to foot.
She was screaming at him now, that with a man like him she should have found another, her life had been nothing but work, work, work, worry, worry, worry, and now he made out she was a common whore, when she hadn't had an instant's pleasure in her livelong days.
She beat the side of her head with her fist, and shouted, ‘What an idiot I've been!
Could anyone ever knock any sense into this thick skull, and make me see what kind of a man I'm stuck with?’
She leapt towards him and, seizing the plate of biscuits, brought it down on top of her head until it shattered, and fell onto her arms.
She was shaking with tears and laughter, and Davide began to laugh too, recalling above all his own mother who had broken their best service all those years ago when Rosa wouldn't come to her senses about Tommaso….
But when Maria Filippa heard Davide laugh, she twisted up from her stricken position and her eyes fixed on him with hatred, ‘You're laughing, are you?
Well, I've got plenty to laugh about too, Ha ha aha, ha ha aha, ha ha ha,’ she howled, jackal-like, till saliva flecked her lips.
‘I've given up my life for a fool and he's never even noticed it.
Which makes me something special, a real double double idiot, ha ha ha.’
And she tugged at the patterned chenille cloth spread on the table.
Davide threw himself on it to stop her pulling it off altogether with the bowl of fruit and the jug of water and glasses with it; so they grappled, and in the contact something gave way, melted within them both and they clung together, aching in their heads and their bones as if they'd been caught out on the mountains in the winter and been chilled to the marrow.
He remembered the feel of her tears on his own face, and covered his eyes in the Caffè Gambrinus; in shame for all those years ago when he had provoked such outrage in her, but in sweetness too, for jealousy was a sign of love, every woman knew that.
It showed how desirable her man found her if he feared others might come after her.
He'd probably given her pleasure with his tantrum.
He hoped so; it proved he was a man after all, a man of passion and breeding, with strong heart and blood from his fathers.
And he himself had been a faithful husband, not that he hadn't had his chances — of course he'd had his chances — other supplications and wooing had come his way, more spirited too than that woman from the stationery shop.
But he had chosen to serve his womenfolk with constancy.
His head was growing heavy, he would ask for some coffee when the waiter returned; it was dark indoors, darker than he would have expected on a showery early summer afternoon, when the sun outside does not dazzle.
He lowered his head on to the table; the marble felt fresh in contact with his flushed skin.
Shame to disturb his toilette, when he had been so meticulous that morning.
He must go now, to the apartment block, and make his calls on the tenants.
He had the rentbook with him, in his breast pocket.
He need only get up.
The afternoon was drawing on and he must proceed with despatch, for he had promised his star, Fantina, his dearest daughter, that he would be back early.
They were all waiting for him at home now, he knew, in the olive grove, where the snails would be out crawling in the rain.
Their voices were rising in a strong chorus in his ears.
He must reach them.
The doves were fluttering upwards to the music, and his Maria Filippa — an unusual diva , wearing spectacles — with Pericle on her arm in a lace bonnet and button boots, was greeting him under the olives.
Their three elder girls were standing beside her and the baby, and Fantina was darting around them.
The trees were growing, it seemed to him, on  the stage of a great opera house.
Everything was in shadow, for the tiers of gas candles — an excellent improvement, that — were dimming, slowly, slowly, taking the sight of his daughters and his wife away from him, so that he found himself alone, as he began to sing.