

GROUPS AT WORK
INTRODUCTION
1.
The study of groups in work situations has been an important activity of behavioural scientists ever since the pioneering work of the Hawthorne Researchers over fifty years ago.
The outcome of numerous studies into different aspects of the behaviour of groups is a considerable store of useful and practicable knowledge about the working of groups.
Typical areas of research have included the study of group effectiveness, inter-group competition, and group cohesiveness.
2.
The most important factors in the behaviour of groups are as indicated in Figure 27.1 below.
Previous chapters have dealt with various aspects of leadership, tasks and environment, and whilst these factors cannot be ignored, this chapter focuses attention on the other factors such as group norms, group cohesiveness and roles within groups.
It concludes with a summary of recent research into teams and team building.
3.
Groups at work are formed as a direct consequence of an organization's need to differentiate itself.
Differentiation, or specialization, involves not only the breaking down of the organization into functions, but also the formation of groups to support the tasks assigned to those functions.
A group is basically a collection of individuals, contributing to some common aim under the direction of a leader, and who share a sense of common identity.
Thus, a group is more than an aimless crowd of people waiting in an airport lounge or at a bus-stop.
A group has some central purpose, temporary or permanent, and a degree of self-awareness as a group.
In the work situation, most tasks are in fact undertaken by groups and teams, rather than by individuals.
Groups are also widely used for solving problems, creating new ideas, making decisions and coordinating tasks.
These group functions are what the organization itself needs to fulfil its purpose.
However, individuals themselves need groups.
Groups provide stimulus, protection, assistance and other social and psychological requirements.
Groups, therefore, can work in the interests of organizations as a whole as well as in the interests of individual members.
4.
One of the earliest distinctions to be made between groups (arising from the Hawthorne investigations) was between formal and informal groups.
Formal groups were those set up by the management of an organization to undertake duties in the pursuit of organization goals.
Some writers have described formal groups as official groups, to avoid the confusion that can arise when describing groups operating in an informally structured organization (eg an organic type of organization).
Such groups may be informal in the sense that they have few rules, enjoy participative leadership and have flexible roles.
Nevertheless they are completely official.
What is meant by informal organizations are those groupings which the employees themselves have developed in accordance with their own needs.
These, of course, are unofficial.
Every organization has these unofficial groups, and research has shown how important they are for organizational effectiveness.
GROUP NORMS & group COHESIVENESS
5.
A useful way of looking at the development of groups was made by B. Tuckman in 1965.
He saw groups as moving through four key stages of development as follows.
Stage 1
— Forming.
Finding out about the task, rules and methods; acquiring information and resources; relying on the leader.
Stage 2
— Storming.
Internal conflict develops; members resist the task at the emotional level.
Stage 3
— Norming.
Conflict is settled, cooperation develops; views are exchanged and new standards (norms) developed.
Stage 4
— Performing.
Teamwork is achieved, roles are flexible; solutions are found and implemented.
6.
Group norms can be seen to develop at Stage 3 in the above analysis.
Norms, in this context, are common standards of social and work behaviour which are expected of individuals in the group.
Once such norms have been developed, there are strong pressures on people to conform to them.
Norms are influenced by organizational factors such as policies, management style of superiors, and rules and procedures.
They are also influenced by individual employees, whose standards may or may not be in line with those of the official organization.
For example, a group norm for the young men in an engineering workshop could be to follow a fashion of wearing long hair.
This could conflict with organizational norms concerning the safety of employees in the workplace.
Another example of a conflict between official and unofficial group norms can be drawn from a situation where a group itself decides to operate a certain level of output over a given time, regardless of targets set by the management in their search for increased efficiency and productivity.
The ideal situation, from an organization's point of view, is attained when the unofficial norms of the group are in harmony with the official norms of the organization.
There is no doubt that part of the leadership role of a manager is to secure this harmony in his own section.
7.
Tuckman's analysis of group development can be compared with that of Woodcock (1979).
Who has made a particular study of teams and their development.
Woodcock also sees a four-stage sequence of development as follows:
1.
The Undeveloped Team — Feelings are avoided, objectives are uncertain, the leader takes most of the decisions.
2.
The Experimenting Team — Issues are faced more openly, listening takes place, the group may become temporarily introspective.
3.
The Consolidating Team — Personal interaction is established on a cooperative basis, the task is clarified, objectives agreed and tentative procedures implemented.
4.
The Mature Team — Feelings are open, a wide range of options considered, working methods are methodical, leadership style is contributory, individuals are flexible and the group recognises its responsibility to the rest of the organization.
8.
The key point made by these analyses of team or group development is that effectiveness (see below) is an outcome which develops over time, as the group begin to understand what is required of them and how they can utilise the knowledge, skills and attributes of the individual members in fulfilling group and individual goals.
On the way to achieving effectiveness groups will undoubtedly face uncertainty, if not conflict, but these processes have to be seen as necessary costs of achieving both harmony and purposeful behaviour.
9.
Group cohesiveness refers to the ability of the group members to stick together.
It also applies to the ability of a group to attract new members.
A very cohesive group will demonstrate strong loyalty to its individual members and strong adherence to its established norms.
Individuals who cannot accept these norms are cast out from the protection of the group.
The sending of individuals ‘to Coventry’ as a result of some dispute within the group is an example of this behaviour.
As Tuckman's analysis shows, cohesiveness develops over time.
A newly formed group has little cohesiveness.
10.
There are several factors which can help cohesiveness to develop in a group.
These include the following:
a.
similarity of work
b.
physical proximity in the workplace
c.
the work-flow system
d.
structure of tasks
e.
group size (smaller rather than larger)
f.
threats from outside
g.
the prospect of rewards
h.
leadership style of the manager
i.
common social factors (age, race, social status etc)
In general, the reasons why people do develop into closely knit groups are threefold: because of those things they have in common , because of pressures from outside the group, and because of their need to fulfill their social and affiliation needs.
GROUP EFFECTIVENESS
11.
Group effectiveness has to be considered in at least two dimensions — effectiveness in terms of task accomplishment, and effectiveness in terms of the satisfaction of group members.
Clearly, the official organization-view of effectiveness is more concerned with output, efficiency and other benefits, than with satisfying the needs of individuals.
By comparison, an individual's view of effectiveness is more concerned with personal success in his role and personal satisfaction from being a member of a team.
Looking at the issue in ideal terms, effectiveness is achieved when the needs and expectations of the organization are one and the same as those of individuals.
12.
In his classic work, ‘The Human Side of Enterprise’(1960), Douglas McGregor provided a perceptive account of the differences between effective and ineffective groups.
A summary of the most important features he noted appears below:
Effective groups
1.
Informal, relaxed atmosphere.
2.
Much relevant discussion with high degree of participation.
3.
Group task or objective clearly understood, and commitment to it obtained.
4.
Members listen to each other.
Ineffective groups
1.
Bored or tense atmosphere.
2.
Discussion dominated by one or two people, and often irrelevant.
3.
No clear common objective.
4.
Members tend not to listen to each other.
Effective groups
5.
Conflict is not avoided, but brought into the open and dealt with constructively.
6.
Most decisions are reached by general consensus with a minimum of formal voting.
7.
Ideas are expressed freely and openly.
8.
Leadership is not always with the chairman, but tends to be shared as appropriate.
9.
The group examines its own progress and behaviour.
Ineffective groups
5.
Conflict is either avoided or is allowed to develop into open warfare.
6.
Simple majorities are seen as sufficient basis for group decisions, which the minority have to accept.
7.
Personal feelings are kept hidden and criticism is embarrassing.
8.
Leadership is provided by chairman.
9.
The group avoids any discussion about its own behaviour.
McGregor's view of effective groups corresponds to Tuckman's Stages 3 and 4 ie Norming and Performing.
The features of ineffective groups are closer to Tuckman's Stage 2 ie Storming.
A difference between McGregor and Tuckman seems to be that the former sees some groups as fixed in their poor behaviour, whereas the latter implies that groups tend to move out of the ineffective stages into more effective behaviour.
13.
The major influences on group effectiveness can be broken down into two main categories:
a.
Immediate constraints eg group size, nature of task, skills of members, and environmental factors.
b.
Group motivation and interaction.
The basic difference between the two categories is that (a) represents things that cannot be changed in the short-term, and that (b) represents behaviour that (potentially) can be changed in the short-term.
Let us now look at key points in each of these categories.
14.
Immediate constraints:
a.
Group size — small groups tend to be more cohesive than larger groups; small groups tend to encourage full participation; large groups contain greater diversity of talent.
b.
Nature of task — in work-groups, the production system, including the type of technology used, has a major effect on groups eg high-technology plant often disperses employees into isolated couples incapable of forming satisfactory groups.
Where group tasks are concerned with problem solving, decision-making or creative thinking, different member talents may be required along with a variety of leadership styles.
A further aspect of task is the time factor ie urgency tends to force groups to be task and action orientated.
c.
Membership — the personalities concerned, the variety of knowledge and skills available cannot be changed overnight.
A knowledgeable group, skilled at group working, are much more likely to succeed in their tasks, than an inexperienced group.
Equally a group with a wider range of talents in its midst tends to be more effective than a group with a narrow range of talents.
d.
Environmental factors — these include physical factors, such as working proximity, plant or office layout ie In general, close proximity aids group identity and loyalty, and distance reduces them.
Other environmental issues include the traditions of the organization and leadership styles.
Formal organizations tend to adopt formal group practices.
Autocratic leadership styles prefer group activities to be directed.
More participative styles prefer greater sharing in groups.
The important point about these immediate constraint is that they establish the scenario for the operation of the group.
If the expectations and behaviour of the members match this scenario, then the group will tend to perform very effectively.
By contrast, if there is a considerable mis-match, the chances of the group succeeding in its objectives will be slight.
15.
Group motivation and interaction:
a.
Group motivation-the level of motivation in the group will be a decisive factor in effectiveness.
High motivation can result from members' perception of the task, and their role in it, as being of importance.
Standards of performance are essential to motivation, together with adequate and are essential to motivation, together with adequate and timely feedback of results.
Individuals also need to feel satisfied with membership of the group.
Where these features are absent, motivation will tend to be low.
b.
Group interaction — this depends mainly on factors such as leadership, individual and group motivation, and appropriate rules and procedures.
As we saw in the previous chapter on Leadership, the key to success in leadership is to obtain the best ‘mix’ of attention to task and attention to people, taking the total situation into account.
The ability of the leader in a group to obtain the commitment of his team to achieving the task (team spirit) will result in a high degree of collaboration.
Where interaction is high people tend to be more open, and more comfortable with the pursuit of the task.
All group need some modus operandi.
This might consist of a few simple rules and procedure to control decision-making and conflict, for example.
Alternatively, as in formal committees quite complex procedures may apply in order to encourage or control interaction.
The items under this category are essentially about actual behaviour in a group.
This behaviour is part of a dynamic, or constantly changing process within the group, which can be influenced by individuals in response to issues that have occurred whilst undertaking the task.
Thus, even where the immediate constraints impose tight restrictions on behaviour the group can still be effective if they can be motivated to work together to achieve their objectives.
GROUP BEHAVIOUR & group ROLES
16.
An area of considerable interest to behavioural scientists for many years has been the process of interaction within groups.
This area of study was first opened up by Professor Kurt Lewin in the United States in the mid 1940's with the use of so-called ‘T-groups’ as a device for the study of inter-personal relations within groups.
The T-group approach is based on unstructured, leaderless groups whose ‘task’ is to study their own behaviour and provide feedback to individual group members.
The emphasis in such groups is on the ‘here and now’ situation and the thoughts and feelings generated by it.
Each group is aided by a tutor or consultant, whose task it is to help the group with the feedback aspects.
As a basis for developing information about the working of groups, the T-group method has been immensely useful.
As a practical training method, however, the approach has proved less than popular on account of the threats posed to individuals by the exposure of their beliefs, attitudes and feelings to people with whom they have to work.
17.
Coverdale training is another approach aimed at throwing light on the behaviour of group members.
The name is derived from the author of this approach, which is based on examining group processes during the progress of a series of practical tasks.
Unlike T-groups, Coverdale exercises are structured events.
Having discussed questions of how the initial task was planned and organized and how people felt about it, the experience is utilised to improve task effectiveness and member satisfaction for the next exercise, and so on until the series of tasks is completed.
By using practical tasks as a vehicle for the real issue of assessing group interaction, much of the threatening nature of group process analysis disappears.
Unlike in T-groups, the tutor, or trainer, plays a key role in briefing the group for its tasks and in directing the development of feed-back by means of questions and comments at the end of each exercise.
18.
Other approaches, designed to make people aware of their behaviour in groups, use questionnaires and rating scales to enable participants to record their feelings, perceptions and ideas about the group and its behaviour.
Among such approaches is the Managerial Grid of Blake and Mouton, which is shown in Chapter 46.
19.
One of the most useful attempts to develop categories of behaviour, especially verbal behaviour, in groups was that of R.F. Bales in 1950.
In several studies of small groups, Bales and his colleagues were able to generate a list of frequent behaviour categories to enable them to observe behaviour in a way that was relevant and consistent.
Some examples of the categories were as follows:
Shows solidarity
Agrees
Gives suggestion
Gives opinion
Asks for orientation
Asks for suggestion
Shows antagonism
These categories were grouped according to whether they furthered the task functions or whether they aided inter-personal relations, or socio-emotional functions, as Bales called them.
20.
Bales' ideas have been adapted by a number of British researchers, notably Rackham and Morgan (1977), who have used their version as the basis for improving skills in inter-personal  relationships.
Their list utilises the following categories of possible behaviour in groups:
Proposing (concepts, suggestions, actions)
Building (developing another's proposal)
Supporting (another person or his concepts)
Disagreeing
Defending/attacking
Blocking/Difficulty Stating (with no alternative offered)
Open behaviour (risking ridicule and loss of status)
Testing understanding
Summarising
Seeking information
Giving information
Shutting out behaviour (eg interrupting, talking over)
Bringing in behaviour (involving another member)
Experience in the use of such categories can enable observers of group behaviour to give constructive and relevant feedback to group members, instead of rather generalised or anecdotal descriptions of what has appeared to have taken place.
21.
Categories of behaviour are a key element in distinguishing roles in groups.
Feedback to groups can help the members to see what kind of role they played in the proceedings.
Role is not quite the same as position (or job).
The latter is concerned with the duties and rights attached to a particular job title.
The former is concerned with how the job is performed, and is affected by the expectations of superiors, of organizational policies, of colleagues and subordinates as well as the expectations of the job-holder himself.
This web of relationships has been called the role-set.
22.
In any group activity a number of roles are likely to be performed — for example, the roles of leader, peacemaker, ‘ideas man’, ‘humourist’ and ‘devil's advocate’to name but a few.
In informal groups roles may emerge in line with individual personality and know-how.
In formal groups many roles are already defined, such as chairman, secretary, visiting expert and others.
Sometimes members of a group experience a conflict of roles.
For example, a union representative may feel a conflict between his need to fulfill a spokesman role for his constituents, and his need to act responsibly as an employee of the company.
Sometimes the chairman of a committee stands down temporarily from the chair in order to express a deeply felt personal view about  an issue in which he has an interest.
This action prevents undue role conflict on the question of impartiality from the chair.
23.
Roles are influenced considerably by organization cultures.
In one organization managers may be expected to take a directive style in the management of their subordinates.
Anything in the form of participation would be viewed as weak management.
In another organization the dominant climate could well be democratic and participatory.
In this kind of organization a directive style would be seen as quite out-of-place.
Some organizations operate different cultures in different departments.
Production departments, for example, tend to be task-orientated and directive in style, whereas research and development departments tend to be more considerate of people's needs, and less directive.
COMPETITION BETWEEN GROUPS
24.
So far we have been discussing behaviour within groups.
Another important aspect of group behaviour is intergroup relations.
Since every organization is made up of a number of different groups of employees, the question of collaboration between groups is vital for obtaining an overall balance in the social system.
As Lawrence and Lorsch were at pains to point out (see Chapter 13) integration is as crucial to organizational success as differentiation.
Breaking an organization down into smaller units (work groups) in order to cope adequately with the diversity of tasks that face it, creates opportunities to develop task interests and special know-how, but, at the same time it also creates rivalries and competing interests which can be damaging to the organization's mission.
An understanding of the consequences, good and bad, of intergroup competition can, therefore, be of considerable help to an organization's management.
25.
The first systematic study of intergroup competition was made about twenty years ago by Sherif and colleagues in the United States.
They organized a boys' camp in such a way that two deliberately-created groups were formed for the experiment.
Various devices were used to encourage the development of separate identities between the two groups.
As the camp progressed, a number of interesting changes took place both within and between the groups.
Within groups — collections of individuals, with no special ties with each other, grew into closely-knit groups; the group climate changed from being play-orientated to work orientated, and leadership tended to become more  autocratic; each group became more highly structured and put a much greater emphasis on loyalty and conformity.
Between groups — each group began to see the other group as ‘the enemy’, hostility between groups increased whilst communication between them decreased; stereotyped opinions of the other side began to emerge, especially negative stereotypes.
26.
A further aspect of the Sherif study concerned the effects of winning or losing in an intergroup competition.
This again provided some fascinating material for the researchers.
Winning tended to maintain or even strengthen group cohesiveness, but reduced the motivation to fight; winning also caused a move away from task-orientation towards greater concern for individual needs.
Losing tended to lead to a disintegration of the group, and the search for scapegoats both within and outside the group; tasks needs became even more important to the loser; losing, however, forced groups to re-evaluate their view of themselves and eventually come to a more realistic assessment of what changes were required to make the group effective.
27.
Intergroup competition, as was noted above, has its advantages and disadvantages.
The prime advantages are that a group develops a high level of cohesiveness and a high regard for its task functions.
The main disadvantages are that groups develop competing or conflicting goals, and that inter-group communication and cooperation breaks down.
Since the Sherif study several researchers have followed up with studies of conflict resolution between groups.
The general conclusions are that to reduce the negative side-effects of intergroup competition, an organization would need to:
a.
encourage and reward groups on the basis of their contribution to the organization as a whole, or at least, to large parts of it, rather than on individual group results;
b.
stimulate high interaction and communication between groups, and provide rewards for intergroup collaboration;
c.
encourage movement of staff across group boundaries for the purposes of increasing mutual understanding of problems; and
d.
avoid putting neighbouring groups into a situation where they are competing on a win-lose basis for resources or status, for example.
28.
Not all conflict is harmful.
On the contrary, disagreement is an essential element in working through problems and overcoming  difficulties.
The conflict of ideas when put to the service of organization or group goals is in fact the sign of a healthy organization.
What is to be avoided is the point-scoring conflict that develops between groups who see their relative success and status vis-a-vis their neighbours as being more important than the pursuit of the common good.
TEAMS & TEAM-BUILDING
29.
A team, according to Adair (1986), is more than just a group with a common aim.
It is a group in which the contributions of individuals are seen as complementary.
Collaboration, working together, is the keynote of a team activity.
Adair suggests that the test of a good (ie effective) team is:
‘whether…its members can work as a team while they are apart, contributing to a sequence of activities rather than to a common task, which requires their presence in one place and at one time.’
What we have described in this chapter are the key variables that determine the relative effectiveness of groups in achieving their goals and satisfying the needs of their members.
These variables have to be addressed, if there is to be any chance of building a successful team.
30.
What, then, are the characteristics of effective teamwork?
Research suggests that they are as follows:
clear objectives and agreed goals
 openness and confrontation
support and trust
cooperation and conflict
sound procedures
appropriate leadership
regular review
individual development
sound inter-group relations
Adair emphasises the importance of careful selection of team members.
 The key factors here for individuals are not only technical or professional competence, but also the ability to work as a team member, and the possession of ‘desirable personal attributes’ such as willingness to listen, flexibility of outlook, and the capacity to give and accept trust.
31.
Long-term research into management team-skills has been carried out by R.M. Belbin and colleagues (1981).
The result  showed that a manager's team behaviour fell into one or more of eight fairly distinct team roles, as follows:
Chairman
An individual who can control and coordinate the other team members, who recognises their talents but is not threatened by them, and who is concerned with what is feasible rather than what is exciting or imaginative.
Shaper
This is another leader role, but one in which the role-holder acts much more directly to shape the decisions and thinking of the team.
Innovator
This type of person provides the creative thinking in a team, even if a concern for good ideas overshadows his ability to be sensitive to other people's needs.
Monitor/Evaluator
The strength of this role lies in the holder's ability to analyse issues and suggestions objectively.
Company Worker
Whilst the first four roles provide the major inspiration and leadership, this role provides for implementation of ideas by the roleholders' ability to translate general ideas and plans into practice.
Team Worker
This role meets the needs of the team for cohesiveness and collaboration, for role-holders tend to be perceptive of peoples' needs and adept at supporting individuals.
Resource Investigator
A person in this role looks for resources and ideas outside the team with the aim of supporting the team's efforts.
Completer
This is an individual whose energies are directly primarily to the completion of the task, and who harnesses anxiety and concern towards getting the job done on time and to a high standard.
32.
Individual managers are likely to be predisposed to behaving in one predominant role, even though they may show tendencies towards others.
The dominant role is closely linked to particular reasoning abilities and personality characteristics, but is also affected by the priorities and processes of a manager's job.
An effective team is one that is likely to have a range of roles present in its make-up.
Belbin concluded that the ideal team would be composed of one Chairman (or one Shaper), one Innovator, one Monitor Evaluator, and one or more Company Workers, Team Workers, Resource Investigators or Completers.
Since ideal conditions are rarely present, managers have to build their teams from amongst the people they have, and encourage a greater  degree of role flexibility.
However, a manager can benefit from understanding the distinctions between the roles and making an assessment of the role-strengths of his own staff.
Knowing what to expect, as well as what not to expect, from colleagues enables the manager to head-off potential tensions or even group breakdown.
SUMMARY
33.
A group is more than just a random collection of individuals.
It is a collection of individuals sharing some common purpose under a common leader, and seeing themselves as having a common identity.
34.
The behaviour of groups is determined by a number of key factors, such as:
Group leadership
Group Norms (standards of behaviour)
Group Cohesiveness (loyalty to the group)
Roles played by members (leader, peacemaker etc).
Nature and motivation of members
Nature of the task (problem-solving, production etc)
Size of group Environment (physical and social)
35.
Group effectiveness has to be seen in two dimensions.
Firstly, in terms of the ability to achieve organizational goals, and secondly, in terms of the ability to satisfy individual members' social and psychological needs.
Groups tend to move through four different stages on their way to becoming effective in the sense described.
These stages have been identified as follows:
The major factors influencing group effectiveness can be set under two headings:
Immediate constraints
ie the things that cannot be changed in the short-term (task, group size, members' knowhow etc)
Group motivation and interaction
ie the behaviour that (potentially) can be changed in the short-term (level of motivation and team-spirit)
36.
Interaction within groups has been an important focus of study by behavioural scientists.
Several notable developments have been as follows:
a.
T-groups, in which participants study their interaction with each other in order to achieve greater awareness of, and skill in handling, interpersonal relations.
b.
Coverdale training, where groups study their behaviour in the performance of a series of tasks.
c.
The Managerial Grid, where the focus of attention is the leadership style of the individual.
d.
Behaviour analysis, as developed by Bales in the United States and Rackham and Warr in Britain, in which a set of categories of behaviour is used for measuring individual and group performance, and for identifying roles in groups.
37.
Behaviour between groups is as important as behaviour within groups.
The subject of intergroup competition has been studied by several researchers, and in general the following conclusions have been reached:
a.
Competition has both harmful and useful effects  on groups ,
b.
The most harmful effects are that groups develop competing or conflicting goals, and lose their ability to communicate and cooperate with one another,
c.
The most useful effects are that groups develop strong ties of loyalty (cohesiveness) amongst their members, and that there is a high regard for the task.
In order to obtain the most benefit from intergroup competition, organizations need to reward groups on the basis of their contribution to the common good, encourage intergroup communication and collaboration, and avoid win-lose issues between groups.
38.
Teams are collaborative groups, whose effectiveness depends considerably on the qualities, motivation and roles exercised by team members.
To perform well a team needs a range of roles in its make-up.
SECTION SUMMARY — LEADERSHIP AND GROUPS
1.
Leadership can be defined as ‘a dynamic process in a group whereby one individual influences the others to contribute voluntarily to the achievement of group tasks in a given situation.’
Several different types of leader have been identified as follows:
a.
Charismatic ie based on personality,
b.
Traditional ie based on birth,
c.
Situational ie based on being in the right place at the right time,
d.
Appointed ie based on bureaucratic authority, and
e.
Functional ie based on behaviour/actions.
2.
Leadership depends for its success not only on the knowledge, skills and personality of the leader, but also on the task to be achieved, the skills and motivation of the team, and the environment or situation in which the leader has to operate.
3.
The three major categories of leadership, so far as theory is concerned are as follows:
a.
Trait theories — based on personal qualities and attributes,
b.
Style theories — based on leader behaviour.
and
c.
Contingency theories — based on adaptive behaviour by the leader in the light of the key variables in 2 above.
4.
Style theories were popularised in the 1950's-1960's by several American social scientists.
The examples quoted in this Section were:
a.
Douglas McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
b.
Rensis Likert's Systems 1 to 4
c.
Tannenbaum & schmidt 's Continuum of Leadership Styles
d.
The Michigan Studies — the ‘employee-centred’ versus ‘production-centred’continuum
e.
The Ohio Studies — a two-dimensional approach based on Consideration and Initiating Structure
f.
Blake & mouton 's Managerial Grid, based on Concern for People and Concern for Production
g.
Professor Reddin's 3-D Theory — a three-dimensional grid, which develops the ideas raised by the Blake & mouton Grid and
h.
The Harvard Studies — task leaders versus socio-emotional leaders.
Most of the above theories suggest that leadership style is a question of choosing between two or more mutually exclusive leadership alternatives eg either democratic or authoritarian.
However, three of the examples quoted suggest that the alternatives are not mutually exclusive, and that it is quite possible for a person to be concerned both for people and for the task, for example.
5.
Contingency theories of leadership were exemplified by the work of Adair (Functional Leadership Model) and Fiedler Theory of Leadership Effectiveness).
Both of these writers stress the importance of assessing leadership in the light of the situation.
Adair sees the leader's role as meeting the respective needs of the task, the group and individuals, within a given situation.
Fiedler emphasises the importance of the relative favourableness of the situation for the leader.
This favourableness depends not only on leader-member relations and the degree of structure in the task, but also on the power and authority of the position.
6.
The most important factors in group behaviour are as follows: nature of the task, size of the group, leadership, cohesiveness of the group, nature and motivation of the group members, group norms (standards), roles of individuals within the group, and, finally, nature of the environment.
7.
A group is a collection of individuals, who contribute to some common aim under the direction of a leader, and who share a sense of common identity.
A group tends to pass through four major stages of development in its life.
These stages are: Forming, Storming, Norming and Performing.
8.
Group norms are common standards of social and work behaviour expected of members of the group.
These norms may be official (ie arising from the organization's rules and customs), or unofficial (ie arising from within the group itself.
Part of the leadership role of a manager is to ensure, so far as possible, that official and unofficial norms are harmonised.
9.
Group cohesiveness is an important feature of groups.
This refers to the ability of a group to retain the loyalty of its members and to attract new members.
Highly cohesive groups display a strong loyalty to their members and a strong adherence to group norms.
Factors which encourage cohesiveness include similarity of work, physical proximity of members, group size, leadership style of manager, and other factors.
10.
The effectiveness of groups is usually considered in terms of(a) accomplishment of the task, and (b) member-satisfaction.
The major determinants of effectiveness can be grouped under two headings: Immediate Constraints (ie things that cannot be changed in the short-term) and Group Motivation and Interaction.
Examples of immediate constraints are group size, the nature of the task, and the personalities and other attributes of the members.
Each of these may represent an opportunity or an obstacle to a group, and how well the group comes to terms with these constraints will, in turn, depend on the level of motivation possessed by the members, and on the degree to which they are able to work together.
Leadership plays a key role in the overall levels of motivation and collaboration.
11.
Interaction within groups has been the subject of study by social scientists, and a number of different behaviour categories have been isolated.
These include proposing behaviour, disagreeing, blocking behaviour, seeking information, shutting out behaviour and others.
These behaviour categories are helpful in identifying roles within groups eg ‘ideas man’, ‘humourist’ and ‘devil's advocate’.
A role is concerned with how a person carries out his job, especially in terms of his own and others' expectations of the job.
It is much more than just the duties of the job.
Related groups of roles form a role-set.
12.
Competition between groups is an important issue in the study of groups.
Such competition has both benefits and drawbacks.
The benefits are a high degree of group cohesiveness and attention to task.
The drawbacks are that inter-group cooperation breaks down and competing goals develop.
13.
Teams are essentially collaborative groups.
They tend to work effectively when a balance of roles is present in their composition.
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION/HOMEWORK
1.
Why is it unhelpful to talk of leadership in terms of qualities?
What would supply a more practicable answer to the question ‘what is leadership?’?
2.
In what ways might the following influence a leader's style of leadership: a. his subordinates? b.the tasks to be performed? and c. he situation?
3.
What do you see as the advantages of Reddin's 3-D Theory over the Managerial Grid of Blake and Mouton?
4.
Discuss the concept of ‘dimensions of leadership’ with reference to the work of McGregor, Likert, Reddin and the studies made by the researchers at Michigan and Ohio.
5.
What are the most important factors to take into account when assessing the behaviour of groups in an industrial or commercial setting?
6.
How are group norms established, and why are they sometimes in conflict with the norms of the organization as a whole?
7.
What roles would you expect to see played in: a. effective groups? b. ineffective groups?
8.
What are the implication of Belbin's research for team development or team building?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS — LEADERSHIP AND GROUPS
Three representative questions follow below.
Outline answers may be found at Appendix 2.
EQ 23
The word leadership is sometimes used as if it were an attribute of personality, sometimes as if it were a characteristic of certain positions within an organization, and sometimes as an aspect of behaviour.
Discuss.
(ICSA MPP)
EQ 24
Discuss the evidence which suggests that in order to be effective, a manager can and should be flexible in the choice of his managerial style.
(ICMA OMM)
EQ 25
List the factors influencing effective teamwork.
Take four of the factors and write a short paragraph on each.
(IOB Nature of Mgt.)
CONTROL IN MANAGEMENT
The POMC approach to the grouping of managerial activities, which was introduced in Chapter 15, commences by considering the Planning activities of management, continues with Organizing and Motivating activities and ends with Controlling activities — the subject of this Section.
The control function of management, therefore, rounds off the total process of managing the human, material and financial resources of an organization.
Its primary aim is to measure performance against standards with a view to enabling corrective action to be taken to keep plans on course.
Controlling activities arc so closely linked to Planning and Decision-making activities that it would be advisable to study the next two chapters in conjunction with Chapters 16 and 17.
The three chapters in this Section describe the nature and methods of control (Chapter 28) and outline some of the most important techniques used to provide control information (Chapters 29 and 30).
CONTROL: NATURE AND METHODS
INTRODUCTION
1.
It was noted in the introduction to Chapter 21 that, if planning represented the route map for the journey, then organizing represented the means by which one could arrive at the chosen destination.
We can now add that controlling ensures that the travellers know how well they are progressing along the route, how correct their map is, and what deviations, if any, they need to make to stay on course.
2.
The basic elements of control are as follows:
a.
Establish standards of performance
b.
Measure performance
c.
Compare actual results against standards
d.
Take corrective action where required
This sequence of events can be demonstrated  diagrammatically in a simplified form, as in Figure 28. l, which shows how each element is linked to form a continuous process ending either in the achievement of targets or the modification of plans as a result of feedback (see Figure 28.2).
3.
Several comments can be made about the above diagram.
Firstly, standards of performance need to be verifiable and clearly stated, for example in units of production or sales volumes.
Where standards are qualitative rather than quantitative, it is preferable for them to be expressed in terms of end-results rather than of methods.
Budgets are a particularly useful vehicle for the expression of quantifiable results, and will be looked at more closely later in the chapter.
Secondly, the measurement of performance depends heavily on the relevance, adequacy and timeliness of information.
The supply of such information comes from a variety of sources within the organization.
The single most important source is the Management Accounting department, which is responsible for the regular production of operating statements, expenditure analyses, profit forecasts, cash flow statements and other relevant control information.
Thirdly, when  comparing actual against target performance, most organizations only require action to be taken when the deviation against standards is significant.
Otherwise no action is taken and no reference upwards is asked for.
This is sometimes called the ‘management by exception’ principle.
Fourthly, control is not just a matter of identifying progress, it is also a matter of putting right what may have gone wrong.
Hence the importance of directing part of the control process to the implementation of appropriate corrective action.
4.
The information generated by control systems is known as feedback.
Feedback is usually produced on results ie on the outputs of the system.
Actual performance is recorded and the information fed back to the managers responsible for achieving the target performance.
Early feedback is essential for accurate control, especially where unexpected deviations have occurred.
Where deviations occur, feedback may indicate the need for a change in the process or its inputs, or, possibly, a change in the basic plans or original standards.
See Figure 28.2.
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS
5.
The information necessary to carry out the control function effectively is produced from a variety of sources and often in a variety of forms.
Information can be of the most detailed kind (usually processed by computer), or can be of a judgemental nature (usually in a written report).
With the increasing complexity of control information many organizations have devised a formal Management Information System (MIS) to cope with this problem.
6.
Lucey (1987) defines an MIS as follows:
‘A system to convert data from internal and external sources into information and to communicate that information, in an appropriate form, to managers at all levels in all functions to enable them to make timely and effective decisions for planning, directing and controlling the activities for which they are responsible.’
This definition emphasises the use of management information for the purpose of decision-making.
7.
The model implied by this definition is basically as follows.
The raw data are the basic facts and figures of operational life, such as output figures, hours worked, invoice values, part numbers  etc.
These data may be stored on manual or computer systems.
In themselves they may not have great meaning.
Taken together and assembled into relevant groupings, they become information, which is basically data that has been analysed, summarised and interpreted for the benefit of the potential user, in this case a manager.
The MIS processes are the various procedures and methods used to convert the data into useful information.
This can be acted upon, for example to produce comparisons with expected standards and then take appropriate corrective actions (decision making).
8.
It is possible to identify four types of formal MIS which are useful to management concerned with control at the tactical level.
These are briefly:
1.
Control systems which monitor the organization's activities and report on them, eg production output, sales revenue etc.
2.
Database systems which process and store information, which can be drawn upon as a kind of organizational memory-bank.
3.
Enquiry systems, based on either internal or external databases, for carrying out investigations into the performance of departments, product lines, competitors etc.
4.
Decision support systems, providing computer-based facilities for conducting analyses, simulations etc.
9.
The application of an MIS to key management functions assists control in a variety of ways, as the following examples suggest.
Marketing/Sales
— Clarify current order position
— Identify profitability of particular products
— Identify selling costs
— Produce customer analyses
— Provide surveys of markets
Personnel
— Provide Wage & salary analyses
— Identify sickness absence trends
— Analysis of manpower statistics
— Production of labour turnover reports
Management Accounting
— Production of operating and budget statements
— Analyses of costs/expenditure etc 
— Investment appraisal analysis
— Profit forecasts
— Cash flow projections/statements
Ideally the MIS should be operated on the basis of ‘management by exception’, ie it should enable managers to delegate confidently in the sure knowledge that significant variances in actual performance compared with standard performance will be highlighted in timely fashion by the system.
CONTROL METHODS
10.
The two major approaches to control are (a) those that focus on financial values, such as budgetary control, and (b) those that focus on physical values, such as quality control.
By far the most widespread method of control is that of budgetary control, which will be considered first.
BUDGETS
11.
A budget is a statement, usually expressed in financial terms, of the desired performance of an organization in the pursuit of its objectives in the short-term (one year).
It is an action plan for the immediate future, representing the operational and tactical end of the corporate planning chain.
Budgetary control takes the targets of desired performance as its standards, then systematically collates information relating to actual performance (usually on a monthly or four-weekly period basis) and identifies the variances between target and actual performance.
Thus, whereas budgets in themselves are primarily tools of planning, the process of budgetary control is both a planning device and a control device.
The primary aims of a budgetary control system are to:
a.
establish short-term business plans (N.B. Budgets are sometimes referred to as business plans or profit plans),
b.
determine progress towards the achievement of short-term plans,
c.
ensure coordination between key areas of the organization eg between marketing and production),
d.
delegate measurable responsibilities to managers, with-out loss of control,
e.
provide a controlled flexibility for meeting change in the short-term.
12.
The steps by which a budgetary control system is built up are basically as follows:
i.
Forecasts for key aspects of the business are prepared.
These are statements of probable sales, costs and other relevant financial and quantitative data.
ii.
A Sales Budget is prepared based on an analysis of past sales and a forecast of future sales in the light of a number of assumptions about market trends.
The resulting budget is an estimate of sales for a given budget period.
iii.
A Production Budget is prepared on the basis of the Sales Budget.
This involves an assessment of the productive capacity of the enterprise in the light of the estimates of sales, and a consequential adjustment of either, or both, to ensure a reasonable balance between demand and potential supply.
Production budgets will include output targets, and cost estimates relating to labour and materials.
iv.
A Capital Expenditure Budget is drawn up to cover estimated expenditure on capital items (fixed assets) during the budget period.
v.
A Cash Budget is prepared by the accountant to ensure that the organization has sufficient cash to meet the ongoing needs of the business.
This budget reduces the organization's transactions to movements of cash and indicates shortfalls or excesses of cash at particular periods of time.
vi.
Departmental Budgets are drawn up in the wake of the Sales and Production Budgets.
vii.
Finally, the budgets are collected into one Master Budget, which is effectively a statement of  budgeted Profit and Loss together with a projected Balance Sheet.
viii.
Production of Period Budget Statements, which inform management about their performance against budget in the immediately preceding period, and indicate any variances.
ix.
Action by management, as appropriate.
13.
In developing a system such as the one above, a number of points of good practice need to be considered.
These are as follows:
a.
Budgets should be sufficiently detailed to set clear targets for the managers responsible for carrying them out, but should not be so complex that they defeat their purpose of providing planning and control aids at the operating levels of the enterprise;
b.
Budgets should not be kept to rigidly if conditions change significantly, but should permit reasonable flexibility.
They are a means to an end, not an end in themselves;
c.
The responsibility for a particular budget should be clearly defined;
d.
Budgets should show variances between actual and  budgeted performance (ideally in quantitative as well as financial terms, whenever possible);
e.
Managers responsible for carrying out budgets should participate in their formulation.
BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS
14.
Not all control information is expressed in statements and computer printouts.
Some useful information can be made available in chart form, such as a ‘break-even chart’.
This is a chart which shows how costs and profits vary with the volume of production.
The name is taken from the point on the chart where the total costs line crosses the sales revenue line ie at the point where neither a loss nor a profit is being made.
An example of a simple break-even chart appears below (Figure 28.4).
In the above example, total cost (ie total fixed costs plus variable costs) range from £20,000 to about £38,000.
Total revenue ranges from nil to about £55,000.
The break-even point is achieved when a sales volume of about £32,000 is reached.
Sales in excess of this figure begin to produce a profit.
15.
Break-even charts are useful for their indication of the effects of marginal changes in sales volume or costs on profit figures.
They are also useful for converting profit targets into production targets or sales targets.
The major criticism of such charts is that they assume linear relationships between costs and output, and sales]and revenue, whereas this is not always true.
The straight lines on the charts may be over-simplified, therefore, and would need to be treated with some caution.
Like many other information sources, break-even analysis should preferably be used as one of several devices for obtaining an accurate picture of the business.
RATIOS
16.
A key feature of all planning and control activities is the analysis of performance data.
We have mentioned budgets and break-even charts above, but another useful form of analysis is by the use of financial (and other) ratios.
Financial ratios are relationships that exist between accounting figures, and which are usually expressed in percentage terms.
Such ratios can be grouped under a number of different categories, such as assessment of profitability, for example.
Examples of typical financial ratios are as follows:
The above are tests of profitability.
Other ratios include tests of liquidity, cost ratios and Stock Exchange tests.
Examples of each of these in turn are:
17.
Non-financial ratios indicate the relationship between quantifiable pieces of information, and may or may not be expressed in percentages.
Examples of non-financial ratios are:
13.
Ratios can provide useful summaries of relative efficiency or progress.
Single figures on their own can mean very little but compared with other sets of figures, they can take on greater significance.
Nevertheless, ratios themselves require standards of comparison if an organization is to compare its performance with its competitors, and these standards are not always available.
Also some ratios are fairly crude eg Index of Labour Turnover, which shows the position in gross terms and gives no indication as to whether turnover is spread throughout the organization or is heavily concentrated in one department or in one occupation.
As with break-even analysis, ratios need to be treated cautiously, and should preferably be used in conjunction with other forms of performance analysis.
QUALITY CONTROL
19.
In the physical world of production, numerous control systems are in operation.
One example is that of Quality Control The control of quality rests on the assumption that in mass production no two units are exactly identical, but that it is possible to mass produce vast quantities of almost identical units.
These last-mentioned can be produced within certain tolerances, and a customer will accept variations between these tolerances, but not outside them.
The role of Quality Control is to ensure that appropriate standards of quality are set and that variances beyond the tolerances are rejected.
Thus Quality Control is basically a system for setting quality standards, measuring performance  against those standards and taking appropriate action to deal with deviations outside permitted tolerances.
Quality Control activities can be very costly, and since they represent an overhead cost in the production area, the degree of time and resources spent on them must be related to factors such as price, consistency, safety and legal requirements, for example.
Products such as highly-priced porcelain will be subject to far higher quality controls than run-of-the-mill household earthenware.
Pharmaceutical products are subject to health controls, backed by legislation, and thus require the highest standards of quality.
By contrast, the solid fuel merchant can afford to vary the content of what goes into pre-packed bags of household fuel, provided the weight is correct.
20.
Inspection is an important part of Quality Control.
Usually a choice has to be made whether to carry out 100% inspection or some lesser amount on a sampling basis.
Where perfect quality is required, for example in the construction of nuclear reactor plant, then 100% inspection will be applied.
In batch or mass-production (for definitions, see Chapter 39), 100% inspection is not always necessary, nor is it always effective.
Inspectors usually have to carry out their inspections in noisy and busy surroundings, which may affect their ability to concentrate.
In fact several recent studies have shown that up to 15% of defective items have passed unnoticed in a 100% inspection.
Better results than this can be achieved by sampling techniques in these circumstances.
The most widely used techniques of inspection apart from 100% inspection are random sampling, where batches are concerned, or continuous sampling, in mass-production.
Random sampling means that a batch is accepted or rejected on the basis of the number of rejects found after taking a random sample from the batch.
Continuous sampling is used in mass-production systems, and entails an initial 100% inspection until a pre-determined number of correct items have passed in succession; then random sampling begins and continues until a further reject appears; 100% inspection is recommenced and the cycle is repeated if necessary.
Further points relating to Inspection can be found in Chapter 38 (Production Planning & control ).
21.
The benefits of Quality Control are primarily as follows:
a.
Reduction in costs of scrap or re-working
b.
Reduction in complaints from customers
c.
Enhanced reputation for company's products
d.
Feedback to designers and engineering staff about performance of products and the machines required to produce them.
SUMMARY
22.
The control function of management is closely linked to the planning function.
Plans give rise to actions (performance), and actions have to be monitored to ensure that they reflect the aims and intentions of the plans.
This monitoring of performance is the central core of the control function.
Control establishes standards of performance, measures performance against the appropriate standards and identifies corrective action where required.
This chapter looked at systems and methods of control.
A representative cross-section of systems and methods was outlined, including budgetary control as an example of a financial control, and Quality Control as an example of a control of physical standards.
Two important methods of obtaining control information in a more specialised way were Break-even Analysis and the use of Ratios.
A common feature of all these systems and methods of control is that they contribute to the setting of standards, as well as to the measuring of performance against standards.
They also provide much useful information about performance generally, enabling managers to be better informed about the relative strengths and weaknesses of their operations.
TECHNIQUES FOR CONTROL
INTRODUCTION
1.
The scope for detailed questions on quantitative techniques in the examinations covered by this manual is very limited.
However, in general questions about control in management, some reference ought to be made to the increasing number of mathematical and other techniques which are now available to management in the execution of their planning and controlling activities.
This chapter provides a summary of the principal techniques which examiners could reasonably ask of candidates.
The object in this chapter is to convey something of the nature and application of these techniques without going into detailed descriptions.
For those wishing to enquire further into the field of quantitative techniques, an extremely useful book is ‘Quantitative Techniques’— T. Lucey published in this series.
2.
The techniques which will be outlined in this chapter are Network Analysis (especially Critical Path Method and Programme Evaluation and Review Technique), Simulation and Inventory Control.
Before going on to describe the basic features of these techniques, a few words are necessary about the general field of quantitative techniques.
3.
The label given to such techniques varies considerably.
Sometimes they are referred to as Management Science, sometimes as O.R.
or Operational Research, and sometimes as Quantitative Techniques.
In this Manual the expression O.R.
will be utilised.
The purpose of these techniques is to make quantitative data available to managers in order to aid decision-making, planning and control.
The basic approach of O.R.
techniques was referred to briefly in Chapter 16 (para. 9), dealing with the topic of decision-making.
The approach, this time in slightly more detail, can be stated as follows:
Analyse Data and Define Problem
Develop a Mathematical Model of the Situation
Select Inputs/Data required
Develop Optimum Solution
Test/Modify Solution
Provide Controls/Feedback Mechanism 
Obtain Management Support for Solution
Implement, Maintain and Review
4.
The distinctive approach of O.R., according to the UK O.R.
Society, is that it develops ‘a scientific model of the system, incorporating measurements of factors, such as chance and risk, with which to predict and compare the outcomes of alternative decisions, strategies or controls.
The purpose is to help management determine its policy and action scientifically.
’ The models of O.R.
are symbolic, or abstract, representations of real life problems.
They are usually expressed in mathematical terms (symbols, equations and formulae), and can be contrasted with other models in common use in business, such as budgets, profit and loss statements, sales charts, and numerous others.
5.
The main advantage of O.R.
models is that they provide a basis for the solution of complex problems in static or dynamic situations.
Such models can be designed to take a large number of factors into account at any one time.
They can reduce these factors to mathematical terms and experiment with them by introducing a variety of inputs to assess what effects they have.
All this can be done without interfering with the operational or planning processes currently under way in the organization.
Thus the risks of a particular strategy can be evaluated in a relatively safe manner before being put to the test in a real life context.
6.
The disadvantages of O.R.
models are:(a) they take time to be developed, and are thus less useful for producing quick answers,(b) they can represent an over-simplified picture of a particular set of conditions, and therefore may suggest only partial solutions, and (c) they may be resisted by line managers on the grounds that such models are too theoretical to be put into practice.
To some extent these criticisms are being offset by (a) the wider use of computers to handle complex calculations, and (b) the development of O.R.
teams made up of managers from a variety of disciplines, and not just mathematics.
NETWORK ANALYSIS
7.
Network analysis is the term used to embrace a number of techniques for the planning and control of complex projects.
The basis of network planning is the representation of sequential relationship between activities by means of a network of lines and circles.
The idea is to link the various activities in such a way that the overall lime spent on the project is kept to a minimum.
The optimum linking of the various stages is called the critical path.
The two most frequently used forms of network planning are CPM  — Critical Path Method — and PERT — Programme Evaluation and Review Technique.
The major difference between these two forms is that CPM assumes that the time required to complete an activity can be predicted fairly accurately, and thus the costs involved can be quantified once the critical path has been identified, whereas PERT assumes that time has to be estimated in drawing up the critical path.
CPM tends to be used in large or complex projects in construction and manufacturing.
PERT tends to be applied to one off projects of a complex nature- or to projects where time or cost are of overriding importance.
8.
The basic network is a combination of events, activities and dummy activities, as illustrated in Figure 29.1.
Events are the start or the end of an activity eg kettle filled, tea poured out.
Events are shown as a circle or node and are usually identified by a short description of the event or by a number (l, 2, 3 etc).
Activities are actions which take time eg filling kettle, pouring tea.
They are shown as straight arrows, and are usually designated by letters (A, B, C etc).
Dummy activities are actions which do not incur time, but need to be shown to ensure the logic of the network.
They arc shown as a dotted arrow.
9.
Additional information can be added to the basic network as the exercise progresses.
So, for example, times and costs can be included in the model which is being built up.
The critical path through the network is the longest sequence of activities from the beginning of the network through to the end.
In drawing up networks, estimating times and identifying critical paths, a number of rules and conventions have to be applied.
Among these are that a complete network may have only one start event and only one finish event; that an event is not complete until all the activities  leading to it are themselves complete; and that a network must always move forwards in time.
10.
The advantages of using networks are chiefly:
a.
they provide a logical picture of the layout and sequence of a complex project
b.
they help to identify the activities and events which are critical to the entire project
c.
they provide a basis for working out times, costs and resources involved in the project
d.
they act as a focal point for action and coordination
e.
they make an enormous contribution to both the planning and, especially, the control of complex projects.
SIMULATION
11.
Simulation is one of the most widely used quantitative techniques.
It consists of developing a model of a process, eg corporate planning, which is then subjected to a series of trial-and-error experiments designed to predict the reactions of the process to variations in its inputs.
For example, it would be possible to simulate the effects of differing volumes of sales on key factors in a corporate plan, such as production capacity, purchasing targets and manpower forecasts.
Simulation tends to be used in problems where mathematical solutions are not possible, or where long time scales are involved (eg predicting — population changes over a 30 year period), or where there is no other way of tackling the problem (eg charting space-satellite trajectories).
12.
The basic steps in a simulation are as follows:
Define problem to be simulated
Construct a model
Test the model
Gather relevant data for experiments
Run the simulation
 Analyse the results
Re-run simulation in light of results
Repeat testing and simulation
For all practical purposes it is necessary to run simulations on a computer, on account of the number of times it is essential to rerun the model under different conditions.
13.
The inputs to any model of a business operation will have to include probabilistic elements, if the model is to be a reason-able representation of reality.
Every commercial business, in particular, is subject to chance or risk, and this is where probability comes in.
Probability is the quantification of chance (uncertainty).
It is an important feature of every business simulation eg a corporate planning model or a production planning model.
The rules of probability (p) state that the value of p ranges from 0 (zero) to 1 (one), where 0 indicates the lowest degree of probability and 1 indicates complete certainty.
The values in between are usually expressed as decimals of 1.
For example, the chances of your living to the age of 100 would be very small indeed, say .01.
On the other hand your chance of dying before the age of 100 will be of the order of .99 ie a very high probability.
14.
Probability is either objective or subjective.
Objective probability applies to those events which have been tested previously and found to come up with consistent results.
For example, if an ordinary coin is tossed, the probability that it will come down heads is .5.
Where an estimate of probability has to rely on human judgement and experience, this is called subjective probability, and is the most widely used in business situations.
An example of subjective probability is as follows: the Production Manager of a fast-growing microcomputer manufacturer, whose production has increased by 50% in the past year, without additional capital investment, now estimates the probability of repeating that 50% growth rate as .4, given no change in investment levels.
15.
In the simulation of a corporate plan, for example, the probabilistic elements are selected on a random basis.
This is sometimes known as a Monte Carlo simulation, due to the original gambling application of this approach.
Random selection can be undertaken in several ways, but in this case the most likely methods will include the use of random number tables or computer-generated random numbers.
A random number table consists of lists of randomly selected numbers in which there is no bias.
INVENTORY CONTROL
16.
The final example of a quantitative technique in this chapter is that of Inventory, or Stock, Control.
The inventory of an organization is its idle resources at any particular point in time.
Taking a manufacturing organization as an example, its inventory can be described as:
a.
Raw materials and Purchased items
b.
Work in progress (partly-finished goods/sub-assemblies etc)
c.
Finished goods
In many organizations, the inventory figure is their largest current asset, and is a key factor in their ultimate profit situation.
17.
The reasons for maintaining inventory levels are chiefly as follows:
a.
Raw materials
— to take advantage of bulk-buying
— to smooth out irregularities in supply
— to ensure internal supply to production
b.
Work in progress
— to act as buffer between production processes
c.
Finished goods
— to ensure availability of goods to meet demand
— to smooth out fluctuations in demand
18.
The two basic questions of inventory control are: a.
How much to order to replenish stocks? b.
When to order?
Before these questions can be answered, organizations have to consider the costs involved.
The two basic costs of inventory items are (i) ordering costs ie wages, administration and transport costs etc, and (ii) carrying, or holding costs ie interest on money invested in stock, storage costs, insurance costs etc.
It is these two types of costs that inventory control aims to minimise in the light of the required inventory levels referred to in the previous paragraph.
The O.R.
scientist applies mathematical and statistical formulae to models of an inventory so as to produce data on which buying and stockholding decisions can be taken.
Inventory control is an important feature of Purchasing activities, and is referred to in more detail in Chapter 38 (paras.
16–12).
SUMMARY
19.
This chapter dealt briefly with a selection of management aids which come under the heading of Operational Research (OR) or Quantitative Techniques.
OR techniques are a means to an end.
They can help management to plan and control key business processes by developing mathematical models of problems or processes, which can be subjected to the influence of significant variables, including probability, and which can produce important data about the outcomes of such variables.
This enables managers to assess both results and risks before taking major decisions relating to planning and control.
20.
Three techniques were looked at in outline: Network Analysis, Simulation, and Inventory Control.
Network analysis was seen as important for the control of a wide range of complex projects.
Its two most frequent forms are CPM (Critical Path Method) and PERT (Programme Evaluation and Review Technique).
Networks are composed of three main elements: Events, Activities, and Dummy activities.
These are represented by circles, arrows and dotted arrows respectively.
Networks can be elaborated to show time and costs.
Simulation consists of a model-based exercise in which various changes are introduced and their effects recorded.
Simulation is usually carried out on a computer, and tends to be utilised when mathematical or other measures are not practicable, eg in corporate planning exercises.
Inventory Control is used to ensure that the costs of buying and holding stock are minimised, taking into account the necessary inventory levels for operating the business and keeping the customer supplied.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
1.
The advent of the silicon chip, or integrated circuit, as it is more properly called has revolutionised the field of electronics.
Today a tiny microelectronic processor less than a quarter-inch square can carry a hundred times more computing power than the massive Ferranti Mark I Star, Europe's first commercial computer produced in 1950.
Integrated circuits are currently to be found in computers, pocket calculators, automatic bank tills, industrial robots and a host of other applications.
The ability to harness electrical power in miniature form (ie microelectronics) is having a huge impact on modern life.
In manufacturing we are drawing ever closer to completely automated production systems, and these will be examined in Chapter 41.
However, the most likely way that people at work will come into contact with microelectronics' technology is in the area of ‘information technology’.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
2.
What is information technology (IT)?
A useful working definition has been provided by the Department of Trade and Industry in Britain.
This definition sees IT in terms of:
‘the acquisition, processing, storage and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numeric information by a microelectronics based combination of computing and telecommunications’.
3.
Whereas, in the past, information-handling involved massive dependence on paper, the emphasis now has shifted to the creation, storage and transmission of tiny electrical impulses.
Today, the amount of information contained on a pair of floppy disks could fill an average-size book.
Paper will doubtless continue to be important as a tangible product of the interchange of information between human beings (‘hard copy’).
However, when storage of information is the main consideration, then disks and magnetic tapes are likely to dominate the scene, until newer, even more compact devices are in common use.
4.
There are three major components of information technology and these are as follows:
1.
computers, ie electronic machines capable of making large sets of calculations very rapidly;
2.
microelectronics, ie the design, application and production of very small-scale electronic devices containing densely packed components;
3.
telecommunications, ie the transmission of information by cable or radio waves.
We shall look at these components in turn.
COMPUTERS
5.
The earliest attempts to process data by means of an electromechanical device were made in the United States by Herman Hollerith in the 1890's.
In order to cope with the demands of recording and analysing the United States' census, Hollerith needed a way of automating the process.
He took up an idea from a previous inventor, an Englishman named Charles Babbage, namely the punched card, but designed an electro-mechanical device called a tabulator to ‘read’ the information contained on the card.
His tabulator worked successfully, reducing the number of man-hours for the task by two-thirds.
Hollerith equipment formed the basis of commercial data processing for several decades.
6.
The first attempts at producing a problem-solving machine, or computer, were made during the Second World War as Allied scientists sought to break enemy codes.
Shortly after the war the first commercial computers were developed.
In Britain came the Ferranti Mark I and the Leo computer, in the United States the first Univac machine was produced.
These electronic machines relied on valves (vacuum tubes) for their operation.
They were large, costly, rather unreliable and required a dedicated data processing team to support them.
Such machines were superseded in the late 1950's by so-called ‘second generation’ computers, utilising transistors for their operation.
These computers were smaller than the first-generation machines, were cheaper to run, and were much more reliable.
Nevertheless they still represented items of heavy capital expenditure, and still required a data processing department to be responsible for them.
7.
Large computers, usually referred to as ‘mainframes’, require to be housed in special, air-conditioned accommodation.
Smaller desk-sized, machines are called mini-computers, and, like mainframes, require air-conditioning facilities.
Microcomputers (see next page), by comparison, are altogether smaller and lighter, and do not require any special environment.
8.
A typical data processing (DP) department of the 1960's would have been made up of the following components:
Equipment:
— mainframe computer (including central processing unit)
— input devices (keyboards, tapes, disks)
— storage devices (disks and tapes)
— output devices (printers and visual display units)
— telephone lines and modems (see note below)
Staff:
— Data Processing Manager
— Systems Analysts (to assess potential applications)
— Programmers (to write the instructions for the computer)
— Operators (to load, run and unload the computer)
— Data preparation staff (to convert raw data from documents into a form suitable for the computer)
(Note: A modem is a device for converting analogue signals to digital signals, and vice versa)
9.
The existence of such a department encouraged the centralisation of data processing activities, and endowed its staff with considerable power within the organization.
DP staff were seen as experts, and their function carried a valuable mystique.
Users had to present their data in ways laid down by the DP department; they found themselves bound by the DP department's priorities rather than by their own; and, in addition, they had to compete with colleagues for use of the computer's facilities.
This situation continued until the advent of the micro-computer, which has had the effect of placing considerable computing power in the hands of individual departmental managers and their staff, thus reducing their reliance on centralised computing facilities.
THE MICROCOMPUTER
10.
The micro-computer is essentially a microelectronic calculating system based on a microprocessor (see Fig. 30.1):
Notes
1.
ROM refers to Read Only Memory.
This is located on a permanent-memory chip, which can neither be added to, or altered, by an operator, nor erased when the machine is switched off.
ROM contains the machine's operating codes.
2.
RAM refers to Random Access Memory.
This is located on a temporary-memory chip for storing information supplied to the machine by the user.
Unlike ROM, the RAM chip does not retain information once the computer has been switched off.
The difference between ROM and RAM is rather like that between a printed book, which can only be read, and a personal notepad written in erasable ink, and which can be used over and over again.
3.
The Central Processor Unit is contained on a CPU chip, which controls all the calculating and coordinating functions of the computer.
4.
The Input/Output Interface contains one or more chips for handling signals between the computer and other devices, such as disk drives, printers and visual display units (VDU'S).
11.
A microcomputer is small in size, but powerful and flexible in operation.
Compared with a mainframe or a mini-computer, it is also vastly cheaper.
It offers users the chance to be self-sufficient  for all but their largest data processing operations.
Today there is sufficient software available (ie programs) to enable a microcomputer to perform most office functions reliably — for example, accounting, stock control, word processing etc).
The result is that people at work, whether as individuals or as work teams, are no longer dependent on a centralised data processing department based on a mainframe or mini-computer.
MICROELECTRONICS AND THE MICROPROCESSOR
12.
A microprocessor is basically an integrated circuit designed to carry out calculating and coordinating functions.
It can be considered to be the microelectronic equivalent of a mainframe's central processing unit (CPU).
The first microprocessor as such was produced commercially by Intel in the United States in 1971.
Its development has led to great advances in the miniaturisation of electronic components.
13.
This process began with the development of transistors in the 1950's.
Put simply, a transistor is a small, crystal-based component, which switches or amplifies small amounts of electric current between circuits.
This kind of component is much smaller and more reliable than a valve, which was the earliest form of electronic switch.
A valve, or vacuum tube, looks like a typical electric light bulb, it requires a large amount of power for its operation, generates a considerable amount of heat and is generally found to be unreliable in operation.
By comparison, a transistor is smaller, more robust and requires much less power.
14.
The biggest single leap in information technology, however, was the development in the 1960's of the first ‘integrated circuits’(IC's) in the United States.
Integrated circuits are so-called because they are manufactured as complete circuits.
These circuits are built up by creating microscopic layers of metal and other components on small wafers of silicon, or ‘chips’, using a special photographic technique known a photolithography.
These chips are the basis of modem electronics.
The end result of the process is an immensely complex circuit contained on a minute slice of silicon crystal less than ¼ inch in diameter and barely th inch thick, and all achieved at a very cheap price, custom-built chips excepted.
15.
Recently, methods have been devised of producing ever-more complex chips, and the modern trend is toward very large scale integration (VLSI) chips, on which there can be more than 10,000 components on a single chip.
16.
Most integrated circuits are what are called ‘general purpose chips’ with circuits designed to handle one or more major functions of the host device (eg microcomputer, washing-machine programmer etc).
There are currently three major classes of general purpose chips.
These are:
1)
Memory chips (for storing information)
2)
CPU chips (ie microprocessors)(for carrying out all the calculating and coordinating functions of a computer)
3)
Interface chips (for handling the input/output requirements of a system)
Such chips are designed for varied use and tend to be mass-produced.
They are usually extremely cheap.
17.
Some integrated circuits are known as ‘custom built chips’.
These are designed and manufactured according to the requirements of a particular order.
An example of a custom built chip might be one designed to monitor the pressure in some continuous process operation such as steelmaking or papermaking, where the processor would fit into a particular part of the host plant.
Such a chip is usually very expensive for the purchaser.
18.
The following diagram summarises the developments in electronic circuitry during this century (Fig. 30.2):
19.
The growth in the use of microcomputers in organizations means that people have become much less dependent on a central computer, which need only be used for large scale operations.
Organization wide activities such as payroll processing will continue to be run on the organization's mainframe, but most applications relating to individual departments can now be handled comfortably on a microcomputer.
If linking is required this can be achieved by creating networks of microcomputers linked to a mainframe or minicomputer, where necessary.
20.
Computers are not only employed as tools for use within organizations.
They can also be used for communications with the external world outside organizations.
The key link here is telecommunications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
21.
The term ‘telecommunications’ means transmitting information by means of electric cables (telephone and telegraph) or by means of radio waves.
Every nation in the world has some form of national network for transmitting information in these ways.
Telephone links, for example, are used by businesses everywhere as an essential part of their communication with colleagues and clients.
Because telephone links are based on electronics, they are an obvious resource to be used in the development of information technology.
22.
Unfortunately, there is one major drawback to the closer integration of telecommunications with computers and microelectronics — telephones work in analogue form, but computers use digital signals.
What this means is that telephones utilise variations in electrical current to mirror what is being fed into them, in this case the human voice.
An analogue display on an electronic wristwatch would show a typical watch face with minute and second hands.
Computers, by comparison, respond to signals that are in binary form, which means they are transmitted at two levels only.
Binary signals can only be transmitted as the equivalent to ‘on-off’, ‘yes-no’ and ‘0–1’, for example.
Binary signals are simpler than analogue signals and they can be transmitted much faster.
The size of a computer, ie its capacity to process information is expressed in terms of binary digits (‘bits’).
A bit is the smallest amount of information that a computer can store, ie 0 or 1.
In practice, a computer's capacity is expressed in ‘bytes’, which are units of measure comprising 8 bits.
23.
As information transmitted in binary form is so much faster than analogue signals, the full benefits of computer-based communication systems can only be gained when nations convert their existing telecommunications networks to digital operation.
This is currently being undertaken in Britain, which has the fourth largest telephone system in the world.
By the 1990's the whole network will be digitised.
This situation has given a further boost to the microelectronics industry, which now has the incentive to apply its research and development programmes to telecommunications.
24.
There are several developments which are enabling rapid change to take place in telecommunications.
These are:
a.
fibre-optics — a fibre-optic cable is a finely drawn strand of glass of some tenth of a millimetre in diameter, which is capable of sending high-speed pulses of light in binary form.
Telephone cables made of this material can transmit thousands more telephone calls than conventional copper cables.
b.
microwave transmissions although such waves are used in land-based systems, they are now being developed to operate from geostationary (fixed-orbit) satellites.
c.
infra-red systems — these presently enable items such as television sets to be remotely controlled, that is without wires.
Their future application is seen in terms of providing infra-red diffusers to act as cordless links between such machines as word-processors, telephones and computers, for example.
25.
Telecommunications play a crucial role in information technology.
Without them office communications would be entirely local, and the linking of office systems would be impossible.
Fortunately, telecommunication technology is developing almost as fast as silicon chip technology and is expected to be able to meet the demands that will be made on it by computers and microelectronics over the next few years.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN THE WORKPLACE
26.
The impact of microelectronics technology on work practices and procedures is considerable.
Slow, paper-based systems relying mainly on manual operations (eg typewritten reports and listings) are gradually being replaced by microelectronics-based systems relying mainly on telecommunications.
Particularly important areas of microelectronics' applications are to be found in:
a.
office automation
b.
industrial process control
c.
robotics
d.
computer-aided design and manufacture (CAD/CAM)
e.
worldwide electronic communication
f.
electronic funds transfer
g.
scientific measurement
h.
medical diagnosis
27.
The industrial applications are dealt with in Chapter 41 (New Technology in Manufacturing).
The other applications, especially  those relating to work carried out in offices will be considered in the remaining paragraphs.’
OFFICE AUTOMATION
28.
The prime purpose of an office is to collect and process relevant information, which is subsequently stored or despatched to appropriate persons.
Typical office activities include issuing invoices, handling purchases, dealing with customers’ orders, preparing accounts and statistics, processing the payroll and other routine activities.
Major activities of a non-routine type include the preparation and transmission of letters, memos, reports and various other documents.
29.
Already the computer has made a significant contribution to the processing of much of the routine data generated by office staff.
However, it is only within the last 10 years that it has become possible to process text electronically and thus improve the way non-routine information can be handled.
Electronic text-processors are called word-processors, and are joint products of the computer and the electric typewriter.
When we speak of the electronic office we are now referring to an administrative system based largely on computers, word processors and associated communication devices.
Diagrammatically, this can be expressed as in Figure 30.3.
WORD PROCESSORS
30.
Word-processors can be classified broadly into three categories as follows:
Stand-alones, or dedicated word-processors.
These are independent machines used exclusively for text-processing.
They comprise: keyboard, processor, memory, screen and printer.
Shared-logic, or shared-facility, systems.
These comprise a number of work-stations (keyboards and screens) connected to a central computer, which provides processing, storage and printing capabilities.
General-purpose microcomputers, utilising a word processing program.
Dedicated word-processors, which are currently the most popular category with users, have special keys for formatting commands in addition to the usual QWERTY keys and Function keys associated with computer keyboards.
31.
Benefits claimed from the use of word-processors include:
improved productivity in processing documents, reports, letters etc
increased job satisfaction among operators
improved quality and consistency of final output
staff savings (usually among copy typists)
ease of editing and manipulating text
ease of document recall from storage
ability to integrate the word-processor with office computers
32.
Disadvantages associated with the use of word-processors are as follows:
they inevitably require changes to both the physical layout of the office and to existing procedures
staff need time off-the-job to ensure adequate training
eye-strain can be caused by excessive periods spent in front of the screen
they may lead to staff redundancies
they may reduce the scope of certain jobs, for example of secretarial posts
OTHER OFFICE FACILITIES
33.
In addition to microcomputers and word-processors, the automated office will have one or more of the following facilities:
teletext
viewdata
electronic mail
34.
The main features of these three facilities are as follows:
Teletext — this is a system for supplying commercial and other data via existing television networks.
The system operates rather like an ‘electronic reference book’, whose data-filled pages can be read through by means of a hand-held signalling device pointed at, or linked to, a specially adapted television receiver.
In the United Kingdom there are two competing systems — Ceefax (BBC) and Oracle (ITV).
Viewdata — this is somewhat similar to teletext in that it provides an up-to-date reference source on commercial matters.
However, in contrast to teletext, the viewdata system is available only to subscribers and is an interactive system.
An interactive system enables users to interrogate the database and to supply information, as well as drawing from it.
The system is a combination of communication lines, accessed by telephone, computers (or terminals), and television.
In the UK the public system is called Prestel, and there are a number of private systems.
Electronic mail — this is a system for communicating messages by electronic rather than physical means.
One such system, telex, has been in use for many years.
The difference between telex and the newer systems being developed (eg facsimile transmission) is that the latter enable electronic mail to be passed to and from a terminal on an individual's desk, instead of to a separately-located telex machine in another office.
Recent improvements over the telex system include better editing facilities, more character sets, ability to send multiple letters as well as single letters, and, finally, the automatic filing of incoming and outgoing mail.
The new systems are gradually being integrated into the other leading office systems (computer networks, word-processors etc).
The latest developments in some offices include so-called ‘work-stations’ at each desk, comprising computer and word-processing facilities, electronic mail, and telephone facilities.
ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER
35.
Another fast-growing facility is ‘electronic funds transfer’.
This term describes the ability to effect cashless/paperless monetary exchanges by means of computers and telecommunications.
Banks and other financial institutions are already heavy users of electronic funds transfer, and it is likely to be widely adopted by businesses handling large number of cash transactions, as in the retail trade, for example.
EFFECTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN OFFICES
36.
The principal point about information technology is that it serves people rather than things.
Whereas robots, CNC machines and other industrial computers (see Chap.
41) serve materials and components, and data processing computers serve clerical systems, the new office technology serves Man's needs to communicate with his fellows.
The availability of a wide range of information sources and transmission media gives management and professional staffs, in particular, the ability to make informed decisions based on an up-to-date picture of a situation, and an awareness of alternative responses and their likely consequences.
Computers, for example, are now widely used to answer such questions as ‘What is likely to happen, if we decide to take option A?’
‘What is likely to be the result of changing X but not changing Y?’.
37.
In assessing the effects of information technology in offices, there are several perspectives to be considered:
the general implications (economic, social etc)
the implications for employees
the implications for employers
38.
The general implications of information technology in offices may be summarised as follows:
1.
investment in technology may lead to issues of work fragmentation, boredom, redundant skills and loss of job satisfaction
2.
office jobs will undergo significant changes
3.
fewer jobs may be required as routine work is taken over by machines
4.
the processing and transmission of information by offices will be speeded up considerably
5.
routine office work will become considerably more cost-effective 
6.
flexibility of services offered by offices can be greatly enhanced by the variety of equipment now available 7. international business communication will be readily accessible to even the smallest office
39.
The main implications for office employees include several disadvantages as well as benefits.
The principal advantages are:
Substantial savings on salaries due to fewer staff required
Relative cheapness of new technology (eg a word processor may cost £3,500 compared with £10,000 plus benefits for a secretary)
Substantial savings on overheads due to reduction in office space required as disk storage replaces filing cabinets etc
Speed of obtaining, processing, storing and retrieving information aids decision-making
Vastly improved productivity
Flexibility of working due to variety of equipment available, all or most of which can be operated by existing staff
Improved communications between individual executives and their offices.
CONCLUSION
41.
The availability of the new technology is likely to lead to two opposing tendencies in organizational behaviour.
Organizational structures will tend to favour decentralisation on account of the existence of powerful departmental computer facilities, whilst within offices the trend will be towards the integration of existing services, ie data processing, word processing, voice communication and electronic mail, along the lines suggested in Figure 30.3 in para 29 above.
In these circumstances it will be important for organizations to plan for such a future, so as to ensure that:
a.
facilities are compatible with one another, and
b.
that the inevitable human and organizational consequences can be dealt wisely, fairly and economically.
Notes on further reading.
Readers may find the following texts helpful in learning more about information technology:
1.
Birchall, D. & hammond , V. (1981) Tomorrow's Office Today.
Business Books.
2.
Eaton, J. & smithers , J. (1982) This is IT.
Philip Allan.
3.
APEX (1980) Automation and the Office Worker.
APEX.
4.
Kerridge, C. (1983) Microchip Technology.
J. Wiley & Sons.
SECTION SUMMARY — CONTROL IN MANAGEMENT
1.
The three chapters in this Section have looked briefly at the nature and methods of control, and some of the important techniques which aid control.
2.
Control means to establish standards of performance, measure performance against those standards, and take corrective action where required.
Key factors in control are:
a.
the ability to set clear and measurable standards,
b.
the need to ensure the relevance, timeliness and adequacy of information,
c.
the ‘management by exception’ principle, ie only take action if performance falls significantly against standards, and
d.
the importance of taking corrective action, when required.
3.
An essential feature of most control systems is feedback, ie information generated by the control process.
Feedback is usually produced from the results, or outputs, of the system.
4.
Important methods of control include budgetary control, break-even analysis, ratio analysis and Quality Control.
5.
Budgetary control.
A budget is a statement of desired performance (ie a standard to be achieved), usually expressed in financial terms.
A budgetary control system begins with business forecasts and the development of a sales budget; these are followed by the production budget, a capital expenditure budget, a cash budget and the various departmental budgets; finally these are all drawn up into one Master Budget; once in operation, period budget statements are produced to indicate performance against budget and the variances that have occurred-these variances provide the grounds for any necessary corrective action by management.
6.
Break-even analysis.
This form of analysis of performance is based on a chart, showing monetary values on the vertical axis and sales volume or production on the horizontal axis.
By charting in fixed and variable costs, and then showing revenue, it is possible to see the point at which total revenue equates with total costs ie the break-even point.
Break-even charts are relatively simple to produce, but this simplicity itself may lead to an over-simplified statement of a situation, and needs to be treated with some caution.
7.
Ratio analysis.
Financial ratios indicate the relationships between accounting figures.
Common ratios include those for profitability eg 
Non-financial ratios indicate the relationship between quantifiable pieces of information eg 
Ratios are primarily useful for their ability to indicate relative efficiency.
8.
Quality Control.
Quality Control is the term applied to a system of standards-setting, performance-measurement and action in relation to the quality of a product.
It rests on the assumption that it is possible to produce large quantities of almost identical items in a modem industrial process, and therefore it is possible to establish certain tolerances within which quality is acceptable, and outside which it is not acceptable.
Inspection is usually carried out on a sampling basis but 100% inspection is also common.
Some techniques, especially in mass-production use a combination of sampling and 100% inspection.
9.
Important techniques which aid the establishment of control systems are Network Analysis, Simulation and Inventory Control.
These techniques are often referred to as Operational Research, or Quantitative Techniques.
Their object is to make measurable data available to managers in the areas of decision-making, planning and control especially.
10.
Network Analysis.
This form of analysis is usually undertaken by the Critical Path Method (CPM) or the Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT).
The former is used widely in complex projects in the construction and manufacturing industries; the latter tends to be used in complex, one-off projects or in projects where time or cost are critical.
Both techniques utilise networks to plot events and activities in sequence, with the object of identifying the optimum linking between them (the critical path).
11.
Simulation.
This technique develops a conceptual model of a process, subjects it to a number of experiments and studies the results with the aim of eventually predicting how the model will behave under certain conditions.
It tends to be used for problems where probability is a key factor.
Probability is the quantification of uncertainty, where zero probability is represented by the figure 0 and complete certainty is represented by the figure 1.
Points in between these two are expressed as a decimal eg .5 for a one-in two chance.
Simulation has been used to predict population changes over a long period of time and for charting space-satellite trajectories.
The technique invariably involves the use of computers to handle the data.
12.
Inventory Control.
Inventory control is concerned with the control of an organization's idle resources in terms of raw materials, work-in-progress and finished goods, for example.
It aims to answer two basic questions: How much should be ordered and when?
Models of an inventory are developed, and subjected to various mathematical and statistical formulae, with the object of producing data to enable a considered answer to be given to the two questions mentioned.
13.
Information Technology (IT).
The advent of microelectronics has given a tremendous boost to Man's capacity to acquire, process, store and disseminate textual, numeric and other forms of information.
The three major elements of IT are: computers, microelectronics and telecommunication.
14.
Offices as centres of information — processing in organizations, are major beneficiaries of this new technology.
The most significant benefits arise from the use of microcomputers and word-processors to handle a wide range of data in conjunction with telephones and other telecommunication media.
15.
The overall benefits of IT lie in:
faster, more efficient processing and transmission of information
flexibility in office operations
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION /HOMEWORK
1.
What is the relationship between control and planning?
2.
Discuss the role of feedback in a control system.
3.
Write out a ‘code of good practice’ for an organization about to install a budgetary control system for the first time.
4.
Why do firms need to pay attention to quality control?
5.
In what ways can an Operational Research specialist contribute to the effectiveness of line managers?
6.
What do you see as the advantages and disadvantages of the use of the following in the handling of routine office-work:
a.
microcomputers?
b.
word-processors?
7.
How would you personally describe the term ‘electronic office’?
EXAMINATIONS — CONTROL IN MANAGEMENT
Questions on the control process in management are not among the most frequent questions in general management papers.
Two fairly typical questions on this topic are included below.
Outline answers may be found in Appendix 2.
EQ26
In defining the basic principles of management, textbooks often list Planning and Control as two separate and distinct functions.
How far can they be regarded as independent of one another?
(IOM Business Organization)
EQ 27
What are the basic steps in the Control process?
Identify and explain the key considerations in each step.
(IOB Nature of Mgt.)
FUNCTIONAL MANAGEMENT: MARKETING, PRODUCTION AND PERSONNEL
INTRODUCTION
1.
The chapters which follow in this final part of the Manual focus on the key features and activities of the three functional areas of management which are the most frequent subjects of examination questions: marketing, production and personnel management.
2.
The term ‘functional’ is used to indicate a specialist area of management.
Unlike the situation in our discussion of line, staff and functional authority in Chapter 21, these following chapters specifically do not refer to issues of authority, but only to the specialised role, or function, carried out by particular groups of employees, in this case in marketing, production or personnel departments.
This point of view is in line with a systems approach to organizations, where the distinction between line and staff functions is rather academic, since all functions contribute to the success of the enterprise.
Undoubtedly, certain functions, such as marketing and production, are of particular importance to business organizations, but they themselves rely heavily on other functions such as accounting and personnel in order to achieve their objectives.
3.
Each of the three functional areas is dealt with in terms of its salient features and its mainstream activities.
Enough information is given to provide the reader with a grasp of the essentials of each area.
MARKETING MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION
1.
Marketing is the one function of management which has to be more concerned with what is going on outside the organization than with what is happening internally.
Marketing activities are conducted mainly across the external boundaries of the organizational system, and they are undertaken by managers of all kinds, not only by marketing specialists.
2.
Marketing has been described in several different ways.
A cross-section of definitions, which have appeared over the past twenty years or so, is as follows.
a.
‘Marketing is a human activity directed at satisfying needs and wants through exchange processes.’
(P. Kotler — Marketing Management, 4th Edition, 1980)
This definition emphasises marketing as an issue of social and economic exchange.
b.
(Marketing is)…
‘The management function which organizes and directs all those business activities involved in assessing and converting customer purchasing power into effective demand for a specific product or services and moving the product or service to the final consumer so as to achieve the profit target or other objectives of the company.’
(Institute of Marketing, 1966)
This definition is distinctly action-centred and managerial in approach.
c.
(Marketing is)…‘the whole business seen from the point of view of its final result, that is from the customer's point of view.’
(P. Drucker, The Practice of Management, 1954)
This definition emphasises the concept of marketing and expresses a philosophical approach to marketing activities.
3.
The idea of the ‘marketing concept’ is taken up in Chapter 31, and is compared with other approaches to marketing.
The other chapters in the Section deal with those aspects of marketing, which are the most frequent topics of examination for non-marketing specialists.
These are: the marketing mix, market research and the organization of a marketing department.
THE MARKETING CONCEPT
1.
Every business or public organization has its market, that is to say the group of existing and potential buyers or users of its goods and services.
A market may consist of a mere handful of people (eg specialist collectors of a certain type of antique porcelain), or it may consist of millions (eg consumers of breakfast cereals).
Clearly, relationships with the market are an important ingredient of corporate planning and policy-making.
Organizations have developed several different ways of regarding their existing and potential customers.
The most notable options are as follows:
a.
Production orientation — in this situation, the organization concentrates its attention on production efficiency, distribution and cost in order to attract customers to its products.
This works well when demand is well ahead of supply, and where lower costs will encourage people to buy.
Japanese car manufacturers are examples of this kind of orientation.
b.
Product orientation — in this case the organization stands or falls by the quality of its products.
The thinking behind this orientation is that customers buy products or services rather than solutions to problems.
Examples of product orientation are to be found in education, the arts and journalism, where the inference often is that the supplier knows best what the customer needs.
c.
Sales orientation — here the dominant concept is that people will not buy until they are persuaded to buy by positive selling.
Thus the focus of attention is more on the skills of selling, than on the needs of the buyer.
Several life insurance companies have adopted this approach over the years.
d.
Market orientation-a market-orientated organization is one which focuses on the needs of its customers.
Its primary concern is to find out what its customers needs and wants are so as to meet them with the highest level of customer satisfaction.
In this situation production responds to the demands of marketing rather than the other way round.
This approach to marketing is called the ‘marketing concept’ and its perspective is radically different from the approaches of production, product and sales-orientated organizations.
Examples of market orientated attitudes can be found in some supermarket chains and in numbers of travel agency operations.
2.
The marketing concept takes the view that the most important stakeholders in the organization are the customers.
This does not necessarily mean that the customer is always right, but it does mean that the customer forms the starting point for the organization's corporate strategy.
Organizations that adopt the marketing concept also tend to see marketing as a very diffuse activity, shared by many, and not just the preserve of a specialist group called Marketing & sales .
This is a very important consideration, for, as we shall see shortly in the discussion of the marketing mix, there are certain key issues, such as pricing, which have to be considered and agreed on a shared basis.
3.
Reference was made earlier to customer needs and wants.
What are the differences between these two?
One way of distinguishing between them is to define needs as basic physical and psychological drives arising from being human (eg need for food, clothing, self-esteem etc), and to define wants as specific desires directed towards fulfilling the basic needs.
A need for food, for example, could be transformed into a specific desire (want) for curried chicken, or for bread-and-cheese or countless other variations of food.
The point is that human beings have relatively few needs, but can generate an enormous number of wants.
Not surprisingly, therefore, most marketing efforts concentrate predominantly on satisfying people's wants.
In addition to this, some marketing is directed specifically at creating or changing people's wants.
4.
The marketing role in an organization is carried out by numerous individuals.
In the first place all those senior managers and their advisers, contributing to the organization's corporate plan, are fulfilling, among other things, a definite marketing role ie examining the market-place and assessing the organization's ability to meet current and future demands on its resources.
Many middle managers also carry out a marketing role when dealing with issues relating to their public.
When a production manager for example, meets a customer to discuss a quality problem or a minor design change, he is fulfilling a marketing role; and so is a personnel manager when he negotiates an agreement with union representatives that a particular customer's goods may be moved from the premises during a strike.
Finally, there is the Marketing department.
Its staff are specifically charged with marketing duties — assessing customer wants, gathering market intelligence, obtaining customer reactions, organizing sales and distribution, for example.
The remaining chapters in this Section concentrate mainly on the activities of these Marketing specialists.
SUMMARY
5.
A market is a group of existing and potential buyers or users of a product or service.
6.
Organizations can have a number of different orientations towards their markets.
These are notably:
a.
Production orientation
b.
Product orientation
c.
Sales orientation
d.
Market orientation
7.
Organizations which have a market orientation are said to have adopted the ‘marketing concept’.
This implies that their organizational strategy commences by considering the needs and wants of the customers.
It also implies that marketing is an activity carried out by numerous people in the organization, and not just by those called marketing/sales personnel.
8.
A distinction was made between needs and wants.
Needs refer to basic physical and psychological drives.
Wants are the specific desires that people seek to gratify in fulfilling their basic needs.
Needs are few, but wants are many.
THE MARKETING MIX: PRODUCT AND PRICE
INTRODUCTION
1.
A vital element in every marketing strategy is the marketing mix.
The concept was first expounded by Professor Neil Borden of Harvard University in the 1940's, when he identified twelve key variables in the typical marketing programme.
These twelve variables have subsequently been reduced to four main headings by later writers.
The mix may now be defined as ‘the particular group of variables offered to the market at a particular point in time.’
These variables are principally (1) product,(2) price,(3) promotion and (4) distribution.
Each of these can be further sub-divided as illustrated in Figure 32.1 below.
2.
The marketing mix as illustrated above is the central part of an organization's marketing tactics.
Once the market situation (customers, competitors, suppliers, middlemen etc) has been identified and evaluated, and once the decision has been made to penetrate, or develop, a particular market, then the role of the marketing mix is crucial.
This role will be amplified in the rest of this chapter, and in Chapters 33–34.
3.
Before moving on to consider the different variables, the question of timing should not be overlooked.
The element of time is a vital factor in assessing the particular mix to be offered to a market.
Any market situation can change rapidly over even a short period of time, as can be the case when a major competitor is suddenly declared bankrupt.
By using the marketing mix as a tactical tool of an organization's marketing plans, it is possible to adapt speedily and profitably to changes in the marketing environment.
Thus the development of the mix to meet conditions at a particular point or period in time is essentially a contingency approach to marketing management.
PRODUCT
4.
Any discussion about the marketing mix must begin with the product.
The ‘product’, in this context, means anything that is offered to a market for its use or consumption.
The product can be a physical object or a service of some kind.
The product offered by a manufacturer consists of physical items, such as machine tools, television sets, loaves of bread or cosmetics.
Products offered by service industries include hospital care, dental treatment, holiday arrangements and accountancy services, for example.
5.
The range of products offered by an organization is called the product mix.
Since most, if not all, of the organization's revenue is going to be obtained from the sale of its products, it is clearly important that the range and quality of the product mix is frequently evaluated and amended.
Examples of a product mix are as follows:
a.
Motor ear manufacturer-cheap basic family runabouts, medium-priced family saloons estate cars, executive saloons, and sports cars.
Within most of these product lines, various other refinements can be offered eg two-door and four-door versions of the family saloons, hatchbacks as an alternative to the estate models, variations in engine sizes, and, of course, a range of colours.
b.
District hospital — surgical and medical services, diagnostic services, para-medical services, pre-natal advice and others.
Within each of the major ‘product lines’ various alternative services are offered eg general surgical, accident services, coronary care, X-radiography, physiotherapy, pre-natal classes and so on.
6.
In considering products, it is important to note that people generally want to acquire the benefits of the product, rather than its features.
For example, in buying a motor car a person is buying such things as luxury or speed or economy or status.
The fact that these benefits are achieved by differences in engine size, suspension design or paintwork is really of secondary interest.
Similarly, the reason why we want hospitals is for such aims as the preservation of life or the improvement of health or peace of mind.
Whether these things are achieved by surgery, or by drugs, or by nursing care, or by modern diagnostic apparatus is, for many people, a matter of secondary importance.
7.
If we agree that customers are buying the benefits of a product, then equally organizations are selling the benefits of that product.
The selling effort is not just confined to the Promotion element in the marketing mix.
It begins by being designed into the product itself.
So, for example, the very existence of a product range is, in itself, a selling point for a product.
The same consideration applies to other aspects of the product, such as quality, brand, packaging and after-sales service, where applicable.
Where quality is designed into a product, the benefits can be long product life, absence of faults and subsequent breakdowns, reliability, increase in value and many others.
However, product quality may not be sought after at all.
For example, the benefits of disposable goods are immediate and one-off.
Such goods do not need to be durable or aesthetic, so long as they are hygienic and functional.
Practically every airline traveller in the world has been introduced to plastic cutlery, and every nurse in training has been introduced to disposable syringes.
Thus product quality may be high or low, depending on the wants or preferences of the market, and part of an organization's product strategy is to decide the level of quality to be aimed at.
8.
One important method used to sell benefits is by branding products.
This means applying the organization's ‘signature’ to its product by the use of special names, signs or symbols.
Branding has grown enormously during this century, and there is hardly a product in the Western world which does not have a brand name or designation of some kind.
Famous brand names include Coca Cola, Biro and Hoover, all of which have become synonymous with certain categories of products, whether produced by them or by their competitors.
A ball-point pen is a ‘biro’ to many people, regardless of whether it is a Biro, or a Parker, or a Papermate, for example.
In Britain, the Marks & spencer company market their products under the brand-name of St. Michael.
These products are manufactured by  other reputable companies to a standard approved by Marks and Spencer and sold under the St. Michael label.
By comparison, other retailers, such as Boots, John Lewis, and Sainsbury's market some goods under their own branding and some under the manufacturers label.
Branding also occurs in certain consumer services, such as transport — Blue Riband, Economy, Four Star, Ambassador are all titles that are, or have been, used to differentiate between levels of service.
In general, branding is a feature of consumer products.
It is far less common in industrial products.
9.
Packaging is an important factor in the presentation of a product to the market.
Not only does packaging provide protection for the product, but it can also reinforce the brand image and the point-of-sale attraction to the buyer.
The protective aspect of packaging is vital in respect of items such as foodstuffs, dangerous liquids and delicate pieces of machinery.
Goods such as soft toys and items of clothing may not need such protection, but here other considerations apply, such as the appearance of the goods on the shelf, or the possibility of seeing the contents through the packaging.
Other aspects of packaging may emphasise the convenience of the pack, as for example in cigarette packets which may be opened and reopened several times, or beer cans, which can be opened safely by pulling a ring.
10.
Some products are sold with a very strong emphasis on after sales service, warranties, guarantees, technical advice and similar benefits.
Mail-order firms invariably have an arrangement whereby, if customers are not satisfied with the goods received, they may return them at the firm's expense without any questions being raised.
Computer suppliers frequently provide customer training as an integral part of their total product package.
Car retailers sell vehicles with various kinds of warranties concerning replacement of faulty parts at the suppliers expense.
This facility applies as much, if not more to industrial and commercial buyers as it does to individual consumers.
In recent years the growth of ‘consumerism’ or consumer protection lobbies has led to many organizations taking action to improve the service to the customer after the sale has been concluded.
11.
Emphasis on the make-up of the product is not only vital because of the need to sell benefits to potential customers, but also to take account of another key factor ie the ‘product life cycle’.
Studies have shown that most products pass through a series of stages — their life-cycle — from the time they are introduced until the time they are withdrawn.
A product will typically pass through five major stages in its life.
These are shown in the diagram below (Figure 32.2).
12.
The consequences of these stages of the product life cycle are as follows:
Introduction
Costs are high (because they include the development costs), sales and profits are low.
Few competitors.
Price relatively high.
Growth
Sales rise rapidly.
Profits at peak level.
Price softens.
Increasing competition.
Unit costs decline.
Mass market appears.
Maturity
Sales continue to rise, but more slowly.
Profits level off.
Competition at its peak.
Prices soften further.
Mass market.
Saturation
Sales stagnate.
Profits shrink.
Measures taken against remaining competition.
Prices fiercely competitive.
Mass market begins to evaporate.
Decline
Sales decline permanently.
Profits low or even zero.
Product is withdrawn from the market.
13.
The total length of time over which a product may decline depends on a variety of factors, such as its relevance to basic needs, its adaptability in the light of economic trends and whether it is the focus of short-term fads or of longer-lasting fashions.
A basic foodstuff, such as the common loaf of bread or a packet of ground coffee, will have a relatively long life cycle.
Conversely, in an economy where energy costs are high and fuel conservation is the fashion, the expensive motor car with a high petrol consumption  will tend to have a short life cycle, but the economy car will continue for years.
Fads breed products with a short life-cycle, such as pop records and other leisure items; fashions tend to develop or reappear over the course of years, and the products which follow them tend to have a relatively long life-cycle.
In Britain the fashion for home ownership has developed gradually over three or four decades.
Alongside this development have appeared key products such as estate agents services and mortgage facilities, which have established themselves firmly over the same period.
14.
Taking into account the various stages of the product life-cycle and the period of time concerned, it is possible to plan the product mix, plan the development and introduction of new products, plan the withdrawal of obsolete or unprofitable products, and set the revenue targets for each product within the total range.
If the current position of any one product is plotted correctly on its life-cycle, then it is possible to assess the potential growth of sales, or the degree to which prices should be allowed to soften in order to maintain the market share, or whether the product should be superseded by another.
Thus the concept of the product life cycle makes an important contribution to forecasting of sales and planning of products.
PRICE
15.
If product is the most important single element in the marketing mix, then price is usually next.
Price is important because it is the only element of the mix which produces revenue; the others all represent costs.
Sellers have to gear prices to a number of key factors, such as:
a.
the costs of production (and development),
b.
the ability to generate sufficient revenue and/or profits,
c.
the desired market share for the product,
d.
the prices being offered by the competition.
16.
Price is especially important at certain times.
For example:
a.
when introducing new products
b.
when placing existing products into new markets
c.
during periods of rising costs of production
d.
when competitors change their price structure
e.
when competitors change other elements in their marketing mix (eg improving quality or adding features without increasing prices)
f.
when balancing prices between individual products in a product line.
17.
When a new product is introduced, such as a video-cassette recorder or a home computer, the price tends to be high on account of the initial development and marketing costs.
This sort of product tends to be directed, initially, to higher-income groups or specialist interest groups.
As the product begins to attract increasing sales, and initial costs begin to be covered, then prices can be reduced and production volume stepped up.
However, it is also possible to introduce a product with a very low price in order to obtain a foothold in a new market, or an increased share of an existing market.
A bargain price may well attract considerable sales and at the same time discourage competitors.
The cheap trans-Atlantic air travel pioneered by Laker Airways is an example of this kind of market penetration.
The danger is, of course, that the price may be so low that the business fails to generate sufficient revenue to cover its operating and/or capital costs.
18.
Few products stand still in terms of their costs.
Labour costs increase from year to year, materials costs and energy costs may be subject to less regular, but sharper, increases; interest rates may be extremely variable, and hence the cost of financing products fluctuates.
Many costs can be offset by productivity savings.
Therefore, the costs which are the most crucial are those which represent sudden and massive increases, which cannot be absorbed by improving productivity.
In this situation price increases are practically inevitable, and the question is ‘by how much should we increase them?’.
In certain situations, it may be possible to gain a temporary advantage over competitors by raising prices by the lowest possible margin, and offering some other advantage such as improved after-sales service or credit terms.
Examples of this kind of approach are common in the motor car retail trade in times of low demand, when one-year warranties are extended to two years, and interest-free credit may be offered for a limited period.
19.
The activities of competitors have an important bearing on pricing decisions.
The most obvious example is when a competitor raises or lowers his prices.
If your product can offer no particular advantages over his, then if he drops his price, you will have to follow suit.
If, on the other hand, you can offer other advantages in your marketing mix, there may be no pressure at all to reduce your price.
If a competitor raises his price, perhaps because of rising costs, it may be possible to hold yours steady, provided you can contain your own rising costs.
Pricing is a very flexible element in the marketing mix and enables firms to react swiftly to competitive behaviour.
20.
Competitors may throw out a challenge by improving the product and offering a better distribution service, for example.
This kind of behaviour, too, can be countered by price changes — in this case by easing prices and/or improving credit terms.
Much will depend on the sensitivity of the market to price changes.
If price is the dominant issue for buyers, then they will prefer lower price to slightly higher quality or improved distribution arrangements.
If price is not the major factor in the buyer's analysis, then marginal extra quality and delivery terms may prove the more attractive.
21.
Finally, price is important in determining the relative standing of one product or product line vis-a-vis another within the product mix.
This issue applies particularly in highly differentiated products in the consumer area.
It is important, for example, that a motor car manufacturer establishes appropriate differentials between different models within a product-line eg between 1100cc and 1300cc models, between 2-door and 4-door versions, and between these and estate car versions.
If 1100 cc models are selling well but 1300 cc models are not, it may be in the seller's interests to reduce the differential so as to attract more buyers to the 1300 cc models.
Otherwise a reasonable differential will be expected in order to justify the enhanced engine rating of the larger model.
22.
The concept of a loss leader is often applied to internal price differentials.
This means that one product in a line is reduced to below-cost levels with the aim of attracting attention to the product line or range as a whole.
So, for example, a new fibre-tipped pen, in a range of such pens offered by a newcomer to the market, may be sold at a loss in order to draw attention to the range as a whole, and to establish a share of the total market.
Loss leaders naturally represent very good value for money to the buyer, and can be a very useful way of establishing a range in the market-place.
THE MARKETING MIX: PROMOTION
INTRODUCTION
1.
Every product needs to be promoted, that is to say it needs to be drawn to the attention of the market-place, and its benefits identified.
The principal methods of promotion are: advertising, personal selling, sales promotion and publicity.
It is in these areas that Marketing departments come into their own.
They provide the bulk of the expertise, and carry the biggest amount of responsibility, in respect of these aspects of the marketing mix.
Each of these methods will be looked at shortly.
2.
The aim of an organization's promotional strategy is to bring existing or potential customers from a state of relative unawareness of the organization's products, to a state of actively adopting them.
Several different stages of customer behaviour have been identified.
These have been described in several different ways, but in summary can be stated as follows:
Stage 1
Unawareness of product
Stage 2
Awareness of product
Stage 3
Interest in product
Stage 4
Desire for product
Stage 5
Conviction about value of product
Stage 6
Adoption/Purchase of product
3.
The four different methods of promotion mentioned above are applied, where appropriate, to each of the stages of customer behaviour.
Advertising and publicity have the broadest applications, since they can affect every stage.
Personal selling and sales promotion activities, by contrast, tend to be more effective from Stage 3 onwards.
4.
Before describing each of the methods in greater detail, one further point can be made about them as a whole.
This is that they have a different emphasis according to whether they are being applied to consumer markets or industrial markets.
For example, whilst advertising is very important in reaching out to consumer markets, it is of relatively little significance to industrial markets, where personal selling is the most popular method.
Publicity and  sales promotion activities appear to rank equally between both types of market.
ADVERTISING
5.
Advertising is the process of communicating persuasive information about a product to target markets by means of the written and spoken word, and by visual material.
By definition the process excludes personal selling.
There are five principal media of advertising as follows:
a.
the press — newspapers, magazines, journals etc
b.
commercial television
c.
direct mail
d.
commercial radio
e.
outdoor — hoardings, transport advertisements etc
6.
By far the most important medium, in terms of total expenditure on advertising and sales promotion, is the press.
In Britain this has averaged about 70% in recent years.
The second most important medium is commercial television, which has consistently maintained about 25% of the total.
7.
Whatever the medium a number of questions must be decided about an organization's advertising effort.
These are basically as follows:
a.
How much should be spent on advertising?
b.
What message do we want to put across?
c.
What are the best media for our purposes?
d.
When should we time our advertisements?
e.
How can we monitor advertising effectiveness?
ADVERTISING EXPENDITURE
8.
Decisions about advertising expenditure will usually be made in conjunction with assessments about the position of the product in its life-cycle.
If the product is at the introductory stage, a considerable amount of resources will be put into advertising.
Conversely, if the product is in decline little or no expenditure on advertising will be permitted.
If the product is at the saturation stage, advertising may well be used to score points off the competition eg ‘our vehicle does more miles per gallon than theirs (naming specific competing models).’
9.
There are various options open to an organization in deciding how much to spend on advertising its products.
It could decide to adopt a ‘percentage-of-sale.’ approach, where advertising  expenditure is related to sales revenue.
This has the advantage of relating expenditure to sales, but it discourages innovative approaches to advertising expenditure and does not allow for distinctions to be made between products or sales territories.
It is a relatively crude way of allocating such expenditure.
10.
Another approach to advertising expenditure is to base it on what the competition is spending.
Organizations such as Media Expenditure and Advertising Ltd. in the UK provide regular information on media expenditure for subscribers, and other sources provide information on other key facts such as competitors' market share.
The important point to note about this approach is that it is vital to compare like with like, otherwise the value of the exercise is rather wasted.
11.
The sales-task approach to advertising expenditure can be particularly useful in situations where it is possible to state clearly defined objectives for advertising eg ‘to increase awareness of product X in Y market from present levels to (say) 70%.’
This approach has the merit of allocating advertising expenditure to specific targets, but relies heavily on the organization's ability to define its objectives realistically.
THE ADVERTISING MESSAGE
12.
Probably the most important aspect of any advertising campaign is the decision about what to say to prospective customers, and how to say it.
This is the message which aims to make people aware of the product and favourably inclined towards it.
Advertising copy (ie the text) also aims to make people desire the product.
The entire process is the fundamental one of turning customer needs into customer wants.
13.
Advertising aims to achieve on or more of the following:
a.
increase customer familiarity with a product (or variations of it eg brand, product-range etc)
b.
inform customers about specific features of a product
c.
inform customers about the key benefits of a product
d.
indicate distinctive features and/or benefits of a product (implicitly or explicitly by comparison with competing product).
e.
establish the credibility of a product
f.
encourage potential customers to buy the product
g.
maintain loyalty of existing customers.
In setting out to achieve such aims, an advertiser usually has to abide by a number of laws and codes of practice.
Most countries  exert some degree of State control over the content and form of advertising.
Issues such as obscenity, blasphemy, racial prejudice and sheer misrepresentation figure high on the list of proscriptions.
14.
The content of an advertisement should not, therefore, contain anything offensive to particular groups in society; nor should it contain information or suggestions which are misleading.
Most advertisements tend to select one or two features of their products for treatment and aim to sell the benefits of these.
In some cases, no specific product is mentioned, but a key aspect of the organization's marketing policy is referred to eg ‘We'll Take More Care of You…’ or ‘Shop at X, where the customer comes first…
’ One way of drawing attention to a firm, or a brand, in general terms is to develop a symbol, or logo, by which everyone can recognise it.
Well-known logos in the UK include those for ICI, Philips, and Lloyd's Bank (firms) and for Guinness, Anchor Butter and Birds Eye (specific products or brands).
15.
What is the best way of putting a message across?
This is an important question at this stage.
The content and the form of the advertisement have been dealt with, and now the key point is to get the message over to the customers.
The choice of media depends on the organization's requirements in terms of:
a.
the extent of coverage sought to reach customers
b.
the frequency of exposure to the message
c.
the effectiveness of the advertisement ie is it making a relevant impact?
d.
the timing of the advertisement
e.
the costs involved
16.
If wide coverage is sought (eg for a new Do-it-Yourself product or a new consumer banking service), then a television advertisement put out at a peak viewing time would be the most effective.
However, cost would preclude very frequent advertising via this particular medium, so for frequency of exposure it would be preferable to consider hoardings and transport advertisements (eg as with the famous Guinness advertisements).
For effectiveness, then, magazines and journals tend to reach the most relevant markets, provided they are selected carefully in the first place.
For example, advertisements for camping enthusiasts will tend to produce better results in camping magazines than in national newspapers or magazines aimed at other interest groups, such as collectors of antique furniture.
One of the problems with magazine advertisements, however, is their relatively long lead  time before an advertisement appears.
Newspapers are better media on this score.
Direct mail scores high on relevance ie it can be directed very specifically at certain markets, but because of the personnel costs, it can be expensive.
In the final analysis, organizations have to weigh up the anticipated benefits of particular media against the costs involved.
This brings us on to the question of how do organizations assess the effectiveness of their advertising?
ADVERTISING EFFECTIVENESS
17.
There are two main ways of looking at the question of advertising effectiveness — the first is to consider the results of the advertising in achieving target improvements in specific tasks eg increasing brand awareness in a specific market; the second is to consider the impact of advertising on sales generally.
It is extremely difficult to assess the impact of advertising on sales as a whole, because so many other factors, internal and external, are at work in the marketing process of an organization.
It is easier to assess the impact of specific advertising campaigns on sales in specific product areas.
18.
The evaluation aspect of advertising is an element of marketing which is remarkably short of measurement devices.
The limited aids that are available are as follows:
a.
Television audience measurement figures
b.
Information on the circulation figures for printed media
c.
Information concerning the readership of newspapers and periodicals
d.
Information on specific campaigns obtained by interviews and/or questionnaires
The value of items (a)—(c) is restricted to quantifying or qualifying the market.
They do not provide information about the effects of advertising, but point the way to relevant markets.
Item (d) offers more genuine guidance about the effects of advertising.
After a new series of newspaper advertisements, for example, a firm can test a sample of the readership to ascertain how many readers noticed the advertisement, how many recalled what it said and how many had actually bought the product since reading it.
19.
Like any other aspect of management, if marketing activities can be made measurable, then it is much easier to assess their effectiveness in achieving their objectives.
If they cannot be measured with any degree of objectivity, then effectiveness can only be judged in an incomplete way.
At present the assessment of advertising effectiveness falls into the latter category.
PERSONAL SELLING
20.
However vivid the message put over by advertising, there is no substitute for the final face-to-face meeting between the buyer and the seller or his representative.
Advertising creates the interest and the desire, but personal selling clinches the deal.
In industrial markets, as was noted earlier, personal selling plays an even more extensive role.
For the moment.
let us consider the basic sales process.
This is generally understood to mean:
a.
establishing customer contact
b.
arousing interest in the product
c.
creating a preference for product
d.
making a proposal for a sale
e.
closing the sale
f.
retaining the business
21.
So far as consumer markets, and especially mass markets, are concerned, advertising must play a vital role in the first three stages of the process.
After that, advertising becomes rapidly less important, and personal selling takes over.
By comparison, advertising plays a much less important role in industrial markets, where even the first stage is dominated by personal selling.
22.
Personal selling is the most expensive form of promotion.
This is reflected in the marketing statistics, which show for example, that in the United States in 1976 about $100 billion were spent on personal selling compared with $33 billion on advertising.
Such personal selling ranges from the mere taking of an order in a shop or a sales office, to the creation of new sales in a highly competitive market.
Companies which utilize an aggressive sales policy, based on personal selling, are said to be adopting a push strategy.
By comparison firms which rely more heavily on advertising are described as adopting a pull strategy.
23.
The tasks of a sales representative, except in the routine order-taking role, include other duties than making sales.
These other duties can comprise:
a.
after-sales servicing (dealing with technical queries, delivery matters etc)
b.
gathering information (feedback on customer reactions, competitors' activities etc)
c.
communicating regular information to customers and prospective buyers (new catalogues etc)
d.
prospecting (looking out for new selling opportunities)
24.
In order to fulfil these duties a sales representative needs to have relevant information about:
a.
his own organization (Customer policies, resources available, organization structure etc)
b.
the products on offer (goods, services, ranges etc)
c.
sales and profit targets
d.
customers (size, type, location etc)
e.
sales plan for his territory
f.
promotional material (brochures, catalogues etc)
g.
techniques of selling (creating interest, dealing with objections, closing a sale etc)
25.
Whilst many organizations still see the prime role of the sales representative as that of generating sales, there is an increasing trend which sees the representative in a wider marketing role, which emphasises the profit responsibility of the position.
If sales are pursued regardless of costs and other limiting factors, such as reputation, the value of the sales volume obtained can be severely reduced, if costs have been excessive and/or the organization's image has been tarnished by over-zealous representatives.
If, on the other hand, representatives are trained to put themselves in their customers' shoes ie develop a market-orientated approach, they are less likely to put immediate sales gains before the prospect of much larger market opportunities in the future.
This, of course, assumes that they are rewarded on this basis as well .
In a sales-orientated approach the sales representative is focussing on his needs as a seller.
By comparison, a market-orientated approach to selling concentrates on the needs of the buyer.
26.
In organizing their sales force, organizations usually have three basic options open to them:
a.
they can organize their representatives on a geographical, or territory, basis
b.
they can organize on a product basis (eg where high technology products are involved)
c.
they can organize on a customer basis
The most frequent option is (a), and in some cases (a) plus one of the others.
A territory is normally allocated on the basis of workload and/or potential sales.
The aim is to ensure a fair balance of work and earnings potential amongst the representatives.
The use of territories helps to reduce the costs of travel, accommodation and related expenses, and also eases some of the administrative burdens of controlling the sales-force.
Where the product provides the basis for allocating work, there are advantages in having specialist sales representatives who can deal with technical as well as general queries (eg as in computer sales).
The main disadvantage is that there is a possibility, with large customers in particular, that several different representatives from the organization will each be calling on the same customer.
This increases sales costs considerably, and may possibly outweigh the advantage of specialist representation.
Sales-forces organized on a customer basis have the advantage of a thorough knowledge of their customers' needs and sales records.
They are thus in a good position to forecast potential needs as well.
The drawback, as in the case of product centred sales-forces, is that of overlapping — in this case an overlapping of sales journeys.
Here again organizations have to weigh up the relative gains of this approach against the extra costs.
27.
The effectiveness of sales representatives can be measured in a number of different ways.
Typical evaluation criteria include:
a.
Net sales achieved (per product, per customer etc)
b.
Call rate (number of calls in a given period)
c.
Value of sales per call
d.
Number of new sales/new customers (compared with colleagues or with last year's figures)
e.
Sales expenses in proportion to sales achieved.
In the total marketing effort of the organization, there are, of course, other activities than sales, and the performance of the sales-force cannot be taken in isolation.
As was noted at the beginning of this chapter, personal selling is one part of the promotional activities of the organization, which brings us on to a consideration of the next item: sales promotion activities.
SALES PROMOTION
28.
Sales promotion activities are a form of indirect advertising designed to stimulate sales mainly by the use of incentives.
Sales promotion is sometimes called ‘below-the-line advertising’ in contrast with above-the-line expenditure which is handled by an external advertising agency.
Sales promotion activities are organized and funded by the organization's own resources.
They can take a number of different forms, as, for example:
Promotions directed at consumers
Free samples
Twin-pack bargains (two for the price of one)
Temporary price reductions
Point-of-sale demonstrations
Promotions directed at trade customers
Special discounts
Cooperative advertising
Bonus/prizes for sales representatives
Provision of display material
29.
Reference was made earlier to ‘push’ and ‘pull’strategies.
Sales promotion falls into the first category.
It aims to push sales by offering various incentives at, or associated with, the point-of-sale.
Its use is most frequent in the field of consumer products.
The objectives of a promotion directed at consumers could be to:
a.
draw attention to a new product or line
b.
encourage sales of slow-moving items
c.
stimulate off-peak sales of selected items
d.
achieve higher levels of customer acceptance/usage of a product or product-line
Objectives for a trade-orientated promotion could be to:
a.
encourage dealer/retailer cooperation in pushing particular lines
b.
persuade dealers/retailers to devote increased shelf space to organization's products
c.
develop goodwill of dealers/retailers
30.
The evaluation of a sales promotion is never a clear-cut matter, mainly on account of other variables in the overall marketing mix.
The most popular method of evaluation is to measure sales and/or market share before, during and after the promotion period.
The ideal result is one which shows a significant increase during the promotion, and a sustained, if somewhat smaller increase after the promotion.
Other methods of evaluation could include interviewing a sample of consumers in the target market (eg to check if they had seen the promotion, changed their buying habits etc), and checking on dealers' stock-levels, shelf-space etc.
PUBLICITY
31.
Publicity differs from the other promotional devices mentioned in this chapter in that it often does not cost the  organization any money!
Publicity is news about the organization or its products reported in the press and other media without charge to the organization.
Of course, although the publicity itself may be free, there are obvious costs in setting up a publicity programme, but, pound for pound, these are considerably lower than for advertising, for example .
Publicity usually comes under the heading of public relations, which is concerned with the mutual understanding between an organization and its public.
In recent years several European football clubs have experienced acute problems of crowd behaviour at matches.
One way of reassuring the thousands of well-behaved fans, who might well be turned away for ever, is to back up disciplinary action with a publicity campaign aimed at showing the better side of club football.
Such a campaign could include articles and press releases about improvements in accommodation, the development of the Supporters Club and other club matters.
It could also involve talks to youth groups and others by both players and staff.
32.
Sponsorship events in the arts and sports are becoming an increasingly popular form of publicity.
Concerts, both live and recorded, have been promoted jointly by the musical interests concerned and by industrial and commercial interests.
Athletics meetings, tennis tournaments and horse-races have all been the subject of sponsorship.
Again, although the publicity itself is free the costs of sponsorship are not.
Nevertheless, such activities can contribute significantly to an organization's public image.
Organizations which are selling products that are the target of health or conservationist lobbies are often to be found sponsoring activities such as sporting events and animal welfare campaigns.
33.
A final method of obtaining publicity, and one of the most costly, is by donating substantial sums of money towards an academic or research institution.
In some cases the organization's name is included in the title of the project or position etc (eg as in the XYZ Chair of Industrial Relations at X University).
Thus patronage of sports, the arts and learning are all useful means of gaining publicity in a manner which casts a favourable light on the organization, and, ultimately, on its products.
SUMMARY
34.
This chapter has been concerned with outlining the principal methods by which suppliers of products bring their goods and services to the attention of their markets, with the object of increasing their sales or market share, or both.
The most widely used methods are those of advertising and personal selling.
Advertising aims to attract attention and subsequent purchases by means of persuasively communicating product information via the media (the press, radio and television, direct mail and outdoor posters).
Personal selling involves the use of face-to-face exchanges to achieve the same ends of attracting attention and achieving sales.
Advertising is of greatest importance in consumer markets, while personal selling is the most popular method in serving industrial markets.
35.
The two other methods included in the chapter were sales promotion activities and publicity.
Sales promotion supports other sales efforts by providing incentives to both consumers and traders at the point-of-sale.
Publicity is the free media coverage obtained by the reporting of the organization's activities/products in news items in the press and other media.
Publicity provides a useful way of gaining a favourable public image for the organization and its products.
THE MARKETING MIX: DISTRIBUTION
INTRODUCTION
1.
Having looked at three major elements in the marketing mix product, price and promotion — we can now turn to the fourth, and last, element: distribution.
As the Institute of Marketing definition said earlier, one of the key functions of marketing is ‘moving the product or service to the final consumer…
’ This is the purpose of distribution.
2.
Distribution is primarily concerned with (a) channels of distribution, and (b) physical distribution.
We shall look at these in turn, commencing with channels of distribution.
These channels are the marketing institutions which facilitate the movement of goods and services from their point of production to their point of consumption.
Some channels are direct, as when a computer firm sells its products direct to the users.
Others, the majority, are indirect.
This means that there are a number of intermediaries between original producer and eventual buyer, as in the case of the box of foreign-made chocolates bought at a local retailer by a housewife.
3.
The choice of channels utilised by a producer is determined ultimately by the customer, and in recent years there has been a trend towards shorter channels, as customers, especially in consumer markets, realise that there are price advantages to be gained when middlemen, or retailers, are by-passed in the chain of distribution.
Thus direct mail, cash and carry, and ‘pick your own’(fruit, vegetables etc) operations are increasing in response to consumer interest in this approach.
4.
What are the most common channels of distribution, and what role is played by the various intermediaries in them?
Figure 34.1 opposite illustrates the channel options, which are now described in greater detail.
5.
Channel A represents a direct marketing channel.
This is to be found more in industrial markets than in consumer markets.
Manufacturers of goods such as machine tools, computers, ships and other large or expensive items tend to move them direct to the buyer without involving middlemen or intermediaries.
However, this practice is becoming more frequent in consumer markets as well.
For example, in mail order operations and in door-to-door selling (eg cosmetics, household wares and double glazing).
The reasons for direct channels are basically as follows:
Industrial markets — Relatively small number of customers; need for technical advice and support after the sale; possible lengthy negotiations on price between manufacturer and customer, dialogue required where product is to be custom built.
Consumer markets — Lower costs incurred in moving product to consumer can lead to lower prices in comparison with other channels; manufacturers can exercise greater control over their sales effort when not relying on middlemen.
6.
Channel B represents the typical chain for mass-marketed consumer goods.
Manufacturers selling a wide range of products over a wide geographical area to a market numbered in millions would find it prohibitively expensive to set up their own Highstreet stores, even if they were permitted to proliferate in this way.
For such manufacturers (eg of foodstuffs, confectionery, footwear, clothing and soaps, to name but a few), middlemen are important links in the chain.
Wholesalers, for example, buy in bulk from the manufacturers, store the goods, break them down into smaller quantities, undertake advertising and promotional activities, deliver to other traders, usually retailers, and arrange credit and other services for them.
Their role is important to both manufacturer and retailer.
The role of the latter is to make products available at the point-of-sale.
Individual consumers need accessibility and convenience from their local sources of consumable products.
They also need to see what is available, and what alternatives are offered.
A retail store, whether owned by an independent trader or a huge supermarket chain, offers various advantages to consumers: stocks of items, displays of goods, opportunity to buy in small quantities, and convenient access to these services.
So far as manufacturers and wholesalers are concerned the retailer is, above all, an outlet for their products, and an important source of market intelligence concerning customer buying habits and preferences.
7.
Channel C represents one of the shorter indirect channels, where the retailer is omitted.
This kind of operation can be found in mail-order businesses, and in cash-and-carry outlets.
The former are usually composed of the larger mail-order firms, offering a very wide range of goods (and some services, too).
They buy from manufacturers, store and subsequently distribute direct to customers on a nation-wide basis.
Their ability to attract custom in the first place relies heavily on (a) comprehensive, colourful and well-produced catalogues, and (b) the use of part-time agents, usually housewives, working on a commission basis.
Whilst such an operation does not generally offer any price advantage over a retail business, it is a very convenient way of choosing goods and there is always extended credit available.
With the wider use of computers in the home, and the prospects, in the not-too-distant future of being able to order goods via a telephone link, mail-order business seems likely to grow.
8.
Cash-and-carry outlets usually deal in groceries, and many are open only to trade customers.
They tend to rely on a rapid turnover of stock, to keep down inventory levels.
Their main advantages for buyers are (a) price, which is significantly lower than in a retail operation, and (b) the opportunity to buy small bulk quantities.
Unlike mail-order businesses, they serve relatively local and specialised markets.
9.
Channel D is another version of a shorter, indirect channel.
In this case, it is the wholesaler who is removed from the scene.
Not surprisingly, the retailers who dominate this channel are powerful chains or multiples in their own right.
Some such retailers, as in the footwear trade, concentrate on one range of goods only.
They buy in bulk from manufacturers and importers, and distribute direct to their retail outlets.
They usually offer a wide selection of lines, and are very competitively priced.
Other large retail groups handle a diversity of goods, which are again competitively priced, and made available in prime shopping areas.
The Woolworths chain was a pioneer in this field.
Other examples include Marks and Spencer, and British Home Stores, two chains which based themselves originally on the clothing trade, but which between them have diversified into footwear, foodstuffs, toys and books, amongst other items.
One of the important features of chains  such as Marks and Spencer is their use of private (ie own-name) branding, which is either used exclusively or at least predominantly.
Other chains, such as Boots, supply a wide range of other brands in addition to their own.
Invariably, the own-brand range is offered at lower prices than the competing brands.
This is an advantage to the consumer, but not necessarily to the manufacturer, who may well have made both!
MARKET SEGMENTATION
10.
The above reference to large and powerful retail chains implies that they can exert a strong influence in the marketplace.
This influence works in two directions:
(a) it enables them to demand standards of quality, and ranges of goods which fit into their market strategy, rather than accepting what the manufacturer might prefer,
(b) it enables them to cultivate a particular part, or segment, of a market.
Some footwear chains are exclusively geared to meeting the demands of fashion conscious teenagers, for example.
Others are aimed mainly at a middle-aged market, where comfort and quality are more important than the current fashion.
In both examples, a conscious attempt has been made-to segment the market.
11.
The term ‘market segmentation’ is based on the concept that most, if not all, markets are made up of different types of customers ie within each total market, there exist sub-markets which express distinctive product preferences compared with each other.
Market segmentation, therefore, can be defined as the subdivision of a market into identifiable buyer-groups, or submarkets, with the aim of reaching such groups with a particular marketing mix.
To take an example: in the private motor-car market as a whole there are several different sub-markets, ranging from buyers who are looking for sports cars, through those interested in family saloons and estate cars to those requiring a small, economical second car.
A manufacturer may decide to attempt to meet the needs of the entire market or may decide to specialise in, say, sports cars.
Either way such a manufacturer and his distributors have to vary their marketing mix, if they are to attract the ‘right’ kind of customer.
The product offered, the price range, the manner of promotion and the distribution arrangements must all be considered carefully in the light of the differing requirements of the different market segments.
12.
Market segmentation is especially important in consumer markets, where the numbers of potential buyers can be measured  in millions.
The most frequent methods of segmenting a market are based on geographical, demographic and buyer-behaviour variables, as indicated in Figure 34.2 below:
13.
Geographical variables, such as regions and populations, may be of the utmost significance to suppliers of such goods as delicatessen foods or skiing equipment, for example.
Such goods are attractive to specialised segments of the markets for food and sports equipment respectively.
Attempts to achieve sales without segmenting these markets would result in a great deal of wasted effort.
Large retail chains are usually only prepared to locate stores in areas of high population density, in order to gain the economies of scale that large local markets can stimulate.
This is the result of a conscious decision to segment their markets in this way.
14.
Demographic segmentation involves the sub-division of markets on the basis of variables such as age, sex, occupation and class, for example.
Magazines and journals are examples of  products which are directed towards carefully segmented markets (readership).
In addition to the basic reading material, the advertising contained in each edition reflects the segmentation.
For example, a magazine aimed at mothers with young children will carry articles of interest to such mothers, and advertisements inserted by suppliers of mother-and-baby products.
Age is a powerful basis for segmentation (a) because of the physical changes brought about by growth and ageing, and (b) because of frequently differing attitudes and preferences between age-groups.
In retail operations, particular stores or chains will focus on particular segments of the market (eg Mothercare), whilst others will aim to attract a wide range of customers into their shops, but will organize their shelf-displays to cater for segment needs.
Thus W.H. Smith's shops offer a wide range of magazines, books and records as well as fairly standard ranges of stationery and similar items, in order to meet the needs of a wide range of tastes from a variety of ages and social classes.
15.
Segmentation by social class is aided, in Britain, by the use of a social grading structure based on the occupation of the head of each household.
The grades which are used are as follows in Figure 32.3:
16.
Whilst social class is a demographic factor, it is also a prime determinant of buyer-behaviour variables, since class background influences tastes, values and attitudes.
For example, in beer advertisements there is a strong appeal to working class loyalty, often to particular, local brews.
By comparison, pre-Christmas television advertisements for liqueurs are openly aimed at those who are, or would like to be, middle and upper middle class.
These appeals to distinctive class values are not hit-and-miss affairs, but are based on careful research into class preferences for particular goods and services.
17.
An important variable in buyer behaviour is usage rate.
Some buyers are very light users of a product, whereas others use the same product frequently.
For example, there are regular readers of a particular Sunday newspaper, and these represent the core of its readership, but there are also occasional and casual readers, who may buy because of its coverage of particular events.
Taking usage rate as a variable essentially means segmenting on the basis of volume purchased.
If a supplier decides to increase his market share by attracting higher usage by occasional users, he must first attempt to find out whether they buy competitors' goods or not, or where there is something about the present marketing mix which dissuades them from buying more frequently.
British Rail, for example, has conducted numerous surveys amongst the travelling public to enquire why they do not make more use of trains.
Clearly, the family motorcar is the biggest competitor for seats on a journey, and price is probably the biggest disadvantage of rail travel.
Therefore, to increase the usage rate for non-business travellers, some special price arrangements are needed to encourage people to leave their cars at home and travel by train instead.
British Rail has offered a wide range of economy fares for off-peak periods as a result of its surveys.
In their case, usage rate is an important aspect of marketing because of the high level of fixed costs involved in operating a railway network.
18.
The approaches to market segmentation referred to above apply more naturally to consumer markets than to industrial markets, where an entire market may be made up of just a few customers.
Industrial segmentation usually takes place on one or more of the following bases:
a.
Type of buyer — Government, public service, private firm etc.
b.
Customer size — Large, medium or small.
c.
Class of buyer — Insists on quality or economy or service, for example.
d.
Trade group-Standard Industrial Classification entry.
e.
End-use-Routine/non-routine, specialised/general etc.
f.
Usage rate — Regular or infrequent buyer.
g.
Location — Domestic or overseas, regional/national etc.
19.
Industrial segmentation occurs when a micro-computer business applies differing marketing mixes to two markets, one of small private businesses, and the other of State secondary schools.
The first market may be offered complete packages of equipment, including a printer and additional storage units in addition to the central processor and visual display unit.
The package will be offered at a competitive rate in the medium price range for such a product.
A regular follow-up servicing arrangement will be included as well as full training manuals.
By comparison, the second market will be offered a cheaper price for a less comprehensive service.
Instead of packages, it is more likely that options based on a central processor and visual display unit will be offered, to enable buyers to spend more on input and output devices rather than on storage and printing facilities.
A key consideration in this example is the end-use to which the customer wishes to put the product.
In the case of a small private business, the use is primarily aimed at invoicing, accounting and stock control activities.
The school's use is primarily aimed at familiarisation training for pupils.
20.
The principal benefits of market segmentation from the seller's point of view are that:
a.
he has a better idea of the total market picture, especially in relation to marketing opportunities between segments of that market,
b.
he can tailor his marketing mix to suit the needs of particular segments,
c.
by gaining familiarity with one or more segments, he is more likely to be able to assess the response from them, which is an invaluable asset for planning purposes.
21.
The main benefit from the customer's point of view is that he is likely to have his needs met in a more appropriate way than if the market is not segmented ie where the same product range and price are offered regardless of geographical, demographic and buyer-behaviour considerations.
PHYSICAL DISTRIBUTION
22.
Whereas channels of distribution are marketing institutions, physical distribution is a set of activities.
The former provide the managerial and administrative framework for moving products from supplier to customer.
The latter provide the physical means of so doing.
Physical distribution is concerned with order processing, warehousing, transport, packaging, stock/inventory levels and customer service.
In recent years a number of attempts  to integrate and coordinate these functions has come to be called Physical Distribution Management.
This aims to integrate the activities of marketing, production and other departments in this aspect of the organization's marketing task.
23.
The degree of attention paid to physical distribution depends considerably on the proportion of total costs taken up by distribution costs.
If the product is a high-quality, high-cost item, then distribution costs will probably represent a small proportion of total costs of manufacturing and marketing it, and so physical distribution may be considered very much a secondary issue.
Where the product is offered at a very competitive price, and hence where profit margins may be tight, all overhead costs will be carefully examined.
In this situation distribution costs will form an important issue for the supplier.
An important feature of such costs is that they tend to increase rather than decrease with sales volume.
Whereas unit production costs tend to benefit from increased volume of production, distribution costs tend to worsen.
A high level of customer service also tends to greatly increase distribution costs.
For example, if a customer requires 100% delivery from stock within two days, this means carrying extra stock levels as a buffer against any shortfall in supplies to the warehouse.
If that customer could be persuaded to reduce his requirements to, say, 80% delivery within two days, this might effect useful savings in distribution costs.
SUMMARY
24.
Distribution is a key pan of any marketing mix.
It involves selecting the best channels by which to ensure the movement of goods and services from their original suppliers to their eventual consumers.
The channels of distribution are marketing institutions such as wholesalers and retailers.
A variety of channel options is available.
A direct marketing channel moves goods directly from manufacturer to consumer.
An indirect channel utilises intermediaries or middlemen, such as wholesalers.
25.
Market segmentation is undertaken by suppliers in order to get a clearer picture of the market-place in order to offer a particular marketing mix to one or more segments.
The concept assumes that within any single market there are invariably other sub-markets.
26.
Consumer markets are usually segmented on the basis of geography, demography and buyer-behaviour.
Industrial markets are segmented in a roughly similar fashion, but also include consideration of trade groups and end-use.
27.
Physical distribution is a term covering a set of activities aimed at achieving the physical movement of goods from supplier to consumer.
It involves order processing, warehousing and transport and related activities.
Physical distribution management aims to integrate the responsibilities of marketing, production and other departments engaged in aspects of distribution.
MARKETING RESEARCH
INTRODUCTION
1.
Marketing research is fundamentally about the acquisition and analysis of information required for the making of marketing decisions.
The two basic areas in which the information is sought are (a) markets (existing and potential), and (b) marketing tactics and methods.
The former is orientated towards what is happening outside the organization, in the market-place.
The second is orientated towards the way in which the organization is responding internally to its customers, present and future.
2.
Koder (op.cit.) sees an increasing need for marketing information, because of three important trends in marketing.
These are:
a.
the shift from purely local to wider national and international markets,
b.
the changing emphasis from buyer needs to buyer wants,
c.
the trend towards competition based on non-price weapons.
The implications of these points are that wider markets are not as familiar to suppliers as local markets, and they must therefore seek out sources of information about distant markets.
The move away from relatively predictable needs towards much less predictable wants requires much more research into buyer behaviour.
The trend towards non-price competition requires firms to evaluate their own methods of assembling the marketing mix for their markets.
Ought a better after-sales service be offered to hold off competitors?
How effective are our advertising campaigns compared with our competitors?
Should we put more effort into sales promotions?
These are examples of the kind of questions which firms have to face.
In order to answer them they need marketing research.
3.
The data which forms the raw material of marketing research can be placed under two categories: primary and secondary.
Primary data is gathered directly from the persons concerned, be they customers, wholesalers, or even competitors, for example.
Such data is usually collected by means of surveys and other formalised methods.
Secondary data is information available from published sources externally, and from company records.
The use  of secondary material is cheaper than developing primary data, but may be less relevant or up-to-date.
4.
A marketing research study usually includes the following steps:
a.
Definition of problem and specification of information to be sought
b.
Design of study/project, with particular reference to data collection methods (surveys etc), instrumentation (questionnaires etc) and sample design (of target population)
c.
Field work (utilising questionnaires, structured interviews, consumer panels)
d.
Data analysis (using statistical and O.R.
techniques)
e.
Presentation of report.
5.
As was noted earlier, marketing operates on the external boundaries of the organization.
Its main object of attention is the customer (or market-place), and it is the customer's response, or non-response, that gives rise to most of the problems which marketing research is applied to.
A typical problem could be that of a falling market share for one or more of the organization's product lines.
In order to clarify the problem, and put it into perspective, a number of questions need to be asked.
For example, ‘Is the market expanding, declining or stable?’;
‘What is the situation for competitors?’;
‘Is the threat from UK competitors, or from overseas?’;
‘What advantages, if any, are enjoyed by competitive products?’;
‘What is the organization's reputation with its existing customers?’; and so on.
Some of these questions can be answered by analysing secondary data and others by analysing primary data.
6.
Sources of secondary data are twofold: firstly, internal information from sales budgets, field sales reports and others; and secondly, external information from Government statistics, trade, banking and other reports, the press and marketing research agencies.
The last-mentioned — marketing research agencies — play a significant role in the whole area of marketing research.
They are employed not only by firms with no market research specialists of their own, but also by firms with large market research departments.
Some agencies offer a comprehensive marketing research service, some offer a range of specialised services and others offer what is basically an information-selling service.
Some well-known agencies include A.C. Nielsen which provides regular data on sales, brand shares and prices etc in the retail trade, Gallup, which specialises in opinion research, and AGB (Audits of Great  Britain), which is heavily involved in television audience measurement.
Television and readership surveys in Britain are conducted under the umbrella of two national bodies — JICTAR (Joint Industry Committee for Television Advertising Research), which meters a representative sample of television sets throughout the nation, and JICNARS (Joint Industry Committee for National Readership Surveys), which conducts, and reports on, 30,000 interviews annually, covering over 100 different publications.
7.
Primary data is most frequently collected by means of surveys, based on questionnaires or interviews.
These surveys are invariably undertaken by specialist research organizations, since the construction and administration of questionnaires is a highly skilled operation.
Interviews are generally conducted in a structured form, so as to ensure consistency between interviewers.
The agencies use trained interviewers, briefed about the objectives of each assignment.
Both the questionnaires and the structured interviews tend to concentrate on what the customer likes and dislikes, rather than why.
This last question is handled by means of a number of behavioural techniques, which form part of what has been called motivational research.
The techniques include in-depth, and less-structured, interviews, discussion groups, role playing and psychological tests.
Motivation research is one of the newer aspects of marketing research, and since it concentrates on motives and attitudes, it relies heavily on the expertise of psychologists for the design of and interpretation of its surveys.
8.
Some of the more important advantages and disadvantages of the three approaches described are as follows:
9.
Some or all of the above approaches may be applied to consumer panels, which are permanent groups representing a cross-section of a particular market.
These panels are used by individual companies and by specialised agencies, such as A.C. Nielsen.
They receive regular samples of different products and lines, about which they complete questionnaires, diaries and similar records.
They are usually well-disposed towards researchers and are good subjects for interview as well as questionnaires.
The main advantage of panels is that they provide feedback over a period of time, which increases the reliability of their responses compared with people who may have been stopped for a brief interview outside their local supermarket, for example.
The main disadvantage is that panels tend to be influenced in their buying behaviour by the role they are playing in consumer research.
On balance, the advantages to be gained from panels outweigh the disadvantages.
10.
So far we have been concerned mainly with the market research aspects of marketing research.
The other prime interest of marketing research, as was noted in paragraph 1 in this chapter, is the way in which the organization responds to the demands of the market-place.
The most important method of evaluating the organization's total marketing effort is by employing a marketing audit.
This is an independent examination of an organization's marketing objectives, marketing activities and marketing environment with the primary aims of assessing present effectiveness and of recommending future action.
The audit needs to be carried out on a periodic rather than on an ad hoc basis, and, like any other rational evaluation, needs to be conducted in a systematic way.
The audit may be carried out by the organization's own staff or by external consultants.
The requirements of the task call for objectivity, independence and suitable experience.
Many firms feel that these requirements can best be found in external rather than internal sources.
11.
A systematic audit would encompass the following aspects of the organization's marketing system:
a.
The Marketing Environment
Economic and demographic trends Technological change Legal developments
Social change Markets, Customers, Competitors,
Suppliers, Middlemen, etc 
b.
Marketing Strategy
Corporate objectives
Marketing objectives
Marketing plan (strategy)
Marketing resources
Strengths and weaknesses
c.
Marketing Plans and Control
Sales forecasting
Market plans
Product development
Control procedures
Marketing research
d.
Marketing mix
Evaluation of products, pricing policies, advertising and sales promotion, channels of  distribution and sales force
e.
Profitability and Cost effectiveness
Profitability of products and  markets
Marketing costs
f.
The Marketing Organization
Management structure
Staff motivation
Efficiency
Training
Relationships with other departments
12.
The advantage of such an audit lies in its ability to produce a critical assessment of the organization's marketing strengths and weaknesses, whilst at the same time weighing up the threats and opportunities posed by the external environment.
This critical assessment is valuable to the organization's corporate planning process as well as to its marketing planning.
The main disadvantages are those of time and cost.
It takes a considerable amount of time to conduct an audit covering the points mentioned above, and this time is expensive in labour costs.
SUMMARY
13.
Marketing research is the title given to those activities which aim to provide information about markets and marketing methods for the purpose of facilitating decision-making in marketing.
14.
Marketing research data comes in two basic forms:(a) primary data, which is obtained first-hand from customers, competitors and others in the market-place; and (b) secondary data, which is obtained from various internal and external sources, mainly company records and published reports and statistics.
15.
A typical market research study encompasses the following steps: it defines the problem, specifies the information required, designs the methodology of the study, conducts the necessary fieldwork, analyses the data obtained and, finally, presents a report to the management.
16.
Much of the secondary data available to marketing researchers originates from specialist marketing research agencies, which provide information on sales, prices, market shares, and other key factors.
Such agencies utilise consumer panels, readership surveys and television audience measurement to generate their information.
17.
Primary data is usually obtained by means of questionnaires and structured interviews, administered by trained personnel.
A newer approach to gaining primary data, especially about consumer motives and attitudes, is called motivational research.
This approach utilises interviews (unstructured), group discussions and psychological tests to gain the required information.
18.
The assessment of an organization's marketing effectiveness is carried out by means of an audit.
A marketing audit is a systematic evaluation, carried out by independent personnel, of the external marketing environment, the organization's own marketing strategy, its marketing plans, its marketing mix, its cost effectiveness, and finally, its marketing organization (structure and personnel).
MARKETING ORGANIZATION
INTRODUCTION
1.
As was noted in Chapter 31, there are several ways of looking at marketing.
Some organizations see it as an extension of their production process, others as the means by which their product or service is brought to the attention of the marketplace.
Yet other organizations see marketing as essentially a selling activity, and finally, there are those who see marketing as an activity which begins and ends with the customer.
Naturally, the particular group of values which are held will determine whether the organization will have a marketing department at all, and, if it does have one, what kind of department it will be.
2.
This chapter assumes that the organization sees some definite role for a marketing department, even if it is not a comprehensive marketing role.
The next few paragraphs outline (a) the major structural alternatives that are available to a marketing department,(b) the principal objectives of a marketing department, and (c) the differing perspectives between the marketing department and other departments in the organization.
MARKETING STRUCTURES
3.
Marketing grew out of sales activities.
It eventually absorbed these activities into its own growth and development.
This radical change of role for marketing led to a major change of organization structure, at least for those organizations that adopted the marketing concept.
4.
The early process of change was as follows (Figures 36.136.4)
At this stage there is no specific marketing section or department.
The Sales Manager is responsible for advertising and promotion as well as selling.
Stage two introduces the first formal recognition of marketing as such, but places the marketing manager under the direction of the Sales Director.
At this stage marketing is seen as an important provider of information to support the organization's sales effort.
The marketing section will probably be concerned with advertising, sales promotion, product-development and marketing research.
By Stage three, marketing has moved up to a position of equality with sales.
This situation probably produces the maximum amount of conflict between sales and marketing, as the former concentrate on their  preoccupation with current sales and the latter concentrate on long-term market developments.
Since marketing will see the sales effort as part of the total marketing mix, there will be a strong desire to tell sales what to do and why!
The resolution of this built-in conflict has been achieved, in many companies, by giving predominance to marketing, as shown in Figure 36.4 below:
5.
Stage four presents a functional view of the marketing department.
The separate specialisms of sales, research and advertising/promotions each have their own manager.
This is a common form of structure for a marketing department.
Organizations frequently add other specialist sections, such as customer services and product development.
The main advantage of this type of structure is its relative simplicity, whereby identifiable divisions of labour can be made without causing unwanted overlap or competition between sections.
The main disadvantage of a functional structure is its inability to cope with multiple products or markets, because of difficulties in allocating priorities amongst the specialist sections.
In order to cope with the increased diversity of decision-making required in these circumstances, several companies have introduced a matrix-type of structure, incorporating a number of operational roles, as in Figure 36.5 opposite.
This structure allocates specific responsibility for individual products/product groups and for specific markets, whilst retaining all the key functional posts.
As in every matrix structure, the operational roles have reporting responsibilities to functional managers as well as to their immediate line managers.
So, for example, a Brand Manager's freedom to act is not only prescribed by his immediate Product Group Manager, but also by any one of the functional managers, in respect of his own speciality.
Thus, advertising programmes for a Brand would have to be agreed not  only by the Product Group Manager, but also by the Advertising Manager.
6.
In very large organizations, where a divisionalized structure may have developed because of product or geographical reasons, for example, a decision has to be made about splitting the marketing activities between the divisions and corporate headquarters.
Here the underlying values of the organization's top management come into operation.
If the philosophy is to decentralise, in the way described in Chapter 21, that is to say by effectively delegating authority to the sub-units, then it is likely that little or no role will be available for a corporate marketing department.
If, however, divisionalization is seen as a way of delegating part, but only part, of the organization's marketing effort, then a definite marketing role at corporate level will be established.
A corporate role could just be confined to the provision of specialist services, such as marketing research and specialist advertising advice.
Alternatively, there could be a strong corporate role, giving the staff concerned the right to direct key functional aspects of marketing in the divisions, eg in terms of product-design, corporate image, and marketing control information systems.
THE MARKETING DEPARTMENT IN THE ORGANIZATION
7.
The question of conflict within the marketing function has already been touched on.
We can now turn to the possible conflicts that can occur between the marketing department and other departments.
In any organization it is natural for each sub-division to have its own perspective concerning the ultimate goals of the  organization, and the best way of achieving them.
The degree of conflict which may occur depends largely on the way in which departmental or functional objectives have been drawn up, and whether suitable conflict-resolution mechanisms exist (eg regular meetings between common interest groups, inter-departmental committees etc).
Also, in the context of marketing vis-a-vis the others, a vital element is the extent to which the organization as a whole is committed to the marketing concept.
Obviously, where the marketing concept prevails, the likelihood of serious conflict is reduced, and vice-versa.
8.
Before considering the points of possible friction between the marketing department and others, it will be useful to reflect on the objectives of the former.
If we assume that the marketing concept is upheld in a particular organization, then the key objectives of its marketing department could be as follows:
‘To contribute to the organization's corporate aims in respect of profitability, growth and social responsibility by
a.
Proposing, and seeking acceptance for, improvements in the organization's marketing policies;
b.
Seeking out and identifying advantageous marketing opportunities;
c.
Preparing, in conjunction with other departments, suit-able marketing strategies to meet opportunities identified;
d.
Selling and distributing the organization's products;
e.
Developing new products in the market-place;
f.
Designing and implementing approved marketing plans;
g.
Acquiring sufficient and suitable information, both internal and external, concerning the organization's products, and their impact on customers, competitors, suppliers and others in the market-place;
h.
Ensuring that the organization's products are brought to the attention of existing and potential customers by means of suitable advertising and promotional methods;
i.
Promoting a reputable image for the organization in the market-place.’
9.
The opening sentence of the above list of objectives was included advisedly to indicate the contributive nature of the marketing department's efforts to corporate aims.
Other departments, too, make their contribution to these overall aims.
If the organization's strategy has been worked out in a thorough and  collaborative way, there should exist a mutual understanding of roles as between departments.
This will affect the manner in which problems of misunderstanding and conflict are handled.
However, there is no practical way in which it is possible to avoid all such misunderstandings and conflict.
Even within the marketing department, there are potential conflicts.
For example, the conflicts between current sales effort and market development and between short-term profits and long-term growth.
10.
There are similar tensions between short- and long-term gains in other departments, and, of course, between departments.
Some of the most important sources of friction between the marketing department and other departments are as indicated below.
11.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from the above list is that the marketing department, in particular, disturbs the routines that other departments like to set for themselves in order to achieve efficiency in their own organization.
This happens because marketing personnel are more concerned with what the customer desires, rather than whether it is practicable to give him what he desires.
Marketing's task is to define the customer's needs and wants, but it is up to the other departments to convert those needs and wants into practical reality.
In a truly market-orientated organization there will be a greater willingness to respond positively to the varied demands of marketing than in an organization whose orientation lies elsewhere, in production, for example.
SUMMARY
12.
Marketing departments grew out of the sales function in organizations.
In many cases they are now wider in scope than the function which gave them birth; in others they are at least on a par with the sales function.
Modern marketing departments usually encompass sales, marketing research, advertising and promotion, customer services and product development.
They may also include product and/or market management, where these are diverse enough.
13.
The principal structural options open to marketing departments are (a) a functional structure, based on individual specialisms eg sales etc, and (b) a matrix structure, based on functional roles eg sales managers, market research managers etc and groups of operational roles eg product managers, market managers etc.
The matrix type of structure is more common in organizations with a diversity of products, brands or markets.
In large de-centralised organizations, the marketing function may be split between sub-divisions and corporate headquarters.
14.
The objectives of a marketing department are directed towards the attainment of corporate aims, such as profitability growth and social responsibility.
Marketing contributes principally by identifying market opportunities for the organization, by designing a suitable strategy for meeting those opportunities, and then by implementing approved plans, in collaboration with other departments.
15.
In pursuing its objectives, the marketing department will inevitably experience tensions between its aims and methods and those of its sister departments.
This is mainly because it seeks, first of all, to satisfy the customer's needs and wants, whereas its colleagues seek rationality and efficiency of operations.
CONSUMER PROTECTION
INTRODUCTION
1.
Commercial organizations spend a great deal of effort on assessing the needs and wants of their customers, and yet, as we saw in Chapter 31 (The Marketing Concept), there is a variety of possible orientations towards customers.
Not all firms are ‘market orientated’ to the extent that they put the customers' needs and wants before all else.
Even if firms were completely market orientated, they would still make errors of judgement from time to time.
Therefore, even in the best-regulated circles, the customer may sometimes be badly treated.
Over recent years consumers have become more vocal in reacting to shoddy products or poor service.
As a result there are now Government, as well as private consumer organizations, whose purpose is to stand up for consumers' rights.
The word ‘consumerism’ has been coined to describe the activities of pressure groups in this area, and the term ‘consumer protection’used to describe the efforts made by Government and other bodies to provide rules and codes of conduct for relations between commercial organizations and their customers.
2.
A consumer may be defined as ‘any person (including a corporate body) who buys goods and services for money.’
In the United Kingdom, there are several means by which consumer interests may be protected.
These involve the application of one or more of the following:
a.
The Common Law
b.
Acts of Parliament
c.
Codes of ‘Good Practice’
d.
Trade Marks
e.
Independent Consumer Groups
Each of these will be looked at briefly in this chapter, which will also examine some of the leading public and private pressure groups which help ordinary citizens to obtain redress against unfair trading in goods and services.
COMMON LAW RIGHTS
3.
Common law rights are acquired as a result of custom and practice over many years.
In consumer matters these rights have  not stood the test of time, and in modern economic conditions, Britain and other Western nations have had to introduce numerous statutory regulations to clarify and indeed strengthen the rights of individual consumers.
However, there are still general rules which apply to those who provide goods and services to the community.
For example, a person offering a service must carry it out in a proper and workmanlike way, or to a standard agreed with the customer.
Providers also have a duty of care in relation to any property (eg motor vehicle, television set etc) which a customer leaves with them.
STATUTORY RIGHTS
4.
By far the greatest protection for consumers in Britain is provided by parliament, which in several important pieces of legislation has set up a framework in which the respective rights and duties of consumers and suppliers can be identified and clarified.
The most important statutes concerning consumer affairs include the following:
Sale of Goods Act, 1979
Trade Descriptions Act, 1968
Consumer Safety Act, 1978
Consumer Credit Act, 1974
Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977
Fair Trading Act, 1973
Supply of Goods and Services Act, 1982
The key features of these Acts will be described briefly below.
5.
So far as the sales of goods are concerned, the current law is consolidated in the Sale of Goods Act, 1979.
This emphasises that goods must fulfil three basic conditions:
a.
they must be of merchantable quality
b.
they must be fit for the purpose and
c.
they must be as described
An example of how these conditions might be broken is as follows.
A person buys a new washing machine, and is unfortunate enough to discover that (a) the cabinet is badly scratched, and thus not of merchantable quality;(b) the machine ripped up the first batch of clothes and half-flooded the kitchen (ie it was not fit for the purpose); and (c) the model delivered by the suppliers was not the model agreed upon in the shop (ie the goods were not as described  by the retailer).
The remedies available to the consumer depend on the circumstances of the breach.
For example, in the case of situation (b) above, there would be a right to a complete refund of the price paid together with compensation for loss and damage caused.
In the case of (a) it is likely that the retailer would replace the machine, but his obligation would only be to offer a discount on the price in view of the damaged surface.
In the case of (c), the customer is entitled to his money back.
Note that suppliers are not obliged to offer anything more than cash compensation.
6.
The Sale of Goods Act, 1979 also contains provisions preventing consumers' rights from being eroded by exclusion clauses and special guarantees.
7.
Protection against being misled by false or inaccurate descriptions of goods on sale is provided by the Trade Descriptions Act, 1968.
This Act has been used successfully by motorists, who have discovered that they had been deceived about the previous mileage covered by a second-hand car.
The winding back of car mileometers is a contravention of this Act.
In such a case the dealer can be prosecuted and fined.
8.
The consumer's physical safety is considered in the Consumer Safety Act, 1978, which draws up regulations to minimise risks to consumers from potentially dangerous products, such as oil heaters, electric blankets and certain children's toys.
9.
Moneylenders have abounded in every society, and in recent years have achieved great importance in developed economies because of the stimulus that their services have given to trade.
However, it has become increasingly important, too, that borrowers should not be exploited unknowingly.
In Britain the Consumer Credit Act, 1974 requires that borrowers should know the true rate of interest being charged, and, where an agreement is signed away from trade premises, the person is entitled to change his mind.
There are also conditions preventing consumers from being unfairly penalised, if they get into arrears.
The Act affects all transactions between £50 — £15000.
10.
Another protection for consumers in their dealings with commercial organizations is provided by the Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977, which protects individuals against possible loss of rights from exclusion clauses and disclaimer notices on posters, tickets etc.
Under the Act a contractor cannot ‘contract out’ of his liability for death or personal injury arising from his negligence, for example by supplying a vehicle with faulty brakes.
Nor can he supply goods or services in a substantially different way from those ordered, for example by providing a 1Mb microcomputer  when a 10Mb version was what the customer ordered.
The Act also stipulates that a manufacturer's guarantee cannot exclude liability for damage caused or loss suffered as a result of the manufacturer's negligence.
Disclaimer notices, such as‘Articles left at owner's risk…etc’ are not valid unless the firm concerned can show in court that they were reasonable in the circumstances, and in any case would not protect the firm against any claim arising out of the negligence in respect of the articles.
11.
One of the growing practices in modern legislation is to set up supervisory bodies, or ‘watchdogs’, to monitor the effects of the law in society.
In the consumer rights arena the central watchdog is provided by the Office of Fair Trading, set up by the Fair Trading Act, 1973 to encourage voluntary codes of practice between sellers and their customers, and to provide a central reference point for doubtful cases and matters of principle.
Currently codes of practice have been established in trades such as:
motorcar servicing
laundry services
electrical repair work
package holidays
funeral services
12.
The Fair Trading Act, 1973 also set up the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to:
a. investigate and report on references that relate to the existence of a monopoly situation, ie where 25% of a particular market is supplied by one supplier or supply group;
b. investigate mergers between business organizations.
The intention of these investigations is to ascertain if there could be any adverse effect on the public interest as a result of a particular monopoly or merger situation.
Adverse effects could include: a restricted choice of products/services, and a lack of responsiveness to consumer pressure.
13.
The Supply of Goods and Services Act, 1982, was introduced to improve the consumers' rights in relation to poor service or workmanship.
The Act was needed to make up for the shortcomings of the Sale of Goods Act, 1979, which applied only to the transfer of goods from a seller to a buyer and not to a situation where goods were being provided as part of a service, such as building work and car repairs, for example.
The new Act adopts a similar approach to the Sale of Goods Act in respect of description, merchantable quality and fitness for purpose of goods, but applies it to:
a.
contracts for work and materials
b.
part-exchange contracts (barter)
c.
‘free gifts’
d.
contracts for the hire of goods
The new Act also codifies the Common Law requirements relating to three key aspects of service, ie skill, time and price.
The Act requires suppliers of services to act with reasonable care and skill, and to complete the work within a reasonable time.
The purchaser is required to pay a reasonable price for the service.
The Act also tightens up the application of the Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977, in respect of services and disclaimer clauses.
CODES OF PRACTICE
14.
The Fair Trading Act, 1973, requires the Director General of Fair Trading to encourage Trade associations to draw up codes of practice for fair trading.
Codes do not have the force of law in their own right, but are nevertheless very influential when a court is determining the rights and wrongs of a situation.
Codes are less formal, more easily amended and less time-consuming to operate than legal provisions.
Codes of practice have been developed by associations such as the Association of British Travel Agents, the Motor Agents Association and the Mail Order Traders' Association.
15.
Since advertising and promotion play such a significant pan in the marketing of consumer goods, it is not surprising that consumer protection applies to these activities.
The Trade Descriptions Act, 1968 has already been mentioned, but there are two very important voluntary bodies operating in this field — the Advertising Standards Authority and the Independent Broadcasting Authority.
16.
The Advertising Standards Authority embraces press, poster, cinema advertising and direct mail.
It has developed the British Code of Advertising Practice whose intentions are primarily to ensure that:
advertisements are legal, decent, honest and truthful
advertisements are prepared with a sense of responsibility to the consumer
advertising conforms to the principle of fair competition
advertisers do not bring the advertising industry into disrepute
17.
An example of how the industry maintains its standards can be seen in the treatment of a complaint against a Japanese motor manufacturer by a member of the public (ASA Case Report 119, 1985).
In this case the advertisement said ‘Let us lead you into temptation’ and described one of its models as having ‘A  decidedly illegal top speed.’
The complainant considered that the advertisement was likely to encourage drivers to drive in excess of the legal speed limit.
The complaint was upheld, and the advertisement was withdrawn.
18.
Advertisements on commercial radio and television are controlled by the Independent Broadcasting Authority, which has produced a code of practice for advertisers to ensure, so far as possible, the legality, truthfulness and reputation of broadcast advertising.
OTHER STANDARDS
19.
Probably the most well-known body in Britain for establishing voluntary standards of quality and reliability is the British Standards Institution, whose famous Kitemark indicates that goods conform to the high standards set by the Institution.
The BSI is an independent non-profit making body incorporated by Royal Charter in 1929.
Its principal objectives include the promotion of health and safety, the protection of the environment and the establishment of quality standards.
Domestic examples of items for which British Standards are available include pushchairs, cots and motor cycle crash helmets.
20.
Another body somewhat similar to the BSI is the Design Council, set up in 1944 to improve design standards in a wide range of manufactured goods.
The Council tests products to see if, in their opinion, they are well-designed well-made and of practical value.
In suitable cases they award their distinctive triangular logo as a mark of their approval.
By their work they are promoting the idea that goods should be of merchantable quality and fit for their purpose.
TRADE MARKS
21.
Trade marks were originally established to protect manufacturers' products from being ‘pirated’ by their rivals.
Once certain marks became well-known, they also provided an advantage to consumers, who were able to associate particular trade marks with a particular quality goods.
Famous trade marks include Coca Cola, Guinness, Sellotape, IBM and WordStar.
Persons buying products bearing those names are entitled to expect the particular standards associated with them.
MANUFACTURERS' LIABILITY
22.
In England and Wales, a manufacturer has a common law duty of care to ensure that his products do not cause injury or damage to a person or to his property.
Note that this duty does not extend to the quality or performance of the goods, but only to their causing injury or damage.
In such a case, it is up to the complainant to show that the damage or injury was due to the manufacturer's negligence.
23.
Statutory duties are imposed on manufacturers by the Health and Safety at Work etc, Act 1974.
This Act, amongst other duties, requires designers, manufacturers and importers to ensure, so far as practicable, that any article is safe when properly used.
INDEPENDENT PRESSURE GROUPS
24.
There are a number of independent pressure groups in the United Kingdom working directly on behalf of consumers.
These include:
The Citizens' Advice Bureaux (incl.
C.A.B.
Consumer Advice Centres).
These provide free advice for local citizens on a wide range of matters, including consumer affairs.
The Consumers' Association This body carries out independent tests on a wide variety of consumer goods and services.
The results are published in a monthly magazine (‘Which’).
National Viewers' and Listeners' Association This organization monitors radio and television programmes with the aim of persuading programme planners to avoid excessive violence, sex and other issues which could be distasteful to family viewers.
PUBLICLY-APPOINTED CONSUMER GROUPS
25.
Publicly appointed bodies representing consumers' interests are considerably more numerous than private groups.
Local authorities have established services such as Trading Standards Departments and Consumer Advice Centres, for example.
There are also several bodies established by statute to represent the views of users of public services.
Examples of such groups include:
The Post Office Users Council
The Transport Users' Consultative Committee 
Electricity Consultative Council
Regional Gas Consumers' Councils
Domestic Coal Consumers' Council
National Consumer Council
These Councils are composed of representatives from various user-groups, including local authorities, Citizens Advice Bureaux, welfare groups etc.
They are independent of the industry concerned.
SECTION SUMMARY — MARKETING MANAGEMENT
1.
Chapters 31–37 have dealt with the salient features of marketing management in practice.
The topics covered are those which occur the most frequently in the examinations of those bodies not principally concerned with the profession of marketing.
2.
Marketing has been defined in several ways — as an exchange activity, as a management activity, and as an attitude of mind.
There are common threads running through each of the common definitions.
These include the acknowledgement of groups of buyers (markets) in search of means to satisfy their needs, and the efforts made by producers to meet those needs in a profitable manner.
3.
The marketing concept considers the customer to be the prime reason for the existence of an organization, and therefore seeks to direct the organization's efforts towards identifying and meeting customer needs and wants.
Organizations do not all subscribe to the marketing concept.
They may instead opt for a production, product or sales-orientation.
4.
The marketing mix is a central feature of an organization's tactical plan for a particular market.
It consists of the key marketing variables that are offered to a market at a particular point in time.
These variables are primarily the product, its price structure, the way it is to be promoted, and how it is to be distributed.
The product can be varied in terms of quality, number of versions, branding, packaging and after-sales service.
A key aspect of this part of the mix is the life-cycle of the product.
This requires adapting the mix to the appropriate stage of the cycle Introduction, Growth, Maturity, Saturation, and, finally, Decline.
5.
The price element of the mix can be varied in terms of its basic price and by means of credit arrangements.
Price is the most flexible element in the mix, and can be employed to ward off competitors, handle price-sensitive markets, and adapt to changes in the product life-cycle.
6.
Promotional variables include advertising, personal selling, sales promotion and publicity.
They are all directed towards bringing potential customers from a state of unawareness of the product to a state where they are convinced of the value of the product and proceed to buy it.
The promotion aspects of the marketing mix vary slightly between consumer markets and industrial markets.
For example, advertising is used very heavily on consumer markets, and only lightly in industrial markets.
Conversely, whereas personal selling is the single most important means of promoting industrial goods and services, it is rarely seen in consumer markets.
Advertising is carried out via the following media — the press, commercial television, direct mail, commercial radio and hoardings/outdoor displays.
Of these media the press is by far the most significant in terms of the expenditure by clients.
Personal selling is carried out mainly by sales representatives and by sales assistants.
Of the two groups the former are more biassed towards persuasive selling, whilst the latter tend to be order-takers.
7.
The role of the sales representative is extremely important in the organization's overall sales effort.
The duties of representatives include the following-after-sales servicing, gathering market intelligence, communicating relevant information to customers, and prospecting for new business.
These are in addition to straightforward selling activities.
Representatives are usually organized on a territorial basis.
They can also be organized on a product basis or a customer basis.
Their results can be evaluated in several different ways, including the following — net sales, call rate, sales per call, number of new sales customers, and sales expenses as ratio of sales achieved.
8.
Sales promotion activities are particularly applicable to consumer products.
These activities are directed at two main groups — customers –at the point of sale) and the trade (wholesalers and retailers).
Sales promotion aims to act as a back-up to other forms of promotion, notably advertising, by offering incentives to customers and traders in order to push certain products or lines.
For customers these incentives include free samples of the product and twin-pack bargains; for the trade they include special discounts and the provision of display material.
9.
Publicity was the final aspect of promotion to be considered.
Publicity is part of the total public relations effort of the organization.
It is concerned with the understanding between the organization and the public at large.
Publicity itself is basically news material about the organization which is published in one or more of the media.
Sponsorship of sporting events and patronage  of the arts are methods which are being used increasingly to promote an organization's reputation with the public.
10.
Chapter 34 examined the issues of distribution, as part of the marketing mix, and of market segmentation.
Distribution is primarily concerned with the task of moving the product to the consumer.
This task is achieved via a number of channels of distribution.
These are marketing institutions set up to facilitate the movement of goods and services from their point of production to their point of consumption.
The most frequent elements to be found in a marketing channel are — manufacturers (or producers of services), wholesalers, retailers and customers.
The middlemen may sometimes be excluded from a channel, as in most industrial marketing, where direct channels from manufacturer to customer are employed.
11.
Market segmentation is one of the refinement processes of marketing.
It is a tactical device for breaking down any one market into a number of separately identifiable sub-markets in order to be able to reach that sub-market (or segment) with a particular marketing mix.
The market for private motor-cars, for example, can be broken down into several segments, depending on income levels, family commitments, benefits sought and many other preferences.
Segmentation is usually undertaken on the basis of three major variables in target populations — geography, demography (age, sex, occupation etc), and buyer behaviour (brand loyalty, usage rate etc).
These are the most important variables for consumer markets.
For industrial markets, the variables have a different emphasis.
They include the following examples — type of buyer (Government, private firm etc), trade group, and end-use (specialised application or general etc).
12.
Physical distribution is concerned with the physical aspects of moving goods from the manufacturer or supplier to the customer ie transporting, warehousing, packaging etc.
The attention paid to physical distribution is related to the relative proportion of distribution costs in total costs.
If the proportion is high, then considerable efforts will be made to contain such costs.
13.
Chapter 35 outlined the key features of marketing research.
Marketing research consists of those activities which aim to provide information about markets and marketing methods for the purpose of facilitating decision-making in marketing matters.
The object of the research is to enable the organization to find out what is going on in the market-place, and to evaluate the impact on customers, competitors and others, of the organization's own marketing activities.
The raw material of marketing information  comes in two forms — primary data, which is obtained first hand, and secondary data, which is obtained from a variety of published sources, both within and external to the organization.
The most frequent methods of gaining primary data are by the use of questionnaires and of interviews, usually carried out by trained agency staff.
14.
The most comprehensive way of assessing the organization's marketing performance is by means of a marketing audit.
This is an independent examination of the marketing objectives, activities and environment of the organization, with the object of (a) assessing present effectiveness, and (b) recommending future action.
Typical components of an audit would be — marketing environment, marketing strategy, marketing plans and controls, the marketing mix, profitability and costs, and the organization of marketing.
15.
This Section also looked at the organization of marketing.
Marketing has developed out of sales.
In some organizations it is still seen as the junior partner to sales, in others it has an equal status, in yet others it has a superior status.
In market-orientated organizations, marketing encompasses all the marketing and sales functions.
A typical marketing departments is organized either functionally or in a matrix-type of structure.
The principal objectives of such a department are to identify market opportunities, design a strategy to meet them and then implement approved plans, in collaboration with other departments.
The other departments will inevitably come into conflict with marketing from time to time because the latter's need to satisfy customers requires an adaptability that does not fit into their drive for efficiency of operations.
16.
Consumer protection has, in recent years, become more of a preoccupation for governments and pressure groups.
In Britain the major contribution to consumer protection now lies in:
a.
statutory rights
b.
activities of voluntary bodies such as the British Standards Institution and the Consumers' Association.
17.
The principal purposes of legislation are to ensure, so far as practicable, that (i) goods and services fulfil basic standards of quality and fitness  for purpose,(ii) goods and services are fairly described in advertising etc,(iii) goods are safe, and (iv) any financial arrangements (esp.
credit) are made clear to the purchaser.
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION/HOMEWORK
1.
What are the implications for a business organization of adopting the marketing concept?
2.
In what ways can marketing departments differ from other departments in terms of key objectives, main activities and system of values?
3.
‘Promotion and Distribution are very much the second class members of the marketing mix.’
Discuss this view of their role in the mix.
4.
How true is it to say that customers look for benefits, not for features when considering a product?
Discuss in relation to some popular consumer item.
5.
What advice would you give a manufacturer of robots concerning the promotion of his products in Britain?
6.
How would you distinguish between ‘push’ and ‘pull’strategies in selling?
7.
Why do so many suppliers of goods and services still rely on the services of middlemen?
What factors do you think could change their reliance on such services?
8.
What is ‘consumerism’, what forms can it take, and how can marketing managers respond to it?
9.
In what ways might the following seek to segment their markets: a. a manufacturer of beers and lagers.
b. an estate agent in a suburban area.
10.
Is marketing research a luxury?
Discuss.
11.
How might an organization divide up the responsibility for marketing activities between its sub-divisions and head office?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS — MARKETING MANAGEMENT
Most of the questions selected below are taken from the examinations of bodies other than the Institute of Marketing.
In most cases, therefore, what is required is a good general grasp of the topic.
Detailed answers, showing an in-depth knowledge of the subject-matter, would not normally be expected.
EQ 28
‘Without adopting the marketing concept a company cannot possibly hope to develop future plans.’
Discuss this statement from the point of view of a manufacturer of capital goods (ICMA OMM)
EQ 29
In the concept of the ‘marketing mix what is meant by the term ‘below-the-line’ activities?
Discuss the range of objectives likely to be set in using such activities.
(ICMA OMM)
EQ 30
What is the importance of the concept of the ‘product cycle’ for business planning and budgeting?
(ACCA Business Management)
EQ 31
In the development of new products, the marketing, design and manufacturing departments have a contribution to make.
Discuss the areas of potential conflict between these departments, in finalising new product design, and suggest ways in which these conflicts might be resolved.
(IOM Business Organization)
PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION
1.
The production function of an organization exists in order to make available the goods or services required by the customer.
Production management, in particular, is concerned with the provision of goods.
It is the central part of the manufacturing process.
Its responsibility is to plan, resource and control the processes involved in converting raw materials and components into the finished goods required to satisfy the needs and wants of the organization's existing and potential customers.
2.
In a market-orientated organization, production begins with the customer in the market-place.
An idea for a new product is generated, or assessed in marketing terms, by the market research section.
If the idea seems viable, it will be turned over to the Research and Development (R&D) section, where any necessary research, design and development work can be carried out.
The next stage forward is for early prototypes to be produced.
If the prototypes are satisfactory, then the pre-production stage can commence.
This stage aims to simulate, as far as possible, the actual conditions on the production line.
Thus at this stage the customer's needs are being set against the cost of materials and labour, the manufacturing capacity of the production department, and issues such as quality levels.
In the case of a firm manufacturing industrial goods, it is likely that at this stage, if not earlier, samples of the new product will be sent to the customer for testing and approval.
If the pre-production runs have been successful, then the product can move forward again, this time to the manufacturing stage.
3.
There are several key elements in the production process, and this Section looks at those that are the subject of examination questions for business and accountancy students.
In particular, Chapter 38 sets out the main features of a production planning and control system, Chapter 39 briefly outlines the principal methods of production available to organizations, and Chapter 40 examines some of the leading aids to production, such as Work Study, and Chapter 41 outlines key features of new technology in manufacturing.
PRODUCTION ORGANIZATION
4.
Before we proceed to these other chapters, it may be helpful to consider the likely organization structure of the Production function in a manufacturing organization.
The organization chart below illustrates the principal divisions of labour within the  function and provides an example of the structural relationships between the different departments or sub-units.
5.
The above organization chart represents just one of several ways in which production could be organized.
Much depends on the type of production, the relative standing of groups such as Quality Control, Purchasing and Maintenance, and the extent to which sophisticated computerised systems are in operation.
In the example shown above the asterisks indicate that Quality Control is shared among three sub-units: Manufacturing (as shopfloor Inspection), Production Planning & control (as Quality Control of processes, materials and purchased items), and Production Engineering (responsible for quality of design and with overall responsibility for Quality Control standards in production).
6.
In the example given, the production function has been divided up into four sub-units or departments.
There could have been a greater degree of specialization, but this has been avoided here in order to emphasise the collaborative nature of many of the specialisms to be found in the production function.
Brief observations that can be made about the four sub-unit management positions are as follows:
a.
Manufacturing Manager — this person is responsible for the manufacturing and assembly processes, together with their associated product processes (heat treatment, painting etc); this work is carried out in accordance with Works Orders and schedules submitted by Production Planning & control ; Inspection has been included here, although it could have been located separately to provide an independent inspection service; the Manufacturing Manager has a heavy responsibility for the recruitment, training, rewarding and retention of employees.
b.
Manager, Production Planning and Control — this role is responsible for providing the framework and the impetus for production-the main activities of the role are described in the following chapter on this topic.
c.
Technical Manager or Production Engineer — the latter title is the more popular of the two, in practice, although the former is probably a better description of the role.
The role is the first major link between Marketing and Production, being involved at the earliest possible stages of transforming customer needs and wants into practical possibilities.
This role is particularly important in the development and application of computers in the production process.
d.
Maintenance Manager — this role has been given considerable status in this example; it could have been placed in a subordinate position to the Manufacturing Manager, where it is frequently to be found.
The important point to remember is that all the sub-units are needed if the production function is to meet its aim of providing the goods required by its customers, and to do so in a way that meets the profit, growth and other objectives of the organization as a whole.
PRODUCTION PLANNING AND CONTROL
INTRODUCTION
1.
Modern production processes are complex and costly.
Machines, computers, materials of all kinds, and labour all have to be blended together to enable the production system to carry out its operations in a cost-effective way.
Thus production processes require careful planning and controlling.
2.
The basic elements of a production planning and control system are as follows:
a.
Translate the customer's requirements, as defined by the final pre-production design and preliminary sales forecasts, into production instructions (Works orders).
b.
Prepare production schedules and programmes.
c.
Plan the supply of materials, parts, components etc.
d.
Plan availability of machines, specify jigs, tools etc.
e.
Ensure labour requirements.
f.
Set production targets.
g.
Maintain stock and purchasing records.
h.
Progress orders through the factory.
i.
Liaise with the marketing department.
j.
Raise final production documents (delivery notes, invoices etc).
3.
There are several points arising from the above lists:
a.
The plans referred to are short-term plans for periods of from one week to one month.
At the start of a new production process, these plans may be altered at frequent intervals.
b.
Production schedules are basically timetables.
They are usually of a detailed nature, specifying the time-tabled requirements for precise operations and jobs, and invariably set out the sequence of priorities.
The major aims of scheduling are to ensure, so far as possible, that work is completed on time and within budgeted costs.
Wide use is made of Gantt charts (see Figure 4.3) in production  scheduling.
These are particularly useful for the scheduling of relatively straight-forward, routine projects.
c.
Plans for materials etc involve stock control and purchasing, which will be referred to later in the chapter.
d.
Plans for machines include the availability, capacity and loading of machines.
Capacity and loading may vary considerably between different types and models of machines, and these facts have to be taken into account in planning the overall production effort.
Carefully — planned loading can reduce material waiting time, even out loads between machines and processes, reduce idle time and highlight machine utilisation.
e.
Labour requirements are a vital part of the production process.
As well as detailing the numbers and types of employees required, there are questions of pay and incentives to be agreed before production commences.
If new machines or new processes are to be employed, it will be necessary to organize training in machine operations and safety.
f.
All plans should set targets.
In this case targets, based on sales forecasts, will be set in collaboration with marketing or sales staff, as representatives of the customer, and will take into account considerations such as planned maintenance, product quality control and machine breakdowns, for example.
g.
The progressing of orders through the production process is essentially a monitoring and reporting task, which also involves some ‘chasing-up’ of progress in situations where orders have fallen behind schedule.
The main job of a progress chaser is to watch out for, and report, any deviations from schedule, and provide help in sorting out delays in production.
h.
Liaison with the marketing department is important to ensure that the productive effort is meeting the customer's needs, or, where there are difficulties in production, ensuring that the customer is informed and/or is prepared to accept a slightly different standard or quality of product, for example.
i.
Finally, the outputs of the production system need to be accounted for, invoiced and delivered (to the customer or into stock).
Thus the final step is to ensure that the appropriate paperwork is available and correctly completed.
4.
The process which has just been described is clearly a very complex affair, but most of the decisions involved in it are programmable types of decisions.
It is possible, therefore, to apply the considerable power of a computer to the process.
Computers have the ability to undertake masses of calculations very rapidly, they can perform a number of separate operations at one and the same time, and have the ability to store massive amounts of information.
5.
The use of computers in production is extending all the time, as fully-automated plants and robots can bear witness.
However, in a more conventional way, computers can be employed to store and develop works orders, schedules, machine loading, stock levels, progress documents and many other related examples of production information.
The prime benefits of computer applications in these circumstances are:
a.
effective control over the processes concerned;
b.
the ability to adapt quickly to avoid difficulties;
c.
the ability to take advantage of opportunities arising from the speed and accuracy of feedback information received from the computer.
PURCHASING
6.
A brief reference was made earlier to the subject of purchasing.
This is an important aspect of production management and will be outlined below.
Purchasing costs often represent a substantial part of the total costs of production, and they are costs which may be incurred by various sub-units of production.
The purchasing function, therefore, has numerous links with other sections and departments internally, in addition to its links with external suppliers.
7.
The primary responsibility of the purchasing department is to secure sufficient and suitable raw materials, components, other goods, and services to ensure that the manufacturing process is fully supplied with all its materials, and to achieve this responsibility in a cost-effective manner.
To this end the purchasing department can usually be expected to be responsible for the following:
a.
Appraisal and selection of suppliers.
b.
Collation of up-to-date information on suppliers, prices, distribution methods etc.
c.
Purchasing goods and services at prices which represent the best value to the business in the long-term (ie not necessarily the lowest prices at a given time).
d.
Maintenance of adequate stock/inventory levels.
e.
Establishing and maintaining effective working relationships with relevant departments (Production, Marketing and Finance).
f.
Developing effective links with existing suppliers, and maintaining good relationships with potential suppliers and with competitors.
8.
The above description clearly denotes an extremely important function.
Purchasing ought not to be seen as mainly a question of routine paperwork.
Purchasing decisions are often very risky, and can involve an organization in carrying considerable costs.
It has been estimated that a 5% excess in purchasing costs can lead to a 25% reduction in profits.
By contrast, a small saving in purchasing costs can be worth considerably more in terms of equivalent sales value.
9.
The Purchasing Manager in charge of a purchasing department exercises his responsibilities in close collaboration with other colleagues.
For example, most purchasing decisions can only be taken after due agreement with financial, production or marketing colleagues.
Where the Purchasing Manager's particular expertise comes into its own is in the presentation and evaluation of purchasing alternatives, or in the assessment of whether to make or buy a particular product or component.
It is in these discussions that the knowledge of materials, their quality, prices, availability etc enables the Purchasing Manager to contribute significantly to the ultimate decision to buy, or not to buy.
10.
If a decision is made to proceed with a purchase, then the sequence of events could follow these lines:
a.
Purchasing receives requisition from appropriate authority.
b.
Purchasing approaches selected supplier to negotiate quantity, quality, price and delivery of goods.
c.
If (b) proceeds satisfactorily, purchasing places an order with the supplier.
This could be a one-off, or spot, order, or a contract order over a period of time.
d.
Purchasing maintains records of orders made, orders fulfilled, delivery dates, invoices etc.
e.
Purchasing arranges for originating requisition to be met, either directly from supplier or via stores, and amends stock/delivery records as appropriate.
11.
In the purchase of material goods, issues of quantity, quality, price and delivery are crucial in several respects.
These could be described as the key elements of the ‘purchasing mix’.
Quantity.
The quantity of goods to be ordered, and the time at which they should be ordered are major considerations.
On the one hand insufficient quantities at a particular point in time, will cause costly delays in production.
On the other hand, the larger the quantity ordered, the more will have to go into stock as temporarily idle resources, also a costly business.
The ideal to be aimed at is to find the optimum way of balancing the costs of insufficient stock against the costs of holding stock (tied-up capital, storage space, insurance, damage etc).
Techniques have been devised by Operational Research scientists to enable organizations to work out the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) for individual stock items, and to aid them in setting optimum re-order levels (ie the levels at which stock needs to be replaced).
In some cases, the decision about quantity (and indeed time) may be dictated by considerations of future supply, particularly where these may be threatened by economic or political pressures.
Decisions may also be influenced by favourable trends in short-term prices.
Quality.
The quality of the goods purchased needs to be suitable (a) for the manufacturing process, and (b) for the customer's wants.
In seeking decisions about quality, the purchasing department have to work closely with both production and marketing staff to arrive at a suitable compromise.
Inspection of goods received is vital to check that the supplier is fulfilling the order to the correct specification.
Price.
Purchasing should ideally aim for a price which gives the best value to the organization, taking quality, delivery and relative urgency into account.
This may not always be the lowest price available, but the one which represents the best value over a period of time.
Delivery.
One of the factors which needs to be considered by the purchasing department in the appraisal and selection of suppliers is the reliability of deliveries.
The lead time between an order and a delivery is an important aspect of stock control.
Where lead times are certain, they can be allowed for in stock calculations.
Where they are uncertain, it makes stock control much more difficult.
Not only is stock affected by the delivery situation, so is production.
The latter is particularly vulnerable to delays in deliveries for items which are used continuously, and for which minimum buffer stocks are held.
Buffer stocks are reserve stocks held for emergency shortages.
12.
Several aspects of stock control have been mentioned in paragraph 11, and these can be drawn together in a simplified graph of stock-levels.
Such graphs have a typically saw-tooth pattern, reflecting the outputs (usage) and the inputs (deliveries) to stock, as in Figure 38.1.
Usage reduces stocks over a period of time.
Such usage will invariably absorb some of the buffer stock unless planned deliveries are made on time.
The lead time as shown is the time taken between the order being made and the delivery taking place.
As soon as the delivery is made stocks shoot up again, until further usage reduces them, and this produces the saw-tooth effect on the graph.
Should planned deliveries not take place, and should usage continue, then eventually a stockout situation will be reached, where, for , the goods in question will be temporarily out-of-stock.
INSPECTION
13.
In addition to the purchasing and stock control aspects of production planning and control, there is the question of the control of quality.
This control begins with inspection of the raw materials and other items purchased from suppliers, continues with inspection during production, and ends with a final inspection before delivery to the customer.
The responsibility for checking quality on the shop-floor is usually that of the Inspection department, whose main task is to ensure adherence to the  organization's quality standards.
These standards are normally set with several objectives in mind:
a.
to produce products which are satisfactory to the customer,(quality, reliability, variety etc).
b.
to produce products that are consistent with the organization's responsibility to its workforce, shareholders and other stakeholders,(safety of production, ethically acceptable etc).
c.
to attain (a) and (b) within agreed levels of inspection costs.
14.
The costs of ensuring quality are twofold — direct costs, such as the wages and salaries of designers and inspectors, and indirect costs, such as the loss of orders, wastage and rectification costs.
Some of these costs are directed towards preventing faults and errors, others are directed towards curing faults and errors.
15.
In inspection there are basically three main reasons for inspecting work:
a.
to accept or reject items
b.
to control the process of producing the items
c.
to improve the process itself, if necessary.
There are two main methods of dealing with these issues:
Process control and acceptance sampling.
These are examples of what has been called ‘Statistical Quality Control’.
Process control consists of checking items as they progress through the production process, comparing them with the relevant standards, and taking any immediate corrective action to prevent further faults.
Process control may be expedited by the use of control charts, which can show in graph form actual performance against standard performance, and the amount of any deviation.
Another form of process control is automatic process control, where sensing and other measuring devices are built into the machine concerned to provide immediate information and immediate corrective action.
Automatic inspection of this kind is more feasible than human inspection in cases where (a) accurate measurement is possible,(b) where continuous inspection is highly desirable and (c) where reliability of inspection is important.
Objective measurement in inspection is called checking by variables, which contrasts with checking by attributes, which is a subjective method.
16.
This leads us on to acceptance sampling.
This is where the customer samples a batch of newly delivered goods, and either  rejects or accepts the batch on the basis of an acceptable quality level, usually a small percentage of rejects per batch.
If the number of rejects in the sample is in excess of the agreed percentage, the whole batch is returned to the supplier.
The sampling may be checked by variables, or by attributes (eg ‘satisfactory’ or ‘unsatisfactory’).
The latter calls for a human judgement instead of a ‘scientifically’ measured fact.
Human inspection is most suited to instances where (a) objective standards are not available, and (b) where discretion is required in analysing and assessing faults and errors.
This approach is most likely to apply to the more complex issues of quality control, and to the improvement of processes, where machine functioning and location, materials used and other factors need to be seen in context, if changes are to be made in the process.
MAINTENANCE
17.
The role of maintenance in a production planning and control system is to so organize maintenance activities that production has the optimum availability of plant and machinery in the conduct of its operations, and that, if an unexpected breakdown occurs, it will be dealt with in the minimum possible time.
18.
According to the British Standards Institution, maintenance is ‘work undertaken in order to keep or restore every facility.’
There are several different kinds of maintenance, as follows:
a.
Preventive maintenance, which aims to prevent breakdowns.
b.
Corrective maintenance, to repair faults.
c.
Breakdown maintenance, to rectify breakdowns and prepare contingency plans for possible breakdowns (provision of important spare parts etc).
d.
Running maintenance, carried out whilst plant or machinery is operating.
e.
Shutdown maintenance, carried out when plant or machinery is taken out of service.
19.
The above forms of maintenance can be combined into a planned programme of maintenance for each major piece of plant or machine.
Planned maintenance means that routine servicing and overhaul arrangements are scheduled in advance and contingency plans drawn up for unexpected breakdowns.
The effect of having planned maintenance is to minimise unforeseen faults or breakdowns.
Thus maintenance can make an important contribution to containing machine running costs as well as ensuring optimum machine availability.
SUMMARY
20.
The role of production planning and control is to plan, acquire, schedule and control all the resources and facilities required to transform customer requirements into acceptable end-products.
The process involves planning the supply of men, machines and materials and organizing all these elements into a coherent system of production.
Several of these tasks require the collaboration of production with other departments, notably Marketing and Finance.
21.
Purchasing plays an important role in production activities.
Its key responsibility is to ensure that the manufacturing process is fully supplied with materials in a cost-effective way.
This entails appraising and selecting appropriate suppliers, being well informed about the purchasing market, purchasing goods at optimum prices in terms of value, and maintaining adequate stock/inventory supplies.
22.
Purchasing involves important decisions about quality, price, quantity and delivery — the key elements of what can be called the ‘purchasing mix’.
The general principles to be followed in each of these elements are as follows.
Quality — this should represent the best compromise between the wishes of the customer and the limitations of production.
Price — ideally this should provide the best value over a period of time.
Quantity — this should be sufficient to ensure that items do not run out of stock, but not so much that unnecessary inventory costs are incurred through excessive stock-holding.
Delivery — here the key issues are timing and reliability and these are the features of the delivery service to be expected of suppliers.
23.
Inspection is another important activity in the production process.
The Inspection department's role is to ensure that quality standards are properly maintained, without incurring disproportionate costs.
Inspection is undertaken primarily by (a) process control, and (b) acceptance sampling.
Process control is conducted during the manufacturing process.
It consists of checking items as they progress through the process, comparing them with relevant standards and taking corrective action, where required.
Such control is often fully automatic.
Acceptance sampling is usually carried out at the customer's premises and consists of examining samples of goods delivered, noting the number of reject, or unsatisfactory, items, comparing this number  with an agreed acceptable quality level.
If the number of rejects exceeds the level, the batch is returned.
24.
Maintenance comes in several different forms (preventive, corrective etc), all of which can be combined into a system of planned maintenance.
Planned maintenance minimises unforeseen breakdowns, reduces machine running costs and ensures optimum machine availability.
TYPES OF PRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
1.
The most common method of distinguishing between production systems or types of production is to separate them into the three categories of jobbing, batch and mass production.
This is the approach which will be used in this short chapter.
The three categories are very broad, as Joan Woodward and her researchers discovered in the 1950's during their work on industrial organization in Essex (See Chapter 13 paras.
13–19 above).
In the Essex research, written up in ‘Industrial Organization: Theory and Practice, O.U.P., 1965 it was felt necessary to sub-divide these broad categories further so as to produce eleven.
A comparison between the Woodward list and the three common categories will be made towards the end of this chapter.
2.
The jobbing, batch and mass production categories each have their own distinctive systems of operation, and their own problems of production planning and control.
Each will be examined in turn with the aim of highlighting the most important factors involved.
JOBBING PRODUCTION
3.
Jobbing production may also be called job production or unique production.
The essential feature of jobbing production is that it produces single articles or ‘one-off’ items.
These products may be small, tailor-made components, huge pieces of equipment or large single items, such as a ship.
Most products are made for a particular customer or to a particular order.
Jobbing production is to be found in industries such as heavy engineering (eg production of electricity generating plant), shipbuilding and civil engineering (eg bridge construction).
It is also to be found in most other industries, where it is employed to produce prototype models, spare parts, modifications to existing plant and countless other ‘one-off’, tailor-made pieces.
There is hardly a factory in existence which does not have a jobbing department somewhere or other.
4.
Because of the unique or individual nature of each article or item to be produced, planning is not easy in jobbing production, neither is control.
Efficiency of operations has to give way to inventiveness and creativity.
This can be illustrated by considering  some of the key characteristics of jobbing production.
These are as follows:
a.
A wide variety of different operations to be performed under varying circumstances ie no standardisation.
b.
Varying sequences of operations, also subject to varying circumstances.
c.
General-purpose machinery and equipment.
d.
Varied work layouts, depending on process and/or operation.
e.
Unpredictable demands on stores.
f.
Workforce skilled in wide range of skills.
g.
Adaptable and equally skilled supervision.
Many of the above conditions make it extremely difficult to plan, integrate and control the types, sequence and timing of operations.
It is difficult to avoid idle time for both men and machines.
Thus the entire manufacturing process tends to be relatively expensive compared with other forms of production.
Against this can be weighed the advantages of producing an article or item which is made especially to the customer's own specification.
BATCH PRODUCTION
5.
Batch production is the production of standardised units, or pans, in small or large lots (batches).
It represents a halfway position between jobbing production and mass production, and is mostly to be found in the light engineering industry.
The main distinction between batch and jobbing production lies in the standardised nature of the former.
Unlike the varied operations and sequences of the unique ‘one-off’ products of jobbing production, the products of batch production are dealt with systematically in lots, or batches, only moving on to the next operation, when each lot has been machined or processed in the current operation.
6.
Batches may be produced to order and forwarded direct to the customer, as in the production of subcomponents for another manufacturer, or they may be made for stock.
One of the major problems associated with batch production is to determine the optimum size of batches, particularly where a generalised, rather than specific, demand for a product exists.
If too many units are produced, stocks will lie idle or go to waste; if too few are produced, the item will go out of stock, and it may be difficult to fit in further batches in the short-term.
7.
The key characteristics of batch production are as follows:
a.
A standardised set of operations, carried out intermittently, as each batch moves from one operation to the next.
b.
General purpose machinery and plant, but grouped in batteries of the same type.
c.
Heavy shop-floor stores requirement.
d.
Narrower range of skills required.
e.
Emphasis on production planning and progressing.
f.
Relatively short production runs.
These characteristics lead to a generally well-controlled and efficient method of production, whose main disadvantage is the time-delay caused by the queueing effect of individual units waiting for the batch to be completed before moving on to the next operation.
This problem can be overcome by changing to an assembly line operation which is a prominent feature of flow production, or mass production, as it is commonly called.
MASS PRODUCTION
8.
Mass production dates from the time of Henry Ford, who was the first man to adopt the principle of the production line, when he used this approach to produce a restricted range of motor cars put together in a flow-line process.
In a unit mass production system, a small range of products is produced in large quantities by ‘flowing’ uninterruptedly from one operation, or process, to the next until completion.
This type of production requires careful and lengthy planning of plant and processes.
The capital costs are high on account of the specialised nature of the machines required for the production line.
However once the line has been set up, control is relatively simple.
Mass production systems are dependent on the high demand created by mass markets, for it is only by making the fullest use of the capital equipment involved that a manufacturing organization can achieve its target profit levels.
9.
The key features of mass production are as follows:
a.
Rigid product specifications, previously tested.
b.
Specialised machines and equipment, set out in a line for nation.
c.
Highly-standardised methods, tools and materials.
d.
Long production runs for individual products.
e.
Narrow range of skills, and specified range of operations required by workforce at any one point in the line.
In purely rational terms, mass-production is the most efficient way of producing large quantities of articles or items.
Control can be  exercised to a sophisticated level because of the standardised nature of the entire process.
Its greatest drawback is that it requires human beings to adapt themselves to the production process, and in most Western countries, there has been a reaction against this requirement.
Employees are seeking to counteract the tedium and monotony of the highly specialised work patterns in mass-production by pressing for more integrated roles, requiring a wider range of skills and operations.
In some cases this has led to the complete break up of production lines into autonomous circuits, each operated by teams of employees using their skills on a shared or flexible basis.
10.
Another form of mass production, usually called flow production or process production, can be seen in continuous process industries such as steel-making, paper-making and cement production.
In such industries the products literally flow from one process to the next, but, unlike in the mass production of individual products, this process is continuous for weeks or months on end.
In flow processes, the supply of raw materials has to be planned to the highest standards in order to avoid complete plant shutdown owing to unforeseen shortages.
In these situations shortages have a much more serious effect than in unit mass-production.
Fortunately, the control mechanisms and procedures for flow processes are usually so sophisticated that the processes become automatically self-regulating.
Another important difference between this form of mass-production and unit mass-production is that the former invariably requires a lower labour force than the latter.
SUB DIVIDING THE CATEGORIES
11.
As was noted above (in paragraph 1), the three common categories are very broad.
Even our analysis has had to distinguish between two forms of mass production, and the use of batch methods was applied to small and medium sized lots, which omits the possibility of large batches.
Clearly it would be better to have a more detailed picture, which more accurately represented the number of options available.
This is all the more reasonable if one considers that very few, if any, manufacturing concerns engage solely in one type of production.
12.
The list which follows compares the much more detailed analysis of Woodward's researchers with the broader one that has been applied above.
The Woodward list is taken from the published account of the research.
13.
It can be seen that the Woodward analysis of jobbing production corresponds to the description given in paragraph 3 above, but by giving each of the main types of jobbing production its own title, the Woodward analysis provides for a more accurate representation of the range of options.
Where batch production is concerned, the Woodward analysis distinguishes four types of batch production compared with the one type we have described.
The Woodward team not only distinguished between small and large batches, as described in paragraph 5 above, but also between large batches produced by single machines or batteries of machines and large batches produced on assembly lines.
(The latter, in our definition, would fall under ‘mass production’.)
They also included the intermittent production of chemicals as a separate batch process.
Thus their range of batch options is much more comprehensive and distinctive than the broad category we have used.
Finally, the Woodward breakdown of mass production into two categories makes explicit the distinction made in our analysis between mass production and flow or process production.
14.
On balance, it is probably helpful to think firstly in terms of the three broad categories, so as to separate the main production options available, and secondly in terms of the more detailed breakdown in order to draw up a truer picture of what may be possible in practice.
SUMMARY
15.
This brief chapter has sought to describe the main features of the basic types of production systems — jobbing, batch and mass production.
Jobbing production refers to the production of unique or ‘one-off’ items, made to order.
These items may be small or large, and they are produced under conditions of what is appropriate at a given time, rather than conditions which are standardised.
Both planning and control are difficult to achieve in this form of production.
16.
Batch production refers to the production of standardised units in batches, or lots.
Only when a batch has completed one process can it be moved to the next.
Batches may be produced to order, or for stock.
Batch production can be relatively well planned and controlled, but queueing problems may arise when batches are ready to move on to the next operation.
These problems can be overcome by utilising assembly lines ie moving over to a mass production method.
17.
Mass production refers to the production of vast quantities of product units in a flow-line process, where each smoothly from one operation or process, to the next until completion.
Where the mass-production of continuous processes is concerned, the method is called flow production or process production.
Mass production methods call for detailed planning and sophisticated control procedures.
There is very little scope for the exercise of skills by *e workforce, and the flowline layout has been challenged in several quarters.