

Coastal features
Although normal subaerial erosion may act with greater power on some parts of the earth's surface than on others, an obvious example being found in the contrast between rates of denudation in river valleys and on plateau surfaces, the general result of such erosion is an overall reduction of the surface.
The action of the sea, however, is concentrated within comparatively narrow limits.
In plan the length of the coastline obviously limits the area which waves can attack, so that the more highly indented coastlines offer greater lengths to wave action.
In section the range over which erosion is operative is equally restricted, although there is as yet no precise agreement as to the exact limits.
Waves certainly erode a metre or so (several feet) above the level of the highest spring tides, but the depth below the lowest neap tides at which erosion occurs appears to be much more variable.
A second contrast between subaerial and marine erosion is to be found in the relative importance of erosion and deposition.
Although deposition may be an important feature in the process of stream and slope grading, it is usually temporary and the products of erosion are finally reduced in size and transported to the sea.
Thus the coastline receives not only the products of marine erosion but also the waste derived from subaerial erosion.
It is not surprising, therefore, that on the coast forms due to erosion and to deposition are more equally balanced than they usually are inland under the influence of subaerial erosion.
Finally, it must be pointed out that the recession of a coastline is not merely the result of marine erosion.
Where the cliffs are high they may be undercut by the sea with the result that most of the material may be removed by the subsequent collapse of the upper undermined section.
Alternatively, the rate of marine erosion at the base of the cliffs may be less than the general rate of subaerial denudation over the whole cliff.
Such a condition leads to a degraded cliff, one that is principally the product of subaerial erosion and only locally sharpened at the base by marine erosion.
Factors affecting marine erosion
The factors affecting erosion on the coast may be divided into two broad groups.
On the one hand there are the waves themselves and the various  factors which control their size, shape and approach to the coast.
On the other hand are the characteristics of the coast: the height of the cliffs, the lithology of the rocks, the orientation of the coast with respect to the waves and the supply of debris available on the beach.
The effect of waves
The erosive activity of waves is partly due to the effect of impacts of water against the coast and partly to the action of stones and boulders moved by the waves.
The nature of the impact has a considerable effect on the pressure exerted on the cliff face and a number of different types have been examined by Russell and Macmillan (1952).
If the sea is deep right up to the coast the waves may reach the coast and be reflected back without breaking.
The reflected waves interfere with the incoming waves to produce a pattern of standing waves or clapotis, the crests of which always appear in the same places (Fig. 8. 1A).
Such waves  are said to be capable of setting up oscillations which may damage a jointed structure, as the increases and decreases of pressure tend to pull jointed blocks away.
In designing artificial defences the structures are made sufficiently strong to resist this type of wave, so that one might, therefore, expect closely jointed rocks to be susceptible to damage by clapotis as such rocks are the nearest approach to natural walls.
Yet plunging cliffs, i.e. those whose profiles are continued straight down below the sea, are free from notches, benches and other forms of wave action.
Some plunging cliffs may be due to faulting, downwarping and volcanic flows of very recent date in tectonically mobile areas such as New Zealand.
The lack of notching of these, therefore, may be due to lack of time.
Other plunging cliffs, however, have been formed by the Post-glacial rise of sea level, for example the sheer, gaunt, limestone cliffs that form Cape St Vincent at the south  western tip of Portugal.
These cliffs fall from a monotonous, limestone, coastal plateau straight down almost vertically into deep water.
Their steepness leads one to infer modern erosion due to their great exposure, but there is no wavecut bench to indicate any erosion.
Any debris dislodged from them by hydraulic action sinks to the depths and cannot be used by the waves to attack the cliffs.
Thus, plunging cliffs seem to suggest that, at least in certain areas, reflected waves and clapotis are not very effective.
The highest pressures exerted on the rock are connected with breaking waves, but the pressure varies with the distance between the point where the waves break and the cliff.
When waves break it has been observed that a jet of water at the crest of the wave may move forward with twice the velocity of the wave as a whole, so that high pressures may be exerted for a period of a second or two on the cliff face.
Such conditions, shown in Fig. 8.1 B and D, have been shown to be the main ones responsible for damaging marine structures.
A pocket of air may be trapped between the breaking wave and the cliff, if the wave breaks in the right position relative to the cliff (Fig. 8.1C).
If this happens very high pressures may result due, not to the wave itself, but to the pressure of the air compressed between the wave and the cliff.
Work by Bagnold has shown that the pressures are greatest when the pocket of trapped air is thinnest and that when the dimension of the pocket at right angles to the cliff reaches half that of the depth of the pocket the pressure is negligible.
The possibility that these momentarily high pressures may damage jointed rocks cannot be ignored, but there is, curiously enough, no direct evidence as yet that actual damage has been caused by waves of this type.
The reason may be found in the fact that the air tends to burst upwards through the water along the path of least resistance.
Very high velocities have been observed in the movement of spray rising from impacts of this type.
Large masses of spray have been recorded moving upwards at above 110 km/h (70 mile/h), while small jets have been observed with the astounding speed of over 270 km/h (170 mile/h).
There still seems to be a lot to be discovered quantitatively about the physical nature of wave damage or erosion and its precise causes, although Komar (1976) has pointed to work being done in Japan relating wave height and frequency, together with rock properties, to rates of cliff recession.
But this approach, although of extreme importance in assessing potential erosion is not primarily concerned with the basic physical causes of wave damage.
The amount of erosion of any rock cliff will depend not only on the way in which the waves break against the cliff but also on the size of the waves.
The size of the waves is governed largely by the time during which they have been moving under the influence of the-wind.
The time may be limited by the proximity of another shore from which the wind is blowing or by the duration of the wind.
Where the fetch, or distance at the disposal of the wind for the generation of waves, is very large the factor governing the height of the waves is the time during which a wind of a given strength  has.been blowing.
As an example Russell and Macmillan (1952) quote the fact that with a westerly gale of twelve hours' duration in the Atlantic the size of the waves reaching Cornwall would be limited by the time and not by the fetch, i.e. the distance between Cornwall and America.
On the other hand fetch is the limiting factor in the height of waves generated by easterly winds over the North Sea.
As a more extreme example may be quoted the case of a south-easterly gale in the Straits of Dover: however long the gale blew the waves could never exceed a certain height determined by the distance across the Straits.
Each sea and ocean tends to have a maximum wave size (Zenkovich, 1967) depending upon the size and shape of the basin and the weather conditions.
In mid-ocean storm waves are typically 15–20 m (50–65 ft) high and 300 m (1000 ft) long at a maximum.
In the Mediterranean waves 9 m (30 ft) high and 200 m (650 ft) long have been reported, while in the North Sea, the Bering Sea, the Barents Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk waves 8 m (25 ft) high and 150 m (500 ft) long have been observed.
The Baltic and Black Seas, which are smaller, seem to have maximum waves about 6–7 m (20–23 ft) high and 60–100 m (200–330 ft) long.
These figures refer to the size of free waves in the open ocean.
When waves approach the shore they suffer a number of changes.
Storm waves produced in open oceans travel on far from the storm centres with velocities which depend on wave length, the longer the wave length the higher the velocity, and on the height of the waves, the lower the waves the less readily they are damped out.
Such waves are known as swell, and they are often the main waves affecting coasts in the southern oceans, for example South Africa and Australia.
As swell waves or wind-driven waves run into shallow water the velocity and wave length both decrease, as also does the wave height at first, but when the ratio of depth to wave length falls below 0.06 the waves increase in height immediately prior to breaking (Bird, 1968).
At the same time changes of wave direction are imposed on waves by the sea bottom interfering with the flow pattern in the waves, but these directional changes are considered later on.
In connection with wave attack it is useful to distinguish between prevalent and dominant winds.
Prevalent winds are those which blow with the greatest frequency at any place.
Over the British Isles the prevalent wind at all stations is the westerly wind.
Dominant winds are those which produce the largest and most damaging waves at any station.
The prevalent and dominant winds may blow from the same direction or they may blow from almost opposite directions.
On almost the whole of the exposed parts of the western coasts of Britain both the prevalent and dominant winds are the westerlies, but on the east coast, where the prevalent winds are still the westerlies, the dominant winds are the easterlies, as the westerly winds are blowing offshore and are incapable of producing waves affecting the coast.
A final factor affecting the erosion of cliff coasts composed of hard rock is the load of stones and boulders stirred up and moved about by the waves.
The effect of the load is probably somewhat different from the variations of pressure set up by breaking waves, which may dislodge jointed blocks.
Boulders flung against the cliff by the waves are much more likely to knock off projecting corners and become themselves rounded in the process than to dislodge rock masses.
The amount of attrition can be readily observed in the rounded nature of many cliffs below the high tide level and in the rounding of the beach material itself.
Care must be exercised in introducing the latter as evidence of marine abrasion, as in many parts of the coast the beach material is derived from the erosion of cliffs of incoherent material already containing rounded or partially rounded stones.
Well-known examples are the cliffs of Pleistocene deposits on the east coast and the cliffs of Tertiary beds and coombe rock on the south coast, all of which may contain rounded flint material.
The purely surface nature of the abrasion of beach pebbles may be deduced from flint beaches.
Flint is comparatively brittle but the number of flints with fresh fractured surfaces is usually small.
On the other hand the roughening due to superficial abrasion is quite apparent.
Most of the remarks so far apply particularly to coasts of hard rocks.
Where the rocks exposed in the cliffs are incoherent, pressures produced by the waves may be of less importance and much of the erosion accomplished by the load flung against the cliffs and by the simple swilling action of the waves, which removes the finer matrix from gravel beds.
The beds are quickly eroded, the cliff over steepened, and collapse follows due to the inability of the material to maintain very steep faces.
Such coasts are often fronted by large shingle beaches, derived from the destruction of the cliffs, and the erosion of the cliff depends to a large extent on the protection afforded to it by the beach.
On shores composed mainly of shingle the amount of erosion performed by waves depends to a large extent on whether they are constructive or destructive.
The differences between these waves have been examined by Lewis (1931).
Broadly speaking, waves with a high frequency (13–15 per minute) are destructive, while waves with a lower frequency (6–8 per minute) are constructive.
The difference appears to be caused by the direction of the plunge of the mass of water when the wave breaks.
In high-frequency waves the water motion appears to be nearly circular so that, when the waves break, the mass of water is directed downwards at the beach (Fig. 8.2A).
With this type of wave the swash, or rush of water up the beach from the breaking wave, is weak as the water plunges directly on to the beach.
In addition the backwash from the last wave is still moving down the beach when the next wave arrives due to the high frequency of the waves.
Thus, an already weak swash is further impeded in its movement up the beach by interference from the backwash of the wave before.
The result is that this type of wave combs material down from the top of the beach giving a net erosive effect.
Constructive waves, on the other hand, have a lower frequency and the particle movement within them is more elliptical (Fig. 8.2B).
The result is a powerful swash which moves material up the beach.
The backwash is reduced in energy by the percolation of water into the shingle, so that the backwash is not necessarily able to return the material carried forward by the swash in spite of the fact that it is combined with the effect of gravity, whereas the swash is acting against gravity.
Constructive and destructive waves correspond closely with two of the main types of breaker recognised today, namely spilling and plunging breakers.
Swell waves running on to a coast break when the forward motion of particles at the wave crest exceeds the forward movement of the wave as a whole, a state of affairs caused by the wave retarding as it runs into shallow water and sometimes over-naively attributed to friction with the sea bottom.
In spilling breakers the crest spills down the front of the wave without the wave front becoming vertical and surges forward over the beach.
In plunging breakers the wave front becomes vertical and the crest plunges nearly vertically downwards with far less surge up the beach.
There are, of course, many natural breakers which do no conform exactly to these two sorts.
Komar instances surging breakers which shape up as though to plunge, but the base of the wave then surges forward and the crest collapses.
The simple association of degradation and aggradation of beaches with wave type needs some modification.
Obviously waves may have frequencies of intermediate magnitude and so be difficult to classify as either destructive or constructive.
Further, large waves of destructive type, although combing the beach down, may at the same time fling shingle up above high water mark and so form beach ridges.
In fact, very large waves, whatever their  frequency, tend to erode the beach, while small waves tend to build the beach up.
Finally, it is not entirely true that the wave is the independent variable and the beach the dependent one, because the form of the wave, at least when it nears the coast, is to some extent dictated by the form of the beach and the immediate offshore bottom.
An interaction exists just as it does in river processes.
Onshore winds and waves lead to the piling up of water near the shore, and this water has to escape seawards in one way or another.
It used to be thought that there was a seaward movement of water on the bottom, so producing the undertow which was considered so dangerous to bathers.
If such a flow exists it may assist the seaward movement of debris and hence contribute to the erosion of the coast.
It would not necessarily be capable of moving debris, but any debris lifted by wave action would have its direction of fall influenced by the direction of the bottom current.
In recent years it has been generally held that the backwash down the beach contributes to the breaking of the next wave, becomes involved in it and is returned with the swash, so that there is no continuous undertow transferring water out beyond the breaker zone.
Whether there is a percolation of water seawards in the beach material is another possibility, which does not seem to have received much attention, but it is unlikely that such a form of movement would be capable of dealing with the total volume of water involved.
Starting with Shepard's work in the late 1930s it has become increasingly normal to attribute the return flow to local rip currents.
There must come a time when so much head of water is piled against the beach that at certain points it is enough to initiate return seaward flows, which are the rip currents.
Once a current is developed and the head of water is lowered a hydraulic gradient is developed along the beach and a circulation pattern develops of longshore currents feeding seaward rip currents (Fig. 8.3).
Speeds of 8 km/h (5 mile/h) with waves 3 m (lo ft) high are normal, while speeds of double this may occur in severe storms.
These currents show on aerial photographs because of the colouring given by the amount of sand being carried by them.
Rip currents also occur with oblique waves.
Such waves pile water up and initiate longshore currents.
If these currents are  confined, at every point along the beach the addition of more and more water could only be handled by a continuous acceleration of the current, which does not occur.
In this case the head of water is relieved by the formation of rip currents oblique to the shore and to the wind.
Rip currents are still a subject of active research and by no means everything is known about them, in particular the generation of the cell circulation which feeds them.
It is apparent that such a pattern requires the existence of a variation in the piling up of water along the beach.
From such heads of water currents will diverge along the coast and turn seawards as rip currents when they meet opposite currents emanating from the next divergence along the coast.
But the question really is to explain variations in water level along the coast.
Where the offshore topography consists of deeper and shallower areas at right angles to the coast, incoming waves will be less retarded in the troughs and so produce divergences, while the shallower areas will be areas of convergence, submarine equivalents of the pattern of waves round headlands (Fig. 8.7).
These convergences will thus provide the sites for the divergent longshore currents required to initiate the cell circulation pattern.
But it is also believed that such cellular circulation develops on smooth coasts with uniform offshore bottom topography.
One suggestion to explain this invokes the development of standing or edge waves normal to the coast and the interaction of the incoming swell, provided that the periodicity is the same, with the standing waves to provide the loci of higher water from which the longshore currents diverge.
Once a rip current pattern has developed it scours the sea bottom to give areas of deeper water which perpetuate the cell circulation pattern: a classical example of positive feedback.
The problem curiously resembles the formation of patterned ground in periglacial conditions (Chapter 15): the reasons for the initiation are difficult to discover, the reasons for the maintenance of the pattern are reasonably clear.
The occurrence of oblique waves introduces a distortion into the simple cellular pattern, one longshore current being much stronger than the other where a pair converge to form the rip.
Constructive waves are often low frequency waves of swell type.
Large swell waves may be present with an absolutely calm sea or even with light offshore winds in the opposite direction.
These tend to cause offshore movements of surface water and either a return movement along the bottom or in certain restricted zones.
Thus the constructive action of the waves may be helped by the general onshore movement of water.
Tides, surges and currents
The causes of the tides need hardly concern us here, except to state that the interaction of the solar and lunar gravitational effects, the shape of the oscillating basins, i.e. the seas and the oceans, the earth's rotation, and the modification imposed upon tides by coastal configuration produces tides  of varying range from virtually nil in many oceanic situations to very high figures at the head of certain bays and estuaries, for example 15 m (50 ft) at the head of the Bay of Fundy and 12 m (40 ft) at Avonmouth in the Bristol Channel.
Bird (1968) divides up coasts on the basis of tidal range into microtidal (less than 2 m: 6 ft), mesotidal (2–4 m) and macrotidal (more than 4 m: 12 ft).
Tidal ranges are important in several respects.
The inshore limits of wave erosion are related to the heights of high tides, so that the inshore margin of a marine terrace may vary by 6–7 5 m (20–25 ft)(half the tidal range) from areas with no tides to areas with the maximum tidal ranges known.
This fact must obviously be taken into account in the interpretation of raised beaches.
Where there is no tidal range wave attack is concentrated at the same level of the coast for twenty-four hours a day, but where the tidal range is great it may be spread over a vast foreshore zone and may only attack the foot of the cliffs for a very short period at each high tide.
Furthermore, if large tidal ranges are accompanied by such wide foreshores much of the wave attack and energy will be expended thereon.
Thus the optimum conditions for coastal terrace development would seem to be areas with small tidal ranges.
Finally, tidal range is an important factor in the generation of tidal currents (see below) which may locally become of geomorphological importance.
Surges, or storm surges, are accentuations of tidal conditions by suitable meteorological situations.
The height of tides is increased by onshore winds and by reductions of atmospheric pressure, a fall of I millibar raising the ocean level by about 1 cm (0.4 in).
Very deep depressions might lead to rises in sea level, therefore, of the order of 0.5 m (1.5 ft) or even more in tropical cyclones.
True storm surges lead to even greater rises than this.
They may be illustrated by the surge of 1 February 1953 that caused such serious damage round the coasts of the North Sea.
The North Sea is obviously so shaped that very strong northerly winds can cause a piling up of water in the southern part of the sea, either because the escape route through the Straits of Dover is narrow, or because it is quite possible for the winds in the North Sea to be predominantly northerly while the winds in the English Channel are predominantly westerly.
Such a situation can easily arise when a depression is situated off southern Norway.
It results in a tendency for water level to rise both on the North Sea and English Channel ends of the Straits of Dover thus preventing the water escaping in either direction.
Such a situation arose on the night of 31 January-1 February 1953 (Robinson 1953).
A deep depression with a centre varying between 968 and 978 millibars moved from the Faroes to the mouth of the Elbe, while behind it a ridge of high pressure built up strongly over the Atlantic.
The northerly gradient behind the depression was thus exceptionally steep.
In  fact the gradient wind at 600 m (2000 ft) was of the order of 250 km/h (150 mile/h) and surface gusts of 180km/h (over 100 mile/h) were recorded on the east side of Scotland.
It was a time of spring tides, which, because of the surge, were some 2 m (6 ft) higher than predicted in eastern England and 3 m (10 ft) higher in estuaries in the Netherlands.
On to this exceptionally high tide were piled waves of over 6 m (20 ft) amplitude so that wave attack was absolutely excessive (a series of accounts of the damage is given in Geography, 1953, pp. 132–89).
It was fortunate that the time of the surge did not coincide perfectly with the high tide, otherwise damage might have been worse.
Again, it was bad enough to have a surge associated with high spring tides, but it could have been associated with equinoctial springs seven weeks later with even more disastrous results.
Currents may be set up in various ways (Guilcher, 1958).
Wave currents are caused by the fact that a wave is an orbital motion which decreases with depth.
Therefore, the forward movement at the top of the orbit is greater than the reverse movement at the bottom.
This results in a gentle down-wave drift of water, which can lead to the accumulation of water along the coast and so help to generate rip and longshore currents.
These latter have already been discussed and attributed to gravity movements of water accumulating along the shore.
Tidal currents are caused in two main types of situation.
If, for some reason, the time of high tide is different at the two ends of a strait, there will obviously develop a strong gradient between the two, giving rise to a tidal current which in narrow straits can become very strong.
Even if there is no difference in time a narrow strait can so canalise the tide that a powerful current is developed.
The maximum velocity known occurs in the Moluccas and is of the order of 25 km/h (15 mile/h).
Velocities of 17–18 km/h (10–11 mile/h) occur between Alderney and the Cotentin peninsula, while even in the Straits of Messina, in the virtually tideless Mediterranean, velocities of 8 km/h (5 mile/h) have been reported.
Discharge currents in estuaries may be very strong because the high tide impounds river water which strongly reinforces the ebb flow.
The attitude towards the role of currents in erosion and transport has varied a lot.
At the turn of the century both were attributed mainly to currents.
In the interwar period most of the activity was referred to waves.
Since then a more balanced view has prevailed in which currents and waves are seen to act together.
Currents of the velocity quoted above are obviously capable of severe erosion and considerable transport.
Where currents are feeble their role may lie principally in determining the direction of fall of particles raised into suspension by wave action.
Virtually, then, they determine the direction of saltation.
The effect of the nature of the coast on erosion
Although reasonable surmises may be made concerning the effect of  various properties of the coast on erosion, little is known of the precise effects which they have.
The nature of the rock, its hardness, its reaction to chemical weathering and the frequency of its faults and joints must be of considerable importance.
The height of the cliffs must be considered, as the higher the cliff the greater the amount of material which has to be eroded to cause a given recession of the coast.
Finally, the orientation of the coast with respect to dominant waves, the degree of indentation of the coast and the nature of the shore profile away from the coast seem to play important parts in coastal erosion.
The chief lithological effects are probably due to the hardness of the rock and the degree of its jointing: the harder the rock and the smaller the degree of jointing the slower the rate of coastal erosion.
Erosion is most rapid in completely uncemented rocks.
Much of the east coast of England is formed of Pleistocene deposits which yield rapidly to wave action provided that they are not protected by natural constructional forms or by artificial defences, such as breakwaters and groynes.
Similarly many parts of the coasts of Sussex and Hampshire are formed of soft Eocene, Oligocene and Pleistocene rocks, which are also readily eroded.
The speed of erosion of these uncemented rocks can be very alarming.
Steers (1953) has quoted examples from the east coast: in Holderness in a thirty-seven year period towards the end of the last century the average loss from the coast was a strip 65 m (215 ft) wide, or an average annual loss of about 1.75 m (6 ft), while the district suffering the most severe erosion lost 82 m (273 ft) in the same period.
At Pakefield, near Lowestoft, one point on the coast receded 185 m (620 ft) in the period 1883–1 947, i.e. an average annual loss of nearly 3 m (10 ft).
A similar average annual loss has been recorded at Warden Point on the Isle of Sheppey, where the rock is non-resistant London Clay.
Immediately after the 1939–45 war considerable erosion started on the Sussex coast between Worthing and Littlehampton, due probably to the decay of the groyne system.
For a couple of years the low cliffs of unconsolidated coombe rock and brickearth were eroded at the rate of 3.5–6m (12–20 ft) per year before they were boarded in and a new groyne system established.
The extreme example of soft rock is probably provided by volcanic ash and a recession of almost one mile in the period 1883–1928 of cliffs composed of this material on the island of Krakatoa between Sumatra and Java has been observed by Umbgrove (Guilcher, 1958): this works out to a loss of over 30 m (100 ft) per year at some points.
For erosion to continue at the rates noted above it is necessary that the material supplied by the cliff should be transported away by the sea: otherwise there may be formed extensive beaches, spits, bars and comparable forms, which dissipate the energy of the waves and prevent, at least temporarily, the base of the cliff being attacked.
The eroded material is usually moved away by the action of longshore drift (see below), which, in England, moves material mainly from north to south on the east coast and from west to east on the south coast.
Whether erosion is active on any cliff may be  established by the nature of the cliff profile: an actively eroded soft cliff shows evidence of scouring at its base, and the cliff above will have signs of active slumping of the unconsolidated material; a dead cliff in incoherent material will quickly become degraded and covered in vegetation (Fig.8.4) Good examples of dead cliffs are to be found behind Romney Marsh, Morfa Dyffryn in Merionethshire, and the dune complex at Winterton Ness in Norfolk.
In soft cliffs erosion is very active at first and becomes progressively slower until it halts, unless the debris from the cliff is moved away so that it does not interfere with wave action at the foot of the cliff.
Erosion of hard rocks is usually very different.
Here, the joints and small faults are of very great significance in allowing the ingress of the sea and in affecting the detailed form of the cliff and the rock platform in front of the cliff (Plates 24 and 25).
Joints and fissures are probably enlarged partly by the abrasive effect of stones scoured into them by the waves and partly by the pressures generated by the waves when they break against the cliffs.
Joints may be enlarged into deep narrow inlets such as the geos developed in the Old Red Sandstone of Caithness.
Faults may be enlarged by the sea into caves or even into tunnels through narrow promontories: spectacular examples of the latter are to be observed at Tintagel, north Cornwall, where a fault zone is followed by two through tunnels (Wilson, 1952)(Fig. 8.5), the more important one being the well-known Merlin's Cave beneath the Island.
The final result of marine erosion along joints and other planes of weakness is the production of stacks, such as the Old Man of Hoy in the Orkneys and the Needles off the western end of the Isle of Wight.
The joint pattern is also of considerable importance in controlling the nature of the cliff profile.
When the dip of the beds is fairly steep towards the    sea, there is a tendency for blocks of rock to break off at the joint planes, usually at right angles to the bedding, so that the cliff profile tends to be dominated by the dip of the beds.
Where the beds are vertical, horizontal or dipping inland, joint blocks cannot readily break off and slip down the bedding planes: the result is a tendency for the cliffs to be more nearly vertical.
Interesting forms may result where rocks of differing lithologies are exposed in the cliff face, especially where soft, incompetent rocks are overlain by resistant rocks.
This arrangement of beds is conducive to the formation of landslips on a large scale, several examples of which are to be found on the south coast of England.
At Folkestone Chalk lies above Gault Clay in the cliffs, and the clay thus tends to become saturated and to have its shear strength greatly reduced.
This leads to landslipping.
At Seaton in Devon comparable landslips occur where Chalk and Upper Greensand overlie incompetent rocks of Lias and Trias age.
The possibility of considerable chemical action at water level on limestones and related rocks cannot be ignored.
Guilcher in particular(1953 and 1958) has analysed the development of such features in a variety of climates.
Even in the British Isles some of the harder limestones are eroded into clintlike surfaces.
The difficulty has been to account for the way in which such features develop, as the sea in most regions is saturated with calcium carbonate, and in some places supersaturated.
In a study of Oahu, one of the Hawaiian islands, Wentworth (1939) attributed the solution not so much to the action of the sea but more to the effect of fresh water seeping from the land at sea level.
Pools of water, presumably derived from this source, were observed on the upper parts of the beach and were not saturated with calcium carbonate.
But although this hypothesis removes one difficulty it creates several more, as indicated by Guilcher (1958).
Even in Oahu, where the solution is intense, the coastal limestone regions receive only about 1000 mm (25 in) of rain a year and this would not appear to be sufficient to account for the amount of solution.
Secondly, Panzer has noticed solution forms at the base of several small isolated rocks, which would not have sufficient surface area to allow a large amount of surface water to collect.
Finally, important solution forms are to be found in the Red Sea, a region of such aridity that the possibility of fresh water playing a part at the present time can be ignored.
Some other explanation of the solution must obviously be sought and is probably to be found in diurnal variations of the carbon dioxide content of the inshore waters.
One suggestion is that, as the solubility of carbon dioxide increases with decreasing temperature, the cooling of the sea at night will lead to an increased acidity and hence to increased solution.
A more likely explanation is probably to be found in the diurnal variation of carbon dioxide content caused by the activity of algae.
During the day these organisms absorb carbon dioxide from the water for the process of photosynthesis, the decrease leading to the precipitation of finely divided calcium carbonate by the sea.
This deposited material is mainly removed by the waves so that at night, when the algae emit carbon dioxide, the ensuing greater acidity of the sea water causes a chemical attack on the rock itself and not merely the redissolving of the finely divided material precipitated during the day.
Some very good examples of solution effects may be observed on the coast of Glamorgan where the Carboniferous Limestone emerges as the wavecut platform from beneath Liassic cliffs, for example near Nash Point.
The same rock on the coast of the Gower peninsula also displays the phenomenon.
The degree and nature of the fretting seems to vary with the position on the wavecut platform in relation to sea level.
Even in non-calcareous rocks it is possible that sea water may exert a chemical action on some rock-forming minerals, thus causing a rapid dissolution of the rocks.
According to Joly, basalt, obsidian, orthoclase felspar and hornblende weather three to fourteen times more rapidly in salt water than in fresh.
There is, of course, some difficulty in ascertaining how much of the chemical weathering of a rock is due to its contact with the sea, as it is quite possible that rocks, subjected to severe chemical weathering on the land may, by movements of base level, be brought to sea level.
In that case, it would be easy to attribute to the chemical action of the sea the chemical decay already caused by subaerial weathering.
It is also possible that some of this weathering might be caused by salt crystallisation effects (see Chapter 3).
Apart from the lithological details of the rock, the height of the cliff must have a considerable effect on the rate at which it weathers back.
For any given cut into the cliff by the sea (AB on Fig. 8.6) the amount of debris liable to collapse on to the beach will be proportional to the height of the cliff.
In Fig. 8.6 the amounts of fallen debris are proportional to the areas ABCD and ABEF: the amount provided by the cliff in Fig. 8.6B will obviously be much greater than that provided by the cliff in Fig. 8.6A.
Before the sea can effect any further erosion at the base of the cliff it will have to reduce the cliff debris to such a size that it can be transported away from its protecting position at the base of the cliff.
Not until that is done will the sea be able to recommence its erosive activities at the foot of the cliff.
Finally, the exposure of the cliff to damaging waves must be considered.
Any cliff or headland which faces the direction from which the greatest waves come will obviously be exposed to severe wave attack.
This will be especially true of headlands, due largely to the phenomenon of wave refraction (Fig. 8.7).
Any wave approaching the coast from the open sea will   usually reach shallower water first off the headlands.
As the waves run into shallower water they are retarded, this being noticeable when the depth of the water is reduced to one half of the wave length.
The retardation is apparently not due to friction with the bottom, but is caused by changes in the flow pattern enforced on the wave by the shallower water (Russell and Macmillan, 1952).
In addition to the retardation this results also finally in an increase in the height of the wave as it is about to break.
In Fig. 8.7 the shallower water off the headlands is affecting wave E slightly, causing a slight sinuosity to be formed on the wave front.
Waves D, C, B and A show progressively greater degrees of retardation, with resulting greater degrees of refraction until wave A is not only breaking against the point but also against the sides of the headland.
The result is naturally a concentration of erosion on the headlands, thus leading ultimately to a smoothing out of the coastline if it is of one rock type.
Embayments caused by less resistant rocks will probably not be eliminated, as an equilibrium will be reached between waves, coastline form and rock resistance.
Even where the coast does not face directly towards the incoming waves refraction causes the waves to swing round and approach the shore less obliquely than they were when further out to sea (Fig. 8.8).
The result is a tendency to increase the amount of erosion on the coast.
It is usual today to illustrate the concentration of marine erosion on certain parts of the coast by drawing a series of lines orthogonal to the refracted waves (Fig. 8.9).
Where these orthogonals converge erosion will be severe: where they diverge it will be minimal.
This provides a graphic illustration of the erosion of headlands and the general lack of erosion in pronounced embayments.
Although it appears to be generally true that erosion is concentrated on the more exposed portions of the coast, one occasionally finds examples of marked marine erosion in extremely sheltered positions.
In this connection the 7.5 m (25 ft) raised beach, probably of late Pleistocene age, on the west coast of Scotland is very instructive.
The beach is found not only in narrow lochs but even in very narrow, sheltered straits between islands and between islands and the mainland.
A good example is afforded by the distribution of    the beach round the island of Seil.
The beach is well developed in the south-west of the island between Easdale and Cuan Sound, where the coast is very exposed to the south-west (Fig 8.10), i.e. in a position where the beach would certainly be expected.
But the beach is also marked on the extreme southern tip of Seil where the exposure to the waves is limited and, even more remarkably, in the narrow strait separating Seil from the mainland (Plate 26).
North of Clachan Bridge it has remained as a clear bench on either side of a strait no wider than an average English lowland river.
It is possible that the beach on the exposed portions of the coast was originally much wider and that much of it has been destroyed by marine erosion at the present sea level, whereas it has been almost completely preserved in the narrow straits.
But even if this were true, it would only alter the degree of the problem, as the rocks on the west coast of Scotland are almost entirely hard and the cutting of beaches in narrow straits must indicate that waves of considerable power have operated there.
Many of these straits are noted for strong tidal currents, but although such currents may assist in moving away the debris of erosion, they are generally held to be impotent as a cause of marked marine erosion, at least of those which outcrop in this locality.
In fact, the more one thinks about the distribution of this rock platform the less plausible seems the explanation in terms of marine erosion.
One is tempted to think in terms of some glacial process, for example freeze-thaw in conjunction possibly with salt weathering.
Yet there are features which are  difficult to explain on this hypothesis; caves are known in places at the rear of the beach and occasionally stacks, examples being on the west coast of Arran near Imachar (Plate 32), which could hardly have withstood freeze-thaw and salt weathering capable of flattening the metamorphic rocks involved.
One may have to resort to that favourite escape, recourse to a compound hypothesis involving the effects of different agents at different times in the past.
The nature of the wavecut beach
As the sea cuts into the land, the cliff collapses and the collapsed material is broken down and transported away, there results the slow development of a wavecut platform.
In soft rocks a profile drawn normally to the beach would show a concave form comparable with the long profile of a river.
At the foot of the cliff, where debris slipping from the cliff is liable to collect, a steep gradient is needed to enable the sea to comb the material down the beach, but, although this action may assist in the formation of a concave profile, it is probably not the sole cause of the concavity.
It is a matter of common observation that shingle tends to accumulate on the higher parts of the beach while the lower parts are essentially sandy.
Many of the beaches of the east and south coasts with their banks of flint shingle in the upper parts and sand lower down show this admirably.
There are probably two contributory causes.
It has already been noted that the swash often tends to push shingle up the beach, while the backwash is incapable of moving it down again.
A second factor may be found in the nature of particle movement within waves when they run into shallow water.
Although in deep water the particle movement is almost completely orbital, this is not so when the waves reach shallow water near coasts.
The waves change from regular undulations to sharp crests separated by long flat troughs.
As the crest passes there is a strong but short forward movement, while during the passage of the long flat trough little movement takes place.
This causes a tendency for material to move abruptly forward during the passage of the crest, while the slight movement associated with the trough is insufficient to affect the material.
The operation of these processes is thought to contribute to the shoreward movement of sand and shingle (Russell and Macmillan, 1952).
Shingle moved to the upper parts of the beach by either of these causes will pile up until the bank becomes so steep that stones start to roll down the beach, thus maintaining a steeper inshore section to most beaches.
In addition to the variation in gradient which produces the concave profile characteristic of many beaches, the overall gradient varies from beach to beach.
There seem to be three main factors affecting overall gradient:
1.
The grain size of the sediment has a direct effect on the percolation rate which is the main control of gradient, the coarser the beach sediment the  steeper the slope.
This, of course, is responsible for the concavity where the upper parts of beaches are coarse and the lower parts fine in their sediment sizes.
2.
The better sorted the sediment of a given calibre the steeper the beach: again it is a question of permeability, the possible volume of voids and hence the permeability being greater in well-sorted sediments.
3.
Exposed (high energy) beaches seem to have more gentle slopes for a given grain size of sediment than do protected (low energy) beaches.
This statement must not be taken to mean that exposed beaches have gentler profiles than protected beaches, because the energy available may itself affect the calibre of sediment present so that a complex relationship exists.
The effects of the available energy may be seen by comparing the summer and winter beach profiles at the same place (Fig. 8.11).
These often show a winter profile combed down into a series of bars and troughs caused by the destructive waves of winter storms and a steeper summer profile with a large inshore berm built up by swell waves of constructive type.
In areas of resistant rocks the wavecut platform (Plate 27), although often showing some degree of concavity, may be considerably flatter than the average sand and shingle beach.
Considerable doubt exists as to the precise method of formation of such rock platforms.
One of the major controversies is concerned with the relation between high water level and the abrupt break of slope at the inshore margin of the beach, a feature which has sometimes been called the nip.
The relation between this point and high tide level is of considerable importance in the interpretation of raised beaches and old high level marine-cut terraces.
Obviously mean sea level has little to do with the height of the nip, which is more closely related to high tide level, but high tide level is in itself a variable level.
Further, if splash and spray are effective agents of marine erosion, erosion may take place considerably above high tide level, the exact amount depending on the size of the waves and the way in which they break against the bottom of the cliff.
There seems to be general agreement that the inner edge of the bench may be a metre or so above the level of the highest tides.
This is eminently reasonable as effective action by big waves must extend above the level of the highest tide.
But when the action of splash and spray is considered, there arises the possibility of the rock bench extending above this, or, if the rocks are suitably stratified, of subsidiary benched at higher elevations.
That significant marine action extends to quite high levels is well known.Wentworth (1938) has for instance described an example from the Hawaiian Islands, where a block of tuff weighing about 7 tons has been moved several feet fro its natural position at an elevation of 12m (40 ft) on an exposed cliff.
Other examples, often involving the movement of large blocks in structures well above sea level, are also known, while there is the record of the grounding of a 100-ton sloop on the top of Chesil Bank in 1824.
The sloop apparently ran straight on to the top of the bank under sail in spite of the fact that the top of the bank is 10 m (30 ft) above the level of high  spring tides.Jutson (1939) has pointed to a series of generally narrow platforms cut mainly in almost horizontal rocks in New South Wales and extending up to a height of 10 m (30 ft) or more.
From the presence of enlarged joints and marine gastropods on these shelves, he was prepared to attribute them to marine action since the sea has stood at its present level.
In practice it would be very difficult to distinguish between platforms formed by splash and spray in relation to present sea level and platforms formed by higher sea levels and modified today by splash and spray.
Other authors have used the second interpretation in connection with the same platforms.
Stepped wavecut platforms may be formed in horizontal rocks (Plate 28), but on these the steps are smaller than on those described by Jutson.
In general there seems to be a tendency for structural rock surfaces to be stripped where they approximate to the profile of the wavecut bench.
This can be seen near Dunstanburgh Castle in Northumberland, where the Whin Sill is nearly horizontal but with a slight apparent dip to the south.
Structural surfaces within the sill seem to be stripped until they depart too much from the equilibrium erosion profile, at which stage the marine bench seems to step up to a slightly higher structural surface.
Such a state can only arise where structural surfaces very nearly conform to an equilibrium profile.
A second major controversy concerns the possible width of the wavecut bench.
In this connection thought appears to be divided almost on a national basis, English authors having resorted freely to the assumption that the sea is capable of cutting wide platforms in their interpretation of high level terraces, while American and continental authorities have been much more inclined to doubt whether the sea can cut a very wide bench unless there is progressive drowning of the land or unless the sea is merely trimming up a subaerial surface.
One view of marine erosion would regard it as active only in the early stages of cliff development (A to C in Fig. 8.12), while at later stages the energy of the waves is dissipated on the increasingly wide rock platform so that erosion at the base of the cliff becomes ineffective, a fact attested by the degradation of the cliff by agents of subaerial weathering (D and E in Fig. 8.12).
Other authors, e.g. Challinor (1949), have expressed quite opposite views, maintaining that the wavecut bench is cut at such a level as not to impede the action of the waves at the foot of the cliff, so that long  continued marine planation may occur.
The truth probably lies between the two extremes.
It is difficult to see how the rock platform can entirely dissipate the wave energy, as, if the waves break on it, they must presumably erode it, thus ultimately allowing them to reach the foot of the cliff again.
On the other hand, this degradation of the bench must be a slow process, so that the rate of cutting of a marine bench may be expected to become slower as it becomes wider.
These problems are all confused by difficulties of observation, largely the result of many changes of base level in the Pliocene and Pleistocene periods.
It has sometimes been argued that marine erosion is not active at present because raised beaches are still preserved on exposed parts of the coast, e.g. on Gower in South Wales and at Brighton.
But the fact that a usually narrow portion of beach is preserved is not an argument against modern erosion by the sea unless there is not even a minor cliff at present high tide level, as there is no means of telling h, ow wide a strip of raised beach has been eroded away by the sea.
In some areas, for example Arran, the low raised beach shelves gradually beneath the sea and, where this happens without any eroded nip, it seems that there can have been no erosion related to present sea level.
The opposite suggestion, that marine planation at the present level is active, has been made from observations of wide platforms truncating hard rocks and apparently related to present sea level.
In this case, however, it may be that present sea level coincides with an older sea level to so close a degree that the erosion platform merely represents the trimming up of an earlier one.
The possibility that present sea level is approximately the same as an earlier sea level must be taken into account before attributing some of the present high cliffs of the British coasts to recent erosion.
It is difficult to imagine that vertical sea cliffs 60 m (200 ft) high, such as those at Hartland Point in Devon, have been cut entirely in the short Post-glacial period since the sea rose to its present level.
In places it may be possible to test whether a wavecut platform is related to present sea level or not.
Many British cliffs are degraded, inactive cliffs.
This can be seen very clearly on some parts of the North Devon and Welsh coasts, for example round Llangranog in Cardiganshire, where the greater  part of the cliff profile consists of a vegetated, degraded cliff with a sharp active section at the base (Fig. 8.13).
Even some active-looking cliffs, such as those on the Lias of Glamorgan near Southerndown, show on close inspection vegetation growth which suggests, if not complete inaction, at least intermittent erosion only.
In front of the active section there should be a wavecut platform corresponding in width to the amount of recession of the active cliff.
If the wavecut platform extends much further seawards than the projection of the degraded cliff it seems very likely that much of the platform was cut in the past at the foot of the cliff which has now become degraded and not in relation to the present active section at the bottom of the cliff, the state of affairs shown in Fig. 8.13.
The belief that the sea acting at one fixed level cannot cut a very wide bench may be derived from the knowledge that sea level relative to the land has changed often in the recent geological past.
It appears never to have remained sufficiently constant to enable benches more than a few kilometres wide to form, at least since the beginning of the Pleistocene period.
The constructive action of the sea
Although fine material may be transported far out to sea in suspension, much of the coarser debris eroded from the cliffs or brought to the coast by the rivers accumulates on the beach, where it may be subjected to the constructive action of waves.
It may be built up into shore features without undergoing movement along the beach or, more commonly, it is transported along the beach to a point where natural factors allow it to accumulate and to be built up by wave action.
The nature of the processes causing this longshore drift is of great importance in understanding many constructional shoreline forms.
Longshore drift
If the wave front approaches parallel to a coastline sand and shingle merely move up and down the beach, but under the more usual conditions of oblique approach the movement is not quite so simple.
Particles moved up the beach by the breaking waves do so normal to the direction of approach of the waves, but they roll down in the direction of the steepest beach gradient.
The result is that they move along the beach with a type of zigzag motion (Fig. 8.14).
The oblique waves responsible for longshore drift will also set up a longshore current, which will assist in the process of moving material along the beach.
Obviously, such a current cannot affect the transport of material in the swash zone, but it may greatly help transport by saltation and suspension in the breaker zone.
For any particular coastline there is a dominant direction of movement depending on the direction of the dominant winds.
Thus, along the south  coast of England the movement of material is eastwards, while on the east coast, where the dominant winds are north-east, it is southwards, except along part of the north Norfolk coast where it is towards the west.
The direction of the drift can be observed from a number of phenomena.
On the south coast the spits are generally orientated towards the east, as is shown by the spit which previously diverted the mouth of the river Adur east of Shoreham, and by Hurst Castle spit in Hampshire.
On the east coast the spits are generally directed towards the south, e.g. Orford Ness, except on the north Norfolk coast, where Blakeney Point is directed westwards.
On a smaller scale the piling up of shingle against groynes is always on the side facing the direction from which the drift is coming (Fig. 8.15).
For short periods the dominant direction of the drift may be reversed by abnormal wind conditions.
Such reversals, which may last for a period of several years, have been observed on the east coast.
At Kessingland in Suffolk at one stage groynes accumulated material on their southern sides, thus indicating a drift from south to north in a direction contrary to the general direction of drift on the east coast (Steers, 1953).
Although the drift of coarse material on the upper part of the beach must be due to wave action and not to current action, the role of currents in moving material over the sea floor is disputed.
One finds direct contradictions such as Lewis's (1931) observation that an 8 km/h (5 mile/h) current off Hurst Castle Spit was ineffective in moving the lightest shell debris except when combined with wave action and Russell and Macmillan's (1952) belief that shingle has been scoured to a depth of nearly 60 m (200 ft) by this same current.
They also calculate that sand grains of 0–5 mm (0–02 in) diameter can be moved at a depth of 150 m (500 ft) by a surface current of about 1 7 km/h (I mile/h).
Bird (1968) quotes a number of examples of currents scouring hollows in the sea floor in soft sediments, of scour hollows in narrow straits in which strong tidal currents are known to occur, and of coarse sediments marking the tracks of currents in areas of mainly fine sediment due to the winnowing effect of those currents.
Some of the problems of the relative parts played by waves and currents are in process of being cleared up by the use of traceable sand and shingle.
There are three main methods of making such material traceable, but there is one general problem: wide dispersion and burial means that large amounts of material have to be used and that the traced percentage is low.
The simplest method is paint, and paint sufficiently resistant to stand a certain amount of abrasion is now available.
Nevertheless, the problem involved in finding painted pebbles among the millions of beach pebbles is on a par with the fabled needle and haystack problem.
Radioactive substances may be added to either sand or shingle.
It may be necessary to make artificial materials.
Various glasses have been used to make artificial sand.
Cement and exotic natural rocks have been used to simulate flint pebbles, because they are more easily drilled for the insertion of radioactive material.
When such material is used it must be ensured that it conforms approximately in density and shape with the natural beach material.
Fortunately, it has been found that flint pebbles with surface layers of ferric oxide can be rendered radioactive and this eliminates much of the laboriousness of the earlier experiments.
Nevertheless, the radioactivity imparted to the pebbles must be weak and transient for obvious health reasons, and this means that radioactivity detectors must be very near the pebbles before they are located, thus increasing the tedium of the experiments.
Further, such material cannot be used in places frequented by crowds, while its transient activity means that material which takes time  to prepare must be used immediately.
The method, therefore, lacks flexibility.
Finally, fluorescent materials, which glow brilliantly in ultraviolet light, may be used.
Sand may be coated with a mixture of plastic glue and dye, while artificial concrete pebbles, in which are embedded fragments of fluorescent plastic, may be used to simulate shingle.
On the whole experiments seem to have confirmed that considerable movement of shingle offshore only takes place where pebbles are stirred up by wave action, though currents may contribute to their direction of fall.
Thus it seems likely that in the general process of longshore drift under the action of oblique waves, longshore currents and oblique rip currents may help in the movement of the finer material.
The maximum transport occurs in the breaker zone, where wave action is strong and continuous and where the lifting of particles by waves allows the current to operate to fullest effect.
The overall volume of transport decreases both up and down the beach from this zone.
The dominance of wave action over current action in longshore movement is emphasised by estimates of the relative importance of movement as bed load and as suspended load summarised by Komar (1976).
Roughly four-fifths is thought to move as bed load including saltation, leaving only one-fifth to be accounted for by suspension.
Of course, much of the finer material normally moved by suspension has already been moved offshore by currents, as is evident from the dearth of silt and clay particles present in beaches.
Minor constructional features
Although the more generally noticed constructional shoreline features are the large sand and shingle formations, interesting minor features are to be observed on many beaches, among them beach cusps and sand bars, for the formation of which little or no longshore drift is necessary.
BEACH CUSPS
Cusps are a formation found on the upper parts of beaches, especially on shingle beaches.
They consist essentially of a series of sharp headlands of shingle separated by sweeping bays (Fig. 8.16).
The variation in elevation between the-headlands and the troughs is usually less than 1 m (3 ft), but differences up to a maximum of 33 m (11 ft) have been reported by Guilcher (1958).
The distance between the cusps on shingle beaches is usually of the order of 5 m (15 ft), but on sandy beaches may be much greater ranging up to over 60 m (200 ft)(Russell and Macmillan, 1952).
On beaches with mixed sand and shingle there is a tendency for the coarser material to be gathered into the cusps and for the finer material to form the bays.
The origin of such cusps is obscure (see Komar (1976) for summary of theories), although it is much easier to see why, once formed, they will be maintained.
If a beach is ridged at right angles to the land the swash will diverge from the ridges into the furrows, while the backwash will be concentrated into the furrows, thus leading to scouring in them.
Such a movement of water on a cusped beach is illustrated by the arrows in Fig. 8.16.
We can say that a given pattern of cusps is associated with given conditions of beach material, beach gradient and wave characteristics.
They are rhythmic phenomena and thus analogous to river meanders, or pools and riffles, the basic causes of which remain equally obscure.
SAND BARS
These forms, which have been described by King and Williams (1949), are characteristic of tideless seas, such as the Mediterranean and the Baltic.
They are related to the break point of the waves and are sometimes referred to as break point bars.
Their formation can be simulated in a glass-sided tank in the laboratory, where observation is very easy (Fig. 8.17).
Where the waves are unbroken, i.e. outside the bar, the predominant movement of sand grains on the sea floor is towards the land, while, where a series of broken waves or surf occurs, the movement is mainly seawards.
Such processes lead to a concentration of sand and to the building of a bar at the break point.
These observations, incidentally, are further evidence against the existence of a general undertow, a point which has already been discussed earlier in this chapter.
As the point at which the wave breaks depends on the size of the wave, the position at which the bar will form will also depend on the size of the waves.
This may lead to the formation of more than one bar, the outer being related to the break point of storm waves and the inner to the break point of normal waves.
In addition, a progressive increase in the size of the waves should lead to the movement seawards of the bar, while a diminution should lead to a landward movement, both being caused fundamentally by the movement of the break point.
On flat sandy beaches in tidal seas a somewhat different formation takes place.
It can readily be appreciated that with the rise and fall of the tide the break point migrates over a wide zone of the beach so that the formation of a break point bar is not to be expected.
Instead, flat beaches, such as that at Blackpool, are often characterised by the formation of a series of ridges and runnels.
King and Williams observed in laboratory experiments that, in addition to the break point bar, there is the tendency for the swash to form a second bar at its upper limit.
This swash bar may be pushed up above high tide level and is obviously not destroyed by a falling tide as would be a break point bar.
The gradient of the swash bar on its seaward side appears to be related to the nature of the waves, short waves building up steeper gradients than long ones.
Thus, if the general beach slope is very gentle and the fetch of the waves, and therefore their wave length, limited, the gradient of the swash bar may exceed the beach gradient.
This leads to the formation of a ridge behind which a trough or runnel is produced.
Although they admit some doubt as to the exact mode of formation, King and Williams suggest that a swash bar is formed at low tide, that this bar is overrun by the tide, which produces a series of similar swash bars as it advances up the beach.
The position and the number of the ridges so formed vary, but there is a tendency for the ridges at high and low neap tide levels to be the most permanent, as would be expected from the fact that the waves have more time to act at these levels than at intermediate levels.
Major constructional features
OFFSHORE BARS
The swash and break point bars described by King and Williams are very small features compared with true offshore bars, which attain lengths of dozens of kilometres on the east coast of the United States.
They consist of ridges of shingle and sand projecting above high water level and generally lying a few kilometres offshore.
Usually the largest bars are broken through at intervals by tidal inlets especially where powerful rivers reach the coast.
Although it is clear that the bars must be formed by waves breaking some distance offshore, certain details of the origin of the bars are far from clear.
To enable waves to break some distance offshore it is necessary that the offshore profile should possess a very gentle gradient.
Such profiles are characteristic of shorelines of emergence rather than of shorelines of submergence, a fact which led Johnson (1919) to class offshore bars as features typical of shorelines of emergence.
But if the necessary very gentle offshore gradient can be produced on any type of shoreline it is quite likely that offshore bars may form.
In the British Isles the best examples are found off the Norfolk coast, as will be described below: although this coast is one of submergence, the offshore profile, composed largely of glacial deposits, is extremely gentle, thus allowing waves to break long before they reach the coast.
The usual explanation of offshore bars is that given by Johnson (1919) and the stages of formation envisaged by him are shown in Fig. 8. 18.
In the initial stage, Fig. 8. 18A, breaking waves excavate material from the sea floor and form a submarine bar, which is slowly built up until it appears above sea level (Fig. 8.18B).
The lagoon between the bar and the land is colonised by various types of marsh vegetation and slowly fills up with a mixture of sediment and decaying organic matter (Fig. 8.18C).
At the same time the bar is being pushed inland by the sea, which erodes material from the outside of the bar and, in times of storm, flings it over the bar on to the marsh.
The result is that the marsh bed appears on the beach in front of the bar (Fig. 8.18D).
Finally, after a long time, the bar is pushed so far inland that the marsh is completely eroded and the remains of the bar with associated sand dunes appear on the original coastline (Fig. 8.18E).
The origin of the material forming the bar excited some controversy in the early investigation of coastal processes.
Some authorities, notably Gilbert, maintained that most of the material was supplied by longshore drift and that the waves merely acted on this material: others, especially de Beaumont, considered that the material contained in the bar was eroded from the sea bed in front of the bar, as is shown in Fig. 8.18.
The question was thoroughly investigated by Johnson (1919), who showed that the processes should result in differences in offshore profiles, which ought to be detectable in actual examples.
If the material was supplied almost entirely by longshore drift, the profile outside the bar should be continuous with that inside the bar (Fig. 8.19A): if the bar was formed by erosion of the sea floor, the profile outside the bar, if projected back towards the land, should not reach seal level at the coast but some way inland (Fig. 8.19B).
The majority of actual examples investigated by Johnson revealed profiles of the second type, so that it may be concluded that much of the material forming the bar is eroded from the sea floor.
One final point which remains uncertain is the manner in which the bars are built up above sea level.
Steers (1953) has stressed the importance of vegetation and of dune formation in the history of offshore bars on the north Norfolk coast, which will be discussed below, and it is possible that slight changes of base level may also be important in the initial stages of some offshore bars.
Given a slight negative movement of base level, underwater sandbanks may appear above high tide level and could be converted into offshore bars by wave action.
Alternatively, a slight positive movement of base level could flood the area behind a line of coastal dunes on a low-lying coast, so that the dunes projected above high water level and formed the basis on which the bar was built.
The most varied and closely investigated series of offshore bars in Great Britain is to be found on the Norfolk coast between Hunstanton and Sheringham.
Any material moving southwards along the east coast is stopped by the eastward projection of the Norfolk coast, which has been likened by Steers to a great groyne.
In addition, the sea floor, which has a very gentle gradient, is probably composed largely of unconsolidated glacial deposits, with the result that conditions are ideal for the formation of offshore features.
Further, there is a general westward drift of material along this section of the coast, so that the shingle formations exhibit a wide variety of features due both to straightforward wave action and to longshore drift.
It must, however, be said that measurements of shingle movement made by Hardy (1964) showed a dominant eastwards movement of material on Blakeney Point, one of the main features of this district.
Such a movement, if continued, would presumably quickly deplete the feature and lead to its destruction, unless the bar is being built up by onshore movement of material at its western end as Hardy suggests.
Steers (1964) took up this point and argued that the structure and history, as far  as it is known, of Blakeney Point pointed to a westwards movement of material in the long term view.
It is well known that local reversals of movement occur and may possibly go on for a number of years.
The earliest stage in the formation of an offshore feature is the deposition of a bank of sand, which may ultimately emerge at high tide.
Sand blown from the very wide sand flats at low tide may be trapped on the bank by pebbles or by such debris as barbed wire or any of the usual drift commonly found on beaches.
Later, if sufficient material accumulates and the bank is not completely destroyed at high tide, various plants colonise the sand and trap further wind-blown material.
Ultimately the bank, with its specialised vegetation and growing sand dunes, appears permanently above the sea.
The usual form of such banks on the north Norfolk coast is crescentic, an excellent example being provided by Thornham Western Island (Fig. 8.20).
Once such an island has become permanent, longshore drift takes place along the seaward side, and so leads to modification and complication of the initially simple form.
An idealised development from a simple crescentic bar to a more complex form is shown in Fig. 8.21.
The first stage is shown as an arcuate ridge.
Under the influence of the dominant north-east winds erosion takes place in the east, while longshore drift prolongs the western end until, in stage 2, the bar has a form comparable with Thornham Western Island, the original western part of the island being preserved as a recurved lateral in the middle of the inner side of the island.
Later development involves continued erosion in the east and the landward movement of the bar, while the western end is prolonged and further laterals record different stages in its growth (stages 3–5 in Fig. 8.21).
It is not entirely clear why the end of such features grows for a period and then is recurved back towards the coast.
The prevalent westerly winds on the Norfolk coast are probably of considerable  importance in this connection, as once the end of the island starts to recurve, they will tend to build up the laterals roughly at right angles to the main ridge.
Scolt Head Island, the most fully developed offshore bar on the Norfolk coast, has had a history comparable with the above idealised conditions.
The present distribution of shingle ridges and their probable earlier continuations are shown in Fig. 8.22.
Periods of westward growth have alternated with periods when lateral development was most pronounced.
Westward extension was rapid until the formation of the main group of laterals round the House Hills (2–4 on Fig. 8.22).
After this phase of pronounced lateral development another period of westward extension carried the island as far as the Long Hills, where another closely spaced group of laterals suggests a further retardation of the island's growth westwards.
Finally, the western point, with short laterals, indicates that the island has recently entered into another period of westward extension, though the point is subject to considerable modification from year to year.
The main ridge and the laterals only provide the framework for the island, for, as will be described below, the development of sand dunes and of salt marsh is of the greatest importance in the history of offshore features of this type.
The other major feature of the north Norfolk coast is Blakeney Point (Fig. 8.23), which differs from those already described in being tied to the coast at its eastern end near Sheringham, and is thus really a spit and not an offshore bar.
The eastern part of the spit, which is not shown on Fig. 8.23, is a long simple shingle bank, but the western part is more complex and gives evidence of periods of westward extension alternating with periods when lateral formation was predominant.
The chief groups of laterals are    to be found at the Marrams, the Hood, and in the Long Hills.
Far Point is subject to considerable change from year to year, as is the western end of Scolt Head Island.
The origin of Blakeney Point is open to discussion: it has been suggested that the western end may have been a feature comparable with Scolt Head Island and later joined to the mainland by a simple spit growing westwards from Weybourne: it may have developed entirely as a spit such as Orford Ness or Hurst Castle Spit, which will be described below; or the whole feature may represent an offshore bar driven so far inshore as to become attached to the coast.
The equivocal evidence about the direction of movement of material has been discussed above in considering the general direction of movement on this coast.
THE ROLE OF VEGETATION IN THE FORMATION OF COASTAL FEATURES
The shingle ridges forming the skeletons of Scolt Head Island and Blakeney Point constitute only one aspect of the development of such landforms.
Sand dunes (Plate 29) and salt marsh, both of which depend in their formation on vegetation, complete the process.
The necessary conditions for the formation of sand dunes are a wide foreshore exposed at low tide so that the wind blowing over it can dry the sand and set it in motion; something to trap the sand and cause it to start accumulating; and plants to colonise the pile of sand and by binding it together to prevent its complete destruction by the wind or high tides.
The importance of a wide foreshore in dune formation can be illustrated well from Blakeney Point: at the western end of the point, where the foreshore is very wide, there are well-developed dunes, but at the eastern end, where the narrow shingle ridge faces much deeper water, dunes are absent.
Once sand starts to move on the foreshore, which it does by the process of saltation, it will tend to be trapped by shingle patches, by piles of drifted debris, or by tufts of a coarse grass, Agropyron junceiforme.
The next stage, provided the accumulation is not destroyed almost as fast as it is formed, is the colonisation of the incipient dune by marram grass, Ammophila arenaria.
(or Psamma arenaria as it is sometimes called, the initial letter being silent.
Although no doubt justifiable to the specialist the strict application of the law of priority in botanical and zoological nomenclature seems a sterile and often confusing exercise to those who merely wish to recognise a potato when they see one).
Marram grass possesses a deep and branching root system, which effectively binds the dune together, while the plant itself encourages further accumulation of sand.
Indeed, marram grass only thrives while fresh sand is being added to the dune.
Once accumulation ceases the marram dies out and is replaced by lichens, mosses and other plants: the soil of the dune is enriched by humus from decaying plants and from rabbits and by lime from shell fragments within the sand, so that the nature of vegetation changes and a more complete cover finally appears on the dune.
The usual reason for the cessation of the sand supply is the formation of a newer line of dunes in front of those previously developed, and these new dunes trap the greater part of the sand supply.
At this stage, when the marram dies and the dune has only an incomplete cover of vegetation, there is a great danger of a blow out.
Either unaided or acting upon a part bared by fire or other forms of human destructiveness, the wind starts to erode the dune.
In unfavourable circumstances erosion may be so great as to tear a gap through the dunes, such a feature being described as a blow out.
The sand eroded accumulates down wind from the dune, where, being fresh, it is recolonised by marram and stability is thus regained.
Under certain conditions the blow out may not become stabilised, so that the mass of sand migrates slowly in the direction of the resultant of onshore winds with trailing arms of partly vegetated sand on either side of the original blow out.
It is then a parabolic or U-dune.
In some ways it resembles a barchan (see Chapter 11), but the arms trail, whereas in a barchan the arms or horns lead: the barchan presents its convex face to the wind, the parabolic dune its concave face.
If for any reason, such as fire or overgrazing, the arms of the parabolic dune become unstabilised, the whole form may become merely a shapeless mass of sand migrating downwind through the dune belt.
Sand dunes usually accumulate at the top of the beach and on the shingle ridges themselves and materially add to their height, many dunes containing as much as 12–15 m (40–50 ft) of sand (Steers, 1953).
Dunes higher than this, for example those on the west side of the Cotentin peninsula near Carteret which reach an elevation of 60 m (200 ft), are piled up over solid rocks.
Salt marsh plays a more important role than sand dunes in extending the area of dry land.
The following account of the formation of salt marshes and  the plant communities developed in them is necessarily brief, but a much fuller account may be found in Steers (1953) and the papers quoted therein.
Any foreshore of gentle gradient can be seen to possess irregularities in its surface usually in the form of broad ridges and swells and shallow depressions.
When such areas are quietly flooded by the tide the material carried in suspension is deposited over the whole foreshore.
But, owing to the fact that on the ebb tide water movement is confined to the depressions, the sediment deposited will not accumulate in the depressions to the same extent that it accumulates on the ridges.
The accumulation on the ridges and swells is aided by the presence there of seaweed or flotsam, which tends to hinder the flow of the tide and to cause it to deposit the material it is carrying.
When sufficient deposition has occurred the area is colonised by various types of salt-loving, or halophytic, vegetation.
In north Norfolk Salicornia spp. and Suaeda maritima are typical plants found at low levels in the marshes.
Such plants, which do not form a very close cover and which in winter are merely bare stalks, do not constitute a very efficient trap for further sediment, except in summer when they are best developed.
However, they often have seaweed intertwined in their stems and, where this occurs, the dense cover acts as a check on water movement and encourages further deposition.
With continuing deposition the nature of the plant cover slowly changes, as various species are adapted to slightly different conditions of flooding.
At later stages the marsh cover becomes denser and deposition is encouraged, until finally the marsh is built up to such an extent that it is only covered at high spring tides.
During this process of marsh formation, the original shallow depressions, which were areas of non-deposition in the early stages, are slowly converted to creeks.
The ebb and flow of the tide is concentrated in them, so that there is always sufficient scour to prevent their being silted up.
The edges of the creeks are often, in East Anglia, colonised by one particular plant, Halimione portulacoides, a thick, bushy plant with dense foliage, which, by restricting the flow of the tide, encourages deposition on the margins of the creeks.
The banks are often built up in this manner above the level of the surrounding marsh, rather like the levees of a meandering river being built up above the level of the floodplain.
Although creeks are thought to be largely areas of non-deposition rather than areas of erosion, the scour of the tide along them may cause some lateral erosion and water draining at times of very high tides from areas behind the zone of creeks may plunge into the heads of the creeks and so cause a certain amount of headward erosion.
Salt marsh development is very significant in filling the areas between offshore bars, such as Scolt Head Island, or spits, such as Blakeney Point, and the mainland.
In these areas and between the laterals of the bars and spits, where the movement of the tide is usually unaccompanied by marked wave action, conditions are ideal for quiet deposition.
But deposition is not  confined to such completely sheltered areas: both on the north Norfolk coast and in the Wash similar salt marshes develop where there are no protecting offshore features.
The rate of accretion varies with the stage in the development of the marsh, as has been shown by careful measurement made by Steers.
For the purpose of such measurements a layer of distinctive sand is put down on the marsh and the amount of accretion after a period of years measured by cutting down to the patch of sand with a tool sharp enough not to disturb the section.
On the lower parts of the marsh, which are most frequently covered by the tide, accretion at the rate of almost 1 cm per year has been recorded at Scolt Head Island, while at higher levels, where the frequency of flooding by the tide is less, this is reduced to one half or less of the rate at the lowest levels.
The rate of accretion may seem slight, but, as it means a gain in height of 0.4–1.0 m (1½–3½ ft) per century, it must rank as one of the more rapid geomorphological processes.
When the marsh has built up to an elevation such that it is covered only by the highest tides, it is usually reclaimed for pasture by building a simple embankment around it.
Piecemeal reclamations of this type account for the intricacy of the system of banks protecting the low-lying pastures surrounding the Wash.
Today, when reclamation is carried out with the use of expensive mechanical equipment, it is not profitable to start until a strip, 200 m or more in width, is ready.
The account of the development of marsh given here applies mainly to East Anglia.
On the western coast, where extensive marshes are to be found in Cardigan Bay, the succession of plants differs in some respects from that of the east coast, but the general process of deposition encouraged by plants and leading to a sequence of changing plant communities is similar.
SPITS
Spits differ chiefly from offshore bars in that they spring from the coast and are supplied with material mainly by longshore drift and not from the sea floor.
Broadly speaking there are two main types: those which diverge from the coast at a marked angle and those which run approximately parallel to the trend of the coast.
In the latter class may be included not only those which deflect a river such as the spit at Shoreham, Sussex, and Orford Ness, but also the bars and spits which often form across bays.
The orientation of coastal features such as spits is largely governed by dominant wind and wave directions.
Lewis (1931) formulated the simple rule that spits orientated themselves perpendicular to the direction of dominant waves; in practice they are probably never quite at right angles for this orientation would tend to inhibit the longshore drift necessary for their growth.
Schou (quoted in Guilcher, 1958) used a more refined criterion than the direction of dominant waves.
He introduced the idea of a resultant wind obtained by summing vectorially all winds exceeding 20 km/h (13 mile/h)(the lower limit of Beaufort Force 4).
The stronger winds are weighted usually by multiplying the frequencies by the cube of the velocities in constructing the vectorial diagram (Fig. 8.24A) in which the lengths are proportional to the calculated vectors.
The reason for the weighting of the stronger winds is to be found in the fact that their effectiveness increases much faster than their speed.
The resultant shown in the diagram is the sort that one might expect in Britain, which is an area of dominant westerlies.
The diagram uses only an eight point compass: it is possible and preferable to construct such a diagram with finer divisions.
Of course, the resultant of all winds is probably not the most useful resultant, as on most shores it is only the onshore winds which count in constructional action.
Imagine a west coast situation (Fig. 8.24B) with a north south section of coast.
In this case only south-west, west and northwest winds would be onshore, so that it would be better to derive a resultant of onshore winds from section ABCD of Fig. 8.24A.
Most coastal features attached at both ends to the coast orientate themselves at right angles to the resultant provided that the fetch is approximately the same in all directions.
If maximum fetch coincides with the resultant the same relationship usually holds.
Where they do not coincide the coastal orientation usually lies between the two directions, being nearer to the one which is dominant.
Forms which are not attached to the coast or only attached at one end seem to orientate themselves, some at right angles to the resultant like attached forms and some parallel to the resultant for reasons which remain uncertain.
Many of the latter are the forms mentioned in the first paragraph of this section as running parallel to the coast.
Schou's theory works best in comparatively enclosed areas where the effective waves are usually caused by fairly local winds, for example Denmark and much of Britain.
Where the main constructive waves are swell waves which may have been generated hundreds and even thousands of kilometres away and travelled on as free waves, it is quite likely that the local resultant wind has a far smaller part in the orientation of coastal forms.
These conditions hold on open oceanic coasts, for example the Atlantic coasts of Europe and Africa.
An example of the type of spit which leaves the coast at a marked angle, is to be found in Hurst Castle Spit, Hampshire (Lewis, 1931).
It is a long shingle spit terminating at its far, or distal, end in a number of recurved ridges (Fig. 8.25).
The dominant south-westerly winds cause an eastward longshore drift in the area, and material accumulates off the headland from which Hurst Castle Spit springs.
The material is then worked on by the waves and built up into a ridge facing the direction from which the greatest waves come.
The tendency for spits to be orientated at right angles to the dominant waves is well illustrated by Hurst Castle Spit which is particularly instructive in this respect for the spit does not continue the direction of the coast west of Milford, which is west-north-west to east-south-east, but orientates itself north-west to south-east, thus demonstrating the connection with wave direction.
Once the spit starts to form material is pushed along it by longshore drift, thus leading to its continued growth until it reaches water so deep that wave action is destructive.
The sweeping curve to the east on Hurst Castle Spit is due to the fact that offshore banks to the west of the spit cause approaching waves to be retarded and to approach the feature as shown in Fig. 8.25.
The eastern extremity of the spit is not greatly affected by waves from the south-west, but comes under the influence of north-east winds blowing down the Solent.
Waves formed by these northeast winds are responsible for the marked angle at the far point and for the building up of the recurved end so that it faces north-east.
The successive north-east facing ridges at the southern end of the spit probably record phases in the evolution of the spit and are comparable with  the laterals on Scolt Head Island and Blakeney Point.
The probable evolution of Hurst Castle Spit is shown in Fig. 8.26, from which it can be seen that, with the wearing back of the coast from A to C, the spit will occupy successively the positions AA', BB' and CC', the last being its present position, in which it preserves the recurved ends of former stages.
Orford Ness (Steers, 1953) is a spit of a different type: instead of departing from the coast at a marked angle, it runs roughly parallel to the coast for its entire length (Fig. 8.27).
It is remarkable that the river Alde immediately south of Aldeburgh is separated from the sea by only about 50 m of shingle at the narrowest part of the spit, which causes a 17 km (11 miles) deflection of the river.
The spit appears to have started growing from Aldeburgh in a southward direction at a slight angle to the coast with the end recurved towards the coast as in many of the features already discussed.
Erosion on the main section facing east and lengthening to the south resulted in the pattern of south-west trending ridges preserved between the lighthouse and Stonyditch Point.
The latter represents an important point in the spit's history, as beyond this point it is simpler in form and composed mainly of a few subparallel shingle ridges.
The importance of Stonyditch Point as the end of the spit for a long period is emphasised by the position of Orford, which was well situated as a port when the Ness ended at Stonyditch Point and not in its present position some miles to the south.
At the present time most of the alterations affecting the spit are confined to the southern end, where it is weakest.
The narrow neck just south of Aldeburgh appears to be surprisingly  resistant: it was breached, however, by the 1953 floods, but reformed by bulldozers within a few days.
Some spits grow from the mainland towards islands, with the result that the islands become tied to the land by shingle bars, which are known as tombolos.
The ideal geological situation for the growth of tombolos is an area of submerged drumlins, where there are many islands and an ample supply of debris for the waves to form the connecting ridges.
Spectacular examples of tombolos joining partially submerged drumlins to the mainland are to be found on the coast of Nova Scotia near Halifax (Johnson, 1925)
In the British Isles a fine example of a tombolo is provided by Chesil Beach, a 30 km long (18 miles) ridge connecting the Isle of Portland to the mainland (Fig. 8.28).
Although from West Bay to Abbotsbury the main shingle ridge hugs the coast, it departs from the coast south-east of Abbotsbury and leaves between it and the mainland the elongated lagoon known as the Fleet.
A number of problems is posed by Chesil Beach.
Compared with most other shingle features in the British Isles the beach is a simple though large ridge, reaching its maximum size at the Portland end, where it is 60 m (200 yd) wide and just over 12 m (40 ft) high.
Secondly, there is a progressive grading in the size of the material composing the beach from West Bay to Portland: at West Bay the shingle is small, about the size of a pea, and it increases progressively to the south-east until it reaches the size of one's fist at the Portland end.
Attempts have been made to explain this grading, which is not characteristic of the majority of British spits.
It has been suggested that the prevalent west and south-west winds tend to set up a longshore drift towards Portland, so that the majority of coarse material accumulates at that end.
When the winds are southerly the drift would be in the reverse direction, but the waves responsible, being of smaller size due to limited fetch and generally lighter winds, would be capable of moving only the finer material back towards West Bay.
Although this is a possible explanation, it is not completely convincing, as similar conditions must prevail on many other spits, none of which show the progressive grading of material characteristic of the Chesil Beach.
Finally, it is not certain whether the beach originated as a spit and extended south-east from West Bay, or whether it started as an offshore bar which has later been driven shorewards by the waves.
A further form of constructional feature is the baymouth bar (Plate 30), which completely seals off the lagoon behind, an example being found at Loe Pool in Cornwall (Fig. 8.29).
Of somewhat similar type are those bays, which have spits springing from the headlands on either side and growing towards each other, the distal ends being separated by only a narrow channel.
An excellent example of this type is to be found at the entrance to Poole Harbour (Fig. 8.30).
Where these double spits are found in positions sheltered from the dominant westerly winds, as at Poole, Christchurch, in Hampshire and Pagham in Sussex, it is possible to regard them as being formed by longshore drift from two directions.
In sheltered positions the effect of the westerly winds would be minimised, while that of easterly winds would be accentuated out of normal proportion.
On this hypothesis the spits both start from their respective headlands and converge towards the centre of the bay.
An alternative explanation has, however, been advanced by Robinson (1955), who has noted some objections to the foregoing hypothesis.
In none of the examples studied is there any evidence of a longshore drift towards the west in the shape of piling up of material on the east-facing sides of the groynes.
Further, at Poole Harbour the northern spit, Sandbanks peninsula, appears to be suffering erosion rather than accretion.
The danger of a break through the northern end of the spit was so apparent that a sea  wall was built along this section in 1890.
Such features are not consistent with the idea that the peninsula was built by longshore drift from the east, unless such drift was active only for short periods while during the intervening time the drift was predominantly from the west.
In view of this Robinson suggests that such double spit forms were originally baymouth bars which have been breached by waves in times of great storms.
On this hypothesis one would expect the eastern spit, Sandbanks peninsula in the case of Poole Harbour, to be in a state of decay due to the cutting off of the supply of material by the breach.
Such an idea appears to accord with the known state of affairs at Poole Harbour.
Admittedly, there is no evidence of breaching in historical records, but interesting support for the idea is to be found from the history of Pagham Harbour in Sussex, where there are two spits comparable with the Poole ones.
In order to counteract erosion it was decided to build a complete shingle ridge across the harbour entrance and this was done in 1876.
The ridge survived until a storm in 1910, when it was breached in the middle, thus causing the harbour to revert to its former double spit state.
While it is perhaps not completely safe to make conclusions about the evolution of natural features from the fate of man-made structures, the breaching of a former complete bar does, as its author suggests, provide an alternative to the hypothesis of a locally reversed drift.
Although Robinson's suggestions are attractive, Steers (1964) does not believe that all double spits can be explained as breached baymouth bars.
He points out that even at Poole the two spits are not aligned with each other as one would expect had they been remnants of a former baymouth bar.
Further, there are cases known, such as Bridgwater Bay, where it is a question of historical fact that two spits have grown towards each other.
Elsewhere other double spits seem to be not explicable in terms of breaching.
As usual, it seems that similar phenomena can be produced in different ways.
Constructional forms already described have been intricate in detail but simple in general outline, but some natural forms have origins which appear to be much more complicated.
A very good example of a complex form is provided by the cuspate foreland of Dungeness (Plate 31), which has been studied in detail by Lewis (1932), whose ideas on its formation are indicated in Fig. 8.31.
In the beginning Dungeness is conceived to have been a simple spit springing from the coast in the vicinity of Fairlight (A on Fig. 8.31) and extending eastwards across a broad bay now occupied by Romney Marsh.
It is-thought that, in the early stages, the sea tended to build up a fanshaped mass of shingle ridges represented by the phases AB, AC and AD (Fig. 8.31).
This development is analogous with the known development of the comparable mass of ridges at Camber Castle.
These ridges have been built with considerable rapidity for Camber Castle stands on the innermost ridge, although, when it was constructed in 1538–9, it stood on the ridge next to the sea.
Following the early stages of development came an   extension of the spit right across the bay (AEFG): this extension has been suggested to explain the orientation of the ridges near Hythe.
Immediately after this stage the ridge was breached, the most important break being near Fairlight.
Robbed of its supply of shingle from the west the spit began to be swung round to face the dominant waves, i.e. those from the southwest.
The ensuing series of stages, HKEFG, LME and BMN, are consistent with the known orientation of shingle ridges on Dungeness (Fig. 8.31).
During this period the spit suffered erosion on its south-west facing portion, the shingle being transported round the Ness itself and built up into new ridges on the east-facing side, where the dominant waves come from an east or north-east direction.
The process of erosion on the west and accretion of new ridges on the east has actually been observed by Lewis.
Behind the shingle formation Romney Marsh gradually grew up and completely filled the former bay.
Although the account above gives, in broad outline, the general evolution of Dungeness, the dating of the various phases is a matter of some difficulty (see Lewis, 1932), while a major problem remains, namely the source of the shingle built into Dungeness.
Most of this is flint, which could not have been derived from the Hastings Beds exposed in the cliffs to the west.
The Eastbourne area is the nearest chalk district, though much of the flint derived from that area must accumulate at Langney Point and not be available to be transported by longshore drift to Dungeness.
Coral coasts
Coral reefs and atolls present a series of complex problems, involving ecological questions concerning the organisms involved, most of them species of coral, and geomorphological questions of the ultimate origin and present modification of these features.
The exact parts played by earth movements and Pleistocene changes of sea level are both involved and imperfectly understood.
The problems are reviewed by Guilcher (1958), Stoddart (1969), Steers and Stoddart (1977) and Stoddart and Steers (1977)
Corals themselves require certain conditions for their growth, especially the compound corals that are the important reef-builders.
Simple corals are found under somewhat more variable conditions.
In the first place they need high temperatures: the mean annual temperature should not fall below 18° C (65° F), and they grow best with temperatures between 25 and 29° C (77 and 84° F).
Their resistance to lower and higher temperatures varies from species to species and there are no thresholds at which they suddenly disappear: rather do the reefs become impoverished, probably through interference with reproductive processes; 36° C (97° F) seems to be as high a temperature as most species can stand, but there are exceptions even among allegedly sensitive species.
Thus, corals are essentially tropical and virtually confined within 30 degrees of the equator.
The depth to which corals flourish varies from account to account: 25 m (12 fathoms) according to Guilcher (1958), 50–60 m (about 30 fathoms) perhaps less (Kuenen, 1950) or 55 m (30 fathoms)(Steers in Lake, 1949).
According to Stoddart most reef corals grow at depths of less than 25 m (12 fathoms) and optimum growth conditions appear at depths of less than 10 m (5 fathoms).
The critical point is the effect of depth on illumination, which affects the photosynthetic activity of symbiotic algae.
These plants absorb the carbon dioxide released by the corals and so help to keep the water oxygenated.
In turbid water the depth to which corals grow will be more limited than in clear water.
The inhibiting effect of sedimentation on corals has been stressed in the past and it has been said that the absence of corals from the mouths of large rivers, for example those of south-east Asia, is due to the amount of fine suspended sediment.
However, it is now known that some corals can survive settling sediment and that even reefs may develop in muddy surroundings.
Coral species vary in their ability to cope with sediment.
Branching corals seem to be less adversely affected than massive corals.
Perhaps the general absence of corals from near large river mouths is partly the result of sediment and partly the result of low salinities.
Guilcher (1958) quotes salinities of 27 40 parts per thousand as being required for corals, but they have been observed flourishing in the Persian Gulf with salinity as high as 48 per thousand.
There is some evidence that low salinities induced by freshwater may result in physiological damage to corals.
Another factor inimical to corals is prolonged emersion, but resistance to this varies with the species.
Those which normally live on the inner part of the reef flat (see below) are more resistant to emersion than those normally under vigorous wave action: some species can survive emersion for periods up to three hours.
It used to be argued that turbulence was necessary to ensure the oxygenation of the water and the continuation of the food supply, but it is now thought that the main role of turbulence is in getting rid of excess carbon dioxide.
Coral structures tend to adopt certain recurrent features, both as regards the overall form of reefs and as regards the zonation of reefs.
Let us look at  the latter first.
In simplified form (Fig. 8.32) the zonation of atoll reefs barrier reefs are very similaris as follows:
(a) The seaward slope.
This is usually steep, often at an angle of 45 degrees, and sometimes overhanging.
It may be interrupted by submarine terraces.
(b) The algal ridge.
This is only well developed on the seaward side of the windward reef of atolls.
It is less developed, or even absent, within the lagoon and on the seaward side of the leeward reef.
It is characteristic of the trade wind belts of the Pacific, but does not occur in monsoon or Doldrum areas there, and is either very patchy on, or absent from Indian and Atlantic Ocean reefs.
The ridge is formed by the algal genus, Porolithon, not by Lithothamnion after which it used to be named.
It extends in places up to a metre or so above the level of the reef flat due to the fact that Porolithon can survive in the splash and spray zone and does not need long periods of immersion.
The outer side of the algal ridge is often interrupted by a system of spurs and grooves, the latter running back through the ridge as a series of surge channels, which may even become roofed over in places by the development of Porolithon from their sides.
Opinions have been divided whether the spur and groove systems are due to erosion or the constructive action of corals.
Stoddart quotes a great number of opinions on this subject: it seems that some authorities think that they may have been caused by a fall in sea level which meant that the reef flat became a barrier to water movement, so that surf became channelled down the outer edge of the algal ridge as it returned to the sea; alternatively the spur and groove system may be the most effective form of baffle for dissipating wave energy and is caused by reef-building corals forming the spurs — the grooves, once formed, may  of course be accentuated by scouring.
This is one of those most probable state explanations, and may be compared with what has been said about meanders and beach cusps.
Inland from the algal ridge there is often a shallow gutter, the origin of which presents a problem.
It seems to imply that the algal ridge is not building seawards, unless the gutter is also moving seawards at the same rate.
(c) The reef flat.
This, which is exposed at the very lowest tides, consists usually of a 300–500 m (1000–1600 ft) wide surface of dead coral and debris partly cemented with encrusting algae.
Live corals are locally present, but the main characteristic is that of a surface-hardened platform of dead coral and debris.
Below the surface hardening the material is often unconsolidated.
On the reef flat blocks of lithified material several metres in diameter may be found.
In areas subject to tropical cyclones these may be eroded blocks moved under the abnormally large waves accompanying such storms.
In other places they seem to be in situ and may be the eroded residuals of reefs built in relation to earlier, higher sea levels.
The basic causes of the Indo-Pacific reef flats of the type described above are uncertain.
In particular it is not known whether they have been formed in relation to present sea level, in very much the same way as it is not known whether the wavecut platform round Britain was formed entirely in relation to present sea level.
They differ from Atlantic reef flats in being considerably higher in relation to tide levels.
(d) The island.
This is probably formed of consolidated, calcareous sandstone, known as beach rock.
Accumulations of this material can move downwind through corrosion of the exposed side and the formation of new beach rock on the leeward side.
(e) The lagoon.
Usually there is a narrow reef flat separated from the lagoon floor by a steeper slope.
The flat may be partly formed of sand swept from the island and partly of coral.
Corals also grow on the lagoon slope and in patches, known as reef knolls, on the lagoon floor.
This zonation scheme is simplified.
A fuller division of reefs is given by Stoddart (1969).
It is similarly possible to make complex classifications of the types of reefs (summaries may be found in Daly, 1934; Guilcher, 1958; Stoddart, 1969, and the references quoted therein).
As with most classifications of natural phenomena the exact forms of which are governed by the interactions of continuously variable sets of conditions, the classification can be as complex as one likes and the only non-controversial classification is that which puts each reef in a class of its own.
Such a procedure, of course, defeats the object of classification.
For present purposes the oldest classification into fringing reefs, barrier reefs and atolls (Fig. 8.33) may be retained as long as it is realised that, although these are commonly occurring forms, there are many others (Guilcher, 1958) which it is very difficult to fit into these simple classes.
Barrier reefs and atolls are very like each other in general form and zonation.
Barrier reefs may not only lie some distance off major land masses, as shown in Fig.8.33 and exemplified in the Great Barrier Reef off the Queensland coast which is almost 2000 km (1250 miles) long and up to 1000 m (1000 yards or more) wide, but may also completely encircle non-coral islands or groups of non-coral islands, one of the best examples of which is the Truk group in the Caroline Islands (Fig. 8.34).
In detail barrier reefs consist of whole series of individual reefs and may have small islands on them.
Fringing reefs may occur directly exposed to the sea or may form on  coasts within barrier reefs: the former often have a zonation similar to barrier reefs and atolls, but the latter have no algal ridge and often very abrupt outer edges.
Some of the general problems concerning the morphology of coral reefs have already been mentioned in discussing their zonation and form.
In addition there are distribution problems.
The presence or absence of reefs cannot be explained solely in terms of temperature and turbidity, for, although reefs are absent from cold current shorelines, such as the west coast of South America, they do not occur even where the temperatures are high enough for coral in this region.
Again, in some areas where conditions throughout appear to be favourable to corals, coral reefs and banks will be found on some submerged banks and not on others, for example in the Laccadive Islands in the Indian Ocean.
But the most important fact requiring explanation is the depth at which the bases of the reefs occur: in other words some mechanism is required to provide for the depth at which coral is found, because this is much lower than the depth at which reef-building corals flourish.
This general tectonic coral atoll problem has been the one to receive the most attention in the past, though it is now being displaced by morphological, ecological and sedimentation problems (Stoddart and Steers,(1977).
Although various theories have been proposed, there are two about which there has been most argument.
These are the subsidence theory originally put forward by Darwin and strongly supported by Davis, and the Glacial Control theory advocated by Daly.
The first requires the subsidence of a whole series of oceanic islands: the second attempts to use the fluctuating sea levels of the Pleistocene, which are well evidenced by all sorts of phenomena, as the explanation of the features of coral reefs.
If we believe in the idea that the most economical hypothesis is the best, then Daly should win, but it seems at present as though the evidence in favour of the subsidence theory, with its ad hoc lowerings of islands, is considerably greater than that for the Glacial Control theory.
Let us consider the latter theory first and see where it falls short.
Broadly speaking, Daly envisaged a phase of stability in the earth's crust between the last major earth movements in the Tertiary period.
and the oscillating sea levels of the Pleistocene.
This period was sufficiently long for the widespread planation of oceanic islands, many of them volcanic.
Daly draws attention to the great number of submarine banks and lagoons of atolls, which occur at depths of up to 90 m (300 ft).
Depths less than this can be explained by the infilling of lagoons and the deposition of some material on banks.
The breadth of some of these banks is so great that they cannot be attributed to marine erosion at low sea levels corresponding with glacial periods: the Nazareth bank near the Maldive Islands is about 350 km (220 miles) long and reaches a maximum breadth of about 100 km (60 miles) and lies almost uniformly at a depth of about 60 m (200 ft).
The theory thus involves a long phase of stillstand with a sea level considerably  lower than the present one in the latter part of the Tertiary period immediately prior to the Ice Age.
This supposition conflicts with the conclusions of students of the geomorphology of the lands, who usually regard sea level as being much higher in that period than it is now.
Daly suggests that before the first interglacial period there were no coral reefs in the modern sense, which is disputable.
He argues that the low sea level of the first glaciation would enable the sea to act at greater depths and scour much of the mud, which is inimical to corals, from the banks and their edges.
In the higher sea level of the first interglacial, any mud left would be at too great depths to be disturbed by waves and hence for the first time the seas would be clear enough for reef-building corals to flourish.
The corals were presumably killed off in glacial periods by emersion, by the decrease in sea temperature and by the increased amount of mud stirred up by the lowered sea level.
The sequence of events is shown in Fig. 8.35.
During the last interglacial reefs occurred (Fig. 8.35A), but with the low sea level of the last glaciation (Fig. 8.35B) these were killed off in most areas.
With the Post-glacial increase in sea temperature the bank is liable to be colonised afresh by corals (xx on Fig. 8.35B).
As sea level rises these will develop and grow upwards, but those on the margins of the bank will be more favoured than those in the area which becomes the lagoon, as they will receive a better supply of food and better oxygenated water than the colonies within the lagoon.
Thus the atoll, which had existed in the last interglacial, reformed in the Post-glacial period (Fig. 8.35C).
This theory satisfactorily explains a number of the observed facts, though not all of them.
Many of the submerged banks and the bottoms of the lagoons of the atolls seem to be at a remarkably uniform depth, as one would expect if they represent an important phase of planation during a long period of preglacial stability.
It must be noted, however, that it is by no means certain in the majority of examples that the lagoons may not contain considerable thicknesses of coral.
Daly stressed the narrowness of most reefs and showed, from examples where the rate of reef growth is   known, that there had been ample time in the Post-glacial period for the growth of modern reefs.
This again is disputable.
Where reefs are notably wider than the average it may be assumed that there the corals were not killed off during the Pleistocene.
The average width of reefs found by Daly was about 600 m (2 000 ft), while wide reefs in the Banda Sea between Celebes and New Guinea, which are between three and four times the average in width, could be explained on the reasonable grounds that the area is so near the equator that temperatures never fell sufficiently to kill the coral.
In the lower glacial sea levels the straits in this region would have been narrower and shallower and the water comparatively warm even for this latitude.
Nevertheless, the low sea level would have killed existing corals, which do not survive above low tide level as a rule, so that there ought to be discontinuities in the reefs, and, if those who believe in progressively lower interglacial sea levels are correct, the reefs should exhibit a terraced or stepped form.
Davis's (1928) objections on physiographic grounds to Daly's theory do not seem to be valid, and are according to Daly due to a misconception of the Glacial Control theory.
The first is that drowned valleys down to about 90 m (300 ft) are explicable as features related to low glacial sea levels and later drowned, but if they are deeper then this subsidence must have taken place.
This is true, but even Daly would not exclude preglacial subsidence and it is very difficult to demonstrate the date of subsidence in many examples.
Daly himself mentions coral islands which have been elevated and others which have subsided, for his theory does not exclude local subsidence.
Davis's other objection, that islands within barrier reefs should show signs of recent cliffing if they had been strongly attacked by marine erosion during low glacial sea levels, is, according to Daly, due to Davis misinterpreting the Glacial Control theory, which does not involve glacial but preglacial planations.
Stoddart (1969) has mentioned several detailed objections to the Glacial Control Theory.
If we add these to those included above, we have the following:
1.
The theory requires a low preglacial sea level, which is completely at variance with the conclusions of most Pleistocene research workers.
2.
The higher interglacial sea levels should, if there had been no subsidence, have produced a series of raised reef terraces corresponding in elevation with the Pleistocene raised beaches and river terraces in other parts of the world.
3.
Stoddart uses a rate of rainwater solution of emerged reef limestones of 10–20 mm (0.4–0.8 in) per 1000 years and suggests that this is not enough to destroy reefs in glacial periods, the last of which he reckons to have lasted 60 000 years.
His solution rate would effect 0.6–1.2 m (2–4 ft) surface lowering in that period which is clearly not enough to destroy reefs.
Even if we take the general figure of 50 mm (2 in) per 1000 years for limestone solution used in Chapter 7 it would still only give 3 m (10 ft) of lowering, which is again not enough.
Intertidal limestone solution is at a much higher rate, 100 mm (4 in) per 1000 years, but because of the low sea levels this could not really be expected to destroy reefs.
It seems likely that in glacial periods reefs would only have been karstified and not destroyed as envisaged by Daly.
4.
Most damaging to Daly's hypothesis is the evidence of coral rock thickness revealed by borings and geophysical work (Guilcher, 1958; Stoddart, 1969).
One would not expect coral thickness exceeding 90 m (300 ft) if only glacial control had been involved in the formation of coral islands.
A few borings indicating greater thicknesses might be explained away as going diagonally through detritus on the outer flank of the reef, but there are now too many for one to conclude that the results can be explained in this way.
The early Funafuti boring reached 340m (approx. 1 130ft) while seismic work suggests up to 760 m (approx.2 530 ft) of coral overlying volcanic rock there.
At Bikini shallow water reef limestones have been proved to 780 m (approx. 2 600 ft), while the least depth of the volcanic basement is 1 600 m (approx. 5 300 ft).
On Eniwetok olivine basalt was reached in two borings at 1 405 m (approx. 4 680 ft) and 1 283 m (approx. 4 280 ft) respectively.
Admittedly, the lowest levels of the overlying limestone date back to the Eocene, but this merely proves long-continued subsidence: horizons of land fauna indicate interruption by periods of emergence.
On Kwajalein, the world's largest atoll, seismic work shows a volcanic basement at approximately 1 000–2 000 m (3 300–6 600 ft).
In the Tuamotus basalt has been reached at 438 and 415 m (approx. 1 460 and approx. 1 380 ft).
In Bermuda lava has been found at much shallower depths ranging from 20 to 170 m (approx. 70–570 ft) approximately, but in the Bahamas a deep boring ended at nearly 450 m (1 500 ft) in Lower Cretaceous dolomite.
Even certain elevated atolls seem to have such a thickness of limestone as to indicate subsidence before present uplift.
Thus practically every boring seems to vindicate the subsidence theory and to provide evidence against the Glacial Control theory.
Subsidence is common in certain oceanic areas and may be related to the creation and collapse of mid-ocean rises (Stoddart, I 969).
Guyots, which are submerged, bevelled volcanic mountains, are known, some having Cretaceous and Eocene faunas on their summits.
These presumably sank too fast for compensating reef growth.
So, it seems, we must turn to the subsidence theory.
The subsidence theory is simple.
One assumes that a subsiding island originally possessed merely a fringing reef.
As the island subsided the reef would grow upwards and outwards at the edges, the only places where growth is active for reasons already stated, while the dead part of the reef between the island and the front of the reef would be flooded.
Thus, the fringing reef would be changed into a barrier reef and finally into an atoll if the island subsided completely.
This theory was advocated in the nineteenth  century by Darwin and Dana, and strongly supported by Davis.
The evidence from the few areas that have been bored or surveyed geophysically supports this view, but other evidence does not fit so well.
If many banks and lagoons are at very similar depths, it would mean a remarkably and almost incomprehensibly uniform subsidence over a very large area, confined, incidentally, largely to tropical and especially tropical oceanic areas.
The impression one gets from the various accounts, however, is of a remarkable uniformity of depth from some writers, and of far less uniformity from others.
Certainly, some lagoons are abnormally deep and large amounts of subsidence have been recorded from other areas,.
but Daly's account of uniformity of depth is supported by a considerable number of examples.
Kuenen (1 950) has also pointed to two features which cannot readily be explained by the subsidence theory.
The first is the absence of deep gaps in barrier reefs and atolls, whereas if subsidence has been long continued, there should be deep gaps present, because once the gaps are deeper than the depth at which reef-building corals occur they cannot be filled by coral growth.
To account for them by subsidence, it must be assumed that preglacial subsidence was so slow that any breaches could be healed by new coral growth, while the Post-glacial rise of sea level was so rapid that any breaches formed could not be filled.
There is a certain amount of evidence to support this contention, which does, however, show the importance of glacial control in the later stages.
Secondly, many islands with barrier reefs also have fringing reefs within, whereas if they were subsiding the interior fringing reef should be converted to a barrier reef.
In fact islands with multiple barrier reefs are unknown, although a very few double reefs are known.
This must mean that subsidence has been steady, for any halts in subsidence should have resulted in the formation of fringing reefs which would later have been converted to barrier reefs by renewed subsidence.
The presence of a fringing reef and a barrier reef on an island would seem to be best explained by glacial control, the barrier reef being formed with the Post-glacial rise of sea level and the fringing reef by the more stable modern sea level.
Although there are certain features not readily explicable by subsidence, we cannot revert wholly to the Glacial Control theory.
It is incontrovertible that there has been long-continued subsidence on many oceanic atolls.
May it not be, however, that others have originated in the way suggested by Daly?
Although there are many boreholes and seismic records, there are still a great many more unsurveyed islands.
It seems that the effect of Pleistocene sea levels may, in fact, be evident on a more modest scale.
Many of our modern reefs may be interglacial reefs, karstified during low glacial sea levels and now veneered with a capping of modern coral.
A discontinuity known as the Thurber Discontinuity occurs in some Pacific areas: above it the corals are younger than 6 000–8 600 years old, depending on the locality, and may represent Post-glacial coral growth when sea level rose above the discontinuity.
Some  degraded sections of higher level limestone on present reef flats may represent interglacial or Post-glacial higher sea levels.
It has even been suggested that some coral reefs, which it will be recalled are mostly dead coral and debris, are being destroyed rather than built up: they could be relics of higher sea levels.
So, the Glacial Control theory, while seeming to be mostly invalidated as a basic explanation, may come into its own as the best way to explain many of the details of present reef morphology.
Deltas
It is difficult to know exactly where to include deltas.
Many of them are coastal, though others are found in lakes and coastal lagoons, for example the Gippsland Lakes in Victoria.
Conditions favouring deltaic accumulation are:
1.
A large load of river sediment.
2.
Usually a large river.
This condition is necessary for marine deltas, otherwise the action of the sea might disperse the sediment.
In sheltered lakes deltas may be built by much smaller rivers.
3.
Reasonably shallow water offshore, though the necessity for this really depends on the amount of sediment available and the strength of marine erosion.
Very deep water must inhibit delta building.
For example, the Congo, which virtually debouches into a submarine canyon, has no delta.
4.
A coast on which the wave energy is low, though here again how low will depend on other factors such as sediment supply and tidal range.
5.
A small tidal range: the Mediterranean, Black Sea and Caspian Sea bear witness to this in the Nile, Rhone, Po, Danube and Volga deltas.
However, deltas can be built in areas of larger tidal range provided that conditions 3 and 4 above are met.
The Irrawaddy and Ganges deltas are in areas of approximately 5 m (16 ft) tidal range.
Deltas are fundamentally features of river deposition, not marine deposition, though marine sediments may be incorporated in their fronts and intercalated with river deposits if phases of subsidence alternate with phases of delta building.
They develop basically because the velocity of a stream diminishes fairly rapidly at its mouth, a condition which must have been accentuated during the Post-glacial rise of sea level: deposition starts, probably aided by flocculation of the finer particles where the effect of salt water is felt, progradation ensues, which further reduces the gradient and so increases deposition by a positive feedback process.
Some deltas are virtually continuations of the aggradation type of river floodplain (see Chapter 9).
The subaerial equivalents of deltas are the waste fans that occur at mountain fronts in arid regions and in certain European mountain valleys, especially where there is a lot of coarse debris available, for example in the southern Alps.
The reasons are the same; the valleyside torrents are checked  when they reach the main valley floor and aggradation takes place, the fan shape usually resulting from the stream shifting its course from time to time.
Although the term, delta, was originally derived from the Greek letter which approximates in shape to the Nile delta, it is generally used with a wider range of meanings today.
Deltaic deposition can occur anywhere that a current carrying sediment slows down, especially if the cause of its check in velocity is due to it spreading out on release from a confined channel Thus submarine tidal deltas can be built where strong tidal currents pass through narrow straits between islands and then fan out.
With the reversal of tidal currents deltas can be built up at both ends of the strait.
Examples of such double tidal deltas are known from the Dutch Frisian Islands.
Similarly, many estuaries formed by the Post-glacial rise of sea level have infills which are essentially deltaic in character even though they do not emerge at the surface.
The mouth of the Loire has a submerged delta of this type, the two distributary channels being near the land on either side and separated by a mass of sediment some of which is exposed at low tide as banks in mid-estuary.
Coastal rivermouth deltas vary in shape and certain forms are alleged to recur, though all sorts of intermediates probably exist.
Where sediment is abundant and wave and current action limited, deltas tend to be lobate, the classic example being the Nile.
They present convex outlines in plan whether they are simple or compound deltas, composed virtually of a series of sub-deltas.
In the extreme case of abundant sediment and weak marine action, the levees on either side of the distributaries may be prolonged seawards to give a digitate delta, for example the Mississippi.
Where marine action is relatively stronger deltas tend to be cuspate with concave outlines in plan, for example the Tiber, though one wonders whether these differences in plan might not be due primarily to the frequency and location of distributaries: the Tiber has only one.
Delta plans may also be distorted by strong longshore drift.
In very simple small deltas deposition takes place in the embankment form with bottomset beds being overrun by foreset beds, above which the topset beds develop (Fig. 8.36).
In practice deposition will be much more complex than this.
The distributaries will build levees of the coarser parts of their load, while the areas between will be occasionally flooded, built up   with finer sediments, converted into swamps and so become sites of the formation of peats and organic muds.
The advancing delta front, especially if there is constructive wave action and longshore drift as on the Rhone delta, will be fringed with spits and bars, which may cut off coastal lagoons.
These will then develop through the usual plant successions into areas of organic sediment rather like the backswamps in the interior of the delta.
Very much of the sedimentation will be fine and the classic foreset bed pattern may not be discernible in such sediments.
The whole environment is mobile and in such a state of balance between deposition and erosion that changes are frequent and often important.
Imagine a digitate delta prolonging itself rapidly seawards.
As the course lengthens the bed of the distributary will be built up and the situation may arise where a levee is breached and a new shorter course to the sea made available.
This might well be stabilised as the main course and result in the construction of a new delta segment, until the gradient advantage of the distributaries over it was nullified by the extent of the segment.
At this stage the old outlet might be reoccupied or a new breach used.
Such a cycle is shown by the West Bay sub-delta at the mouth of the Mississippi (Fig. 8.37).
By 1845 the levee is breached, but no delta exists; by 1875 a well-built lobe fills much of the bay; 1922 shows little further expansion, while by 1958 large areas have reverted to bays and lakes.
Some idea of the importance of change may be got from the fact that the Mississippi has built seven major lobes in the last 5 000 years and that the last of these lobes has six sub-deltas, of which the West Bay sub-delta is one.
The last four of these sub-deltas were formed by levee breaches in 1839, 1860, 1874 and 1891.
Not every delta will construct new lobes, but some, like the Rhone, have distributaries which vary in importance from time to time.
The formation of new lobes is only one part of the story, for as soon as a distributary abandons a lobe, which is thus deprived of its sediment supply, marine erosion can set in.
The sediments of the old lobe will be attacked, destroyed and incorporated in marine sediments.
At the same time the inroads made by the sea may provide a potentially steep gradient course to the sea should the levee of the main channel be breached in an appropriate place.
One is tempted to see this succession of delta building, nullifying of the gradient advantage as the delta builds out, abandonment of a lobe which is then eroded by the sea, and ensuing recreation of a potential steep gradient course, as a possible explanation of cyclic sedimentation without change of relative land and sea level.
In this mobile environment the interpretation of sediment structures is obviously going to be complex.
Layers of organic muds of swamp origin will be interspersed with wedge-shaped horizons of marine sediments thinning landwards and representing marine advance, however this may have been caused, levees of coarser sediment will follow the courses of former distributaries, while fanshaped spreads of such material will mark  the sites of levee breaches.
Old beach ridges may indicate former limits of the delta, while differential compaction, the organic sediments being much more compressible than the mineral silts and sands, will almost certainly further confuse the pattern.
Perhaps the most fluid of all deltas are the Arctic deltas, such as the Mackenzie in Canada and the Lena and Kolyma in Siberia.
The Lena delta is very complex and is said to have as many as forty-five mouths.
Catastrophic summer floods caused by thawing farther south may raise the discharge to the level of the maximum known for the Congo.
These floods transport a vast mass of debris including ice rafts and trees into the delta region before the latter has really thawed.
The old distributaries may still be frozen and incapable of handling the volume of the river and the load  it is carrying, so that there is wholesale bank breaching, flooding and the creation of new distributaries.
It will be realised that the interpretation of deltas is partly a question of geomorphology, involving form and the use of historical records, but the sediment succession is really only explicable by the detailed methods of Pleistocene stratigraphy.
Classification of coasts and shorelines
Classifications of most landforms are in a sense unsatisfactory, because there is usually an infinite variety of forms, some of which fit well into a classification and others only with extreme difficulty.
It is doubtful whether many such classifications are of any use at all, for it is more difficult to remember the results of the classification than the individual landforms.
Coast and shoreline classifications have usually had one of three bases, descriptive, numerical or genetic.
Purely descriptive classifications may be based on the nature of the coast, whether it is a fjord coast, a ria coast, a low plain coast or any other of a number of types.
They may also refer to the relation between structures and the coast, in which case the primary division is usually between longitudinal and transverse coasts.
Due to the variety of natural forms there is a tendency to introduce more and more subdivisions until the classification becomes so unwieldy as to be useless.
Numerical classifications were largely a nineteenth-century fashion and principally originated in Germany (Johnson, 1919).
They consist usually of a ratio between the length of the coast and some other feature, such as the total land area or a line tangent to the headlands of the coast.
As a result they are merely measures of the degree of indentation of the coast, and ‘tell little which a good map does not tell much better’ Johnson, 1919, P. 171).
It may be that with the present trend towards measurement numerical classifications will come back into vogue.
The most commonly used genetic classification is the simple one formulated by Johnson and includes the following four categories of shorelines, which he uses almost synonymously with coastline here:
(a) Shorelines of submergence.
(b) Shorelines of emergence.
(c) Neutral shorelines.
This class includes those shorelines where the exact form is due to neither emergence nor submergence but to a new constructional or tectonic form, e.g. deltas, alluvial plains, outwash plains, volcanoes and faults.
(d) Compound shorelines.
In this class are included all shorelines which have an origin combining at least two of the preceding classes.
In practice, compromise is necessary when assigning actual shorelines to the above classes.
This is principally due to the fact that most of the  world's shorelines show signs of both emergence and submergence due to oscillations of sea level in the Pleistocene period.
The general melting of the ice sheets of the last glacial period has resulted in widespread drowning of coasts, but at earlier stages of the Pleistocene the sea level was higher than at present as is witnessed by remnants of raised beaches.
Accordingly, shorelines are said to be submergent or emergent depending upon the most strongly marked characteristics present.
Such a practice may easily result in assigning shorelines which are genetically the same to different classes.
In Pembroke or south-west Ireland the chief physical features are the drowned valleys or rias, which are so dominant as to cause the shoreline to be classed immediately as one of submergence.
West Sussex and east Hampshire have probably had exactly the same sequence of movements of sea level, but the signs of submergence are not so strongly marked.
There are shallow inlets and islands in the Portsmouth area, but the main river valleys, although aggraded in their lower reaches, are not rias, presumably because the rivers have brought down so much alluvium that they have filled any rias which may have been present, whereas the rivers of Pembroke and south-west Ireland have been unable to achieve this.
Secondly, Sussex shows a good development of raised beach and flat coastal plain, which, together with the smooth shoreline, would tend to make one class it as a compound shoreline.
A classification proposed by Cotton (1952) basically divided coasts into those of tectonically stable and those of tectonically mobile regions.
All have been affected by the Post-glacial rise of sea level, but in the second class this may have been accentuated or nullified by local land movements.
Thus features of submergence may dominate either class: so too may features of emergence, though these will be inherited in the first class and due to recent uplift in the second.
The final categories are:
A. Stable coasts, all basically submergent.
1.
Dominated by features of submergence.
2.
Dominated by inherited features of emergence.
3.
Miscellaneous (fjords, volcanoes etc.)
B. Mobile coasts, affected by tectonic movements in addition to Post-glacial submergence.
1.
Submergent features not offset by uplift.
2.
Dominated by emergent features due to recent uplift.
3.
Fold and fault coasts.
4.
Miscellaneous
This classification sorts out Johnson's compound class by splitting it on visually dominating features into his emergent and submergent classes.
Shepard (1963) used a classification which basically divided coasts into those shaped primarily by non-marine agencies and those shaped mainly by marine processes.
He then proceeded to subdivide the classes: an outline of the scheme is as follows:
A. Coasts whose form is primarily due to non-marine agents:
1.
Coasts formed by subaerial denudation and drowned.
In detail this can be subdivided, e.g. rias and fjords.
2.
Coasts dominated by subaerial deposition.
At least two further grades of division are possible.
e.g. fluvial and glacial exemplify the first of these stages, while deltas represent a second stage division of the former.
3.
Coasts shaped by volcanic activity.
Subdivisions are possible.
4.
Coasts dominated by earth movements.
Faulting and folding provide two obvious subdivisions.
B. Coasts dominated by the effects of marine action:
1.
Coasts shaped by marine erosion.
2.
Coasts dominated by marine deposition.
3.
Coasts built up by plants and animals.
Subdivisions are possible in each of these, e.g. coral and mangrove coasts in 3.
Even with a classification as complex as this it is often difficult to place a coast, because the division between A and B is not easy and is very subjective.
An alternative classification has been proposed by Valentin (Cotton, 1954).
Here the division is basically into advancing and retreating coasts.
The advancing coasts may be due to emergence or to the development of constructional forms either organic or inorganic: they include, thus, shorelines which would have been classed by Johnson as emergent and as neutral.
The retreating coasts include those due to submergence and those due to active cliff erosion by wave attack.
There is no limit to the complexity of classification, simply because of all the intermediate forms and combinations of forms that can occur.
The formulation of classifications provides, if nothing else, mental exercise for geomorphologists.
Movements of base level
The effects of the processes of subaerial and marine denudation described in earlier chapters depend on the influence of base level, which is usually sea level.
Any movements of base level set the sea to work at a different level and the processes of subaerial erosion to grade to the new level.
Thus, movements of base level constitute interruptions in the cycle of erosion.
A major movement of base level must terminate the course of the cycle and initiate a new cycle graded to the new level.
Minor movements of less than a hundred metres or so are probably best regarded as interruptions in one main cycle.
In order to avoid the difficult question of whether the sea rises or the land sinks, it is customary to describe any movement involving a rise of the land relative to the sea as a negative movement of base level, or more simply as a rejuvenation since the processes of subaerial erosion are given new activity.
Similarly, a sinking of the land relative to the sea is known as a positive movement of base level.
The question, whether such movements are caused by worldwide or eustatic movements of sea level or by local movements of the land, is a vexed one.
Movements of base level are of the utmost importance in understanding landforms in most parts of the world, for the earth's surface is in an unstable period of its history.
The Alpine folding movements culminated no more than 35 million years ago and continued into more recent times in some areas.
Many of these Alpine fold ranges, such as the mountains of Japan, the Andes and the arcs through the East Indies are still areas of instability characterised by earthquakes and volcanic activity.
In addition, the last two million years have seen one of the greatest glaciations in the earth's history.
The waxing and waning of the ice sheets lowered and raised sea level as more or less of the water on the earth's surface was locked up in them.
There were at least six cold periods with glaciation somewhere on the earth.
These were not of equal intensity, so that the low glacial sea levels may not have been identical.
Similarly, the interglacial periods have not been of the same duration and have presumably not resulted in equal melting of the ice.
In the short period of Post-glacial time the ice sheets have not completely melted with the result that present sea level is probably lower  than it was in some of the interglacial periods.
These Pleistocene oscillations of sea level have been superimposed on slightly earlier and usually downward movements of base level, so that the landscape in detail is complex and has developed under the influence of many and varied movements of base level.
Positive movements of base level
In their effects on relief positive movements are less spectacular than negative movements of base level, as the relative rise of the sea has the effect of hiding parts of the earth's surface beneath the sea or beneath thicknesses of alluvium.
Along the coast the most obvious signs of positive movement are to be found in drowned river valleys, usually called rias when they are in areas of rugged relief and estuaries when they occur in subdued lowlands.
Fine   examples of rias are to be found in some of the peninsulas of western Europe, notably south-west Ireland, Cornwall, Brittany and north-west Spain.
The actual form of the ria depends partly on the relation between the previous river valley and the rock structures and partly on the relation between the rock structures and the coastline.
Where the river valleys have followed the weaker beds in the structures, drowning will result in long but usually simple inlets of the type observed in the extreme south-west of Ireland (Fig. 9. 1).
Where the rivers have flowed transverse to the structure rias formed in them will have a much more irregular plan: the main arm of the ria may not be straight and it may possess branches developed along weaker beds followed by the courses of previous subsequent streams.
A good example of this type is provided by Cork Harbour (Fig. 7.13) and another by Plymouth Sound.
If the structure is parallel to the coast drowning will result in a series of lines of islands representing the old ridges and long narrow arms of the sea along the old valleys, as in the Yugoslav coast (Fig. 9.2) and the coast of southern Chile.
Where the sea breaches former ridges in this type of coast intricate transverse rias of the type of Cork Harbour may be formed: an excellent example is to be found north of Zadar (Zara) on Fig. 9.2.
Whether the rias or estuaries persist depends to a considerable extent on their depth and on the amount of alluvium being brought into them by inflowing rivers.
In areas of readily eroded rocks the rivers may carry so much load that one of two things may happen: either the estuary may be filled soon after it is formed or the aggradation may keep pace with the rising sea level so that there is not a stage of actual ria or estuary formation.
Most of the rivers of eastern and southern England possess buried channels, graded to a much lower base level and now completely filled with alluvium.
Excellent examples are provided by the main rivers crossing the South Downs, the Arun, Adur, Ouse and Cuckmere.
The alluvium reaches thicknesses of approximately 15 m (50 ft) in the Adur and Ouse valleys and 30 m (100 ft) in the Arun valley.
The aggradation in the lower reaches of these rivers results in a landform with all the appearance of a true floodplain, a broad tract of easily flooded land over which the river flows in sweeping meanders, or did so until their courses were artificially contained in the interests of navigation and flood control.
The interpretation of the sequence of events involved in the aggradation is one in which the geomorphologist has usually insufficient specialised knowledge, as the phases of marine and river aggradation are represented by different types of alluvium with differing fossil contents.
This subject will be considered a little more fully below.
There is, however, one theoretical criterion by which rias, which have been later infilled, can be differentiated from lower reaches aggraded solely by the deposition of river alluvium: it lies in the suggestion that, if a ria or estuary had existed, the old shores at the side should show signs of marine cliffing.
Unfortunately the rivers, meandering over their own aggradation, may be expected to produce comparable cliffing where they impinge against the solid rocks of the valley sides, so that, in practice, an interpretation of events based solely on the evidence of landforms is not practicable.
Indeed, it may be true that most of the great floodplains of the world have been formed by aggradation provoked by the Post-glacial rise in sea level and not by the erosional method outlined in the discussion of the Davisian cycle (Chapter 2).
Before the days of common subsurface investigation it was very difficult to distinguish between the two.
With more money available to satisfy scientific curiosity, with the development of a range of types of boring equipment and with the adaptation of seismic work, the solid profiles beneath alluvium can more often be determined.
Usually floodplains are not veneers of alluvium explicable by lateral channel movements, but considerable thicknesses smoothing over more complex relief.
The Mississippi is probably the classic case.
The English Fens, with their projecting islands of solid rock, are another and will be considered in more detail below.
True eroded floodplains may be locally present along rivers, but one needs to use this hypothesis with caution as an explanation of major floodplains.
This, incidentally, throws some doubt on the efficacy  In addition to the aggradation of the lower reaches of river valleys, the Post-glacial rise of sea level caused widespread aggradation of any lowlands which had been eroded to a sufficiently low level.
The outstanding example of such aggradation in the British Isles is provided by the Fenland.
Here a thick series of alluvial deposits rests in a basin cut largely in the Upper Jurassic clay formations, the Oxford, Ampthill and Kimeridge Clays.
Islands of solid rocks, usually Upper Jurassic or Lower Cretaceous, rise through the alluvium especially in the south of the Fens in the vicinity of Ely.
The history of the succession of climates and vegetation and the relative changes in the levels of land and sea have been worked out on the basis of stratigraphical and botanical investigations in great detail by Godwin (a simple account is given in Darby, 1938, and a full account of the vegetation zones in Godwin, 1975).
As the sea level rose in Post-glacial times two conflicting physical processes took place: a tendency for the sea to invade the area and to leave behind extensive deposits of marine silt and a tendency for a large-scale development of peat in the districts furthest away from the sea.
On the seaward side of the Fens in the Wisbech district silt deposition was predominant throughout, while on the landward side in the Cambridge-Ely area peat is the dominant formation.
In the intervening regions these deposits interdigitate, periods of marine transgression being indicated by silts and periods of regression by peat beds.
In general there were two main phases of peat formation and two marine transgressions, the earlier of the two being much more important.
Not only can the physical conditions be interpreted from the stratigraphy, but the actual climate can be estimated from the vegetation preserved in the deposits.
On these bases Godwin has distinguished the following phases in the development of the Fens.
The dates are based on those given by Godwin (1975)
(a) The pre-Boreal period (Zone IV).
During this period, approximately 10 000 to 9 000 years ago, the whole of the Fenland was a basin of Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks with a varying thickness of glacial deposits covering them.
The floor of the North Sea was dry and peat was forming on it, as the Post-glacial rise in sea level had flooded neither the floor of the North Sea nor the Fens.
(b) The Boreal period (Zones V and VI).
From about 9 000 to 7 000 years ago there was a gradual improvement of climate, the predominantly birch forest of the previous period being replaced by pine forest and then by mixed oak forest.
Sea level rose and by the end of the period the North Sea had reached approximately its present extent though it did not affect the Fenland.
The beginning of peat formation occurred in the deeper river valleys of the area.
(c) The Atlantic period (Zone VIIa).
The period from 7 000 to 5 000 years ago was one of increasing dampness and of extensive peat formation.
It is generally thought that the climate became more oceanic in character.
The  growth of peat resulted in the killing of the forest by the exclusion of air from the roots of the trees, and many of these dead trees became entombed in the peat.
It was during this period that the main lower peat of the Fens, with its bog oak, was formed.
(d) The sub-Boreal period (Zone VIIb).
An increasing dryness towards the end of the previous period had allowed forest to spread over most of the peat areas, but this in turn was interrupted in the sub-Boreal period, 5 000 to 2 800 years ago, by a widespread but shallow marine transgression.
True marine conditions probably prevailed only in the north of the Fens but brackish conditions further south are witnessed by some of the fossils.
This was the period of the deposition of the Fen or Buttery Clay.
(e) The sub-Atlantic period (Zone VIII).
From then on damper conditions once more prevailed and the recrudescence of peat formation covered much of the Fens, the deposit forming today the main upper peat.
A limited marine transgression in the Roman period caused the formation of salt marsh in the northern part of the Fens, while the Fen rivers aggraded their courses and built up levees of silt.
The levees caused the areas between to be very subject to flooding and consequently peat formation was further favoured.
The levees of the former rivers through the Fens are now marked by raised banks, or roddons, which have been favoured settlement sites due to their comparative dryness.
The level of the roddons has probably been accentuated by the oxidation and consequent lowering of the level of the peat on either side, but the roddons are thought to have been always higher than the surrounding peat fen (Godwin, 1938).
Differential compaction of the peat and silt may have been involved as well.
Such detailed analyses of aggradation deposits as this are not possible by purely geomorphological methods, but require considerations of stratigraphy and especially of fossils.
Various fossils may prove useful.
The dating of the various phases may be brought about by a study of the archaeology of the district, such methods having proved to be very valuable in the Fens.
Beds representing marine invasions may contain marine shells or brackish water shells, thus giving an indication of local conditions.
Freshwater beds may be shown to represent either marsh or river conditions by the nature of the freshwater Mollusca they contain.
Further discussion of these various methods can be found in Sparks and West (1971).
But by far the most refined technique for the interpretation of aggradation deposits is that of pollen analysis.
The technique of pollen analysis (Faegri and Iversen, 1964; Godwin, 1941) was largely developed in Scandinavia.
Under suitable conditions pollen is well preserved in certain deposits especially in peats.
Careful sampling of such beds at close intervals by boring tools which reduce the risk of contamination to a minimum, followed by laboratory treatment designed to separate the pollen grains, allows the investigator to build up a picture of the vegetation conditions prevailing during the period of  deposition of the bed.
For this pollen is the best fossil available as it is the most readily dispersed and therefore the most likely to show correlations over wide areas.
The composition of the forest cover and of the smaller plants is usually represented by diagrams showing the relative percentage of the plants present.
It has been found that there is a definite sequence of vegetation changes in the Post-glacial period and that these changes can be recognised over wide areas.
The actual vegetation may not be identical owing to varying local conditions but there is sufficient affinity to make correlations reasonably certain.
By such a refined technique as this it is possible to know what was happening in various aggradation deposits at various periods of Post-glacial history.
The method can also be extended to aggradation deposits of interglacial age.
Work on these lines has already cleared up many of the mysteries of the Pleistocene and holds more hope of a final elucidation than any other method known.
Finally, the importance of rises of base level in the formation of islands must be stressed.
Although islands may be formed by a variety of processes, such as vulcanism, tectonic movements and accumulation, many of the world's present islands must have resulted from the Post-glacial rise of sea level.
Reference to the Dalmatian coast (Fig. 9.2) will show how the flooding of valleys and of cols through the intervening ridges leads to the production of many islands.
It is probable that some islands around Britain have been formed by the oscillatory nature of Pleistocene sea level (Fig. 9.3).
A comparatively  narrow neck of land (A) joining two larger masses of land (B and C) may be imagined.
During a glaciation, the streams draining the neck of land will be rejuvenated and will tend to cut into the neck of land, which will be partly flooded when sea level rises in the next interglacial.
A series of such oscillations, aided perhaps by marine erosion, is probably an important cause of island formation.
The process has been invoked by Everard (1954) to explain the separation of the Isle of Wight.
Originally the island was joined to Purbeck by a Chalk ridge the ends of which are still visible in Purbeck and in the Needles at the western end of the Isle of Wight.
It was finally breached by the sea flooding through valleys late in the Pleistocene.
At the same time the western tip of the Isle of Wight was also almost isolated from the main mass of the island by the flooding of the valley of the western Yar which at present lies well below 15 m (50 ft) OD and extends north-south across the island three miles from its western extremity.
Some such process may have been originally responsible for the separation of England and France by the formation of the Straits of Dover, although this would have involved the breaching of a much broader barrier than the Purbeck-Isle of Wight ridge.
It should be noted, however, that an alternative hypothesis has been suggested for the formation of the Straits of Dover by Stamp (1927), who thought that they were due to the southwards overflow of a proglacial lake ponded up in the southern North Sea by an ice front stretching from England to Holland.
Like the formation of many major landforms, this is a problem where there is room for differences in belief through the absence of any positive evidence.
Negative movements of base level
Negative movements of base level have a much more profound effect on the relief than the positive movements.
Landforms developed in relation to the earlier and higher base level are abandoned as erosion starts to work down to the new base level.
Some of the landforms, especially if they are depositional, may be quickly destroyed, but forms cut into resistant rocks may be preserved for a very long time.
Thus, the record of many negative movements of base level may remain in the landscape to be interpreted by the geomorphologist.
The chief landforms resulting are raised beaches and marine terraces, river terraces and breaks in the cross-profile of the valley, breaks in the long profile of a stream usually known as nick points, and incised meanders.
(a) RAISED BEACHES AND MARINE TERRACES (Plates 32 and 33)
Provided that the sea has been eroding for a sufficient length of time a negative movement of base level results in a raised beach, consisting as a rule of an eroded platform of solid rocks with or without a covering of beach deposits.
Such features are usually called raised beaches if they are at a low level, approximately below 50 m (150 ft) OD, and marine terraces, platforms, benches or erosion surfaces if they are above this level.
On the whole the raised beaches are characterised by a platform with overlying beach deposits, while the marine terraces are usually devoid of such deposits.
Thus, the terminology corresponds approximately with the nature of the landform, although there are low raised beaches without deposits and a few of the higher marine terraces with deposits.
Low raised beaches are well represented around the south and west coasts of Great Britain, less well on the east coast, and particularly well on the west coast of Scotland.
Along the foot of the South Downs north of Chichester there is the well-known Goodwood raised beach at about  30–40 m (100–130 ft) OD, with gravels which are readily recognisable as beach material: a low raised beach a few feet above present high tide level is to be found on the Gower peninsula in South Wales; on the west coast of Scotland a raised beach at approximately 7 5 m (25 ft) OD occurs on many of the islands, such as Arran, and in many of the lochs.
The older and higher marine terraces have been the subject of a very great amount of research in Britain, though there is less general agreement on their interpretation.
It has been shown conclusively in the south-east of England that a marked terrace of early Pleistocene age with beach deposits in some localities occurs at about 195 m (650 ft) OD (Wooldridge and Linton, 1955).
Therefore, it is clear that there may be expected to be remains of comparable marine terraces at any level between that terrace and present sea level.
Most workers who have studied the south and west of Great Britain are convinced that below 195 m (650 ft) OD there is a succession of marine terraces, while some workers have produced evidence to suggest that the succession also extends to considerably higher altitudes.
These interpretations have met some opposition on two main counts: very few of the presumed terraces have beach material on them and they are so fragmentary as to rouse the criticism that their interpretation is at times subjective rather than objective.
The lack of beach material may be    explained in three ways.
It is probably fallacious to assume that at every level a pebble beach was formed: if the rocks eroded are weak, such as clay, or both fairly weak and chemically attacked by the sea, such as certain types of limestone, there may well have been no or very little beach material formed.
Some present beaches at the foot of chalk and limestone cliffs have only small quantities of pebbles, for example that to the east of Brighton.
Secondly, it is possible that the beach gravels have been eroded away since their formation.
In Britain much of the area has been glaciated and even the unglaciated part has certainly been subjected to tundra conditions and solifluxion (see Chapter 15) during the Pleistocene.
The preservation of beach gravel would then be a question of its accidental occurrence in some specially favourable situation not subject to glacial or periglacial action.
Gravels resembling marine gravel do locally occur but they are by no means common, even in areas well away from the ice margin.
Finally, it may have been that before the Pleistocene, with its powerful glacial and periglacial denudation, the amount of gravel transferred to the sea by the rivers was much less, so that there was far less material from which the sea could build beaches.
The second main objection to the interpretation of these fragmentary features as remnants of marine terraces, that they are insufficiently well preserved to be objectively assessed, is a problem common to the interpretation of all relict features undergoing destruction.
Between a perfectly preserved marine terrace and one so destroyed as to be unrecognisable there must be a whole series of terrace fragments in various states of preservation.
It should really be occasion for surprise that the terraces are as well preserved as they are, not that they are dissected.
The real danger lies in a too enthusiastic recording of very doubtful features as marine terraces.
Most of the terraces are preserved as flattenings on spurs and it is possible that similar features might result from wasting of a spur due to attack by the headward erosion of valleys on either side.
However, careful studies over considerable areas with measurement of heights have shown that the presumed terrace fragments do fall into marked series, so that the basic interpretation seems to be correct, even though features other than terraces may have been included occasionally.
There are other difficulties encountered in the study of the higher marine terraces.
In areas of permeable rocks with sub-parallel valleys the terrace fragments on the spurs have breaks of slope both at the back and the front, and, in favourable circumstances, terraces at quite close height intervals can be shown to be distinct from each other.
In areas of impermeable rocks, such as the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of Wales, the terraces are often preserved as a series of broad swells reaching approximately the same elevation, but the break of slope between two adjacent terraces is not always observable.
It is then possible to argue that the so-called terraces really represent parts of a single warped surface, but a close study of the altitudes usually leads to their interpretation as distinct terraces.
The high sea levels of the Pleistocene, corresponding to the interglacials, are often held to have been responsible for highly degraded marine terraces now found at altitudes up to about 70 m (230 ft) above present sea level.
Pleistocene changes of sea level were not simple up and down movements with reversion to a pre-existing level, but oscillations superimposed on a generally downward movement.
The descending sequence of marine terraces would then represent successively younger interglacial periods.
The correlation of old marine terraces and various phases in the Pleistocene has been a particularly fruitful source of disagreement among glacial geologists and geomorphologists.
Much of the earlier work was done on Mediterranean terraces and these, as well as many of the terraces in other areas, cannot be directly related to Pleistocene events.
Thus, the presence of solifluxion on a raised beach means that it must precede one glaciation, but this merely fixes its age as pre-last glaciation and gives no indication of how many glaciations have passed since the beach was formed.
Although it seems highly probable that sea level changes have been similar over very large areas of the earth's surface, the possibility of local terraces of different dates due to other causes cannot be excluded.
An example is the terrace around Lake Harrison at a little above 120 m (400 ft) OD (see Chapter 14), which might easily be confused with the well-known British marine terrace at about the same level but probably much earlier in date.
The surest way to fix the level of the sea in the interglacial periods would seem to consist in undertaking pollen analyses of interglacial beds containing marine transgressions.
This has been done in the case of a number of last (Ipswichian) interglacial deposits in Britain to give a clearer idea of sea level at that period and the amount of East Anglian downwarping since (Sparks and West, 1971).
The too simple glacio-eustatic view of a descending series of old marine terraces being associated with interglacial high sea levels needs to be guarded against in areas such as East Anglia, where differential warping of the land may well have occurred.
This can be illustrated with reference to the Cromerian deposits at West Runton in Norfolk.
It has been shown that the Upper Freshwater Bed of the Cromer Forest Bed dates probably from an early interglacial, but there is no sign of a marine transgression in the bed although it covers the middle part of the interglacial, when such a transgression would be expected.
The bed lies at about present high tide level, so that there is no indication of marine action at levels as high as at present.
Elsewhere the 70 m (230 ft) terrace is sometimes attributed to the first interglacial period.
Is it then to be concluded that the Cromer area has been downwarped at least 70 m since the Cromerian interglacial, or, if such an amount of downwarping seems to be excessive, that the sea level of the Cromerian interglacial was not as high as 70 m above the present?
The whole subject of the relation of sea levels to Pleistocene events is so confused and the possibility of new information being obtained by the botanical study of interglacial beds so important, that it is better to leave the question open at the moment.
It is highly likely that interglacial sea  levels are represented by marine terraces or raised beaches, but the levels associated with each interglacial are to some extent in dispute.
The question whether these old marine terraces are due to differential uplift of the land or worldwide lowerings of sea level, is a highly controversial one.
The details of the terraces are complex and not of great relevance to such a general study of geomorphology as this, but summaries of various British successions may be found in Wooldridge and Linton (1955) and George (1955).
In the past the doubt felt by some about the existence of great sequences of high-level eroded plateau surfaces has been reinforced by problems of explaining the possible basic causes of the vast changes in base level required.
It may seem somewhat curious logic to decide whether empirically determined facts can only be accepted provided that they can be explained, but one can understand the attitude when the facts seem less than certain.
When Baulig, between the wars, was strongly advocating worldwide eustatic changes of sea level the only possible reasonable explanation, namely deformation of ocean basins, seemed very unlikely in view of the widely held view of the permanency of ocean basins current at that time.
However, with the comparatively recent revolution in geological views on the matter, and the promulgation of the theories of plate tectonics and seafloor spreading (Ollier, 1981), ocean basins seem to have become some of the less stable features of the earth's crust.
Thus, major changes in oceans with consequent major changes in base level seem far less improbable than they did previously.
(b) RIVER TERRACES (Plate 34) AND VALLEY CROSS-PROFILES
Just as the marine terrace represents the abandoned sea floor, so do river terraces represent valley floors abandoned by the rivers as they start to cut down to the new and lower base level.
They are intimately connected with  breaks in the long profile of the streams.
In Fig. 9.4 the original floodplain of the river is represented by the terrace A, while, after one rejuvenation, a   second terrace B was formed into which the river is again cutting down to form a third terrace C. Each terrace disappears upstream at the point to which the head of rejuvenation has receded: this can be more readily appreciated from a section down the valley (Fig. 9.5).
Where rejuvenation intervenes before the river has had sufficient time for lateral erosion to form a flat valley floor, there will not be river terraces at the side of the stream but merely breaks of slope in the valley sides (Fig. 9.6).
Such breaks, which occur in deep mountain valleys more often than  in lowland valleys, are not always easy to interpret, as similar forms may be caused by lithological differences or by glaciation.
The main characteristic of rejuvenation terraces and breaks of slope in the valley side caused by the same process is that the terraces are essentially paired, so that they occur at the same elevation on both sides of the valley.
This enables them to be differentiated from some of the other forms of river terrace, which must be considered in any study of terraces.
Generally rejuvenation terraces are cut into the solid rock or consist of a rock bench veneered with a comparatively small thickness of alluvium.
It is possible for a river to reach grade and to start to form a floodplain while it is still transporting coarse material over a comparatively steep gradient.
With general reduction of the land through which it flows and a decrease in the calibre of the load, the stream is enabled to flow over decreasing gradients.
If this process is combined with lateral shifting of the river the result will be terraces which are not paired (Fig. 9.7) and which converge downstream towards the mouth of the river (Fig. 9.8).
Terraces of this type have been observed by Lewis (1944) in laboratory models of streams.
The formation of unpaired terraces is also likely to happen when a stream proceeds to excavate a mass of glacial material choking its preglacial valley.
The resulting terraces will also differ from most rejuvenation terraces in being cut solely into drift and not into solid rock.
Finally, changes of climate may result in yet another type of terrace.
Changing climate results in changes in the discharge of the streams and in the nature of the weathering of the valley sides.
The latter may well cause the amount and the calibre of the load to alter.
In areas near the Pleistocene ice sheets the advent of tundra conditions usually resulted in the rapid weathering of large quantities of material so that the load of the streams was increased in both amount and calibre.
The new load could not be transported over the existing river gradients, as these were not sufficiently steep.
As a result aggradation took place and the surfaces of such aggradations, now dissected by later erosion, may remain in the form of terraces.
A combination of rejuvenation and climatic change may cause complex terrace forms to be developed.
Such a combination occurred, of course, during the glacial periods, when the increased rate of rock weathering caused aggradation in the upper reaches of streams while the lowered sea level caused rejuvenation in the lower reaches.
Thus, a glacial terrace profile may be above the interglacial or Post-glacial profile upstream and below it downstream: the terrace profiles, in fact, cross (Fig. 9.9).
In this  figure the normal profile is represented by the curve CD, which is not adapted to glacial conditions as these require aggradation upstream to the level B and erosion downstream to the level A. An excellent example of crossing profiles of this type is provided by the river Durance in southern France (Baulig, 1950).
The last glacial period, the Weichsel glaciation, is  represented upstream by a terrace which rises about 30 m (100 ft) above the river at Sisteron.
Downstream the relative altitude of the terrace decreases and immediately east of the lower Rhone the old course of the Durance plunges beneath the alluvial spread of the Rhone delta to a depth of at least 50 m (160 ft).
(C) BREAKS IN THE LONG-PROFILES OF RIVERS (NICK POINTS)
As shown in Fig. 9.5 terraces are formed by a head of rejuvenation receding up a river and causing the river to become entrenched in its earlier valley floor.
Where the coast has deep water offshore a fall in base level means the formation of a vertical or very steep cliff.
One may imagine the river cascading over this in a waterfall or a series of rapids (Fig. 9. 1OA).
Headward erosion is rapid at this point and regrading of the river starts to work back from the mouth.
The waterfall is usually held to be slowly flattened out by the erosion of the river so that the new section of the profile occupies successively the positions 1 to 6 (Fig. 9.10A).
When the nick point has receded a considerable distance upstream it will have a much gentler form, comparable with A (Fig. 9.1OA), which represents the head of an earlier rejuvenation.
Conditions such as these are those usually adopted in diagrammatic representations of the process.
On very few coasts is there sufficient depth of water offshore to allow for merely vertical displacement of the shoreline following a rejuvenation.
Generally speaking the offshore profile is much more gentle, so that a fall in sea level of 30 m (100 ft), for example, will cause a displacement seaward of the shoreline to the extent of anything between a few hundred  metres and perhaps 20 km (12 miles).
The more rapid the fall in base level the greater will be the migration of the shoreline, as there will be less time for marine erosion to act and push the shoreline back towards the land during the fall.
Even if the fall is comparatively slow a lateral displacement of the shoreline must still be expected to occur.
Such a movement modifies to a considerable extent the nature of the nick point originally formed (Fig. 9.10B).
Instead of being a vertical fall it will be merely a gentle hump, especially if the offshore gradient is very little steeper than the original river gradient.
Under these conditions the slight convexity caused by rejuvenation will be quickly rendered even less conspicuous by subsequent river erosion.
If the river was not graded before the rejuvenation occurred the nick point may well be indistinguishable from other irregularities present in the stream.
Nick points are often difficult to distinguish from breaks of slope caused by hard bands of rock, especially as nick points will tend to be held up on such hard beds through the difficulty of eroding resistant rock.
It is possible for a series of nick points to migrate up a stream and for the whole series to coalesce when they are held up by a resistant bed.
In these difficult conditions the question whether nick points related to rejuvenation are present can sometimes be decided by a study of the long profiles of terraces downstream: as many terraces as there are nick points should merge with the present river profile at the hard bed.
(d) INCISED MEANDERS (Plate 35)
If the rejuvenated stream was characterised by meanders it is likely that the meanders will be incised deeply during rejuvenation.
It does not follow, however, that incised meanders are necessarily signs of rejuvenation, as if a stream starts to meander before it attains grade it may incise its own meanders to some extent without being rejuvenated.
Incised meanders are sometimes separated into intrenched and ingrown, the chief difference being that the ingrown meanders are more slowly incised, due to less rapid downcutting or to more resistant rocks.
The physical differences between the two classes are related to the fact that ingrown meanders are able to perform much more lateral erosion during incision than are intrenched meanders.
The meanders themselves tend to develop laterally and the meander belt as a whole tends to migrate downstream.
The results can be seen in the form of the spur profiles between the meanders.
In the case of intrenched meanders a cross-section of the valley would be more or less symmetrical wherever it was taken (Fig. 9.11A).
In addition, the spurs between the meanders preserve the general height of the plateau surface away from the river, except where they are so narrow as to be subject to general lowering by the formation of the slopes on either side.
Ingrown meanders, on the other hand, lead to an asymmetric cross-profile of the valley (Fig. 9.11B).
The tendency for the meanders to swing laterally is betrayed by the general decrease in elevation of the spurs from     the plateau towards the river, while the downstream migration of the meander belt results in the formation of sharp undercut cliffs (positions marked X on Fig. 9.11B) and gentler slipoff slopes (Y on Fig. 9.11B).
The differences between the two types, intrenched and ingrown, are not perfect, as there is the possibility of every intervening phase depending on the rate of downcutting.
The floodplain characteristic of meander cutoffs resulting in oxbow lakes is also repeated in incised meanders, especially those of the ingrown type.
Continued attack on the upstream sides of spurs and enlargement of the meander leads to a tendency for a break through at the neck of the spur, as it becomes thin (Fig. 9.12A).
When the breach finally occurs the old course of the meander is left as a curved through valley, perhaps drained by minor tributary streams, while the remains of the spur form an isolated hill, often known as a meander core.
The lower course of the river Wye, through the Forest of Dean, illustrates both phases of the process.
The most spectacular example of the stage depicted in Fig. 9.12A is provided by Symond's Yat on the northern margin of the plateau, but comparable conditions occur within the gorge itself, at Tintern Parva in the middle of the gorge and near Wintour's Leap a couple of miles north of Chepstow.
A clear example of an abandoned incised meander occurs near Redbrook and a less spectacular but probably younger example near St Briavels (Miller, 1935).
Under certain extremely favourable natural conditions the break through the neck of the spur may lead to the formation of a natural arch, but this is unlikely in humid climates such as that of Britain, as chemical weathering would probably never allow such a formation.
It may happen rarely in arid or semi-arid climates.
In France examples of natural arches are known in  limestone , the nature of which rock reinforces a tendency towards dryness in the climate and the possibility of underground abstraction of drainage through jointed rock without doubt assists the process.
A very fine example is provided by the natural arch in limestone on the river Ardèche in the Cevennes to the west of the Lower Rhône valley (Plate 36): this approximates to what one would expect if a meander of the type shown in Fig. 9. 12A had been cut through at the neck.
Less perfect examples, which may throw light on the mechanism involved, occur in the valley of the river Cesse at Minerve.
This is the area of low Eocene limestone plateaus, at about 250 m (800 ft) between the coastal plains of Languedoc and the scarped edge of the Central Plateau, some 35 km (22 miles) north-east of Carcassonne.
In the last decade or so the area has become fairly well known as the centre of production of red wine which has risen in the hierarchy of wines of Languedoc: it should achieve further fame for its ponts naturels.
These are really tunnels and the one at Minerve itself (Fig. 9.
I 3) seems to be a case of a stream locally disappearing underground rather like the Ystradfellte    example mentioned on p 201.
The example a few hundred yards upstream cuts through the neck of an entrenched meander, but it is some 100 m (330 ft) long so that considerable modification will have to take place before it becomes a true natural arch of the Ardèche type, if it ever does.
It does suggest that an underground abstraction of drainage through fractures in the rock may be a preliminary stage in the formation of natural arches.
If the rocks into which the river is incised are sufficiently weak, ingrown meanders may never develop as the intervening spurs are destroyed too rapidly by the downstream sweep of the meander belt.
Instead, the sweeping of the meander belt would probably lead to a system of unpaired terraces, such as those already described.
There remain certain problems connected with incised meanders (Blache, 1939–40).
In areas of rocks of varied resistance incised meanders may be preserved in resistant rocks such as limestones and destroyed in areas of weak rocks such as clay: this is more or less as expected since the downstream sweep of the meander belt would destroy the spurs in clay regions.
But there is more to the difficulty than this: the width of the belt of incised meanders in the limestone is often greater than the width of the floodplain in the clay.
Unless it is assumed that the original stream had a meander belt of varying width, we must conclude that the meanders have not only been incised but also more fully developed in the more resistant rock.
Presumably this might happen due to the greater amount of material to be eroded before a cut off could occur.
However, there does not seem to be a simple connection between resistant rocks and incised meanders, as Blache has pointed to the fact that the lower Loire passing through Palaeozoic rocks does not meander, while the Seine has meanders in the Chalk of a greater size than those found in the Mississippi.
In general, areas of tabular relief seem best suited to the preservation, if not to the formation, of incised meanders, e.g. the Mesozoic areas of the Paris Basin and the lower Wye gorge, although why this should be so is not certain.
Methods of investigating features of rejuvenation
Because of the need to be able to assimilate and present objectively masses of map data and also because of scepticism sometimes expressed about their very existence, rejuvenation features, mainly successions of erosion surfaces, were quite early subjected to quantitative methods of investigation and depiction, which still illustrate well some of the problems and pitfalls involved.
In the first place there are devices designed to present a digest of a lot of map information mainly as an illustration.
An erosion surface should show up as an excess in a certain range of altitude and this can be revealed by a device such as a hypsographic curve, which aims to depict the overall distribution of elevation and is usually used to illustrate the earth's major relief features.
It normally shows the percentage of area lying above a certain height (Fig. 9. 14 (1)) and in this case excesses caused by the presence   of erosion surfaces will show as slight bulges above the ideal concave regular curve.
These can be accentuated, as in Fig. 9.14 (2) by plotting instead the area between pairs of contours.
Obviously this is a coarse instrument and at best can only reveal major features and is quite hopeless when there is a terrace or more than one terrace between each pair of contours.
A somewhat similar device, conceived by Hanson-Lowe (1935), was the clinographic curve, which transformed an area such as that shown in Fig. 9.1 5A into that shown in Fig. 9.1 5B keeping the areas between contours the same.
From the latter a plot of the average slope profile of the landscape could be obtained.
It was often drawn with the slopes exaggerated by a constant as natural slopes are usually so gentle.
On this once again major erosion surfaces should show up as convexities.
Yet another numerical device was the altimetric frequency curve, which really expressed the frequency of spot heights falling within certain class intervals.
It was assumed that any erosion terraces would show as modes in the frequency distribution.
It was applied by Baulig to Brittany (1935) and seemed to work quite well as the basic map used was the old French 1:80 000 hachured map which had plenty of spot heights often on flattish summits or spurs.
It works less well on British maps with their dependence on contours though interesting results were obtained by Hollingworth (1938).
Obviously the modern sophisticated reader will know that one can use the highest points in each square of a fine grid or take the heights of points picked at random to provide data.
By and large this device will reveal more detail of terraces than the hypsographic and clinographic curves, especially if a lot of care is given to the selection of class intervals.
Less objective devices are provided by such methods as generalised contours which are attempts to reconstruct the original contours by linking up the furthest points reached by each contour from the area of highest ground.
This can be illustrated by a dipslope example (Fig. 9.16) in which the reconstructed contours suggest a series of flatter and more steeply sloping areas.
The method can hardly be described as truly objective.
A similar effect of ignoring the valleys and concentrating on the spurs can be obtained by superimposing a series of sections on one another.
Projected profiles consist of drawing the first section completely, while parallel sections behind the first are only drawn in so far as they project above earlier sections   (Fig. 9.17).
In superimposed profiles the sections are drawn completely so that parts of the later profiles below the first are also drawn.
The disadvantage of the latter is that it leads to an untidy looking diagram, although it will reveal lower terraces obscured by high ground in the foreground.
In drawing such sections it is normal to have them at equal distances at right angles to the guide line which ensures that they are correctly related.
However, as it is usually a method designed to illustrate something already known, a certain discretion may be exercised in the placing of the lines of section.
The result is a composite section with some resemblance to a panorama.
It differs from the latter in that the viewpoint is not a single point but an artificial one extending the full length of the section.
In the right type of country projected profiles may illustrate the relief remarkably well: in Fig. 9.17 it is obvious that there is an area of high ground near the crest of the escarpment separated from a wide terrace on the dipslope by a noticeable break of slope.
The terrace, in turn, is terminated to the north by a steeper slope representing that part of the Chalk dipslope exhumed from beneath Tertiary beds.
None of the devices so far described is going to reveal anything which is not there in the map.
At best they provide an objective digest of certain features of a map, which some people can probably detect just as well by scanning the map but others may not.
The same is true for any method of map analysis however complex it may be.
Accordingly it became normal to try to survey erosion terraces and their associated features in the field and this type of investigation illustrates well the desirability of fitting the punishment to the crime, or more prosaically reaching a compromise between accuracy and amount of data.
Two types of feature were surveyed and they required somewhat different accuracies of determination: nick points and terraces.
(a) NICK POINTS
As the interval between the surveyed contours is usually 100 feet on British maps and as nick points may be such small features, the long profiles of rivers have to be accurately levelled.
This applies particularly to lowland rivers of gentle gradient, but for reconnaissance work in mountain areas, where the gradients are steep and the breaks of slope marked, a less accurate  levelling instrument, such as the Abney level, may be used.
The actual heights of the nick points are of little significance, because during their recession up various streams they may reach a wide variety of altitudes.
But they may be used in reconstructing the former profile of the river and therefore in deriving the sea level to which the river was graded.
As was seen in Chapter 5 the form of a graded river approaches a concave curve as a rule, though it may depart from it under certain circumstances.
If a polycyclic river is surveyed and results in a section comparable with that shown in Fig. 9.5, it is possible to extend the segments of the river downstream either by continuing the curve ‘freehand’ or by finding a mathematical expression to fit each segment and extrapolating the curve on that basis.
Extrapolation based upon continuing the curve by eye is not very accurate and Miller (1939) has stated that it is possible to draw good-looking curves which diverge by 10 m per km (50 ft per mile) but which both provide a smooth extrapolation.
Extrapolation based upon a mathematical formula has the appearance of a much greater degree of precision and has been used by a number of workers in Britain, e.g.Jones (1924) and Brown (1952).
The method has however been severely criticised by Miller (1939).
The root of the trouble lies in the fact that no segment of a polycyclic river has a perfectly smooth concave profile, so that the formula gives a curve with an approximate fit.
This can be dealt with either by fitting the natural curve and the formula curve so that their departures from each other are minimised through the whole length; or by fitting the curve obtained from the formula to the lower parts of the segment of the river on the assumption that grade would be more nearly perfect in this reach; or by refining the formula until it becomes very complicated indeed.
Miller has shown that the differences in the derived base level may be very great depending upon which course is adopted.
Even when complex formulae are used it has proved possible to find two, which give extremely good fits to the natural curve, but provide base levels differing by about 60 m (almost 200 ft) for a base level at about 120 m (400 ft) OD (Miller, 1939).
The danger of error increases with the length of the extrapolation, which may be many times the length of the segment to which the curve is fitted.
Other possible sources of error are to be found in the assumptions that conditions of climate and load-discharge have changed little.
But all these factors may have affected the actual form of upper segments of the profile.
Further, erosion does not cease above a nick point, so that the form above that point may not be the same as when the river was rejuvenated, especially if climatic change has occurred.
Finally the position of the mouth of the river at all stages may not be known so that we may not be certain of which stretch of the former river we are dealing with.
In view of these possible sources of error it is surprising that extrapolated profiles ever yield results of any value.
Yet the base levels derived from  them are not very different from the base levels derived from the study of marine and river terraces.
Two facts probably contribute to this state of affairs: few of the sources of error may be present in the actual rivers surveyed, and most studies involving extrapolated profiles have also considered the terrace evidence so that the old base level was known by other methods.
If this is the case extrapolated profiles are best regarded as means to supplement knowledge rather than as a primary method.
(b) TERRACES
Although the height of terraces can be estimated by eye by an experienced observer in closely mapped country to a sufficient degree of accuracy, it is safer to determine the heights instrumentally.
However, as terraces are usually degraded and as it is usually extremely difficult to determine their precise limits, a degree of accuracy lower than that required for the long profiles of streams is permissible.
Such instruments as the Abney level and aneroid barometer (Peel, 1949; Sparks, 1953) can be adapted to the determination of elevations, while the extent of the terraces can be mapped on the 1: 25 000 or 1: 10 560 maps by reference to the field boundaries.
The advantage of the surveying methods indicated above is that, although they are less accurate than precise levelling, they are much more rapid and allow large areas to be covered.
In a consideration of terraces it is probably better to cover large areas with an accuracy of measurement of approximately + or 1.5–3.0 m (5–10 ft) than to measure a few terrace fragments with great accuracy.
As the aim of investigating terraces is to determine as accurately as possible former base levels, the back of marine terraces (E on Fig. 9.18) should be measured as this approximates to the former high tide level, but the front of river terraces (F on Fig. 9.18) is the closest approximation to  the level of the centre of the old valley floor which was graded to high tide level.
In practice it is difficult to locate these points, as the foot of the old cliff (O on Fig. 9.18) may be obscured by talus or, more often, modified by erosion, in which case it may have been at A and the former cliff be represented by AH.
Similarly, if the terrace is a river form, its original sharp front edge (XUY) may have been considerably altered by erosion.
One  can, then, only obtain approximations to the height of the significant features.
Further, the usual smooth convex and concave slopes allow considerable latitude in the decision as to where the back and front of the terrace are located.
Lastly, it is often almost impossible to decide whether a terrace is marine or subaerial, for the form itself is not conclusive and there is so often a complete lack of deposits on it.
In practice, therefore, it is safest to measure the elevation range of the terrace by determining the altitude at the back and the front, to map the terrace, and to arrange all the terrace fragments on some sort of diagram designed to show the height ranges of the fragments.
From the last it can be determined whether the terraces fall into significant altitudinal groups or not, and thus whether they represent intermittent falls of base level punctuated by stillstands or a more or less steady fall of base level with terraces at all levels.
It would be naive to expect every fragment surveyed to fall neatly into a pattern in which terraces occurred at certain heights and were completely absent from the other heights.
Some of the reasons for this have already been mentioned, but there are others as well and the whole lot may be summarised as follows:
1.
The errors inherent in the rapid methods of surveying used to ensure that large areas are covered.
2.
The difficulty in defining the critical points to measure owing to degradation of the original landforms.
3.
Inclusion of both subaerial and marine terrace fragments.
4.
Original variations in the height above mean sea level of the inshore margin of marine terraces due to variations in tidal range from one area to another.
5.
The unlikelihood of base level having fallen rapidly between terraces and remaining absolutely constant while terraces were being cut.
It is much more likely that the periods we call constant saw some small changes and the intervening periods, although generally of more rapid fall, were punctuated by minor stillstands.
6.
Sheer misinterpretation of a part of the present surface as degraded terrace when in fact it was not.
In addition to the fact that all this means that, even with field survey, the interpretation of erosion surfaces can rarely be absolutely conclusive, the correlation of surfaces from one area to another remains inconclusive on height alone.
When comparing terrace patterns from one area to another one should take into account, not only the height, but also the degree of development and the degree of complexity of the various members of terrace sequences, i.e. whether certain terraces seem compounded of several minor elements.
The importance of changes of climate
Because geomorphology as a science was developed to a large extent by workers in the humid temperate regions of North America and Europe, there has arisen a natural tendency to regard the landforms developed in that type of climate as normal.
Any study of a world climatic map will, however, show that this type of climate is no more widespread than several others.
Arid and semi-arid conditions stretch over much of Central Asia and the Near East, as well as covering large areas of Australia, Africa and North and South America.
Extremely cold climates cover considerable areas in the northern hemisphere and include areas of permanent ice, such as Greenland, and areas of tundra climate, such as the northern parts of the USSR and north Canada.
Equatorial rain climates occupy large areas in Africa and South America and comparable monsoon types are found in southern Asia.
The extent of these climatic zones, together with others of more intermediate type such as the Mediterranean, makes the attempt to regard our own climate as normal an extremely prejudiced point of view.
Of these other types of climate the most commonly treated by geomorphologists are the arid and polar groups.
There are probably several reasons for the concentration on these two.
The polar regions, the high glaciated mountains and the deserts seem to have attracted explorers far more than the equatorial and tropical rain forests.
Modern expeditions have usually included scientists with the specific object of gathering specialised information on all aspects of the areas explored, and so landforms have been studied by geographers and geologists.
The reports of earlier and less specialised exploration often include references to landforms as they are often the first things to engage the attention of the non-specialist.
In these ways a considerable amount of knowledge of the landforms of the most explored regions has slowly accumulated.
Secondly, many of the late nineteenth-century American geologists, who provided much of the basis of systematic geomorphology, were engaged in surveying the semi-arid western parts of the United States.
Thus, an early appreciation of these landforms was almost bound to arise.
It has  been strengthened by the continued attention paid by the Americans to their own arid regions and, in later years, by the general increase of research in Africa.
Thirdly, both arid and glacial climates leave the landforms bare and almost devoid of vegetation and, since the regions as a rule are infertile, natural forms are left unobscured by the activities of man.
Such open landforms are in many ways more satisfactory for study than, for example, the cultivated, boulder clay country of East Anglia, where natural forms are obscured by woods, hedges and buildings, or the tangled rain forest of the Amazon Basin.
The concentration on arid and glacial regions was probably also partly instrumental in the development of climatic geomorphology.
These two climatic regions are undoubtedly those with the most individual landforms, largely the effects of wind plus intermittent water action, and ice action respectively.
Hence, it was natural to become preoccupied with climate and to try to set up a geomorphological scheme in which climate dominated erosion and erosion dominated structure and lithology, so that every climatic zone had its characteristic landforms.
Climatic geomorphology has been a very important element in the subject in Europe, especially in Germany and more recently in France.
Davis, himself, paved the way for this when he admitted the existence of arid and glacial cycles of erosion.
Later attempts to define climatically related morphogenetic regions have been made by a number of people, e.g. Peltier (1950), Budel (1963) and Tricart and Cailleux (1972).
Climatic differences cause changes in the nature and balance of the processes working on the earth's surface with the result that the ensuing landforms may vary considerably.
The actual agents of erosion may be completely different: glaciers do not exist in humid temperate regions except at high altitudes, where the climate is not really humid temperate, while wind, which is of considerable importance as an agent of erosion, transport and deposition in deserts, can almost be ignored except in the formation of coastal dunes.
The relative importance may change, as can be seen in the increasing importance of mechanical weathering in cold and dry climates.
The speed of action of any agent may be different: the rate of chemical weathering in the equatorial regions appears to be greater than in any other part of the earth.
The effective resistance of rocks varies with the changing dominance of the agents of weathering: limestones may be more resistant in deserts than in humid regions as they are less subject to chemical weathering there.
Differences in the vegetation cover can affect erosion by direct protection of the ground and by binding the soil mantle together.
Some climates have marked seasonal regimes, so that the study of seasonal fluctuations of climate may be necessary to explain the landforms.
This can be seen in the example of river action: in climates with rain at all seasons erosion and deposition are almost continuous except in so far as they are varied by floods; in areas marginal to ice sheets the short periods  of summer thaw, which result in enormous increases in the discharge of meltwater streams issuing from the ice, are the significant ones; in deserts it may well be that the isolated rainfall, occurring perhaps once every five or ten years, is of greater significance than anything else.
These and other differences must all be considered in order to understand the landforms produced by the various types of climate.
Yet it is by no means certain that these climatic variations produce completely distinctive sets of landforms.
Details may vary and certain climatic zones may produce more individual features than others, as was suggested above for the glacial and arid climatic zones, but it seems to be doubtful whether fluvially controlled landscapes formed in different climates are as distinctive as is sometimes maintained (Stoddart, 1969).
It might well be more prudent to think of climatic influences on forms and erosion rates rather than climatically dominated landforms.
In this connection it must be remembered that climatic regions are not really climatic regions at all.
The world can be divided up on a purely climatic basis by using any climatic parameters one likes, so that the number of possible methods of division is very large, but, as most of these are meaningless geographically, it is possible to say that pure climatic regions do not exist, at least from a geographer's point of view.
There are very few, if any, abrupt breaks in climate, only steeper and less steep climatic gradients.
The former usually coincide on a broad scale with mountain ranges and with areas where ocean currents of contrasting characteristics converge, e.g. the northern Pacific coast of South America.
Hence the geographer usually chooses to classify climate on a vegetational basis, assuming that vegetation is mainly a response to climate.
In effect, he defines the climatic range of vegetation zones and proceeds to call them climatic zones.
It is important to remember this when thinking about climatic geomorphology, because if one assumes that landforms are going to vary significantly with these zones, one assumes that the climatic parameters controlling landforms are the same as those controlling natural vegetation.
And that seems to be too large an assumption.
In fact, it would be much better to try to determine by objective, and preferably quantitative description whether distinct and separable groups of landforms exist and then to proceed to define any such in climatic terms.
Furthermore, the pure climatic-geomorphological point of view involves two basic assumptions, which one would hesitate to make.
The first is that climate swamps structure and lithology, an admission that few geologically trained or biased geomorphologists would make.
This particular form of controversy is well illustrated by recent discussions on karst geomorphology, which seem to have resulted in the general attitude that there are certain forms which characterise tropical karst, but that the effect of lithology is as important in tropical limestone landforms as it is in temperate limestone landforms.
This attitude seems eminently sane.
The second assumption inherent in climatic geomorphology is that as an  attitude it is actualist, i.e. it attributes the landscape to present processes.
This may be a reasonable attitude in certain circumstances, e.g. in the denudation of spoil tips or the dissection of incoherent sandstones in the semi-arid western parts of the United States, but it is demonstrably wrong in many areas and likely to be wrong in many others.
We know that in most regions there have been frequent changes of climate in the geologically immediate past.
Therefore, these Pleistocene changes of climate must be considered as well.
The result of these was that the areas covered by the ice and adjacent to the margins of the ice sheets experienced more or less regular successions of climate, ranging from glacial through periglacial to humid temperate in the glaciated areas and from periglacial to humid temperate in areas near the ice sheets.
Each climate is capable of producing different types of landforms.
Therefore, it is dangerous to try to explain present-day landforms merely by the operation of present processes of erosion acting over very long periods of time.
While some landforms may have been so produced, it is possible that many of them may be relict forms subject to little later modification.
The great difficulty is that it is impossible in many cases to determine whether erosion of the type required for the production of the landforms continues, as the period of observation available to any one person is too short.
The importance of the processes of glacial and periglacial erosion in the formation of many features is clear, but others have much more debatable origins.
The normal forms of glaciated mountains are accepted by all as due to ice erosion and no one would seriously suggest that such features as corries, glacial troughs and overdeepened basins are still being formed.
Yet there are a number of other landforms in the formation of which the relative importance of past and present processes is difficult to assess.
Among them are such features as the screes of the Lake District, which may be fossil forms due to frost shattering in the closing phases of the Pleistocene; dry valleys in Chalk areas, which have been discussed in Chapter 7; some of the gravel river terraces, which, although composed of coarse gravel, have gradients less than those of present rivers, which appear to be capable of transporting no material coarser than sand and mud.
Pleistocene changes of climate do not apply, however, only to temperate latitudes, but to most of the climatic zones of the earth.
The general shift towards the equator of the climatic belts resulted in large parts of the deserts having more temperate and, of greater importance, slightly more humid climate.
In the explanation of landforms found in deserts, the possibility of valley formation by streams in the more humid parts of the Pleistocene cannot be ignored, as will be seen in the following chapter.
It is generally held that the glaciations were approximately synchronous in both hemispheres so that the climatic belts of both hemispheres tended to move towards the equator simultaneously.
The hypothesis raises, however, one difficulty: if there was a shift towards the equator in both hemispheres, it  would seem that either a climatic belt was squeezed out or one or more narrowed in latitudinal extent.
The second suggestion is probably the more likely, because, in view of the general nature of the earth's atmospheric circulation, it is improbable that the deserts squeezed out the equatorial belt.
There was probably a diminution in the width of the deserts due to the encroachment of humid temperate conditions on their high latitude sides and to the stability of the equatorial belt on the other side.
Although Pleistocene climatic changes are by far the most important in the interpretation of present landforms, it may be occasionally necessary to consider the changes of climate in the earlier parts of the Tertiary period.
Few areas have been subjected to uninterrupted denudation since then, but, as the earlier Tertiary climates were very different from the present ones, any surviving landforms could present difficulties to the investigator.
In Great Britain, for example, parts of the Eocene were characterised by hot, humid climates, as is shown by the resemblance of the contained fossils to forms now occurring in Malaya.
The role played by early Tertiary tropical weathering in the production of some European landforms may have been considerable.
It could well be that some of the summit surfaces of the Hercynian blocks are Eogene pediplains, while the weathering responsible for the formation of tors may have been tropical weathering of the same date.
However, the significance of climates of the more remote geological past is greatest in connection with their role in the formation of relief now being exhumed from coverings of later rocks.
In Britain various landforms have been said to be exhumed from beneath a covering of Triassic sediments.
The Trias in this country was a time of desert conditions so that the forms exhumed from beneath its rocks will have to be compared with modern desert landforms.
Charnwood Forest, a mass of Pre-Cambrian rocks projecting through the Trias of Leicestershire, was regarded by Watts (1947) as essentially an exhumed Triassic landscape.
The present slopes of Charnwood Forest are continuous with those beneath the adjacent Trias, while signs of polishing, grooving and etching by wind action have been found on granite excavated in quarries.
Geophysical work (King, 1954) has demonstrated how some major British landforms are more or less coincident with New Red Sandstone features.
Thus, the western part of the English Channel coincides approximately with a basin of deposition of this age, although it is unlikely that the detail of the landscape owes much to desert erosion in that period.
Generally, the Bristol and English Channels with the high ground of Devon and Cornwall between correspond roughly with the distribution of basin and range in New Red Sandstone times.
More questionable, unless there is evidence, is the attribution of uplifted and dissected plateaus to Triassic erosion, burial and later excavation.
There are so many periods during which such plateaus could have been formed and dissected that, in the absence of geological evidence in the form of outliers, it is not surprising that theories of origin have varied widely.
Exhumed forms may be of any age, although Triassic forms have probably received more attention than any others in this country.
Parts of the Chalk dipslopes of the London Basin are regarded by Wooldridge and Linton (1955) as exhumed Tertiary forms (see Fig. 9.17), while large areas of the Central Plateau of France are considered by Baulig (1928) to be exhumed surfaces of various ages (see Chapter 16).
The idea of palaeokarst landforms seems to have been attracting the attention of European geomorphologists in recent years and possible examples of various ages have been described from different places, e.g. Belgium and Poland (Sparks,
Exhumed landforms usually only dominate the landscape in the broad view.
The majority are erosion surfaces, and in detail the landscape is usually attributable to a combination of forms derived from present and recently past climates.
It is only fair to conclude this short discussion with the statement that there have been and, indeed, are geomorphologists who have fervently opposed the climatic-geomorphological point of view.
The most forceful of these, Lester King, would have the pediplanation cycle recognised as the standard and sees no essential morphological differences between arid and humid cycles.
The reader is referred to King's works for further details (King, 1967; Chapter 5 and the references quoted in that work).
Landforms in arid and semi-arid climates
Although aridity is the dominant characteristic of the deserts of the world, the variety of climate, structure and relief to be found in deserts is large.
Excluding the cold tundra, deserts range from 50 degrees North in Central Asia to within a few degrees of the equator in South America, with the result that temperature conditions vary considerably.
The intermontane and continental interior deserts have greater extremes of temperature than the west coast deserts, such as the Atacama, where the moderating influence of cold currents is felt.
Similarly the amount of rainfall varies considerably.
In parts of the Atacama desert practically no rain falls, but in other deserts, especially locally on mountains, the annual rainfall may be as much as 250 mm (10 in).
All these factors, together with the susceptibility of the different regions to torrential downpours at irregular intervals, will affect the nature of the weathering and erosion taking place.
There is an even greater variation in relief and structure, and the sand dunes and rock plains, which commonly figure in the popular concept of a desert, form only a fraction of the total area.
The Australian desert, for example, is structurally an ancient worn-down plateau of crystalline and ancient sedimentary rocks, the more resistant of which rise to a thousand metres or more (a few thousand feet) above the general surface level.
Some of these mountains have the typical inselberg form (see below), for instance Ayers Rock and Mount Olga north of the Musgrave range, while parts of the adjacent Petermann and Musgrave ranges, if clad with more luxuriant vegetation, would be difficult to distinguish in form from mountains developed in temperate climates.
Excellent photographs of these different forms are given in Finlayson (1936).
In the desert of Arabia, again, a great variety of scenery is to be found.
In the south-eastern corner between the Hadhlamaut and the Persian Gulf, lies Rub' al Khali, the Empty Quarter, which consists essentially of a low plateau sloping northwards from about 300 m (1000 ft) down to sea level and covered to a considerable extent with sand dunes.
This area, which approximates to the traditional concept of a desert, may be compared with western Arabia adjacent to the Red Sea rift, where in Yemen rugged mountains rise to well above 2 000 m (7 000 ft) and north of Medina extensive flows of lava are found.
The Sahara, too, has its variety.
The almost impenetrable Great Sand Sea of western Egypt and adjacent parts of Libya forms one of the world's greatest dune areas.
The contrast between this area and the Tibesti and Ahaggar massifs is enormous.
The highest part of the Tibesti consists of an enormous volcanic mass, which seems to have reached the solfatara stage, but has certainly been active in the recent geological past (Gautier, 1928).
In form and size it is comparable with Mount Etna and reaches a similar elevation, approximately 3 300 m (11,000 ft).
The Ahaggar is also volcanic, but activity ceased earlier than in the Tibesti and it is now more degraded, although the wrecks of the ancient volcanoes still reach to about 3000 m (10,000 ft).
A different structural type is to be found in the interior basin deserts of the western United States and Central Asia.
Precipitation on the surrounding mountains may give rise to streams which quickly disappear where they reach the basin, as in the Taklamakan desert of the Tarim basin (Stein, I933) The basin often consists of gentle slopes of graded sediments derived from the surrounding mountains leading to a central saline lake or swamp.
In view of the enormous variety of deserts, caused principally by structural and lithological differences but also by climatic differences, it must be emphasised that the features discussed below are not characteristic of all deserts.
Weathering under arid conditions
Although doubts have been cast upon the efficacy of temperature changes in disintegrating rocks by expansion and contraction alone (see Chapter 3), the question deserves a little more attention.
It will be remembered that experiments involving large temperature changes and steep temperature gradients between the surface and interior layers of the rock appeared to produce no disintegration until water was present.
Although the diurnal range of air temperature in deserts may be very large, that of the temperature of the surface of rock and dust is often considerably greater.
Some instructive figures are given in Hume (1925).
Generally speaking, the minima recorded in the air and on the rock surface are the same, but the maxima recorded on rock considerably exceed the air maxima, the actual amount of the excess depending principally on the nature of the surface and the relation of the surface to the prevailing wind.
For example, the maximum excess of surface temperature over air temperature varied in Egypt from 4C (7F) on slate to 18C (33F) on flint, while sands and gravels in sheltered places had temperatures exceeding the air temperature by 20 degrees C (36 degrees F).
As, however, the air, even in deserts, is never completely dry, the effects of temperature changes cannot usually be isolated from chemical effects.
The humidity  may be quite high, a series of observations quoted by Hume showing minimum relative humidities ranging from 16 to 32 per cent and maximum relative humidities ranging from 68 to 96 per cent.
Some of the illustrations of shattered pebbles attributed to thermal expansion and contraction are of flint and quartzites.
Hume, for example, shows flints split by straight parallel fractures (Plate IV), while Bosworth (1922, Fig. 72) has an admirable illustration of a quartzite pebble from Peru subject to beautifully regular exfoliation.
As both flint and quartzite are practically homogeneous silica rocks, not subject to chemical weathering except by strong alkalis, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that in these examples, in spite of the experimental evidence, thermal expansion and contraction alone have effected the disintegration of the pebbles.
Certain other mechanical effects have been mentioned from time to time.
We need not take too seriously the explanation of the shattered pebbles as being caused by lightning strikes or local fires; this explanation invokes an awful lot of lightning in low rainfall regions and too many fires for comfort in areas with scant vegetation cover and small populations.
One possible factor (Mabbutt, 1977) might be the sudden cooling produced by occasional showers falling on very heated rock surfaces.
As the tensile strength of rocks is lower than the compression and shear strengths it is most likely that rock will be shattered during cooling and contraction.
Even if this does not produce actual fracture it may cause very slight opening up of any planes of weakness in the presence of water, a case of a mechanical effect aiding a chemical process and a possible explanation of the success of the second part of Grigg's experiments in producing alteration on the surface of his block of granite (see Chapter 3).
It is possible that the expansive forces of hydration may assist here if alteration products are present.
Salt crystallisation effects, which have been described in Chapter 3, have recently figured more prominently in explanations of desert weathering.
This is really a mechanical effect, although solution is necessary to allow the crystals to form within the fabric of the rock by evaporation.
Without any moisture little could happen.
Peel (1966) attributes honeycomb weathering in sandstones and taffoni in acid crystalline rocks to salt weathering.
The very form demonstrates that they cannot be due to wind blast and the lack of polishing of the rocks as well as the equal development of undercutting of rocks in all directions suggests that a directional agency such as wind is not responsible.
Chemical weathering or salt crystallisation or both combined are far more likely to provide the cause.
Whether mechanical disintegration is regarded as acting alone or always or usually in conjunction with some chemical weathering, the fact remains that it appears to play a large part in desert weathering and is responsible for the predominance of angular broken waste material in deserts.
Various surface and subsurface crusts are found in many deserts, but it is doubtful how far many of them are forming under present conditions.
For example ferruginous crusts, or ferricrete, are almost certainly fossil features  as they probably form in wetter climates and are discussed in the next chapter.
The thinnest crusts are known as desert varnish.
This consists of a very thin, shiny, dark surface layer, measured in fractions of a millimetre, developed on stones and rock outcrops.
It consists of an enrichment of iron and manganese, the proportion of the latter always increasing outwards (Mabbutt, 1977).
It develops best on slightly rough, but not  disintegrating surfaces, especially on rocks rich in iron and manganese but is not exclusive to these.
Thus it is very well developed on fine-grained basic igneous and metamorphic rocks.
Its formation is not completely understood but the fact that it is better developed on loose stones than on rock pavements and that there is frequently a well-developed band extending from an inch or two below the surface to just above the ground surface, suggests deposition from solutions derived from the soil by capillary action.
Crusts formed of the most soluble salts are usually found in the lowest part of desert basins.
Their main constituent is usually gypsum — hence the term gypcrete.
The calcium sulphate was probably concentrated by evaporation of shallow lakes, though wind-borne gypsum dust may have contributed in places.
Thick fossil examples of such layers occur in the Triassic rocks of Cheshire and Teesside, where sodium chloride layers are found as well.
Sometimes more soluble salts may survive in especially arid regions, for example the caliche of the Atacama desert, which consists of a mixture of very soluble sodium salts, of which the sodium nitrate was at one time very valuable commercially.
Calcareous crusts, often termed calcrete and sometimes caliche, the latter being an ambiguous term in view of its alternative use mentioned above, are formed earlier in the evaporating sequence than gypcretes.
They may, therefore, form in valleys and basins, especially in areas of calcareous rocks, and theoretically should be nearer the margins of the basins as they crystallise earlier than gypsum before the lakes have shrunk to the same degree.
Other calcretes may have developed as enriched horizons in soils near the lower limits of leaching.
Calcretes developed in this way are thickest and at the greatest depth in the soil profile in areas of 100 400 mm (4–16 in) of rainfall especially on the temperate margins of deserts (Mabbutt, 1977) and become thinner and much nearer the surface in the arid regions proper.
These features are probably reflections of the degree of leaching, which depends to a large extent on the rainfall.
Siliceous crusts, or silcretes, are much more durable, but seem to be mainly if not entirely relict features.
They occur in many deserts but are not confined to them.
According to Mabbutt they are particularly characteristic of the Australian deserts, especially the Lake Eyre Basin.
They may be up to 5 m (15 ft or so) thick and underlain by 50 m (150 ft or so) of weathered material.
They are probably relics from the Tertiary and there are no known examples of their being in the process of formation today.
It is suggested that they have been deposited either from silica mobilised in solution or from  colloids and attain their maximum development in areas of pervious quartzose rocks.
As silica is only mobilised in strongly alkaline environments and as gypsum and other soluble salts occur in the underlying zone of weathering, it is suggested that they may have been formed in an arid environment.
Topographically they mantle a widespread pediplained surface, the Australian pediplain, while the association of hard cap rock with a deep weathered layer below leads to characteristic minor undercut escarpments.
The effects of wind
Sandstorms and sand dunes are spectacular features and indicate significant wind action, but the effects of wind in deserts may easily be overstressed, especially the erosive effects.
The nature of the movement of particles by the wind in deserts has been closely investigated by Bagnold (1941), who distinguished three types of movement, suspension, saltation and surface creep.
Only very fine particles, those with diameters less than 0–2 mm, are carried in suspension by the winds normally found at the surface of the earth.
Particles larger than this are subject only to saltation and surface creep.
Saltation, which has already been discussed with reference to rivers, and the sea, is most significant in understanding the erosive action of sand.
In a turbulent flow of air near the surface local upward currents may lift a sand grain.
As it falls it is moved horizontally in the general wind direction.
Thus the path taken by a moving grain consists of a short, near vertical ascent and a longer sloping fall (Fig. 11.1A).
When it strikes the surface it may either rebound, thus repeating its motion, or it may start saltation in another sand grain by impact.
The height attained by sand grains undergoing saltation depends on the velocity of the grains, and thus basically upon wind velocity, and on the nature of the surface.
On pebble surfaces saltation is noticeably higher than on sand surfaces (Fig.
I 1.
IB), but even on these surfaces grains undergoing saltation rarely reach more than 2 m (6 ft) above the surface.
The energy of the falling grains may not be absorbed in rebounding or in starting saltation by impact, but may be used in disturbing a number of grains, which are driven forward for a short distance on the surface.
At low wind velocities the jerky movement of these grains may be observed, but as the wind velocity increases this appears to change into a steady forward creep of the surface grains.
This surface creep merges into very low saltation.
Thus it may be seen that the only grains actually suspended in the air are the very fine ones.
The upper parts of sandstorms, which may rise hundreds or even thousands of metres into the air, are composed solely of dust, and sand movement takes place only very near ground level.
When the dust-laden wind meets an obstacle, the dust particles rarely strike the obstacle as they are diverted round it in the general air flow and so exert  little or no erosive effect.
The sand grains themselves are confined to a layer very near to the surface and thus their erosive effect is very limited in vertical extent, while surface creep can obviously affect only an extremely limited vertical range.
The work of wind erosion is therefore very limited.
A minor effect of wind erosion is the formation of faceted and polished pebbles.
Facets tend to be cut by sand abrasion at right angles to the wind, the facets being curved as on this microscale wind abrasion increases upwards.
If the pebble moves on the desert floor new facets may be formed, giving rise to the three-crested or dreikanter form, the importance of which was probably exaggerated in earlier literature.
Dust abrasion may polish the facets formed by sand abrasion — in workshop terms the difference between the effect of 60 grit abrasive paper and 800 grit paper.
Faceted and polished pebbles are not all that common and are also found in periglacial conditions where wind action may have been important, e.g. the Breckland of East Anglia.
The main effect of wind is probably to be seen in undercutting and fluting at the base of upstanding rock masses, while such things as wooden telegraph poles and stone monuments may be undercut at the base and even worn through.
Very few features appear to be attributable solely to the action of  wind-driven sand and Cotton (1942) mentions only yardangs as likely to be caused solely by wind action.
These consist of elongated U-shaped troughs separated by sharp ridges and were first described from the Taklamakan desert.
They are usually developed in soft material and the relief of these and related forms may be up to 50 m (150 ft) high but is usually a lot less.
True yardangs consist of elongated ridges with blunt undercut ends facing the wind and tapering tails downwind rather like desert drumlins.
In the Kerman Basin of Iran they are associated in a series with kaluts, consisting of soft sediments dissected by the wind, streamfloods and other contributory agencies into parallel steep-sided ridges, and also with dune fields aligned in the direction of the wind.
Thus an association of features leads to the attribution of all of them to a common agency, rather like the association of subglacial channels with eskers in a different context.
The kaluts are the larger features reaching 50 m or so high, while the yardangs are less than half as high.
Similar systems of parallel ridges and troughs aligned in the direction of the wind occur south of the Tibesti in Chad republic.
They are developed in sandstones where a master joint pattern is aligned with the trade winds and do not occur where the joint direction deviates by more than 15 degrees from the wind direction (Mabbutt, 1977).
Undercutting, polishing and pitting up to about 3 m (10 ft) confirms that wind has played at least an important part in their development, while their restriction to areas of erodible sandstone providing a large amount of material for sand blasting also strongly suggests the part played by the wind.
Peel (1966) considered that these would have taken a long time to form and their unidirectional nature may indicate that the north-east trades have been blowing over this area for a very long time.
From time to time various other forms of undercutting have been attributed to wind but the possible effects of other agencies, such as wetting and drying near the surface and salt weathering must not be forgotten, though they are doubtful as explanations of abraded wooden telegraph poles and even these cannot be attributed to gnawing by desert rats.
The danger of involving wind erosion merely because of the form may be well illustrated by the photograph (Plate 37) of a type of minor landform, which used to figure in old accounts of deserts as Zeugen, developed on acid moorland on the Fell Sandstone near Rothbury in Northumberland.
Of greater importance is the process of deflation, or removal by the wind of the fine products of weathering.
On the general desert surface the wind removes the finer products in suspension and may shift the sand by saltation and surface creep, thus leaving a surface of gravel or bare rock.
These deflation surfaces have been given a variety of names: desert pavement and boulder pavement are self-explanatory terms, while the gravel left after deflation has been termed lag gravel and in the Sahara a stone-strewn surface is known as hamada.
However, it seems that deflation, though a possible cause, is only one of several possible formative processes (Mabbutt, 1977) of hamada, which is  usually residual or near-residual in origin, and reg, which is a surface of finer gravel, often underlain by a soil profile, transported from elsewhere.
Wash erosion, with removal of fines is another possible cause, as is a surface concentration of stones achieved through the upward displacement of stones in the profile, a common enough phenomenon but one the causes of which are incompletely understood.
Finally, it is possible, where the stony surface lies above a weathered soil profile, for the whole thing to be due to differential weathering, the stones in the lower part of the profile being weathered more rapidly than those at the surface due to the greater likelihood of a damp environment below.
Once formed the stony surface, often termed desert armour, will tend to protect the surface, very much as the coarse material in a stream bed makes it often less erodible than the banks.
Some desert hollows may also be attributed in considerable part to deflation.
An initial hollow, whether scoured by the wind or not, would tend to be damper than the surrounding desert and thus chemical weathering would be greater there.
Chemical weathering is of the greatest importance in producing fine material, as clay minerals are formed by this process.
If the hollow is subject to drying, there would be a considerable proportion of material fine enough to be removed by the wind in suspension.
Phases of weathering, drying and deflation would lead to a steady deepening of the hollow.
Whether such a process can operate on a large enough scale to produce major oasis depressions is more doubtful.
The process of deflation of the finer constituents from deserts probably accentuates the dominance of coarse waste, initially brought about by the importance of mechanical weathering.
Of the finer grades of debris, the silt fraction is more readily moved than the clay, because it is less cohesive.
The dust from the deserts is carried considerable distances until it is dropped either by a decrease of the wind velocity or, probably more usually, by being washed down by rain.
The deposit, which is characterised by a great dominance of silt-sized particles, is known as loess.
The most extensive deposit of this material is found in north China, where it is derived from the deserts of Mongolia and transported to north China by the strong northwesterly winter winds.
Deposits of comparable material which extend from the Ukraine westwards along the foot of the Hercynian uplands of Europe as far as the chalk plateaus of Artois and Picardy, were most likely derived by deflation from the glacial deposits of the North European Plain during the Pleistocene period.
Probably of greater importance than the erosion forms produced by winds in deserts are the depositional forms.
These again have been intensively studied by Bagnold (1941) who distinguishes between the small-scale sand ripples and ridges and the large-scale dunes.
The general distribution of the major sand dune areas in deserts requires some explanation.
Peel (1966) estimates that only about 10 per cent of the area of the Sahara is formed of ergs or sand seas and that these remain more or less fixed in position.
The source of the sand raises an interesting question, because it is difficult to see how such amounts could have been accumulated by the wind.
Opinion is tending to veer to the view that the wind has merely modified pre-existing sand accumulations left by other agencies, including the sea.
It seems that the Rub' al Khali desert of south-eastern Arabia occupies a structural offshoot of the Persian Gulf in which marine sands accumulated in the later parts of the Tertiary period and have since been reworked by the wind.
Some Saharan ergs may have had a similar origin but others may have occupied basins of centripetal drainage into which sand was transported in periods of wetter climate.
If the raw material of most of these ergs has been provided by other agencies, as differences in character between the surface wind-worked material and the sand at depth seem to indicate, then the locations of desert dunes, coastal dunes and periglacial dunes all seem to depend on the concentration of sand provided by some.other factor.
This hypothesis must not be pushed too far, because one of the main Saharan ergs is the Libyan Sand Sea on the borders between Egypt and Libya in the arid heart of the Sahara.
Reverting to the construction of sand features and taking the small scale features first it may be said that the formation of sand ripples is closely connected with the process of saltation.
If one imagines a surface with chance irregularities (Fig. 11.2) on to which grains are being driven by saltation, it is obvious that the frequency of bombardment by sand grains will be greater on the slight slopes facing the wind (AB, Fig. 11.2) than on  slopes facing away from the wind (BC, Fig. 11.2).
Thus on AB the rate of arrival of the sand grains and the surface creep will be greater than on the reverse slope, BC.
In fact, material will be arriving at B faster than it can be removed.
Similarly, in a hollow, such as A, the sand grains are being driven faster towards B than they are arriving, thus accentuating the hollow.
As all sand surfaces possess chance irregularities, even though they may be only of the magnitude of a few sand grains, there is a natural tendency for ripples to form.
The wave length of such ripples varies with the strength of the wind, which controls the distance travelled by each grain during saltation.
If the surface were perfectly flat saltation would take place theoretically from the whole area and there would be an even shower of grains falling after saltation.
But the ejection of grains by bombardment will not be even on a surface such as that shown in Fig. 1 1.2.
Due to the greater bombardment on the slope AB more sand grains will be ejected from this area: these will tend to land again at a distance of one characteristic grain path downwind and thus lead to increased accumulation in that area.
Thus, a ripple pattern with a wave length corresponding to one characteristic grain path, which depends ultimately on wind velocity, will be formed.
Bagnold's idea about the wave length being controlled by the characteristic grain path has been disputed and it has been suggested that the wave length may be linked with ripple height, in which grain size is important, as well as with wind strength.
If this process went on unchecked it should lead to an increasing ripple height, but, as the ripple crests rise, they increasingly interfere with the wind, so that the sand grains on the crests are blown over into the troughs.
Thus the maximum height to which ripples can develop is limited.
In fact they are very small features, usually less than 50 cm (20 in) in wave length and less than I cm (L in) in amplitude.
The presence of larger grains and granules can produce larger features with wave lengths up to a couple of metres and amplitudes up to 20 cm (8 in)(Mabbutt, 1977).
The formation of sand ridges is by a somewhat different process.
In sand containing coarser and finer grains, such as that shown in Fig. 11.3, the fine material may be removed from the area CD, thus exposing the coarser grains.
Although these coarser grains cannot be removed directly by the wind, the impact derived from saltation is able to move grains six times the size of those forming the saltation.
Thus the coarse grains will be driven up the slope DA and will come to rest in the lee of the crest, AB, past which they cannot move because of the complete shelter here.
This process leads to the accumulation of coarse grains on the crests of ridges, from which they are not removed, as they are considerably larger than the size the wind is able to move.
Ridges formed in this way attain greater sizes than ripples and Bagnold quotes wave lengths exceeding 20 metres (70 ft) and heights of more than 60 cm (2 ft) as common in parts of the Libyan desert.
With the minor forms so far described it is possible to investigate causes by means of almost full-sized experiments, but the formation of dunes proper involves the usual sort of inferential argument based on field observation commonly employed by geomorphologists.
It is unlikely that there is a transition between the minor forms and the major ones: indeed, there seem to be fundamental differences between the two (Mabbutt, 1977), including the fact that the minor forms, being due mainly to surface creep, have the coarser grains in the ridges, while the larger forms, due mostly to saltation, tend to have the finer material near the crests.
Two of the more clearly defined dune forms are the crescentic dunes, or barchans, and the long straight dunes, or seifs.
The maximum height of barchans is about 30 metres (loo ft) and their maximum width and length about 400 metres (1300 ft).
However, according to Mabbutt many barchans are a lot smaller than this.
He quotes an example from a dunefield in southern Peru where the average width of barchans is 37 m and their height about one tenth of this, this being a width height ratio commonly found in barchans.
Seif dunes are larger: in the Egyptian Sand Sea they attain a height of loo metres (330 ft) and dunes twice this height have been reported from southern Iran.
The transverse width is about six times the height, and their length may be 80 km (so miles) or more.
According to Bagnold, the barchan is formed when the wind is nearly unidirectional: it is orientated with the horns downwind.
Seif dunes are  formed when strong winds blow from a quarter other than that from which the prevalent winds, responsible for the general sand drift, arrive.
Observed examples of these relationships occur sometimes in the lee of cliffs.
If a unidirectional wind blows over a cliff face (Fig.
I 1.4), sand will accumulate in the lee of the cliff, where it will be sheltered from the prevalent wind but subject to lateral gusts.
In this area a seif-like dune forms, but away from the shelter of the cliff the influence of the prevalent wind is again felt and the seif-like dune tends to break down to isolated mounds and finally to barchans.
In addition, Bagnold has observed that barchans may be formed in the troughs between series of seif dunes, in the manner shown in Fig. 1 1.5.
The  direction of the seif dunes shows the direction of the prevailing wind, which is also responsible for the barchans in the troughs, where the effects of strong winds from another quarter are not felt.
Additional evidence for the association of barchans with unidirectional winds is provided by Kharga Oasis, one of the only desert stations with wind records: at this locality the winds are almost unidirectional and the barchan is the only form of dune present.
Finally, in very different conditions very small barchans have been observed to form in very cold ice crystals as long as the wind remained absolutely constant in direction.
A barchan dune will tend to form from a mound of sand, the development envisaged by Bagnold being as follows.
In cross-section (Fig. 11.6), the greatest effect of the wind will be felt on the windward slope of a mound of sand, and will lead to a pronounced movement of sand grains to the crest.
Just beyond the crest they will tend to accumulate, for the effect of the wind is felt less here.
Accumulation at the top of the lee slope leads to a steepening of that slope (Fig. 11.6B) and hence to a decrease of the wind effect on it.
The steepening of the lee slope by accumulation at the top goes on until the angle of rest of the material is exceeded (AB on Fig. 11.6c), when shearing takes place along a slightly less steep surface (CD on Fig. 11.6c).
Thus, the slip face of the barchan advances by a process of oversteepening and shearing.
The flanks of the original mound of sand advance more rapidly than the centre, for the rate of advance is inversely proportional to the height of the slip face.
In this way the crescentic barchan form is developed.
The wings advance until they are very much in the shelter of the main mass of the dune, where the sand flow is less and their rate of advance retarded.
The formation of the seif dune is less well understood, but transition forms, which can be connected into a series, have been observed by Bagnold.
If a barchan formed by the prevailing wind (Fig. 11.7A) is subject to a strong wind from another direction (Y on Fig. 11.7B), it will tend to swing round with the development of an incipient new wing at C and the overdevelopment of wing A. If the prevailing wind, X, again dominates, there will be a tendency for the dune to revert to its original form (Fig. 11.7C).
At this stage the wing A is still exaggerated, but would however be reduced provided the prevailing wind, X, was of sufficiently long duration.
However, if the strong wind, Y, again intervenes, there will be a further prolongation of the wing A (Fig. 11.7D).
At this stage it is so far extended as to receive a supply of sand from the original barchan even during the prevailing wind, X. Thus it will continue to grow both during the prevailing wind, X, and the strong wind, Y, with slip faces developed on the side away from the strong wind.
The seif dune differs from the barchan, therefore, in that the slip faces are on the side away from the strong wind and not facing the direction of advance as in the barchan.
The increase in the availability of aerial photographs and especially of satellite photographs has revealed the quite extraordinary regularity of many areas of seif and longitudinal dunes over vast tracts of country.
For example, in the Sahara the dunes are orientated slightly east of south in the north and then veer consistently in direction until they are orientated somewhat south of west in the southern Sahara, beyond which similar orientation is betrayed by the old fixed dunes (Fig.
I 1.8).
The same is true of Arabia.
This pattern is very consistent with the general pattern of winds swinging round the eastern end of the subtropical high pressure cell: in the north they are the north-west to north, etesian or meltemi winds of the Mediterranean lands, while further south they become the north-east Trades.
It has been postulated by Hanna (1969), adopting a suggestion made earlier by Bagnold, that these dunes are caused by the development of longitudinal helical roll vortices in the general air flow.
The idea is illustrated in Fig. 11.9.
It will be seen that, if the maintenance of such longitudinal vortices is possible, the presence of cloud streets (long lines of shallow cumulus clouds), which have also been clearly shown by satellite photographs, and seif dunes could be explained by one single hypothesis.
Hanna showed that it was mathematically possible for such vortices to form under the right surface, wind and stability conditions and that such vortices would have the right sort of diameter, about 2 or 3 km (I-2 miles), to explain the spacing of the dunes.
Once the sand began to be swept to one side to form ridges, heating of the flanks of those ridges would promote the continuation of the vortices and hence ensure a stable dune pattern.
However, no thermally formed vortices have been observed, and if they were they would theoretically be on a far larger scale than the spacing of the longitudinal dunes (Mabbutt, 1 977).
The same author is of the opinion that it is much more likely that lateral shear is set up by differences in frictional drag on the wind between the sand of the dunes and the firm floors of the swales between.
The result should be eddies directed towards the dunes.
Transverse dunes seem to accompany areas of increased sand cover: basically they consist of wave-like forms normal to the dominant wind and are considerably smaller than the longitudinal dunes, normal dimensions quoted by Mabbutt being wave length 50–200 m (160–650 ft) and height up to 10 m (33 ft).
They are associated with thick sand in the lower parts of basins and may be produced by reduction in sand mobility, caused either b– slackening winds, topographic or vegetation barriers, or the presence of very coarse sand of lower mobility.
In addition to the forms described here many other types may be recognised (see summaries in Cooke and Warren, 1973, or Mabbutt, 1977).
One must expect this and while we are trying to understand fully the development of dune shapes and dune systems, it is necessary that researchers should classify dunes on a descriptive basis.
It must also be remembered, however, that there is every reason to believe that dunes will represent the interaction between local wind and sand conditions and the resultants of short term and long term changes in these conditions.
Hence, it is unlikely that all dune forms will ever be reduced to one or two simple categories, although a few simple categories may describe the basic forms.
The effects of water
Very few parts of the world's deserts are absolutely rainless, though certain sections of the Libyan and Chilean deserts approach complete aridity.
Elsewhere, rainfall, although very infrequent, is sometimes heavy, convectional and highly localised.
Extreme examples are provided by the Peruvian desert, normally very dry due to the cold northward-flowing Humboldt current along the coast.
Occasionally, however, this current is displaced and a warm southward-flowing current prevails for short periods.
When this happens, extremely heavy rainfall may result along the desert coast of Peru.
For example, Trujillo received 35 mm (1.4 in) between 1918 and 1925, but during March 1925, when the southward-flowing current prevailed, 390 mm (15.5 in) fell, of which 225 mm (8.9 in) was concentrated in the three days, 7–9 March (James, 1959).
Although special conditions operate in this desert, very heavy convectional showers occur occasionally in most deserts, such as Egypt (Hume, 1925).
When rainfall of high intensity occurs, the runoff is very great and immediate evaporation not very high, at least in the region of the storm, where the air is saturated.
As the water flows away, it suffers heavy losses through percolation into the underlying sand, gravel and rock, and through evaporation outside the storm area.
The rate of rise of floodwater in normally dry watercourses is, in many cases, extreme.
French legionaries have been drowned while encamped in wadis draining from the southern Atlas of Algeria, due to the rapid advance of floods from storms in the high mountains of which they had heard or seen nothing.
King (1948) has quoted the example of the Great Fish River in South-West Africa, which may be dry one day and a surging flood, several hundred metres wide and 9 m (30 ft) deep, the next.
The wadis of eastern Egypt are equally liable to this form of flood and many examples are described and illustrated in Hume (1925).
Although these floods, which have been termed streamfloods by Davis, are rare and of short duration, the amount of work of which they are capable is enormous.
During the long dry periods between floods debris accumulates in the valleys as a result of weathering and also is probably swept in by wind action, so that the streamfloods have an enormous amount of readily available load.
Debris of all sizes up to great boulders may be swept along until the flood subsides.
Often it is transported out of the upland valleys and spread out as fans at the upland edges.
These floods probably constitute the main agent of erosion in deserts at the present time.
Their relative importance is even greater than the floods of humid, temperate regions, because so little erosion is effected between floods.
When streamfloods emerge from the upland front or when heavy rain falls in featureless desert plains, a second type of flow may occur, provided that no main water channels are present.
This consists of an intricate, anastomosing pattern of streamlets, often resembling a series of overlapping, deltaic distributaries.
Should the rainfall be sufficiently heavy the whole of a flat desert landscape may be completely covered with a sheet of moving water.
This type of flow, which is probably rare, has been termed a sheetflood.
Its main action appears to be not one of erosion, but merely  one of transport: it is the mechanism by which much debris is thought to be moved from the foot of the uplands across the gentle slopes that often border them in deserts.
The traditional picture presented above of the efficacy of the occasional desert flood probably really applies to the semi-arid rather than to the truly arid regions.
The significant measure, of course, is the ratio of runoff to rainfall and this seems to vary widely depending on the amount of the rainfall and the nature of the surface on to which it falls.
In general, however, there is little evidence to support the idea that many of the occasional desert rainfalls cause catastrophic floods.
Peel quotes evidence that the raging streamfloods and sheetfloods mentioned above are the exceptions that have impressed themselves strongly on the mind of chance, lucky observers.
In fact, many of the occasional desert rainfalls are very light and incapable of any serious erosion.
Therefore, in the true deserts one is thrown back more strongly on to past climatic conditions to explain obviously water-formed features.
In modern semi-deserts the position may be rather different.
From first principles it might be deduced that the amount of erosion will increase with increasing precipitation, provided that the surface remains bare, but that this will ultimately be reversed by the development of vegetation which will protect the surface from increasing erosion with increasing rainfall.
For certain stations in the United States Langbein and Schumm (1958) have quantified this in terms of sediment yield and shown that this increases to about 300 tons per square km (800 tons per square mile) with a rainfall of about 371 mm (15 in) per year and then decreases as increasing vegetation cover protects the surface.
Although streamfloods and sheetfloods may be effective agents in the formation of semi-arid landforms, many deserts bear the imprint of even more significant water action.
It seems very doubtful whether the required amount of water ever falls in present conditions and many authorities have attributed such erosion to a wetter period during the Pleistocene.
For example, the valley on the west side of the Nile at Luxor containing the Tombs of the Kings appears to be a water-eroded valley, but the tombs themselves show no signs of destructive water action: this means that water action of any significance probably ceased at least 4 000 years ago (Hume, 1925)
It seems easier to relate landforms in many deserts to earlier wetter periods than to present conditions.
Hume gives photograph after photograph of steepsided valleys in limestone and sandstone country in Egypt, which are obviously of watercut form, many of them containing caves, from which springs probably issued at an earlier period.
The same author has also many illustrations of closely spaced badlands type of valley pattern on impervious igneous and metamorphic rocks in the same region.
Indeed, the chief impression on viewing the Mt Sinai massif from the Gulf of Suez is of the gashed sides of this stark, mountain mass.
Further evidence for a past wetter climate is to be found in the wadi pattern present in many parts of the deserts.
These wadis are too long and, in many places, form too integrated a pattern for them to have been formed under present climatic conditions.
In Arabia wadis of very great length are known, while some of the patterns in the Sahara have been described by Gautier (Ig28).
The Ahaggar massif was apparently one of the chief watersheds, for enormous wadis radiate from it in all directions.
In this region the integration of the drainage pattern is so good that practically every point in the area can be assigned to one or another of the former drainage basins.
The comparatively recent date at which water flowed in these wadis is attested by the presence in some of the oases of fish from tropical Africa, while Pleistocene beds in the Atlas have a fauna which has been called a Zambezi fauna.
The last degenerate remnant of this fauna, which migrated across the Sahara during a wetter period, was the small Carthaginian elephant.
It must not be concluded that the Sahara was well watered in the Pleistocene: it probably had a hot steppe type climate rather than a true desert climate as at present.
Nor must it be assumed that the whole of the Sahara shared in this climatic amelioration, for, as Gautier says, there are few traces of wadi patterns in the Libyan desert, which, forming the core of the Sahara, was probably less affected.
Recourse to an earlier wetter phase was had by Peel (1941) to explain the dissection of the Gilf Kebir highlands in the Libyan Desert.
The Gilf Kebir consists of a monotonously smooth plateau, the size of Wales, formed of Nubian sandstone and standing as much as 330 m (1 100 ft) above the surrounding flat desert plains.
The plateau, which is itself an erosion feature, is deeply dissected by steepsided wadis, which are irregular in both long and cross-profiles.
The pattern of old stream courses can be clearly seen from above on the valley floors, but Peel believes that spring sapping may have been very important in the formation of the wadis.
The heads of the wadis are very abrupt and there is no evidence of water having spilled into them from the plateau surface: on the other hand caves within the wadis may well have been formerly occupied by springs during a period of higher rainfall.
The Nubian sandstones forming the plateau are permeable and water sinking into the sandstone may have been thrown out at the foot of its escarpments.
Supporting evidence for a wetter period is archaeological and consists of evidence of human occupation, especially near the edges of the plateau, of Palaeolithic and ‘Neolithic’ type.
Evidence for similar water action in the Peruvian desert has been described by Bosworth (1922).
In addition to relief forms, which he described as in no way different from those which might have been expected from water action, there are great waste fans at the foot of the Andes in the desert.
The principal of these is the Amotape breccia fan which occurs at the foot of the Amotape range, a part of the Andean system rising abruptly 1 500 m (5 000 ft) high above the desert.
It is 30–45 m (100–150 ft) thick near the mountains and thins to 1–3 m (5–10 ft) 8 km (5 miles) away.
These fan  deposits extend into the mountain valleys and have been dissected into terraces by occasional floods emerging from those valleys.
Although modern floods are still of importance, much of the Amotape fan dates from the Pleistocene period.
The evidence for water action in deserts is, therefore, strong.
Some water action may still occur intermittently, but many authors refer many of the landforms to a former wetter period.
Parts of the desert landscape are, therefore, fossil forms subject to little subsequent modification, just as parts of the Highlands of Scotland are fossil glaciated forms, which have undergone no great modification since being glaciated.
How much of this former water erosion can be attributed to pluvial phases in the Pleistocene is very doubtful.
Water erosion on bare, unvegetated landscapes was probably as powerful as ice erosion on our own temperate landscapes.
Yet the degree of integration of drainage patterns shown in some arid regions seems altogether too high to be attributed merely to Pleistocene pluvial periods.
The presence in such deserts as the Sahara of vast lakes such as mega-Chad which overflowed into the Bodele depression south of the Tibesti seems more the sort of feature which would have resulted from increased Pleistocene rainfall.
There is plenty of geomorphological and zoological evidence for such features.
But temporary lakes, however enormous, and integrated drainage patterns which demanded the erosion of much resistant rock are different kettles of fish.
One suspects that many of the dominant erosional relict features in arid regions may be the legacies of even more remote periods in the past.
Many of these former drainage channels are in process of disintegration at the present time (Mabbutt, 1977).
Present-day streamfloods from isolated uplands follow the upper parts of formerly much more integrated and lengthy drainage systems, but deposition as the volume of water is reduced by percolation and evaporation chokes the middle and lower parts of the valleys, which may be converted to dune fields.
The lines of the formerly integrated drainage systems can be traced but they are only used by present-day floods in their upper tracts, so forming a characteristically disintegrated pattern.