

Academic Validation and Change
Principles
This chapter considers the history and development of the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course between 1972 and 1988 from the points of view of academic innovation; the process of validation and professional recognition; the ‘fit’ with institutional and national planning; and the means of effecting change.
Among the points considered are the following:
Academic innovation
The case for and circumstances of creating the Modular Course.
The principal means of growth and development including accretion, redefinition and invention.
Validation
The changing circumstances of validation by the CNAA, including before and after the Interfaculty Studies (IFS) Board and the impact of delegated authority and accreditation.
The achievement of professional recognition of fields and combinations of fields.
Academic planning
Contributions to a Polytechnic development plan.
Academic impact of the NAB planning process.
The prospects of PCFC.
The process of change
Reaction to various types of initiative: internal and external; ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’.
Relationship of field-specific (local) and course-wide (central) changes.
The principles underlying course development were established in a set of aims drawn up in 1972 and reaffirmed by the Modular Course Committee (MCC) in 1978 and 1983.
The original statement was as follows:
Experience over the last ten years (1963–73) has convinced the staff of this Polytechnic of the need for a more flexible type of course than is  commonly offered to students.
In particular, it is felt that the student needs to be allowed some freedom to choose the elements of his own course within the disciplines concerned and to be given the opportunity to spend a proportion of his time working outside his chosen disciplines, for which appropriate credit should be given in the assessment of his degree.
To achieve this flexibility, the modular structure has been adopted in the belief that it provides the maximum amount of choice for the student compatible with the maintenance of academic standards.
The student is given the opportunity either of broadening his areas of study so that he learns some of the principles and methods of several disciplines or of concentrating on the narrower range in order to become a specialist after suitable experience, training or further study.
The ensuing 15 years have been characterized mainly by a series of opportunities for or constraints upon developing theses principles.
Among the former have been the national trends towards acceptance of credit accumulation and transfer and all that they imply; among the latter have been the effect of a tightening national steer on undergraduate student numbers in particular subjects.
In 1983, however, the MCC was able to make the following confident series of resolutions to the CNAA.
i
to re-affirm the principle, inherent in the content and design of the Modular Course, of offering to students a broad-based, flexible course of study in which they participate actively through choice of fields, within fields and of study outside their main field.
They may, for example(to paraphrase the original submission) either broaden their areas of study in order to learn the principles and methods of several disciplines or concentrate on a more extensive study of a single discipline.
ii
to exploit more fully the opportunities provided by the unit credit system to offer these studies on undifferentiated full-time, mixed mode, and part-time routes, and hence contribute to local and national needs for initial undergraduate courses and continuing education.
iii
to build on the established strengths of subject areas and seek to extend interdisciplinary cooperation in teaching, learning and research.
Together these principles attempt to establish what is distinctive about the Modular Course.
Other, more conventional courses have been faced with similar challenges and restrictions over the past decade.
One important theme in the remainder of this chapter is the extent to which a modular course design has made it easier or harder to seize opportunities and work within constraints.
First, however, it is necessary to establish the overall record.
The record
The following summary of the chronology of approval of and recruitment to Fields illustrates the steady development of the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course since September 1973:
Courses (approved by CNAA October 1972) starts with double fields in environmental biology, geology & environment, and human biology, and single fields in biology, mathematics & computer studies, geology, and physical sciences.
(The Polytechnic Diploma in Book Publishing is also integrated with the scheme.)
Course extended to include arts and humanities single fields in English, French literature, geography, German literature, history, history of art; also psychology, anthropology; double field in physical sciences and combinations of arts and science with the scheme.)
Course extended to allow for BEd degrees and honours degrees and Diploma in Higher Education (the latter retrospectively from 1974); education approved for all degree and diploma programmes; also art & design for BEd only and music for BEd and DipHE only, single fields in catering studies, and food & nutrition (approved for BA and BSc only).
Introduction of single fields in French language & contemporary studies, and German language & contemporary studies; DipHE programme  for food & nutrition, French, and German language & Contemporary Studies.
Scheme reapproved by CNAA for five years including new single fields in environmental biology, honours status for food & nutrition, catering and new double field in catering; new single field in visual studies replaces art & design for entire scheme; introduction of BEd and BEd (honours) for qualified teachers.
Previously prohibited combinations of the two French fields and the two German fields approved; also two new single fields in computer studies, and mathematical studies replacing mathematical & computer studies.
Named BSc degrees and honours degrees in environmental biology, human biology (awarded retrospectively from July 1981), earth sciences (replacing double field in geology & environment), and physical sciences introduced; also new fields in accounting & finance, and cartography; food & nutrition field retitled as food science & nutrition.
Polytechnic granted delegated authority to make certain types of change to the course without prior approval of the CNAA.
New single field in musical studies replacing music and available for all degree and diploma programmes introduced.
New single field in publishing replacing Polytechnic Diploma in Book Publishing and available for all degree and diploma programmes introduced.
Scheme reapproved by CNAA indefinitely subject to progress reviews.
General Polytechnic Diploma in Advanced Studies introduced.
Revised regulations for Stage I introduced.
Also ‘independent study modules and new examination arrangements as agreed with CNAA.
Revised regulations for Stage II introduced, and ‘transitional regulations’ for students entering Stage II of the course before September 1985.
New award of certificate established.
Major review of computer studies and submission of reports on physical sciences mean that all fields are approved indefinitely by CNAA.
New timetabling scheme introduced  
New fields in microelectronic systems (single), tourism (single), cell biology (double), languages for business (double) for September 1987; also planning studies (single and double fields, and double field with RTPI exemption) for September 1988.
Overall report to CNAA on information technology across the Course.
New single fields in business administration & management, physics, and chemistry approved for September 1988 (the latter two replacing the double field in physical sciences); five double fields comprising the integrated degree in nursing and midwifery approved for start in September 1989.
Plotting the progress of students by cohort shows the effect of new fields upon the Course, and also of the possibility of mixed mode study (Table 2.1).
The analysis also confirms the strong record of the course in retaining students and seeing them through to their final qualifications.
Table 2.2 links the number of students who could have achieved a degree award by the summer of 1987 with the number of awards actually made.
It excludes intermediate awards (the Certificate and Diploma) and those students who have extended the course for reasons other than failure (Table 2.2).
It should not be forgotten that the Modular Course has expanded in an expanding Polytechnic.
For the quinquennium 1982–83 to 1986–87, i.e. after the major phases of absorption of other large courses, it has remained just below half of the FTE students in the Polytechnic.
From September 1988, particularly through the inclusion of planning studies, it will move to just above half (Figure 2.1).
Student registrations on the course by mode show a small increase in both sandwich and part-time modes which, interestingly, has been matched by a corresponding decrease in such registrations elsewhere in the Polytechnic so that institutional figures are roughly stable over the period from 1982–87.
The phenomenon reflects not only the difficulties of part-time recruitment in an area like Oxfordshire which lacks a large urban and industrial base, but also the fact that the Modular Course has a better chance of retaining and increasing such students than conventional courses (Figure 2.2).
As Figure 2.3 (from the same quinquennium) indicates, the Course has also been able to maintain a fairly stable pattern of enrolments by subject through the initial years of NAB-led planning (an issue discussed further in Chapter 3).
Science registrations remain marginally the largest proportion, while arts and social sciences have dipped proportionately (but not in absolute terms) as a result of NAB steering.
The most significant increase, however, has been in registrations on those modules from fields classified as ‘applied’, i.e. those on which the degree student can also achieve professional recognition.
Finally, the Course remains an extremely popular option for applicants to an extremely popular Polytechnic.
The data on applications at the head of this section can be checked against the information in Figure 2.4 for the Polytechnic as a whole.
Academic innovation
This is how Ernest Theodossin, the historian of the modular movement, describes the origins and inception of the Oxford Polytechnic scheme.
At the time it was designated a Polytechnic in April 1970, Oxford College of Technology sustained four external London degrees, but was not an Institution with Recognised Teachers.
Its record with the CNAA was unimpressive, and most of its proposals had been rejected.
Before the year was over a number of significant changes had occurred: a new director (Dr B. B. Lloyd) arrived; London gave notice that it intended to stop bulk entry to the external system; and D. R. A. Mobbs was appointed a principal lecturer in biology.
Mobbs had returned to Britain from a post at the University of Zambia where the vice-chancellor, a Canadian, had imposed a course unit structure with four units per year, but no choice.
Mobbs felt that the Zambian system worked badly and that he could learn from its deficiencies.
His commitment to the modular structure gained support from the then director, who was interested in choice, in economies of scale, and in some of the technical devices (such as slot timetabling) about which Mobbs was enthusiastic.
Supported by his head of department, Mobbs was given relief from teaching duties to work on course development.
With the impending withdrawal of London validation, the institution was receptive to new ideas.
Mobbs himself felt that he was ‘the new broom’ and that ‘things were working’for him.
He was seeking to develop the widest possible range of courses, so that each person ‘could reach his potential in academic, professional and vocational work’(which he saw as ‘not separate’) in such a way that changes of direction would be possible at many points.
However, had he put forward a radical package, with organisational, administrative and hierarchical implications, he might have encountered resistance.
Instead, the sketch was clear only in his and the director's minds, and what was done was to begin in the limited area, biology and geology.
Later, Mobbs was joined by other subject groups.
Mobbs started work on the project in January 1971; in May 1972 the proposal was sent to the CNAA; it was approved after a one-day visit in November 1972 and the first intake arrived in the autumn of 1973.
The Oxford Modular Course was the first multi-disciplinary modular course validated by the council.
This outsider's account rings true for insiders in two ways.
First, it emphasizes the extent to which the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course was created de novo, with all that that entailed for the enthusiasm of colleagues and the mystification of outsiders.
Second, it accurately acknowledges the source of the scheme.
It remains true that all of the major parameters of Course regulations and management remain today as they were established by David Mobbs; all that has changed is the values given to certain parts of the equation.
Theodossin also implies a third element here, that the scheme began and developed with a wide range of institutional consent precisely because of features of its initial design (he points, for example, to the choice of a term-long unit and the control retained by staff over field changes, if not module changes, by students).
His conclusion is that ‘the Oxford scheme allows the maximum manoeuvrability consistent with not arousing the anxieties of vested interests among the educational establishment’.
This is not how it has always felt.
Some of the early groups joining the Modular Course as they faced the same problem of replacing London external degrees (humanities and social science) felt the strong hand of management as they exercised their ‘academic’ decision to join.
(There is a story, which it has proved impossible to verify from the record, that Lloyd opened one meeting with these staff by declaring ‘this is not a democracy’.)
Other groups, especially more recently, were enthusiastic rather than reluctant.
Those responsible for initial teacher training, for example, were apparently relieved that the Polytechnic, upon its merger with the Lady Spencer Churchill College of Education in 1975, was not intending to leave them as a monotechnic island in the interdisciplinary sea of the Polytechnic, particularly when it remained possible (as confirmed by subsequent experience elsewhere) that isolation would mean a low ranking in whatever prioritization exercises the Polytechnic might be forced to undertake.
Essentially there have been three methods by which new subject areas have joined the Modular Course.
Numerically easily the most significant has been the process of accretion, whereby existing courses have joined the scheme, accepted its rules and conventions and added their subject contribution, in the form of fields, to what is already on offer.
This is the process experienced by arts, languages, social sciences and most recently planning.
The act of joining the scheme in this way is of major significance to the delivery of courses recast in this way.
Until the 1983–84 submission to the CNAA (discussed below), for example, several new areas felt constrained and unconvinced by aspects of the operation (especially timetabling) which made perfect sense for a full-time course in science but considerably less for other kinds of demands.
For example, the history seminar had to struggle to find a two-hour block and the language class could never achieve the desired continuity by organizing its contact time over three, let alone four days of the week.
Second in importance until recently was the process of redefinition.
Here the Polytechnic took established courses, often at a different level, which upon review no longer seemed appropriate or sustainable as part of the institutional profile, and redesigned them as fields on the Modular Course.
Examples of this kind include the Polytechnic's Diplomas in Cartography and Publishing (now single fields), and, most recently, the Polytechnic Diploma in Language Studies (now a double field, leading, over three years rather than the four required for honours degrees in other language fields, to a BA degree only).
Motives here have varied, and included a changing perception of the needs of employers, course costs which were hard to justify in comparison to other areas of the Polytechnic and the need for degree designation in order to attract mandatory student grants.
Third, there are the instances in which the array of subjects and modules across the Course, combined with external pressures and challenges, have facilitated the invention of new fields, and their development at significantly less cost than would have been the case without the modular scheme.
Examples here are tourism, business administration & management, and microelectronic systems.
Each draws significantly upon previously existing courses and each attempts to fill a gap in the current national provision of undergraduate education.
Finally, there is, of course, the possibility of hybrids between two or more of these methods of course development.
The five double fields (each related to a professional register) which comprise the degree in nursing and midwifery involve redefinition of the existing training scheme, accretion of new subject areas in health-related studies and the invention of a new and unique opportunity for intending students.
Validation
The Course as a whole has been presented for validation and revalidation  to the CNAA three times.
In 1972 — 73 it was initially approved after some preliminary negotiation and a one-day visit, as set out above.
The ease of this initial approval of fields in science, where the subject culture was traditionally more sympathetic to modular course design (including progressive assessment, behavioural objectives and all that goes with them), contrasted strongly with the validation experiences of the first major accretions to the Course in humanities, social sciences and teacher education.
Here the subject culture reacted antagonistically, with the result that the initial approvals were hedged around with conditions.
Partly as a consequence the renewal of approval of the whole Course, conducted over two days in 1979 — 80, was based on a submission in which ‘safety first’ had been the internal maxim.
Strong instructions went out to fields reviewing their progress and preparing proposals that there should be as little change as possible from that which had been originally approved.
The event itself, one of the first to be conducted by the CNAA's new IFS Board, was an archetype of the theatre of validation, with 120 people at one stage sitting in the Polytechnic boardroom discussing whether or not the course regulations met Principle 3 of the CNAA's own regulations (about the balance and nature of the course of study).
Left over from that encounter and resolved later in the session was the eventual agreement by the CNAA to the Course being offered on a mixed mode and part-time basis.
Here again a feature insisted upon by Mobbs, that the regulations as a whole be amended to become agnostic as to mode, proved timely but initially controversial.
CNAA members wished a set of special arrangements to be made for part-time students almost amounting to a separate course.
By now virtually all new courses elsewhere follow the Oxford pattern.
Changes were also taking place in the central management of the Course.
Mobbs had resigned from his elected post as Dean.
A successor (all Heads of Department were eligible for election) had proved hard to find and for a brief period the chairmanship of the Course had been taken over by the Deputy Director, Brian Tonge.
Finally, and in time for the 1979 — 80 visit, a Dean was elected: Brian Clark from the Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computing.
Clark had, however, made it clear that he did not wish to continue for a further term and, as a consequence of an Academic Board working party's recommendation, a permanent post was created and filled externally by the appointment of the author.
This put the central management of the Course on a more secure footing for the important preparation for the second resubmission of the Course in 1983 — 84.
In a two-year period of review from late 1981 the Course as a whole and all fields within it reviewed overall principles, the design of the Course and the specific contributions of subject areas.
This large-scale exercise was conducted in the knowledge of considerably greater sympathy on the part of CNAA validators, as reflected in the developing working style of the IFS Board.
Indeed, one measure of their growing confidence in the scheme had been the agreement, from November 1981, to allow the  Polytechnic delegated authority to make certain types of changes to the Course without the prior agreement of the Council.
The specific areas of discretion were as follows:
updating the syllabuses/reading lists;
varying individual module assessment;
reorganization of modules;
variation in prerequisites as a result of the three changes above;
temporary addition of a module;
modifications to specific field regulations as a result of approved changes in structure or content;
adding or dropping a module in a particular subject area;
introduction of new technology/learning methods which might alter student contact time; and
amendment of general regulations where necessary for consistency.
Such discretion was granted on the understanding (1) that any changes made to the approved Course regulations were notified to the IFS Board for information;(2) that all changes to the Course were monitored and evaluated for the purpose of informing the next submission for renewal of approval, and subsequent Course review visits; and (3) that all changes to assessment requirements were agreed with the appropriate external examiner.
The effects of this delegation were to give confidence to the Polytechnic's internal processes of review and validation and to create a body of case law about their achievement in time for the revalidation of the Course in 1984–85.
By that time six termly reports covering over thirty changes (some quite major, including a wholesale review of the catering fields) were on file.
The internal review in preparation for the 1984 — 85 validation event was a massive exercise which galvanized the whole Polytechnic (one conclusion from the CNAA's report was that the process of critical appraisal could be overdone).
In one sense it might also be said to have laboured to produce a mouse.
Principles underlying the Course were reaffirmed, as were the framework of the regulations and the system for delivering the Course (semesters in place of terms, for example, were rejected).
The new elements put forward were as follows:
a redefinition of the advanced module as one-tenth of the notional effort of a full-time honours degree candidate in one year (the basic module remained as one-twelfth);
a relaxation of the regulations on the combinations of single fields in Stage II (the previous regulation in effect required a 50: 50 split, now 7/16 acceptable modules was the minimum for one field (the Course rejected the idea of calling this a major/minor system);
raising the threshold for passing Stage I to 10 modules (previously 8 credits with an average of 40 per cent over the 12 taken was an alternative route);
increasing the proportion of Stage II over which classification is calculated (18/20 for BA/BSc from 18/24);
the introduction of independent study modules into those fields wishing to include them, under carefully controlled conditions including prior approval of the work scheme and assessment schedule (by 1986–87 24 fields included these);
further refinement of the standard module description (which now includes details on general education aims, the assessment scheme, as well as an outline of teaching methods, but no longer requires book lists);
the introduction of a two-tier examination system (described in Chapter 5 below); and
the use of field titles, and not just the anachronistic formula ‘on a Modular Course’ on all degree certificates; this was accepted by CNAA for all but the BEd degree — combinations of single fields being prefaced by ‘Combined studies in…’.
The CNAA's processing of this submission was radically different from its previous practice.
After a preliminary strategic session in London, fields were divided into four cognate groups and each was visited separately for a day on the basis of a volume of field proposals and a critical review.
A final one-day visit by a ‘core group’ of members approved the scheme indefinitely and agreed that the future pattern of review would be on the basis of a rolling cycle established by the Polytechnic.
Talk within the institution was of having fought ‘the war to end all wars’.
In effect the proposal for future review which emerged from the 1983–84 visits anticipated what the Polytechnic achieved through accreditation by the Council from 1 April 1988.
The Polytechnic is now responsible, though its Academic Board, for the processes of both review and initial validation under an accreditation agreement.
The cycle of periodic reviews of fields is in place and the first initial validations have been led from within the Polytechnic, including those for physics, chemistry, business administration & management, and nursing and midwifery.
Professional recognition
In addition to the 15 years of dialogue with the CNAA recorded above the Modular Course has been required to negotiate with a series of professional bodies about the appropriateness for professional recognition of study on various of its fields.
Progress has been patchy but by the time of writing study on the following fields (often requiring further compulsory elements or specific combinations of fields in addition to the general requirements of the course regulations) carry agreed professional exemption or recognition for graduates:
Accounting & finance
BEd
BEd for qualified teachers
Catering management (single and double)
Law
Nursing & midwifery
Planning studies
Psychology
The list comprises the formal recognitions.
Students have also been successful in making individual applications (for example in computer studies to the British Computer Society) and, indeed, such applications in the early years often formed the necessary groundwork for institutional recognition.
Some areas remain, however, aloof from recognizing modular course possibilities.
The slowness of engineering to join the scheme, for example, is explained to a considerable extent by fears of the attitudes of the professional societies (it is hoped that, in time, field combinations such as computer studies and microelectronic systems will succeed in breaching this important wall).
Academic planning
The position of the expanding Modular Course within the planning processes of the Polytechnic causes some major problems and helps to solve some others.
The complications arise from the way in which it has to maintain an internal planning dynamic which cuts across the traditional demarcation lines of faculties and departments.
At the broadest level, the Course contributes in a major way to the achievement of the Polytechnic's overall aims.
These were summarized by the Academic Board in January 1987 as follows:
1.
To provide a distinctive higher education service of undisputed quality which differs from much traditional higher education in the following ways:
(a)
its emphasis on relevance to employment, citizenship and personal development (including the development of critical and rational minds);
(b)
the availability of opportunities to study at a broad range of levels, of course lengths and of modes (part-time, full-time or mixed);
(c)
the possibility of combining different areas of study in ways not generally available elsewhere in the UK;
(d)
its strong links with the local community.
2.
To extend higher education opportunities for those who are at present under-represented in higher education.
3.
To facilitate the continuing personal and professional development of those in work or seeking to re-enter or change work.
4.
Through applied research and consultancy activities and courses, to assist business, industry, cultural organisations, public services, the professions, and the community at large.
5.
To contribute to better international understanding by establishing links with institutions abroad, fostering exchanges and admitting students from overseas.
While the Course facilitates meeting all of these aims, it has a particular responsibility in respect of 1 b and 1 c, 2, 3 and 5 and enables the Polytechnic to make a distinctive contribution to the national system of higher education in these areas.
The difficulties tend to come when these broad aims have to be translated into specific objectives for local areas of the Polytechnic, and in particular into detailed forward planning of student numbers.
Details of the latter process are given in Chapter 3 below.
However, from the point of view of the strategic considerations in this chapter the following points are relevant:
The extent to which the Course encourages and allows choice puts a significant degree of uncertainty into the planning process.
This arises not only from potential changes of field (where student preferences are not guaranteed — the contractual baseline is merely that students are enabled to complete the fields upon which they originally registered) but more significantly from the changing pattern of extra-field choice.
Here, despite all of the external constraints the Course has managed to maintain the principle that every student should be allowed to take any module for which he or she is (qualified and which can be timetabled.
To allow these freedoms and pursue detailed academic planning requires sophisticated and reliable forecasting.
Departments and the fields which they contribute to the Modular Course are not free agents, either in terms of conformity to Course regulations or in being able to project student numbers in isolation.
Any change to a field will have some knock-on effect on other areas in that it will modify the overall pattern of student choice.
There are many initiatives which it is more sensible for the Course as a whole to pick up than for individual fields and departments to plough a lone furrow.
Examples would be recruitment strategies (for example, the priority given to local mature entries), aspects of teaching methods (for example , the development of distance learning), or response to local or national surveys (for example , of courses likely to meet training needs).
As a consequence of these complications the Modular Course has to operate a planning and response structure, through its own committees and crucially through a termly meeting of Heads of Departments contributing to the Course, that is not only sensitive to overall Polytechnic directives but also ensures a sensible collaborative response.
The complex  history of the Polytechnic's involvement with the internal planning exercise directed by the National Advisory Body for Public Sector Higher Education (PSHE) from 1984 — 85 illustrates this point clearly.
NAB's planning process assigns student numbers to institutions by broad subject categories (initially there were 14 of these, subsequently 19).
Each student FTE in each of the categories then entitles the institution to a specific unit of funding.
Overall institutional allocations might then be fine tuned (there was a process initially called ‘mitigation’ which protected traditionally high cost institutions from the full force of change) and there are other criteria to meet such as targets for sub-degree, part-time and mature intakes; but this distribution of packets of money by students identified with subject areas remains the basis of the system.
Obviously for the Modular Course, with its large number of students on two-subject degrees and the freedom for all students to select modules outside their main subject areas, it posed severe problems.
These problems were compounded by the Polytechnic's principled objections to the NAB's overnight conversion of institutional responses to hypothetical planning scenarios devised by the DES (involving a minimum cut of 10 per cent) into ‘bids’.
In the event a system of planning and monitoring of Oxford Polytechnic student numbers based on selecting (arbitrarily) the lower of the two DES course numbers for each student on a combination of single fields was agreed, which enabled Oxford to achieve NAB targets accurately in growth areas, without sacrificing the essential contribution of other areas.
(Many of the growth areas remained buoyant precisely because students could combine ‘favoured’ and ‘unfavoured’areas of study.)
To have Oxford Polytechnic, the largest such scheme in the sector, apparently circumventing the NAB's preferred method of disaggregating modular courses was, however, an embarrassment and for the next cycle, commencing in 1987–88, the Polytechnic shifted to an alternative based on ‘subject weight’.
This mirrored the Polytechnic's own method of calculating student FTEs, by reviewing all of the module registrations (regardless of fields) and consolidating them into subject groups.
The Polytechnic had argued convincingly in the first round that to have done so then would have simply involved the NAB in steering its ‘service’ work around.
(For example, to have increased numbers in computing, when this was a ‘free choice’ of increasing popularity, would have had no effect on the number of students graduating from the field of computer studies.)
Given NAB's acceptance of the new base of the 1986–87 numbers as achieved under the former system from 1987–88, a ‘subject weight’ system is now in place.
At the time of writing, the intention of NAB's successor, the PCFC, to replace NAB plans by individual institutional contracts, is clear.
This will satisfy ‘market forces’ to the extent that the essential link with a centrally agreed unit of resource will be cut.
It is less clear how PCFC, which will operate under the conditions of the Education Act of 1988 from 1 April 1989, will organize the detailed tendering which will be required.
It seems, however, inevitable that the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course will once again be forced to revise its planning and monitoring methodology and establish new arrangements to preserve its central academic features.
The process of change
These overall Course considerations may give the impression of a system that is inflexible and resistant to change.
At times this is undoubtedly true.
Devising a replacement timetabling system for the original scheme invented by Mobbs for a full-time course in science took at least ten months of negotiation and debate.
Similarly the overall scheme does set constraints against which some local initiatives (a desire to incorporate more fieldwork into the regular term, for example) battle in vain .
However, the Course does include smooth and well understood processes for achieving change, connected with the Polytechnic's system of annual review, which have been extensively used.
The main categories of change, and the processes through which they work are set out in Figure 2.5.
Essentially this document brings a process which has been in operation since 1980 into line with the accreditation agreement with the Council.
Each term approximately twenty proposals are reviewed and evaluated before agreement by the Academic Standards Committee (ASC) on behalf of Academic Board.
They can range from modifications to an assessment scheme to a wholesale review of the structure and aims of a field.
Initiatives can also be taken centrally which are then translated into particular applications by fields.
The account in Table 2.3 of the build up of     independent study across the Course would be an example of a course-wide policy which is permissive progressively permeating the Course as a whole.
Returning to the record established at the head of this chapter, the Modular Course has obviously been transformed as it has grown.
It has responded to internal and external stimuli and absorbed the tensions between local and central needs and ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’initiatives.
The external pattern of validation and planning for student numbers has posed significant problems to be overcome but has not significantly impaired a dynamic experiment in course development.
Subjects and Courses: Managing the Matrix
Principles
Managing a large, multi-subject enterprise like the Modular Course makes two principal demands upon an administrative and consultative system: first that it can cope with a high degree of complexity and second that there should be clear lines of accountability for decisions made and the responsibility for carrying them out.
Both demands are further complicated by the embedding of this large enterprise in an institution, and across faculties and departments, which also have responsibility for non-modular work.
The chosen device for surmounting these problems on the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course is the matrix.
Responsibility for deploying resources in support of courses is separated from responsibility for academic management and maintenance of standards.
The former is supplied along an axis controlled by faculties and departments, led by Deans and Heads.
The latter is the purview of another axis in which elected Field Chairs are the most significant individuals.
Where the two axes meet, particularly in the context of policy initiation or adjudication, a small number of academic staff described as the central academic team have particular responsibilities.
Several important issues arise out of this agreed strategy, including the following:
the articulation of academic and resource planning;
the balance of academic and administrative control;
the demands of briefing and training of staff at all levels;
the difficulties of supplying quick and flexible response to opportunities and perceived difficulties; and
the balance between local and central needs and aspirations.
In the remainder of this chapter these issues are tackled in the following way.
An outline of the Modular Course Matrix is followed by a discussion of  roles and responsibilities of key individuals and groups.
To illustrate the type of problems encountered and the extent to which they are overcome the process of forward planning of student numbers is chosen as a test case.
Finally, a summary of policy issues raised and discussed during one academic year (1987–88) is used to demonstrate the pattern of contending interests and the extent to which they can or cannot be accommodated.
The Modular Course matrix
Figure 3.1 summarizes the main features of the Modular Course Management System.
The vertical axis is headed by elected Deans of Faculties and appointed Heads of Department with immediate control over the distribution of resources.
Particular fields may be located entirely or predominantly within each department, and a departmental ‘home’ is identified for each field to ensure accountability for the adequacy of resourcing and planning arrangements.
The academic development and day-to-day management of fields, which may be made up of modules contributed from more than one department, are, however, in the hands of Field Committees headed by elected Field Chairs (the horizontal axis).
Overall responsibility to the Academic Board and the Director for the health of the Course lies with the appointed Dean, who heads a small central team consisting of the Assistant Dean, Modular Course Co-ordinator and eleven senior tutors.
Meanwhile the Course draws upon central services (such as the library, computer centre and Educational Methods Unit) as well as the administrative resources of the Registry and examinations office.
Individuals
The central team
The central team of academic staff responsible for the management of the Course has grown with the size of the Course itself, although not always as fast as the individuals concerned would have liked.
Table 3.1 correlates the course FTE and number of fields with the administrative staff complement within the registry primarily associated with the Modular Course and, in the right-hand two columns, the academic staff.
As explained in Chapter 2, from September 1981 a permanent Dean replaced an elected Head of Department in the role of Dean of the Modular Course.
From April 1987 (after a year in which he acted as Deputy Director of the Polytechnic) he was redeployed as Assistant Director and Dean of the Modular Course on the assumption that he would have half of his time from September 1987 available for Course administration.
At that time the post of Assistant Dean was created to bring the number of central     posts to 2.5 (including the Co-ordinator).
The current disposition of responsibilities between the three posts is as follows:
Dean of the Modular Course
As Dean of the Modular Course the Assistant Director/Dean of the Modular Course is responsible for the academic leadership and management of the Course.
He has particular responsibility for:
development of Course provision within the policies of the Polytechnic;
deployment of the academic management team, including responsibility for staff development;
liaison with the directorate, Deans of Faculties and Heads of Schools/Departments contributing to the Course; and
external liaison on behalf of the Course, for example with NAB/PCFC.
In furtherance of these aims he represents the Modular Course on the Academic Board and its subcommittees.
He chairs the Modular Course Committee (MCC) the termly meeting of modular Heads of Departments, and the termly meeting of staff and students.
He is an ex officio member of the Modular Examinations Committee (MEC) and Modular Management and Review Committee (MMRC).
Assistant Dean of the Modular Course (new post from 1 September 1987) The Assistant Dean is responsible through the Dean for the day-to-day management of the Course.
He takes special responsibility for:
detailed forward planning, including the implications of student target places;
the review and validation system;
liaison with validating bodies (for example, CNAA) and external bodies concerned with credit transfer (for example , South East England Consortium for Credit Transfer (SEEC));
student progress in Stage II;
preparation of materials for examination committees; and
student exchanges.
In furtherance of these aims he represents the MMRC on the Academic Standards Committee (ASC).
He also chairs the MEC and the MMRC.
He is an ex officio member of MCC.
He deputizes for the Dean as and when necessary.
Modular Course Co-ordinator
The Modular Course Co-ordinator takes particular responsibility for:
meeting approved admissions targets by field;
liaison with staff and students, for example to advise on the regulations;
slotting and timetabling;
liaison with student services; and
student progress in Stage 1.
In furtherance of these aims he acts as Chair of the Modular Admissions Committee (MAC) and Careers Liaison Group and Stage I Examinations Committee.
He is an ex officio member of MCC, MEC and MMRC.
He is required to deputize for the Assistant Dean and Dean as and when necessary.
The eleven senior tutors are each seconded from a department to the Modular Course for a third of their time.
Their responsibilities for admissions and counselling in Stage I of the Course are set out in Chapter 4.
Care is taken in allocation of responsibility for fields that each is concerned with at least one field of study outside his or her home department.
In adjusting the Polytechnic's staffing establishment to account for their central contribution a formula is used which balances the contribution of numbers of staff from each department (0.3)— i.e. the ‘payment’— against the central service each department receives (in terms of students admitted and counselled in Stage I)— the ‘bill’.
Other individual contributions to Modular Course management are all departmentally based.
The following extracts from the current Modular Course Staff Guide indicate the key expectations of the two most important links in the chain: Heads of Department and Field Chairs.
Responsibilities of Heads of Departments
The Head of Department is responsible for providing the resources to teach modules in the way that has been agreed.
This will require:
1.
an agreed departmental policy on the sizes of teaching groups  appropriate for the different modes of teaching used in different subject areas and the provision of sufficient staff hours for the modules to be taught in these ways;
2.
consultation where appropriate with the Field Chairs and/or other staff over the timetabling of modules and the provision of specialist rooms and equipment at the times required for particular modules; and
3.
a continuing review of staff and student FTEs so that appropriate admission targets can be agreed with the Dean, other Heads of Departments and the appropriate Faculty Dean, and so that Field Chairs can be properly advised on the implications of student transfers and exchanges.
The Head of Department is responsible for ensuring that all personal tutors, module leaders and Field Chairs in his or her department are aware of their own responsibilities and must be prepared to make arrangements for someone to act in lieu of any of these staff who, for example, are not available to students or registry staff.
The Head of Department or his or her nominee is responsible for informing the Registry of any limit on the numbers of tutees a particular member of his or her staff should be allocated, and of arrangements to be made for personal tutor responsibilities when a member of staff leaves or is granted leave of absence.
The Head of Department is responsible for nominating persons with whom module leaders should clear their examination papers and mark sheets and for ensuring that associated deadlines are met.
The Head of Department is responsible for the annual review of the fields sponsored by his or her department.
The Head of Department is responsible for ensuring that proposals for change are considered by appropriate field and/or subject committees and the departmental board and in particular that resource implications are identified.
The Head of Department in consultation with the Dean is responsible for recommending appropriate action in cases of suspected cheating or plagiarism by students.
The Head of Department is responsible for seeing that access to projects and dissertations is as agreed with students.
The Head of Department is responsible for discussing and agreeing with the Dean the withdrawal of modules from the course as a result of low recruitment or resource problems.
In each case students registered for the module in the current or a future term must be counselled about and registered for viable alternative programmes.
Responsibilities of Field Chairs
There is a Field Chair for each approved field whose terms of reference are set out below.
Some of these responsibilities are defined more specifically, but the way they are carried out will vary from field to field depending on the involvement of the appropriate Head of Department, the presence of Principal Lecturers with defined responsibilities, and whether there are several fields with common modules.
to ensure with the appropriate Head of Department that the teaching and assessment of field modules is consistent with the content of the course as validated;
to represent where appropriate the field in any external discussion with the CNAA, or other bodies;
to test and report on the suitability of applications requiring dispensation;
to counsel field students on their choice of modules;
to arrange and chair, where appropriate, the subject examination committee;
to arrange for field students to receive careers advice;
to arrange and chair regular meetings of the field committee and to produce minutes;
to discuss with the Co-ordinator, Assistant Dean and/or Dean any proposed changes in syllabuses, modules, slotting or field rules; and
to represent the field on the MCC.
Terms of office
The Field Chair is elected for a two-year period by the staff members of the field committee and is eligible for re-election.
Beyond these defined central roles the Course has clear expectations of all permanent members of staff who contribute to it as module leaders and as personal tutors.
In the former role they take responsibility for the design, teaching and assessment of individual modules (see Chapter 5).
As the latter they counsel students about their programmes, confirm their specific choices, and take a direct interest in each student's personal and academic progress (see Chapter 4).
Groups
The committee structure set out in Figure 3.2 represents the collective decision-making framework of the Modular Course.
As is clear from this diagram the main policy-making body is the MCC.
Its more precise relationship to the substructure, in particular to MMRC and the field committees is set out below.
Modular Course Committee (MCC)
Membership Dean (chair) Assistant Dean   Modular Course Co-ordinator Field Chairs Heads of Departments offering fields within the Modular Course Senior tutors Senior Administrative Assistant (secretary) Examinations officer Library representative Four students' union representatives Any member of MMRC not otherwise qualified.
Terms of Reference The MCC is responsible for the coherence and educational effectiveness of the course, and for policy making, and reports to the Academic Board.
Terms of office Field Chairs: elected by field committee for two years, renewable.
Senior tutors: appointed for two years, renewable.
Students: elected by the students' union at the start of the academic year.
Meetings The MCC normally meets twice (in weeks 5 and 8) each term.
The first meeting is termed a ‘business meeting’ and the agenda comprises such items as require decision for the day-to-day running of the course.
The second meeting is termed a ‘development meeting’ and the agenda comprises items relating to the future policy and development of the Course.
The ‘development meeting’ receives the annual review of the course from MMRC (see page 40) in Term 2 of each academic year.
Modular Management and Review Committee (MMRC)
Membership Assistant Dean (chair) Dean Modular Course Co-ordinator Assistant Academic Secretary (secretary) Ten elected members of teaching staff to include at least one member from each faculty Two student representatives nominated by the students' union from the MCC representatives Any Field Chair (not otherwise qualified) choosing to attend and having two days' notice of his or her intention to the Chair.
The Committee may co-opt additional members for special purposes.
The MMRC is a sub-committee of the MCC.
Terms of reference
1.
to be responsible for the day-to-day running of the Course and for making changes as necessary to improve the running of the Course within overall policy set by MCC;
2.
to set up ad hoc committees to examine certain aspects of the Course and supervise certain aspects of management;
3.
to review the regulations as required;
4.
to nominate members from the Course as a whole to Faculty Review Groups (FRG) when they are considering specific changes to fields, annual field reviews and new field proposals;
5.
to propose changes of policy to the MCC;
6.
to prepare briefing materials on issues referred to it by MCC or other bodies for the information of MCC;
7.
to provide the annual Course review for MCC; and
8.
to make recommendations on external examiner nominations to the ASC.
Papers
1.
MMRC agendas are circulated to all Heads of Department and Field Chairs simultaneously with circulation to the Committee.
2.
MMRC minutes, once approved, are circulated to all members of MCC.
The Committee normally meets fortnightly for the first eight weeks each term (weeks 2, 4, 6, 8) and may meet on a fifth occasion (in week 10).
Field committees
Membership Field Chairs Module leaders of modules that are acceptable or compulsory for the field  Appropriate Heads of Departments (ex officio) Student representatives The committee may co-opt additional members for special purposes.
Terms of reference The field committee is responsible for:
1.
administering, teaching and examining the field;
2.
making appropriate recommendations to the MCC for addition, deletion, or changes in modules or field rules; and
3.
nominating external examiners to MMRC and the relevant FRG.
Terms of office
Field Chairs are elected from the teaching staff members of the committee by the staff members.
The office is held for two years from September and Field Chairs are eligible for re-election.
Admissions Committee (MAC)
Membership Modular Course Co-ordinator (chair) Senior tutors Modular Course Admissions Officer (secretary)
Terms of reference
1.
to agree the number of offers conditional upon A level performance that should be made to meet the admission targets for the fields and the Modular Course;
2.
to consider applications for places on the Course and to make offers, invite for interview or take other action as appropriate;
3.
to deal with entries entailing exemption from part of the Course on behalf of the Polytechnic Dispensations Committee, to set appropriate conditions for such entries and to report them to the Dispensations Committee; and
4.
to consider for approval any other exemptions proposed by Field Chairs.
(This is not necessary for modules for which the grounds for exemption are specified in the module description.)
Term of office
Senior tutors are appointed by the Dean on the recommendation of the Heads of Department concerned.
Appointment is normally from 1 January for two years, and may be renewed.
Careers Liaison Group
Membership Modular Course Co-ordinator (chair) Head of Student Services (convenor) Careers counsellors from student services department Nominated representatives of fields or groups of cognate fields.
Function
1.
to discuss relevant information and identify activities organized by student services of which academic staff and students should be aware;
2.
to provide a channel of communication between academic staff and the careers counsellors from student services;
3.
the group meets at least once a term, usually in week 2.
Heads of Departments meeting
The Dean and Co-ordinator meet each term (usually in week 11) with Heads of Departments contributing to the Modular Course to discuss matters of mutual concern.
The notes of their meetings are presented to MCC.
Student/staff open meeting
An open meeting of students and staff is held in the first two terms of each year (usually in week 7), principally for students to express views and opinions to the Dean and staff.
In the third term a meeting is held between students and the Dean or Assistant Dean and Co-ordinator alone, following an agenda set in consultation with the Students' Union.
The notes of these meetings are presented to MCC.
Forward planning
There are several areas in which the continued health of the Course depends upon a collaborative response which must necessarily be more than the aggregate of views of individual fields and departments.
A key example is the forward planning of student numbers.
Here care has to be taken to establish the effect of decisions relating initially to one area across the Course and to fix, relatively early in the year, firm targets for student recruitment in order to meet the Polytechnic's plans for individual departments and schools.
Further complications arise from the lack of fit of this planning process with the form of the overall NAB plan for the Polytechnic (as set out above in Chapter 2) and from such open-ended policies as the Polytechnic's commitment to expand overseas student numbers to 5 per cent of first year intake.
The solutions are found each year through a judicious mixture of strong quantitative forecasting, relying on the student management system (see Chapter 7) and sensible qualitative judgement.
The tables below indicate some major steps in the process of planning for 1988 — 89.
Table 3.2 gives the NAB plan as finally negotiated for Oxford Polytechnic.
A first task accomplished during term 1 is to establish the current FTEs by school and department, fixed by a census on 1 November and to use both this information and the proposed NAB support to fix school and department targets for 1988–89.
Table 3.3 gives this analysis for 1 November 1987.
The academic staffing establishment included in the   budget for that year is then fixed by the Planning Committee and Academic Board.
A proportion of these FTEs is then established as modular and an analysis of the likely effect of rolling forward current Modular Course student numbers is undertaken, including ‘self-correcting’ assumptions about the pattern of student choice (based on a year-on-year analysis of change) plus planned new initiatives.
The outcome is set out in Table 3.4.
Moving from left to right this establishes the proportion of each student registered on a field which is likely to contribute to each subject area's FTE in each stage (b, c), sets this against current FTEs (agreed in the 1 November census — after some major ‘servicing’ arrangements are allowed for; for example a high proportion of Stage I accounting is taught by staff from the catering fields)(a), and adds the likely effect of recruitment targets and combinations for September 1988 (ij), to produce an FTE prediction for the next year (m).
These are then recast into a departmental format and presented for discussion to a key meeting of the central academic team and the Heads of Departments contributing to the Modular Course at the end of term 1.
At this meeting there is considerable scope for adjustment, but the process would clearly fail if there were not also an understanding of the need for a consensual solution to emerge, and within a very tight timescale.
Usually the proposed adjustments are checked outside the meeting by the central team and recirculated for quick comment before publication in a final form in which they can be used both by the Modular Admissions Committee (MAC) to control enrolment and by faculties and departments as the base for resource management.
In December 1987 this adjustment process took a further week and the final outcome is as recorded in Table 3.5.
The fragility of this process is apparent to all who participate in it.
It is crucially dependent upon accurate forecasting and the ability of the MAC to deliver the right student numbers in the right field combinations.
Experience has shown that the forecasting system is fairly robust in years in which there are no major changes in the shape of the Course offerings.
In 1987–88 this was not the case and we failed to predict a dramatic upturn in School of Business F T E s, principally as a consequence of students electing to take tourism modules as an extra-field choice.
(Compare the targets with the actuals in Table 3.5.)
The Course as a whole also over-recruited significantly.
1988–89 is a similarly uncertain affair with the new dimensions of planning, business administration, physics and chemistry.
In these circumstances it was no accident that planning and resourcing were high on the agenda for internal debate.
A year of policy-making
As indicated above, the engine room of policy-making and analysis is the MMRC, with its largely elected staff membership.
Its role is to formulate options and propose solutions to the MCC, which is ultimately responsible to the Academic Board for the Course and its development.
It also plays a key role in the review and validation system.
The analysis below of a year of MMRC activity illustrates not only the nature of live business but also the volume and responsibility of the work it undertakes.
MMRC business 1987–88
The Committee met, as usual, at least five times in each term, often jointly with a FRG.
The business outlined below has been collected under three        not mutually exclusive headings: validation, review and policy.
Policy items normally resulted in a recommendation to MCC, taken at the next development meeting of that Committee.
Validation recommendations normally went straight to the Polytechnic's ASC.
External examiner approvals were also recommended to ASC.
What this summary reveals primarily is the volume and range of work undertaken by a largely elected body of staff and students (it disguises a further aspect of their role as participants in FRG-led review events).
It also points to the creative tension between the needs for maintaining the course (trouble-shooting — as in the ‘open access’ and ‘examining’discussion — as well as fine-tuning the syllabuses offered by fields through the validation system), and those of creatively developing it (in discussions of new fields, new awards and review of basic principles).
Against this background we can return to the issues outlined at the head of the chapter.
Academic and resource planning
As illustrated in the section on forward planning, neither type of planning can proceed in ignorance of the other.
When they fail to be successfully coordinated, as in the episode of tourism enrolments, considerable problems emerge quickly.
Academic and administrative control
It is important that MMRC establishes for the Course management a clear set of academic priorities.
While it is true that no major course development has been held up by administrative constraints, the range of decisions with administrative effects (deadlines, counting rules, etc., as well as the information base about approved fields) imposes a permanent culture of change on the administration of the Course.
Briefing and training
MMRC and MCC decisions can be sensibly implemented only with the knowledge and good will of staff.
The lines of communications, between the two committees, and from the MCC to field committees, is vital.
Periodic initiatives, such as the termly feedback seminars, the publication of in-house journals such as Teaching News (now incorporating the Modular Course's own broadsheet Feedback), and the regular issue of updates to the definitive Staff Guide all play a part.
Systematic training, beyond a small contribution to the induction course for all new staff, has not yet been established.
Speed and flexibility of response
The data above do not give much direct information about timescale.
Fortnightly meetings of MMRC obviously contribute to quick response, as do the Polytechnic's new responsibilities under accreditation.
However, each proposal emerges here only after an important ‘prehistory’ of field committee, departmental board (and occasionally subject committee) consideration (see Figure 2.5: subject committees exist for some subjects which contribute to both modular and non-modular courses in the Polytechnic, for example sociology).
The development of ‘fast track’ procedures, such as those referred to here for assessment changes is indicative of mounting concern.
Centre and periphery
This chapter has necessarily concentrated on activity at the centre and, in doing so, demonstrated how much any local initiative depends eventually on Course-wide endorsement.
Speed of response, confidence that the centre will pick up local concerns, and that centralized constraints will be kept to a minimum are all important in maintaining good morale and a positive outlook by fields.
Admissions and Counselling
Admissions
General principles
The general aim of admissions work is to fill the Course with well motivated students who are likely to benefit from it.
Applicants' ability to benefit is assessed flexibly and credit is given for a variety of qualifications beyond conventional O/GCSE and A level successes.
This is particularly true in encouraging the admission of mature students, among whom local applicants are viewed especially sympathetically.
A good social ‘mix’ is sought among British students and offers are commonly made to applicants both from the EEC countries and other parts of the world.
Applicants with appropriate previous study and/or experience are given exemption from part of the Course and students wishing to transfer from another institution are welcomed, subject to numbers.
By offering a range of study modes and routes, including part-time associate status, individuals are encouraged to use the Course for a variety of personal purposes.
Staffing and organization
Ultimate responsibility for admissions lies with the Modular Course Co-ordinator, an academic working essentially full-time in a management role but retaining some involvement in teaching.
Admissions matters are the largest but by no means only aspect of his responsibilities.
He works with a team of senior tutors whose number has increased broadly in line with the growth of the Course and of its popularity.
There are currently eleven.
Each may handle up to 2,000 applications from the Polytechnics Central Admissions System (PCAS) in a year and is responsible for counselling a proportion of Stage I students.
The size of these responsibilities is recognized by 0.3 remission of teaching.
Tutors are normally put  forward by each department or school contributing to the Course and serve for two years.
The Co-ordinator and tutors meet collectively as the MAC twice termly and as a Stage I examinations committee termly.
The detailed administration of applications is handled by a full-time Modular Admissions Officer who draws on clerical support from within the Registry and who makes substantial use of the central computer services.
Staffing is temporarily expanded by the employment of students from the Course, most notably from late July to late September, but also at other periods of particular pressure during the year.
Targets and offers
The number of students to be recruited for each field in the next academic year (the target) is fixed during the first term of the current year.
The targets relate to first-year degree applications, very largely received through PCAS.
Some such applications for the BEd degree are received from the Central Register and Clearing House (CRCH) but, unusually, BEd candidates may alternatively apply to Oxford through PCAS.
These figures are agreed by consultation with departments and schools on the basis of FTEs known to be generated by the present students and projections for the following year.
In practice many targets remain unchanged for the following year and alterations are normally within the range of 10 per cent up or down.
There is a wide variation in targets, those for 1988 entry varying from 88 for applied education and 80 for English literature to 18 for German language and literature and 15 for physical sciences (single field).
Many of the fields most popular with applicants have targets of modest size.
The 1988 targets of 26 for business administration, 27 for law and 37 for psychology meant ratios of applications per place between September and mid-December 1987 of approximately 75: 1, 60: 1 and 55: 1 respectively.
Also the subject of discussion and refinement during the first term are the number of offers to be made for each field to reach the target (the offer ratio) and the A level grades normally required for entry.
Adjustments are considered in the light of experience of the immediately preceding cycle.
The ratios in use for 1988 entry range widely, reflecting knowledge of the likely number of applicants and the probable take up by those to whom offers are made.
Examples across the range are environmental biology (double field) and mathematics, 13: 1, English and history, 9: 1, and publishing and visual studies 4: 1.
High offer ratios often reflect the relative difficulty of meeting the targets for a small number of fields.
However, they are also set high for a number of fields which are very popular with applicants; used in conjunction with offer conditions which are also high, as a controlling device, they enable offers to be made to a more reasonable proportion of the total applicants (although for 1988 entry 70 per cent or more of all applicants were rejected for twelve very popular fields).
Normal conditional offers broadly reflect the supply of places and student demand for them.
Recent adjustments have usually been slightly upwards, necessitated by the wish to make offers to more applicants, as in the cases of law and psychology for which grades of BCC were required in 1987–88.
Most applications are for two single fields, the normal requirements for which are often different, in which case the conditions are averaged.
For example, an offer for law (BCC) and planning (DDD) would be set at CCD.
It follows that applicants wishing to combine two popular fields are set stiffer conditions (e.g. psychology with English BCC), while lower grades are asked of those choosing a popular and a less popular one (e.g. psychology with chemistry DDD).
Offers are always expressed as two or three grades rather than a total of points to retain a degree of control at the confirmation stage.
Passes, sometimes at specified grades, in individual subjects usually reflect the particular entry requirements of a field.
Senior tutors may make offers on conditions differing from the norm to take account of an applicant's special circumstances, but it is stressed that this should be an exceptional practice in case targets be overshot.
The A level grades normally required are published in the Prospectus, as are fields' specific entry requirements.
The introduction of new fields into the system is problematic as offer ratios and the grades normally required have to be set initially without the guidance of direct previous experience.
There is some intervention in the matter of field combinations.
A field which wishes to attempt to ensure that some offers are made in combination with one or more other fields sees to it at the beginning of the cycle that ‘reserved offers’ are set aside.
Such reserves are most commonly made by fields which, for various reasons such as the general practice of interviewing, tend to fill more slowly (e.g. applied education and visual studies), and with other fields which tend to fill quickly (e.g. psychology).
Reserved offers are subtracted from the maximum offers to be made and then added in by the Co-ordinator as used up.
Reserved offer combinations which prove irrelevant, for the opposing reasons that applications for them are abundant or virtually non-existent, are dispensed with.
Attempts have also been made in the past to limit rather than protect the numbers of offers for particular combinations (e.g. English literature and history of art) to maintain a good spread of students.
PCAS applications and the monitoring of offers
The flow of PCAS forms, which by mid-December 1987 amounted to over 16,00(), begins early in October.
The forms of a number of applicants who have chosen only one single field are temporarily delayed while their choice of a second single field is ascertained.
Forms are forwarded to senior tutors on the basis of their current ‘ranking’.
I able 4.1 shows that in use for 1988 entry.
The basic purpose of the ranking is to equalize the workload among tutors and to determine which one of them will make a decision on each   applicant.
Workloads of applications and counselling are reviewed in the current year and adjustments made to the ranking for the following year, by moving tutors up or down, or by moving responsibilities for individual fields.
Again, the introduction of new fields causes uncertainty.
Each tutor is responsible for a broadly related group of fields and automatically receives all applications for any double fields among them.
However, the number of applications received by him/her for the single fields depends on the ranking.
At the top R.B. receives all applications in which one of his four fields feature in the combination.
In the middle C.J.H. receives applications for law and politics other than in combinations with single fields handled by the five tutors above her.
At the bottom S.W. receives only applications for combinations among his four fields, all others having been directed to tutors above him.
Because of the importance of a co-ordinated and experienced approach to applications from overseas all such, whatever the fields, are handled by W.T whose workload of home applications is accordingly lower.
Decisions to offer or reject applicants are made by the senior tutors, in consultation with the relevant Field Chairs and/or Co-ordinator if necessary.
Pressure of applications means that the use of interviews is exceptional, for most fields, being limited, for example, to mature students offering non-standard qualifications.
However, all applicants under serious consideration for the fields of applied education, planning (double field) and visual studies are interviewed.
The decision on each applicant is entered on the computer record, communicated to PCAS, and the form filed.
The cumulative effect of decision-making is communicated to tutors and the Co-ordinator by the Admissions Officer through the weekly issue of a computer print out known as a P11.
This records, in column form, the following information for each field.
The numbers given in Table 4.2 are for an imaginary field in, say, January.
The crucial column is the derived total of offers made which can be compared with the maximum number to be made as a measure of the field's fullness.
Until late May this figure is calculated as follows: conditional insurance number+conditional firm number x 2 + unconditional insurance number+unconditional firm number × offer ratio; i.e. in the above case 35+ 180+2+45=262.
As the ‘derived offers’ figure rises during the cycle it is automatically flagged with CARE at 75 per cent of the maximum to be made, STOP at 85 per cent and FULL at 100 per cent.
Once a field reaches STOP all further proposed offers must be referred to the Co-ordinator but in practice it is difficult to avoid overshoots in the more popular fields in the spring.
For 1988 entry the method of calculating the derived figure has been changed as from the end of May when applicants have decided on their choices.
Based on the experience that very few who opt to hold offers as insurance actually enrol, their numbers have been omitted from the later calculations.
The derived total becomes the conditional firm number+the unconditional firm number × the offer ratio.
Given the fullness of most fields by the end of the first main phase of the PCAS cycle, the continuing applications procedure and late applications are relevant for only a minority of subjects, sometimes including new fields which suffer from uncertainty as their approval is pending.
The accurate hitting of targets in September owes much to the decisions made as to whether or not to confirm offers to those who have not quite met the conditions, a process strongly influenced by estimates (based on past experience) of the likely take up by those that have.
These decisions in late August are made solely by the Co-ordinator, in the interests of the Course as a whole.
Confirmations of offers which help ‘weaker’ fields are particularly important.
Regular print outs to monitor the situation change in format and name in late August from P11s to P13s.
The latter charts the position field by field, recording the numbers of applicants in various categories, most importantly those with unconditional offers who have firmly accepted (UF) and those with unconditional offers whose decision is as yet unknown (U-).
An estimated enrolment figure is calculated by the addition to the UF figure of the U- figure weighted according to previous experience.
Thus in one field the U- figure may be given a value of 90 per cent as take up is known to be very strong, while in another it is given a value of 25 per cent since only 1 in 4 of such applicants is thought likely to accept.
The validity of these take up assumptions is obviously affected by the passage of time from late August to late September and the firmness of the UF figures is known from experience to vary widely between fields; the estimated enrolment figures are therefore used only as an approximate guide to the Co-ordinator and senior tutors in deciding on the numbers of late offers to be made at special weekly meetings of the MAC in September.
Special classes of applicant
Like other institutions the Polytechnic has paid increased attention to the recruitment of overseas students in recent years.
For the Modular Course one response has been the centralization of liaison and decision-making in a single senior tutor.
A second response has been the setting of separate targets for each field, over and above those for home students.
When first set for 1987 entry, targets were put at 10 per cent of the home figure for most fields and a blanket 15: 1 offer ratio was adopted.
The figures for 1988 entry have been revised in the light of experience, especially for the small number of fields for which demand is strong, such as accounting & finance, computer studies and law.
On the one hand their targets have been increased by agreement with the relevant Heads of Departments/Schools, in one case to a figure as high as 66 per cent of the home target, and on the other hand some offer ratios have been varyingly revised down.
However it is recognized that decisions by overseas students to accept or reject offers are influenced by a more complex set of factors than for home students, and there remains uncertainty over the appropriate offer ratios to be applied.
Detailed work is likely to be done on this aspect in the future.
The preceding paragraph relates exclusively to applicants who are both liable to pay overseas fees and who are seeking places on a degree course.
Students possessing one but not both characteristics are also welcomed onto the Course.
A number of American students spend from one to three terms at the Polytechnic, sometimes as part of institutional exchange arrangements, sometimes on individual initiative.
The modular nature of the Course facilitates credit transfers to and from the American system.
Many EEC students are enrolled on the Course, usually either as one year exchange or private associate students; but a small number seek full degree programmes.
Non-degree applicants apply direct to the Polytechnic, as do students wishing to undertake degree programmes by part-time study.
The extreme flexibility of the Course allows part-time students to change later to a full-time mode, just as it allows full-timers to drop down to part-time study.
Decisions on part-time degree applicants are normally taken by senior tutors.
The Polytechnic Diploma in Advanced Study has proved an extremely valuable opportunity for certain types of applicant, frequently already possessing a first degree.
The individually tailored package of at least 7 modules is ideal for those seeking professional re-orientation or updating in fields such as publishing, computer studies and cartography.
Since the programmes are predominantly of advanced modules, admissions decisions are made by the relevant Field Chairs.
The Course is heavily used by part-time Associate students, mainly home students drawn from the local catchment area.
Their reasons for study are various and include simple personal interest and skill acquisition in connection with present or possible future employment.
Some in due course opt for a diploma programme.
Particularly notable are those who use the Course itself as an access device.
Prospective applicants, usually mature, are given the option of studying on the Course as associate students to demonstrate their potential as degree students.
Asked to take normally from 2 to 4 modules (depending on their existing qualifications) they apply through PCAS and are made offers conditional on their performance as associates.
All associate applicants apply direct to the Polytechnic on a simplified application form.
Subject to establishing their ability to benefit, in which a reference plays an important part, they are admitted by the decision of the Co-ordinator.
No limits are in force and such students simply join the others already on the modules of their choice.
Most part-time students pay fees of one-twelfth of the full rate for each modular credit, up to a maximum of 6 in a year.
For Oxfordshire residents who are registered unemployed or retired the fees are waived for part-time associate study, and from 1988 — 89 part-time degree students will pay only half (£24) the normal rate per credit.
It is conceivable that quotas may come into future use to encourage or limit the numbers of certain types of applicant.
There is current concern to increase the numbers of mature students at the Polytechnic and, although the record of the Modular Course is good in this respect, quotas may be introduced.
Also of current concern is the question of the social composition      of the Polytechnic's student body, in particular the ‘Sloane’ image it has acquired.
Such a dimension is not readily measured.
The most accessible data which might serve as a yardstick is that on applicants' type of educational establishment.
Analysis of this information is planned, an exercise which could lead to policies designed to limit offers to applicants from certain types of schools/colleges.
Any such policy of quotas or limits would add to the complexities of making and monitoring offers, given the multiplicity of fields and combinations (some with reserved places).
Admissions with exemption
There is a steady flow of applications both from students with educational experience at an appropriate level in the past and from current students either at other institutions or on non-modular courses at Oxford.
Although such applications are time-consuming, they make a significant contribution to the Course; in September 1987 60 students enrolled as direct entrants to Stage II.
Application is made direct to the Polytechnic and decisions on whether to offer a place and what exemptions are to be given are made by the relevant Field Chairs, using an interview if necessary.
Exemptions agreed can be anywhere between the extremes of 1 or 2 basic modules to all but 9 advanced ones, depending on the amount and level of previous study and the closeness of its relationship with the new course.
In effect the regulations are tailored to fit each individual.
Examples of these arrangements, as recorded on the M103 forms used, are given in (Figures 4.2 and 4.3).
In cases where the normal rules in Stage II do not apply the entries in Section 3 are made according to the illustrated schedule in Figure 4.2.
All cases are formally approved by all senior tutors sitting collectively as the MAC, thus ensuring fairness and consistency of practice.
Phillip is 34 and has several qualifications in civil engineering and related areas.
These provide the basis for exemptions from 5 basic modules shown in Section 4 — 3 in cartography and 1 each in planning and geology.
No more exemptions are appropriate as his choice of degree subjects indicates a change of direction into completely new fields.
Since his educational experience includes no work in anthropology or sociology his entry to Stage II is conditional on passing the 3 basic modules compulsory for each of those fields.
He will study these as a part-time student in 1988–89 and enter Stage II in September 1989.
Nikola (Figure 4.3) is a straightforward case of a transfer from the first year of one degree course direct into the second year of another.
The delay in starting the course until January was caused by her leaving an interval of a few months before approaching Oxford.
Because there is a good general correspondence between courses she has been exempted from the 3 history compulsory basic modules and from 2 politics ones.
It has not been possible to exempt her from a third politics module, 7605, but rather than delay her      Stage II entry it has been agreed that she may ‘trail’ it in that stage, i.e. she will include it along with her advanced modules as 1 of the 2 basic modules which may also be counted.
Counselling
General principles
The overall aim of counselling is to provide students with readily available information and advice before and throughout the Course.
Each student has substantial scope for individual decision-making, and it is vital that this is exercised on an informed basis, fully utilizing the qualities of choice and flexibility inherent in the Course.
Students are helped to maximize their performance, to cope with academic and other difficulties that may arise and to prepare for the future beyond the Course.
The counsellors
All enrolling students are assigned to a personal tutor, normally an academic teaching in one of their fields, who has responsibility for a total of about a dozen students in various years of the Course.
This relationship lasts for the duration of the Course, unless either party seeks a change.
The personal tutor offers academic advice on the student's choice of programmes as well as other more general advice as required.
The tutor is able to monitor each student's progress by the termly receipt of a copy of the latter's programme, and the tutor also receives copies of any letters sent to his/her students from the registry, for example after examinations committee meetings.
Senior tutors offer information and advice to applicants both on an individual basis and on collective occasions such as visit and interview days.
In order to maintain a link between admissions and progress in the early part of the Course, senior tutors (along with personal tutors) are responsible for counselling all students in Stage I of the Course.
They too receive termly records of their students, check on their progress, and make recommendations to the Stage I examinations committee when appropriate; letters subsequently issued from the registry are copied to them.
Field Chairs advise individual enquirers and talk to all those prospective entrants to their fields who attend a visit day.
Field Chairs (along with personal tutors) are responsible for counselling all students in Stage II, and are systematically involved in comparable ways to those detailed above for senior tutors.
The Field Chair's general administrative responsibility for the subject is reflected in liaison with student representatives from all years on the field committee and, in many cases, the production of a field guide offering advice on various matters.
The Modular Course Co-ordinator plays a major counselling role in relation to prospective applicants.
Many make individual contact by letter, telephone or in person, among them mature applicants, those with deficient or non-standard entry qualifications, and those seeking admission with exemption.
The Co-ordinator gives general explanatory talks on visit and interview days and is active in schools liaison work, responding to requests to attend events such as county higher education conferences and to visit individual schools and colleges.
The Co-ordinator acts as personal tutor to the large number of associate students.
He (and the Assistant Dean) also counsel many other students on the Course who consider that they have problems, and also respond to queries from other staff as to how best to advise individual students.
A range of specialist advice is available to Polytechnic students in general through Student Services.
In addition to counselling on particular personal problems, advice is available on aspects such as accommodation, study skills and careers.
The dissemination of information on employment is facilitated by a Careers liaison Group which provides a forum for student services staff and Modular Course tutors.
In 1987–88 a new module, Graduate Careers, was introduced, designed to offer a new way in which student consciousness of this important issue can be raised.
All staff in their counselling work can draw on a range of standard publications, most importantly the Staff Guide which offers detailed guidance on procedures and expected roles.
Choosing programmes and changing programmes
Choice and flexibility are two much emphasized and real features of the Modular Course.
Although all things are not possible all of the time students possess a considerable measure of initiative in programme design.
The system is designed to see that student decision-making is well informed.
Students are actively involved prior to enrolment.
In late summer those that have indicated their wish to accept an offer are asked to make an input into their Stage I programme.
While 6 or 7 modules are usually predetermined, as compulsory for their chosen field(s), they are invited to choose the remainder, up to a total of 12.
They are advised to choose the compulsory modules for an extra field, not only to encourage breadth of study but also to serve as a foundation for a possible change of field in the future.
That choice made, they are further asked to choose up to 12 individual modules.
On the basis of this return the computer produces a Stage I programme, incorporating these choices as far as practicable, and a term 1 timetable.
From enrolment onwards the student can seek to renegotiate the registered programme.
For a minor change in a single term Form M99 is used (Figure 4.4); for more fundamental changes, or the construction of a complete programme, an M100() (Figure 4.5).
Vital       common features of the two forms are the signatures required on them to establish their validity for implementation.
The signatures aim to ensure that all decisions are discussed with the relevant staff and their implications realized.
In addition to the student's signature any change must bear the  signature of the personal tutor plus, in Stage I, that of a senior tutor, or, in Stage II, those of (usually) two Field Chairs.
Choice of Stage II programmes is required of Stage I students by a common deadline date, week 7 of term 2 in what is normally their first year, so that student numbers on modules, and therefore resource requirements, for the following year can be forecast in advance.
Constant feedback of assessment results is one factor encouraging students to adjust their registered programmes — about 30 per cent of students make some change every term.
There are certain time limits on the making of changes.
Students may register for an additional module up to the end of week 1 of the relevant term (week 2 for new students in their first term), and must officially delete modules by week 6 (about to be brought forward to week 4) of the current term.
The effect of the pre-enrolment registration of Stage I and of the term 2 registration of Stage II modules is that all subsequent minor changes are to an agreed, full programme.
In this respect the ‘cafeteria’ metaphor for describing the Course is quite misleading.
Changing fields
Most students make use of the facility to change their minds about whether or not to take individual modules.
The Course also goes a long way to accommodate the not uncommon student experience of making a mistaken choice of degree subject.
The possibility that a student may wish to change a field of study is anticipated by the initial advice to take the modules compulsory for an extra field during Stage I. Many students do subsequently seek a permanent change to this alternative field.
The reasons may be negative, in that they find themselves less attracted to, or less successful in, an original choice than they had expected, or positive in that experience of the alternative (and to some an entirely novel) field develops changed interests.
Field changes are not allowed in the first term of Stage I but may be sought on the appropriate M101 form thereafter (Figure 4.6).
Again the need to secure the signatures of the personal tutor and all Field Chairs involved ensures that the implications are fully appreciated.
The critical decision is that of the Chair of the field which the student wishes to enter.
The Chair's decision will be based on an assessment of the student's academic suitability and on the estimated size of the Stage II group.
Positive decisions can be taken from January onwards but, especially for fields for which there is much pressure to enter, decisions are commonly held over until July when the student's whole Stage I record is known.
The imbalance of supply and demand in popular fields results in Chairs setting guideline conditions to be met — for example, in order to get a favourable decision the student must not merely pass the field's compulsory modules but should achieve grades of say, B, B, and B+.
Exceptionally, students are permitted to enter a new field and enter Stage II despite not having taken (or passed) one or two compulsory basic modules — such ‘trailed’ modules must be passed in Stage II.
The number of students successfully changing fields has risen in recent years and now stands at 30 per cent of the intake.
For some the change means spending a second year as a part-timer in Stage I passing outstanding compulsory modules.
The great majority of changes are from one single field to another, but there are rare cases of students who change both fields.
Field changes become increasingly difficult once Stage II is entered, but they are permitted in exceptional circumstances, for example, when the first school experience convinces an applied education student of the need to change to the education field.
Assessment and Examinations
Principles
The Modular Course, by its very nature, subjects students to the process of progressive assessment which is one of the three main principles referred to in Chapter 1.
Assessment is at least termly and, in practice, through the regular use of coursework assignments, takes place at more frequent intervals.
Progressive assessment relates directly to the principle of credit accumulation in that passes in individual modules are built up progressively towards a final award.
It also relates indirectly to notions of responsibility and choice in that the Course aims to allow students to make informed choices concerning their future programme of study based on feedback from past assessments.
Modules
The basic unit of credit is the module and in order to try to standardize its credit value across the many subjects and disciplines of the Modular Course it is defined in terms of notional student effort.
A basic module is 100 hours of student effort, an advanced module, intended to allow a greater depth of study, 120 hours.
Most modules are of one term's duration, the Stage I student taking 4 basic modules a term and a Stage II student taking, on average, just over 3 a term, usually 10 a year.
In defining modules in terms of student effort a basis is achieved for comparing arts and science modules with their differing class contact time.
Modules may also be double in size and/or taught over more than one term.
The single module is, therefore, a flexible unit of credit which can be adapted to the different academic demands of the variety of subject areas on the Course.
In 1988 the range of modules included two-term doubles, one-term doubles (used for school experience on the BEd), two-term singles, three-term singles (used in music performance modules) and three-term doubles (used in languages).
The Course abandoned the use of triple and quadruple modules at the time of the 1984 CNAA resubmission for reasons that had to do both with inflexibility for student programmes and with the risk of student failure.
Failure in the quadruple module, even by only 1 per cent, meant all four credits were lost.
The Course decided, therefore, that from 1984 only single and double credits would be allowed, the vast majority following the one-term single pattern (see Table 5.1).
Two-term double modules are used mostly in humanities and social sciences and give longer periods of study for students over broader subject areas.
However, over the period since 1986 there has been a noticeable move in these areas towards splitting double modules into two singles.
Examples include law, sociology, economics, politics and English literature.
There has also been a move in history away from two-term single modules, which were designed to give students a lower workload each week and more reflective time, to either standard one-term singles or two-term doubles.
At the time of the 1984 resubmission the MCC also discussed a move towards a semester system.
This was seen by some to have advantages by conforming to the system adopted by most other modular and course unit schemes in polytechnics and universities.
It would also give teachers more time on each module and reduce the number and frequency of examinations.
The MCC voted by a large majority to retain termly modules for reasons including greater flexibility in module size and length and more frequent feedback to students on their progress.
The termly pattern also allows all examination business to be conducted over the vacations prior to the start of the subsequent term and, therefore, students are able to assess their position and make informed choices and decisions on their future programme of study.
Final, moderated marks and grades are given to every student before they embark on their next series of modules.
The termly style of teaching is also used for non-modular courses and staffing of  both types of courses is easier across the Polytechnic when all courses use the same pattern.
Programmes
In September 1988 there are 38 single and 6 double fields on the Modular Course allowing 709 different combinations of subjects for certificate, DipHE, degree and honours degrees including BA, BSc and BEd.
There can, therefore, be said to be 5,672 courses available on the Modular Course.
Over 800 modules are available to students and it is probable that all 3,000 students registered have unique programmes of study.
A student programme will include compulsory modules as well as some of those recommended by fields.
It will also include modules chosen by the student from any other subject across the Course.
All modules are open to any student possessing the stated prerequisites although there are regulations for Stage II preventing students taking basic modules for which they have an equivalent qualification.
The Course has striven forcefully over the years of increased student demand and decreasing resources to preserve the notion of open access to modules in order to maintain the modular principles of real choice and flexibility.
Assessment
Assessment of students on the Modular Course takes place almost exclusively within modules.
There are no overall Course rules concerned with how modules are to be assessed and a wide variety of assessment methods and styles have been developed by fields and individual module leaders.
Module descriptions must specify how a module will be assessed in terms of the proportion of examination to coursework and can only be changed via the internal validation procedure described in Chapter 2.
Any variety of examination/coursework proportions are possible and the majority of modules are assessed either by 1()0 per cent examination or 100 per cent coursework or the following proportions of examination to coursework: 80/20, 75/25, 70/30, 60/40 or 50/50.
Many fields have a policy that groups of similar modules are assessed by the same weighting of examination to coursework.
In biology, for example, modules with practical classes are usually assessed 75/25, the coursework component consisting of laboratory reports.
In English literature all Stage II students are required to study linked core and options modules from at least one historical period.
All the core modules run in term 1 and are assessed 100 per cent by examination.
The examination requires an essay on one of the themes of the period concerned and a commentary on a piece of text.
The option modules carry a double credit and run over terms 2 and 3.
They cover three detailed studies and include an extensive essay  comprising 40 per cent of the assessment.
The examination, counting for the remaining 60 per cent, is based on questions relating texts to the overview given in the core: text in context.
The Course defines examinations as formal, invigilated, end of term assessments which can take the form of unseen or seen papers.
The Staff Guide recommends that the length of examination be dependent on the size of module and the examination/coursework proportion.
Most single modules have a two-hour examination unless the examination counts for 50 per cent or less of the overall assessment, in which case one hour is the recommended maximum.
All other forms of assessment are included in the term coursework.
This may include essays, seminar papers, seminar presentations, projects, case studies, laboratory work, performances or exhibitions.
Coursework may be carried out individually or in groups; the latter may involve peer assessment.
Also included in coursework are class tests which may take the form of mid-module timed assessments or practical tests in laboratory classes.
Comparison of workloads between modules and fields is difficult.
Module leaders are responsible for informing students in writing at the beginning of a module of the assessment structure, the number of pieces of coursework required, their weightings and the deadline for their submission.
Staff are also encouraged to specify the amount of time students should spend on different aspects of assessed and non-assessed work.
This helps staff focus on the demands they are placing on students within the specified 100 or 12() hours of student effort required in each module.
However, it is probably the students themselves who, through the experience of a wide variety of modules, can make the best comparison of demands, workloads and standards.
The Course, fields and module leaders make frequent use of student feedback for comparison.
The tight specification of aims and objectives, what is to be taught and how it is to be assessed in each 1 1 — week module can lead to novel, innovative and exciting teaching, learning and assessment methods.
Staff have also been able to learn from each other through exposure to different philosophies of teaching and assessment in other disciplines.
This takes place through direct contact with colleagues across the Course but also through their students, who are able to take modules from a variety of subject areas.
Visual studies, for instance, examine the majority of their modules by the assessment of a diary (25 per cent ) and an end of term exhibition of work (75 per cent ).
In education all Stage I modules are assessed 60 per cent coursework, 40 per cent seen examination.
The coursework consists of a group report on an educational issue requiring the students to use their organizational skills in completing the task.
Each report is self-assessed after seminars in which all reports are presented and finally moderated, up to a maximum of one grade only, by the tutor.
Learning skills are developed within both the physical and human pathways in the geography field.
Modules are assigned to levels, the higher  levels using proportionally more groupwork and projects and, correspondingly, placing less reliance on lectures.
The increased use of independent learning at higher levels within the pathway is reflected in the assessment pattern within the modules.
All students on a particular module are assessed in the same way.
No distinction is made on the grounds of students' field of study, mode of study or status.
The Course does not allow special questions to be set in an examination which are compulsory for some groups of students and not others.
However, students are expected to bring to a module and to use in an examination perspectives related to their particular fields of study.
A variety of coursework essays might be given, for example, and students encouraged to select topics in which their own field-specific knowledge would be useful.
Several modules are specifically designed to attract students from different areas of the Course.
In such cases staff from the different areas may themselves become involved in teaching sub-groups of their own students exercises relevant to their particular area or specialism.
Staff from hotel and catering management, for example, take practical classes of catering students on introductory computing modules and carry out exercises with spreadsheets and other commercial packages with applications to food costing or in use in hotel front office computer systems.
Other departments do likewise.
The computer studies staff provide the theory and background information to all students and set special exercises for students not catered for by their own department.
Other modules provide separate seminar classes and exercises relevant to the different requirements of fields.
Examples include physics and electronics problems in basic mathematics classes.
Most modules, however, are not designed to operate in this manner and rely on the students themselves using the module for different purposes.
Introduction to economics, for example, is compulsory for economics and accounting & finance students and leads directly to further studies in these subjects.
It is recommended for publishing students as it gives a useful background to advanced work.
It is also a free choice option to all other students on the Course fulfilling the role of, say, a relevant introduction to economics for those on business and management fields such as tourism or catering management, or a liberal studies option for humanities and science students.
On many modules staff will be aware that they are teaching students from different stages of the Course and with different aims and backgrounds.
Marks and grade
Each module credit carries an assessment weighting of 100 marks.
Marks and associated grades are published for students for each module taken.
Marks and grades are related as shown in Table 5.2.
A progressive average   of marks gained on modules passed is printed on a student's records each term.
Stage I and Stage II averages are printed separately as it is the Stage II average only which forms the basis for determining the class of honours.
S grades and modules for which exemption has been granted are not included in the average.
Similarly credits earned on exchange or by credit transfer (normally a maximum of four exchange credits are allowed) are counted towards the number of credits required for an award but the marks are not used for the purposes of classification.
Only marks gained on the Course are used in the calculation of honours.
Resits, as opposed to fail grades, may be awarded to students, allowing them to be reassessed without retaking the complete module before the next meeting of the examinations committee.
Resits may take the form of an examination, or further coursework or both, the decision usually lying with the module leader.
In general students in Stage I are given resits when they do not reach a pass grade.
In Stage II, however, resits may only be      given on compulsory modules, normally including projects and dissertations.
There is no requirement to give resits but staff are advised to treat Stage I students generously.
Nevertheless, absence from an examination or the non-completion of coursework often results in the award of a fail grade.
Students may take only one resit at the examination session immediately following the one in which the resit was awarded.
The rule allowing students only one resit per session has been developed for both academic and logistic reasons.
It is felt that allowing students more than one resit is too generous, unnecessary when they can often make up lost ground in subsequent terms, and allows the examinations office to timetable all resits in a single block at the beginning of examination week.
Resits may not be carried forward to another examination session, even if the particular module is repeated and another resit examination offered.
Students awarded more than one resit must choose, in consultation with their personal tutor, which one is more important to take.
They may, of course, choose instead to retake the module if it is offered again in a subsequent term.
A pass at resit for all modules carries a mark of 40 per cent only.
However, students taking resit examinations for exceptional reasons, such as an examination missed through illness, are usually allowed to count the full marks earned.
The Course has debated the use of a grades-only system of marking to replace marks as the basis of assessment.
This was rejected on grounds of ease of use and familiarity with the 100 per cent marking scale.
Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that disciplines maintain different marking conventions — differences that a grades-only system could reduce.
Well known examples include the rare use of the 80–100 per cent range in arts and social studies and the full use of very high and very low marks in science and mathematics.
Despite these traditions, analysis of student results does not indicate that it is more difficult to gain a first in arts than it is in science subjects.
However, students gaining good degrees in the arts tend to have a very flat profile of marks clustering around the 70–75 per cent range, whereas science students show more peaks and troughs with marks often ranging from 65 to 85 per cent.
A full statistical analysis of module results is produced each term (see Table 5.3).
For most modules the mean mark will normally be in the low to middle 50s and if there are more than 30 students the standard deviation will tend to be between 10 and 20.
Modules with very high or low means or wide or narrow standard deviations are referred to field committees for comment in the subsequent annual review cycle.
Examination week and Examination Committee
Formal invigilated examinations take place in week 11 and a full examinations board (the MEC) is held after the end of each term.
The Course is  committed to producing complete, moderated assessments at the end of each module in order that students have full information on their progress before commencing their next set of modules.
Under this system students are also able to graduate as soon as they have met the requirements of an award and do not have to wait until July each year.
The examination timetable itself is based on the slotting system and clashes are, therefore, minimized.
The Course uses 12 different paired timetable slots for most modules (see Appendix 1) and it is, in theory, possible to examine all modules over six working days from Saturday of week 10 through to Friday of week 11 with two examination sessions a day.
However, logistic problems and slotting practice have made this ideal difficult to achieve.
Due to the growth of the course, there is not now examination space in the Polytechnic to examine the total number of students registered for modules in each examination session.
Many fields now repeat their more popular modules in separate timetable slots and these students cannot then be examined within the normal week 11 period.
These developments have led to the encroachment of examinations into Thursday and Friday of week 10 but, nevertheless, over 7,600 examination places were administered by the examinations office over an eight-day period in July 1988.
Double marking raises problems for staff already under great pressure of examining three times a year and also working within the tight deadlines of examination week.
Some feel that there is no need to double mark all modules as a large number of examinations contribute to the student's final award.
The students are already assessed independently by a larger number of staff than under traditional degree systems.
Others feel that double marking is essential in order to be fair to students and external examiners.
The Staff Guide offers advice on this matter and recommends to staff when a module should need to be double marked.
For a module involving several different forms of assessment and/or having more than one member of staff teaching and assessing it, double marking is not normally required.
Double marking is appropriate for a module having a high proportion of assessment in one form (for example, 100 per cent examination, dissertations and projects) or if assessment is not objective or quantitative (such as a performance or presentation).
Sample double marking by a second internal examiner is normally sufficient for modules having more than 50 students.
As soon as scripts are marked by internal examiners they are sent to external examiners and the unmoderated results fed into the student management system.
The deadline for submission of mark sheets is the Tuesday of week 12.
This short deadline is achieved through the dedication of staff and the strategy of placing modules with large student numbers early in examination week.
This allows staff with the largest workload most time.
Student records are run off overnight and by Wednesday morning a full list of results by student in field order is available for collection by Field Chairs for Stage II students and by senior tutors for Stage I. 
This procedure of distributing results to approximately 55 staff across the Course enables the progress of the 3,000 students to be reviewed very quickly.
Recommendations on student progress are made to the central management team of the Dean, Assistant Dean and Co-ordinator by Field Chairs and senior tutors before noon on Thursday.
In practice no action is taken for those making satisfactory progress, but recommendations are made, in the form of a series of standard letters, where special action is required in respect of individual students.
The standard letters cover typical student problems such as failure to complete various stages of the Course and warnings.
On the more positive side, degree classifications for graduates are also recorded, based on the students' progressive average.
Recommendations returned by each Field Chair and senior tutor are then collated onto a master set of all student records by the management team.
On Friday of week 12 the examinations office extract all records of students with such recommendations, divides them into three groups (Stage 1, continuing Stage II and graduating students), and these records are printed as the examination booklet which is available for collection by staff centrally involved in examinations committee business by noon on Monday of week 13.
From the 3,000 students on the Course typically 300 records with recommendations will be presented to the examinations committee via this booklet.
In addition 20–50 records of graduating students will be listed at Christmas and Easter and approximately 70() in July.
A typical Christmas examination timetable is shown in Figure 5.1.
An Easter examination schedule would follow the same pattern while in July the examinations committees would meet on the Tuesday and Wednesday of week 13 rather than immediately prior to the beginning of the following term.
The Modular Course uses a two-tier examinations committee structure, the overall strategy being to provide both tiers with relevant information and recommendations in such a way that examiners can concentrate on the important issues relating to student progress.
This includes students who are moderated from pass to fail as well as those on the borderline between two classes of degree.
The first tier to meet is the subject examinations committees.
All subject committees meet on the same day.
The Chair of each committee is usually the Field Chair or Head of Department and membership consists of module leaders from the field and the external examiner.
The subject examinations committees are supplied with records of all their students and the examinations booklet.
Additional information supplied by the Modular Office includes details of medical certificates received over the term, field change requests from students and statistical summaries of module results.
The subject examinations committee discusses moderations by the external examiner which may, of course, affect recommendations published in the examination booklet.
Individual modules are discussed, as is   the overall progress of students and degree classifications.
Any decision to alter, delete or add a recommendation in the light of moderations is reported to the Assistant Dean, as Chair of the MEC by 5.00 pm.
This information is fed into the second tier of the process, the MEC.
The Assistant Dean, as Chair of this Committee, uses the information from each subject examinations committee to amend his version of the examination booklet and to obtain records for any additional students with recommendations.
The MF.C, meets the next day and comprises the chair of each subject examinations committee and three chief external examiners, chosen to serve for two years from among the external examiners, although all external examiners have the right to attend.
The chief external examiners, with the Assistant Dean, also make themselves available the previous day to discuss, with subject examinations committee chairs, students in difficult situations.
This avoids lengthy discussions in the large MEC.
The MEC discusses only those students for whom a changed recommendation has been made.
This includes moderations from the external examiners, late notification of medical problems, decisions on field changes which affect a student's progress or the recommendation of a higher class of degree than that indicated by a progressive average.
In the latter case judgements are always made on the student's overall profile of achievements and no attempt is made to alter marks on modules to produce artificially a higher average.
All recommendations in the examination booklet which are not discussed and not altered are taken as agreed.
The MEC usually meets for 1½–2 hrs and may discuss or note changes to around 50 student cases.
In the week following the July meeting of the examinations committees the Modular Office prints new student records or transcripts for graduates and sends them to home addresses.
At Christmas and Easter records are printed over the next three working days ready for collection by students on the first day of term along with the two to three hundred letters from the Assistant Dean.
External examiners
External examiners work very hard for the Modular Course and play an important part in the progressive assessment of students.
Each is responsible for a specific set of modules and associated field.
They meet field teams in the subject examinations committees three times a year to moderate examinations and to review the progress of students.
External examiners are entitled to attend and contribute to the MEC.
In addition the external examiners review and comment on examination papers, moderate coursework where this constitutes more than 50 per cent of the assessment of a module, review other coursework if necessary, viva students if required, recommend awards, write annual reports and advise staff on the delivery of the course.
Progression of students
The role of the MEC is to consider students' progress at the end of each term.
Formal checks and reviews of student records take place at frequent  intervals and, often, problems can be identified in time for remedial action and counselling.
Students progressing satisfactorily in the standard full-time mode of study, holding a local education authority grant, will graduate at the normal time.
Students studying part-time, and by definition receiving no grant, will graduate on completion of the programme of study planned and agreed between the student and his or her personal tutor.
Such students graduate at the point when they meet the regulations for the specific award, which is not necessarily July in any particular year.
On graduation all students receive a transcript detailing the award, each module passed and the grade earned.
This applies equally to certificates, diplomas, degrees or honours awards.
Students making poor progress exercise the examinations committees for a disproportionate amount of time in comparison with their number.
However, in accordance with the principles of credit accumulation, full-time students can make use of Course regulations to take additional modules, at their own expense in the part-time mode, to get back on track.
If successful, such students will be recommended for reinstatement of their grants and return to full-time study.
Students are also able to extend their course to take extra credits should they not meet degree requirements within the standard three or four years, again by returning part-time.
There is, of course, a minimum number of modules that must be passed each year for any student to be allowed to continue on the Course.
This minimum is 3.
Under Course regulations all students have two years to meet the Stage I requirements of passing 10 modules including all compulsories.
Full-time students meeting these requirements at the end of year one pass automatically into Stage II.
Part-time students will pass automatically into Stage II as soon as they meet the requirements, usually at the end of their second year.
Those passing 10 or more modules but who fail one which is compulsory may, at the discretion of the MEC, ‘trail’ the module into Stage II.
Such modules must be passed but count as any other basic module that can be taken in Stage II.
No student can, however, be in Stage I and Stage II at the same time and no student is allowed to proceed into Stage II unless he or she has fully satisfied Stage I requirements or with the express approval of the Examinations Committee.
Full-time students who pass only 3 to 9 modules in their first year have, by right, the option to return for a second year in Stage I to take additional modules to meet the requirements.
They are not required to repeat the full year.
Their grant would normally be suspended until they meet the requirements and are able to enter Stage II.
This point is often reached the following September.
However, students who fail by only 1 or 2 modules are often able to complete Stage I by Christmas or Easter.
If they are able to construct an approved programme of study over six terms from that date they are then eligible to enter Stage II in term 2 or 3 of their second year.
Their grants would be reinstated from that date and they will obviously   graduate at the end of the appropriate term.
Local education authorities query this pattern of study less often than they used to as principles of credit accumulation percolate through to town halls.
In Stage II the rules are operated in a similar way.
Full-time students are required to pass at least 7 modules in the first year of Stage II, their second  year, to satisfy the requirements of a full-time year of study.
Those passing fewer than 7 modules would have their grant suspended until they had passed the additional modules.
In such cases students are required to meet half the minimum requirements for their final award before the Polytechnic recommends reinstatement of grant.
Students meet this condition by passing 9 modules if they are still eligible for honours and 8 for non-honours.
The remaining three terms' grant can be reinstated at whichever point the student reaches the target resulting, again, in some students graduating at Christmas or Easter after their originally expected date of completion.
Full-time students not meeting the degree requirements at the end of three years may be eligible to return to take additional modules within the maximum period of five years from entry to Stage II.
However, in order to prevent students gaining an honours degree by ‘attrition’, a maximum number of modules are allowed to be taken, if a student extends Stage II beyond six terms, in order to retain honours eligibility.
This maximum is 21 for BSc and BA degrees and implies no more than 3 failures in a programme requiring 18 passes for honours.
The Modular Examinations Committee uses the ‘21 rule’ in considering the eligibility of students to continue for honours when they arrive at the end of the third year with less than 18 passes.
Those with 16 or 17 passes but meeting all other requirements, and who could not keep within the ‘21 rule’ if they were to take additional modules are awarded a degree without honours.
All other students not meeting the requirements for an award are informed whether or not they are eligible for honours should they choose to continue.
These procedures work pro rata for BEd students on a four-year degree.
The MEC assumes that all students will continue for honours, if eligible, unless informed otherwise by the student.
Where they have a choice students use Form M39 to make this and other decisions concerning their award (Figure 5.2).
Students may use this form to indicate whether they wish to be awarded a certificate or DipHE as a terminal or intermediate award and may even indicate the order in which their two fields are to be listed on their transcript and CNAA parchment.
All fields on the Modular Course are designated arts, sciences or neutral.
Students use Form M39 to indicate whether they wish to be awarded a BA or BSc should there be a choice because they are taking two neutral fields or a combination of arts and science fields.
Glasnost
The rapid feedback of marks and grades on a termly basis creates an open system of assessment easily understood by students.
They are able to monitor their progress closely and to relate effort and performance to accepted standards.
They are also encouraged to discuss disappointing  results with module leaders as part of the learning process and, with luck, use this information to improve performance on subsequent modules.
Any one student may take modules from a number of subject areas and will make comparisons of workloads and standards.
If necessary, complaints and criticisms can be made through field committees and the termly staff/student meeting to the MCC.
The full statistical analysis of module results (see Table 5.3) is a public document and is scrutinized by the MCC, the MEC, and FRG, for anomalies every year.
Quick and easy checks can be made on scripts or marks sheets if an administrative error is suspected by a student when his or her marks do not live up to expectations.
A formal appeal against marks can be investigated immediately results are published and, unless a module from the student's final term is involved, can be resolved before the student is considered for an award by the MEC.
Although they may never fully understand the practice and culture of the examinations committees, students on the Modular Course do not feel assessment, examinations and awards to be one of the great mysteries of life.
Review and Evaluation
Some key terms
Monitoring Maintaining course.
The relatively continuous use of standard system outputs to determine the necessity for corrective action.
Review Taking a fresh look.
Periodic and retrospective reconsideration of system performance ranging over standard outputs, purpose-specific reanalysis of past performance, and new evidence.
Evaluation Weighing the evidence.
Often used as a generic term for all activities yielding evidence relevant to course quality.
A preferable interpretation is: a search for evidence justifying a choice between qualitatively distinct alternatives.
The most common choice in higher education evaluation is between ‘change’ and ‘no change’.
If change is necessary, evaluation should also assist in discriminating among rival possibilities.
Validation Establishing adequacy.
The processes by which a new course, or proposal for course change, is demonstrated to be acceptable.
If validation is the establishment that course proposals are of acceptable quality, monitoring, review and evaluation are the processes which attempt to maintain and enhance the quality of courses once they are running.
Oxford Polytechnic's interpretation of modular structure is analogous to a federal state, with a great deal of diversity at the subject-based periphery, and a great deal of uniformity at the administration-based centre.
This arrangement offers unusual opportunities for the quality control of courses.
It also poses unique problems.
The opportunities mainly stem from central record-keeping which creates very large and readily accessible databases incorporating student programme choices, assessment data and resource distribution data.
The problems arise from the need to apply  quality control procedures to each of the various levels in the system, to interactions between levels and to inputs from central services and institutional context.
It should be said that many of the problems which make quality control of elements of the course above subject level a challenge for modular courses are not a challenge for conventional courses only because insufficient comparability exists to make quality control a serious possibility.
What is required ideally is an intelligent decision-making subsystem capable of sampling feedback and effecting or signalling the need for change at every level of the Modular Course which is capable of seriously affecting quality.
The subsystems shown in Table 6.1 actually exist.
Monitoring
All of the opportunities which exist for course monitoring in a monolithic, longitudinal course structure also exist at field level in the Modular Course.
Difficulties are created by the following features of the Modular Course:
acceptability of modules from other fields;
different subsets of students on each module;
two fields contributing to student progress (except for double field students);
interdisciplinary modules, e.g. interdisciplinary projects;
ease of student transfer between modules and fields;
variation in module status (e.g. compulsory or optional);
variation in teaching staff on modules; and
differential overlap between modules.
It is probably obvious that each of these difficulties has an educational flip side.
I-his is no accident, as otherwise there would be no reason to allow the difficulty to exist.
Additionally, other features of the Modular Course allow most of these problems to be solved.
For example, centralized record-keeping enables module enrolment and cohort details to be accurately maintained.
Existence of many modules which are similar in duration and assessment pattern enables ready comparison within and between fields.
Termly and yearly dissemination of assessment results, which include grade frequencies and measures of location and variability, fosters understanding of properties of mark distribution and a (sometimes competitive) interest in the behaviour of academic neighbours.
In a conventional course, the quality of provision is largely confounded with the success of a particular body of students.
Because the staff and student mix on modules varies so freely, quality judgements on the Modular Course have come to relate much more closely to statistical properties of modules in relation to other modules.
See Table 5.3 on pp. 80–1 for a summary of the assessment information which is made available to all Modular Course staff.
Many of the features of the Modular Course which present difficulties   for monitoring are design features of the Course.
In many cases structures have been established which allow monitoring to straddle the subject related fault lines which exist at field level.
For example, field committees which meet at least termly, and on which students are usually well represented, include ex officio module leaders of all modules acceptable to, not just taught by, a field.
A Stage I examinations meeting monitors the academic progress of all Stage I students, this committee largely consists of senior tutors who are responsible for groups of fields.
Their duties include admitting students to the Course and providing programme advice to stage I students.
Their remit thus permits, and indeed requires, monitoring of students across fields.
The MEC, on which all field committees are represented by their Chairs, exists to monitor term-by-term progress of all students.
It should be noted that the possibility of trans-field comparison, which certainly operates to  reduce subject insularity and promote transfer of good practice, also tends to impose a pressure towards uniformity.
Such uniformity is naturally favoured by the central administrative structures, as administration of a system is easier the more similar its component elements; but pressure towards uniformity constantly threatens to erode the distinctive educational requirements of individual fields.
The effects of this pressure have emerged in at least one Modular Course evaluation study (see Table 6.2, Modular Course Management Structures), and a determined attempt has been made to configure the management system in such a way that Field Chairs participate in all Course development decisions, so that special needs are recognized and special difficulties cannot be easily ignored.
It is probably obvious that comparability of unitization and assessment pattern, the frequency with which modules run (often termly for popular Stage I modules), common requirements for students seeking the same qualification (e.g. all honours students are normally required to complete a project), and central provision of course-wide performance data, all operate to facilitate monitoring and to reduce the burden it places upon staff.
Review
As with monitoring, possibilities for periodic review at field level do not differ greatly from those presented by a traditional course.
Difficulties are posed for the review process by Oxford Polytechnic's version of modularity, but most of these are not intrinsically produced by modular design: for example, the requirement that students study two subjects inevitably complicates review, but is not an essential feature of modular courses and frequently exists in non-modular systems.
It may nevertheless be helpful to identify some challenges to effective review:
orthogonality of modular to departmental/faculty structure;
size and diversity of the course;
multiplicity of levels and services;
use of externally derived authority to resist review;
development of burdensome bureaucracy;
penetration beyond documentation facade;
collusive neglect of inconvenient issues;
asymmetrical distribution of responsibility and power;
bias towards assessment of adequacy rather than optimality of provision; and
lack of interest and comparative experience among students.
Management of the Modular Course by field committees at subject level, and the MCC and its executive subcommittee, the MMRC is widely seen by staff as open, participative and democratic.
In a study of ‘need for institutional change’(see Table 6.2), these management structures of the  Modular Course were seen as less in need of change than any other major committees in the Polytechnic.
However, the Modular Course exists within the wider Polytechnic environment which has a traditional rigid, top-down, management chain of command.
Within the Modular Course identification of areas of concern has been followed by one-off evaluation studies, or incorporation into a review cycle.
Almost every major evaluation study has led to minor adjustment or substantial change.
This effectiveness-centred approach has not always been accepted outside the Modular Course.
For example, Heads of Department have resisted review by their own staff.
Central services have not always disseminated the results of their own reviews.
Deans and the directorate remained almost outside the review process until in March 1987, a decision of Academic Board determined that Heads of Department, Deans and members of the directorate should have the ‘opportunity for an annual staff development discussion’.
It remains true that only teaching staff are expected to be routinely exposed to both bottom-up evaluation and top-down development.
This is not to imply that areas outside review are inadequate: the ‘need for institutional change’ review, which was a Modular Course initiative, revealed no perceptions of urgent need for change in any area of Polytechnic management.
But the success of review in some areas can lead to a keener awareness of its absence in others; and however sophisticated the review process, it can affect only those dimensions of course management to which it is applied.
The medium-to long-term outlook is optimistic; the success of the Modular Course educationally, academically, and as a management system which has maintained high morale among staff during difficult times, makes it a hard example to ignore.
The most serious difficulties for ‘orthodox’ review are created by its inflexibility.
Its frequency is usually fixed, though problems may arise more or less often than review cycles.
Its format is usually standard, though much of the information collected and reported at a particular time may not be relevant to current development issues.
It is organizationally unidirectional, filtering fitfully up the management hierarchy, irrespective of the extent to which it is attuned to the current preoccupations of senior management.
These features can all too easily cause the annual review to be perceived as pointless drudgery, cause it to be prepared in as perfunctory a manner as possible and used as a device to obscure rather than reveal problems.
The Modular Course has begun to develop away from this stultifying orthodoxy in a number of ways:
Top-down steering.
Systems higher up the management tree identify issues upon which review is to focus.
This cuts into redundancy and guarantees relevance.
Process rather than outcome orientation.
Movement in this direction was first fostered by CNAA in guiding institutions towards autonomy.
It is now thoroughly internalized within the Modular Course review process.
In practice its major consequences are:(a) the assignment of responsibility for assisting a team preparing a review to individual members of committees higher up the tree; and (b) collapsing levels, e.g. by having MMRC members attend a department's review of its own fields, so that there is no need for a separate event and the process of review can be observed.
Close coupling of review and change.
Proposed change is whenever possible shown to arise from identified deficiencies.
Subsequent review, where possible, tracks the consequences of preceding change.
Minimal Form Annual Reviews.
Inevitably review plays a great part in the process of quality control by external agencies.
Their background knowledge of an institution is typically and corporately small, and sojourn within its walls brief.
Internal reviews may be much more schematic when institutional context and course structure and assumptions are shared, as occurs on modular courses.
On this model, annual reviews of fields continue to be produced, but are as spare as possible.
A set of mandatory elements are agreed by ASC much of the material consisting of collated and briefly interpreted statistics, available from the central administration.
Other elements are optional, or derive from the need to report on recent changes, or to justify changes which are proposed.
More searching and comprehensive reviews occur quinquennially.
Variable periodicity.
Review is related more closely than in the orthodox model, to the state of the system, particularly to whether change is proposed or rapid.
This variation upon standard review practice is not suitable for field reviews, but may be appropriate for example for research activities within a department.
Many other obstacles to review, such as collusive disregard of inconvenient problems, when management of an institution prefers not to recognize a problem, and a course team does not want to be seen either as having problems, or as inconveniencing management, must be addressed by incorporating external expertise into the review process at judicious points.
Part of Oxford Polytechnic's response to accreditation has been to increase the involvement of external reviewers in the quality control process.
This strategy is not the whole solution; for example, external reviewers may be reluctant to identify under-resourcing as a serious quality problem, when they know that additional resources are not available, just as juries would not convict for lamb-stealing in eighteenth-century England when they knew conviction would lead to death.
The only conclusion that can be drawn, regrettably, is that under-resourcing is bad for quality control as well as being bad for quality.
The main input to the review process is documentary evidence.
Obviously this is highly selective, and has an uncertain relationship to non-documentary reality; this might be called the problem of ‘rose-tinted documentation’.
The most obvious solution to the problem is student  representation on review panels, or access to students by a review panel.
The Modular Course employs both devices.
In practice, however, students are not enthused by participative bureaucracy so that volunteers are difficult to find and are probably not representative.
Few students study precisely the same pairs of subjects.
And in general, student opinion needs to be interpreted with caution.
Students are prone to explain undesirable features of a system in terms of its most salient characteristics.
It is extremely common to find Modular Course students attributing such problems as lack of time for background reading, or difficulty in combining final year commitments and applying for jobs, to the Modular Course.
This is not unreasonable, given that students have not as a rule experienced any other regime, but it can be misleading.
A healthy review system is clearly necessary and desirable.
The experience of the Modular Course suggests that what must be avoided is ‘Exocet thinking’: review systems do not stay healthy in fire-and-forget mode — they degenerate into a perfunctory ritual.
The review process is not sufficient in itself as a quality control mechanism.
Even when external advice and student opinion is freely available, review practice requires supplementation.
In part the justification for this claim has already been provided; but there is a further potent reason.
Review is biased towards what actually exists.
This is true at many levels for example, available documentation tends to become the subject of discussion.
Similarly, the adequacy of the course as it exists is usually the implicit object of review.
This neglects the fact that there may be more efficient and effective ways of achieving system objectives which remain unconsidered.
The conclusion must be that monitoring and review should proceed alongside other quality control exercises which are more pragmatic, which introduce a wider range of data, and which are capable of addressing the question of optimality as well as the question of adequacy.
Oxford Polytechnic's Modular Course has long accepted this conclusion.
A consequence of breaking new ground is that received wisdom becomes a poor guide.
Instead course development has been informed by a continuing series of evaluation studies which have sought to assist in establishing priorities and in discriminating between alternative developmental paths.
The style and method of this form of evaluation will now be described.
As problem-centred evaluation is rather less common than methods so far discussed, an attempt will be made to locate discussion within a theoretical framework, and to illustrate it with examples of studies which have actually been carried out.
The role and purpose of evaluation in higher education
In general, evaluation is the collection of evidence relevant to the distribution of rewards and penalties or the making of qualitative choices.
In principle the choices may be between people, objects, events, processes or structures.
Discussion in this chapter will confine itself to evaluation within an established institution.
In this context the object of evaluation is always a system which is usually composed of a structure and a process element.
The existence of the process element means that evaluation is usually oriented towards detection of need for change rather than towards choice between temporally co-existing alternatives.
While change without evaluation is dangerous evaluation without at least the possibility of change is futile.
The truth of the first of these dicta is easy to see: any change may make matters worse rather than better; only in a system which is as bad as it can possibly be, can change be introduced which must be beneficial.
The second dictum may be harder to accept.
Would we not evaluate a one-off course, now completed and never to be run again?
We might, but the course itself is not the only variable which can be changed.
Should the institution support similar courses in the future?
Should clients purchase similar courses or seek alternatives?
Should staff change their approach to the design or presentation of courses?
If no question of change arises then evaluation is deprived of point and becomes instead a public relations exercise service to induce feelings-of-being-consulted in the course consumers, or feelings-of-being-valuable in the course presenters.
Both of these goals can be achieved more effectively without an evaluation charade.
Evaluation and change are logically and methodologically linked in a fundamental way.
Just as ‘facts’ in science only become ‘evidence’when they are ranged for or against some theory, so course data become evaluation data only in the light of contemplated change.
There are a number of reasons why this relationship between change and evaluation deserves emphasis:
External validation in PSHE has familiarized institutions with an evaluation process in which their own role has been largely confined to passively displaying data.
For administrative reasons data generation (institutions) and evaluation decisions (CNAA, etc.) have been artificially stratified.
There is a serious danger that post-accreditation validation procedures will simply internalize this same separation within institutions.
The bulky results of separating data generation from evaluation decisions have for years been a burden to teaching staff, a drain on institutional resources and a crime against the arboreal environment.
Less obviously, the separation is a methodological disaster which left to themselves, institutions had no reason to develop, and now have no reason to perpetuate.
In science it is impossible to proceed by listing all relevant facts, then locating an appropriate theory, because the list of facts is usually unmanageably long.
Indeed, there is no way of defining ‘relevant’, and thus maintaining the list within finite bounds until a theory is specified.
Instead scientists proceed iteratively, arriving at an alternative theory set on the basis of a restricted fact base, and then    generating facts which are maximally likely to discriminate between theories.
This is the model which is most appropriate for evaluation activities within higher education institutions.
A decision that change is necessary is rationally justified when there is an unacceptable difference between a current state and a desired state.
It follows that evaluation evidence depends for its existence and interpretation upon a specification of desired states.
Emphasis upon the link between evaluation and change draws attention to the often neglected fact that evaluation evidence cannot determine system goals nor can it indicate whether system goals are being optimally achieved unless the goals are clearly specified.
In British higher education the precision with which goals are stated is usually inversely related to their institutional generality; thus course and grassroots teaching teams usually have clearly articulated goals; faculty goals are often pious but hopelessly vague; institutional goals are rarely stated and are never sufficiently defined to be operationalizable.
This contrasts strongly with higher education in the USA where institutional ‘mission statements’ are regarded as selling points, and key senior administrative staff may be hired to further achievement of specific goals; and fired for demonstrably not doing so.
Ball and Halwachi (1987) have recently argued that performance indicators cannot be effectively employed within British higher education because of the absence of clearly specified institutional goals.
Within Oxford Polytechnic, one consequence of Modular Course evaluation activities has been to sharpen thinking about course and institutional goals.
Evaluation of the Modular Course
The shortcomings of monitoring and review procedures are one reason why other forms of evaluation operating alongside them are desirable.
New possibilities permitted by modular structure are a second.
For almost the first decade of its existence, the resources of the Modular Course were entirely absorbed by coping with the first-order problems of survival and growth.
By the early years of the 1980s, there was sufficient breathing space for the second-order problem of self-improvement to be addressed.
The earliest steps in this direction were taken by David Watson, the first permanently appointed Dean of the Course.
One of Watson's main contributions to the development of the Modular Course has been to build in evaluation mechanisms at many levels, to foster positive attitudes to evaluation by using evaluation data in course development and not to shrink from its application to his own roles and activities.
The early studies were wide angle studies of impressions of the Course, based around questionnaires and structured interviews.
There was some nervousness that perhaps modular courses did not deliver a satisfactory educational experience from the viewpoint of the student.
As confidence   grew, partly as a result of the student impression studies, so techniques were employed which permitted cross-institutional comparison, which enabled graduate employer samples to participate in evaluation, and which allowed the appraisal of course realities such as grading patterns and resources to be set alongside the studies of course perceptions.
An impression of the nature and pace of these changes is given in Table 6.2.
These developmental changes in perspective and technique were deliberate.
The administrators-of the Modular Course, particularly Watson, realized early that sustainable course quality depends crucially upon relevant feedback and that course development strategies based upon relevant evidence receive readier acceptance from staff than strategies deriving their credibility from the perceived wisdom of management.
Accordingly a series of steps were taken which aimed to establish an academic culture within which evaluation activities were widespread and respected; evaluation skills and expertise were readily available; and  evaluation gradually became an expected element in the body of knowledge and skills possessed by professional higher education practitioners.
These steps were:
top-down initiation of evaluation studies;
dissemination of knowledge and skills by:
1.
establishment of an ongoing course-wide series of termly seminars dedicated to evaluation activities (Table 6.3 gives a list of evaluation issues covered by these seminars during the last seven years);
2.
establishment of a termly newsletter, Feedback, dedicated to evaluation issues and news, and distributed free to all staff; and
3.
appointment of a Modular Course Evaluation Officer (EO).
The first Evaluation Officer was appointed in September 1982.
The EO was a 0.3 FTE two-year post, the appointment being made from among staff on the Course.
It was financed by a levy across all departments contributing to the Modular Course.
The duties of the EO were described in the 1983 Modular Course Staff Guide as follows:
The appointment of the Modular Evaluation Officer ensures that the broader aspects of the Course are (also) reviewed.
The Evaluation Officer provides leadership and coordination for the evaluation of the Course and is the editor of Feedback.
The main job of the EO was to foster an evaluation culture.
But like the risen Christ, he had also to prepare the faithful for his disappearance from the world.
It was hoped that after very few incumbencies evaluation activities would be sufficiently deep-rooted to be self-sustaining, and the post could be abolished.
A second task for the EO was to develop a model of Modular Course evaluation, which related possible objects of evaluation to available techniques and the results of evaluation exercises to the mechanisms of course administration and development.
This overall model of Modular Course evaluation has to be definable within the framework of measurement theory and good evaluation practice; but it must also take account of the needs and distinctive features of the Modular Course.
The main constraints from measurement theory are summarized below.
Constraints imposed by good evaluation practice are rather more severe: an elegant statement of them was produced by the US Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation (1981).
This statement is reproduced as Table 6.4.
All Modular Course evaluation studies have attempted to operate within the Joint Committee standards.
There have been distinct evolutionary changes in the focus, style and methodology of evaluation.
Table 6.2 summarizes major evaluation projects over the five years from 1982–87.
Changes in style are in part due to the emphases of different Evaluation Officers.
The post was designated as a rotational one to ensure periodic changes in theoretical outlook.
Changes in focus have resulted partly from incorporation of some evaluation         functions such as course perception sampling into routine mechanisms of modular and field management.
Another reason for changing focus has been a shift away from evaluation data as adequacy assurance towards evaluation data as a source of developmental information.
This has naturally been reflected in changes in methodology, particularly in a movement away from course impression analysis towards student performance analysis.
Methods of evaluation
Evaluation methods are a subset of measurement procedures.
Measurement is the systematic mapping of a variable on to a set of descriptors.
These descriptors may be words such as‘good’, ‘bad’, etc., or numbers.
All measurement procedures are associated with bias (responsivity to variables other than that being measured) and reactivity (interference with the value being measured by the measurement procedure).
In educational measurement bias and reactivity are hard to estimate but rarely negligible.
The pragmatic implication of this is that whenever possible more than one technique should be employed.
There is a relevant distinction here between data that are independent of the evaluator's own judgements and data that are not.
Evaluation data are obviously never value free; but even subjective data such as student evaluation of courses can be recorded objectively, e.g. self-recorded written responses can be analysed by computer or an independent third party; or  subjectively, e.g. a request for comment from the class can be written up by the course tutor three weeks later.
Subjective methods
Illuminative observation
Perhaps the best known subjective evaluation procedure is the ‘illuminative observation’ technique (Parlett and Hamilton, 1972).
Essentially this consists of a series of extended interviews, together with a scrutiny of documentation and similar deliverables, resulting in a report in which conclusions are illustrated by quotations from interviews, or descriptions of what has been observed.
The utility of such reports obviously depends upon the calibre and acumen of the observer, the typicality of the materials studied and the sample interviewed.
The technique could more illuminatingly be called ‘impressionistic observation’.
It is obviously very prone to bias and reactivity effects; it can easily be subverted by stacking samples; and the credibility of the report depends completely upon the creditability of the practitioner.
As a consequence it can be difficult to make unpopular recommendations stick: either the credentials of the investigator or the weight of the data can easily be challenged by those with a will to do so.
A case in point is a study commissioned by Oxford Polytechnic's Modular Course.
The focus of the study was the final year honours project module and the investigator was a consultant of considerable experience, from outside the Polytechnic.
In the evaluation report some wise and many sensible things were said.
However the effect of the report was determined entirely by reaction to the ‘fear and apprehension…subculture’(Feedback, 1984, p.3–4) which the investigator claimed to have detected.
Though the final report was dutifully disseminated by the course administration, it was greeted with great scepticism by staff and rapidly forgotten.
The reason is that the vivid phrase which the investigator had chosen to ‘flag’ what he considered to be an issue of concern was seen as exaggerated and alarmist by academics.
They were only too used to the need for chivvying insouciant students into beginning some work for the module as deadlines approached.
Once a single strand of the report was challenged, its whole credibility was unravelled: the ‘subculture of fear’ conclusion was not proven, but only illustrated by the report; there were no independent data to show that a general problem existed.
It was thus easy, and probably correct, to write the alleged anxiety problem off as a failure of the investigator's sense of proportion.
But if in this, why not elsewhere.
Once credibility is challenged it is difficult to justify selectively.
In other contexts, the illuminative observation approach has been used by Oxford Polytechnic with more success.
A central service called the Educational Methods Unit may be called upon by academic teams to provide independent evaluations of courses or to advise upon specified problems.
Illuminative observation is often used and generally gives good results.
The salient differences between these two applications are that in  the second case the consultant, though independent of the course team, is known to be supportive and familiar with the background and context of the course under examination; the quality of the consultant's judgement is also known to most of the course team.
It seems a sensible conclusion that the strengths of this technique lie not in the method itself, but in the experience and skill of the person who employs it, and the extent to which these are known and respected by the beneficiaries of the study.
Unpalatable conclusions are likely to require more substantial evidence than this technique can provide.
Interviews
Interviewing is the subjective technique which is most widely used in higher education.
Early evaluation efforts on the Modular Course used interviews to investigate student impressions of the Course (1982; see Table 6.2).
Interviewing is vulnerable to reactivity and bias effects as well as sampling difficulties.
Whenever the validity of interviewing as a decision support technique can be appraised, it is very poor.
Unfortunately it is also associated with an ‘illusion of competence’ effect which leads those employing interviews to value the quality of their decisions out of all proportion to their probable true worth.
It would be rash to conclude that interviews have no role to play in evaluation.
They do provide a rapidly accessed source of data and they can be a fruitful source of issues and hypotheses which should be explored in other ways.
The face-to-face interaction feature of interviews which makes them such a potent source of interviewer bias also makes them an effective device for communicating concern, interest and priorities to interviewees.
The other side of the reactivity coin is that change induced in respondents by evaluation may be of positive benefit.
However, interviews should rarely be used as a sole basis for evaluation decisions of any great significance.
When interviewing is employed, the use of multiple independent interviewers is a sensible precaution.
Validity is also likely to be enhanced if the interview is recorded and transcribed before analysis.
Techniques such as content analysis can make the analysis less impressionistic.
The use of ‘structured’ interviews, with the same items being used for all interviewees, allows the generality of responses to be evaluated.
(But see the next section for implications of this.)
Objective methods
Questionnaires and rating scales
In terms of form and content a questionnaire is a written version of a completely structured interview.
The main differences are in terms of the social processes accompanying inquiry.
As a result, the investigator is not exposed to a number of major sources of bias, such as physical appearance and accent.
Reactivity is also likely to be reduced as respondents can easily remain anonymous-impossible with interviews except when external consultants operate in very large institutions — and there is less social  pressure to produce responses which are agreeable to the investigator.
The disadvantages are that informants are less likely to respond, or to respond seriously, and that the investigator is not able to follow up unanticipated developments.
These disadvantages can usually be coped with providing they are recognized.
Low response rate may actually be genuinely signalling a lack of concern about the evaluated issue, a fact which can be masked by interviews in which respondents feel constrained to provide appropriate positive and negative responses when asked.
In some contexts it may be appropriate to educate a population on the importance of response, to administer the questionnaire to a ‘captive group’ or to offer modest incentives.
Loss of opportunity to respond to the unexpected can be dealt with only by striving to eliminate it.
In practice this means constructing questionnaires on the basis of preliminary interviews, administering pilot versions of the questionnaire under conditions which allow respondents to identify shortcomings and so on.
If precautions are taken to minimize the weaknesses of questionnaires they can be quick and convenient to administer, easy to analyse and have higher validity than more time consuming alternatives such as interviews.
This is not to say that validity should be taken for granted: McBean and Lennon (1985) have shown that though for large groups, response rates of 50 per cent are adequate; with groups of less than 30, an 80 per cent response rate is required to give course ratings which are within 12 per cent of the mean for the population as a whole.
Some studies have raised even more fundamental questions about the validity of course evaluation questionnaires.
Moses (1986), among others, has found that student ratings of lecturer performance were entirely unrelated to self-ratings by the same staff.
Miron (1988) has reported, for an admittedly small university sample (93 classes), that self-ratings of course presentation by newly recruited staff are significantly closer to student ratings than are the ratings of older staff.
Miron's tentative conclusion is that older staff may become less concerned about teaching as they develop other priorities; but it is equally possible that students are responding more similarly, and more favourably, to lecturers who are more like themselves.
Less controversially, it soon becomes apparent to personnel involved in course and presenter evaluation that student respondents rarely assign very poor ratings, or make extremely negative comments, even when other indicators such as colleague judgement suggest that a course has been presented particularly poorly.
This does not impugn the value of student ratings as a basis for relative judgements; but it does suggest that caution should be exercised in making absolute interpretations.
It would be disastrous to morale to introduce a high-powered multiple indicator methodology in order to isolate which staff really are poor performers and which above average.
There is a sense in which students cannot be completely wrong.
If a lecturer is not producing an experience  which students regard as satisfactory, even when academic assessments are fine, some aspects of that lecturer's performance deserve attention.
The pragmatic route through this hazardous thicket of management and evaluation issues which has evolved on the Modular Course has four elements:
Staff are expected to obtain student evaluations of a module whenever it runs.
These evaluations may remain confidential and are expected to guide self-development.
Students are given opportunities at field and Modular Course level to raise difficulties not addressed at the level of modules.
All fields must identify field representatives, elected by students from among themselves, who are expected to bring problems within a field to the attention of the Course administration.
The three criteria for promotion within the institution require the demonstration of excellence in teaching, research and administration.
Advisory literature indicates that summaries and illustrations of student evaluation are an important source of evidence with regard to the first criterion.
The Polytechnic staff development policy requires that each lecturer shall have an annual opportunity for a development interview with a Head of Department.
Problems and progress in the evolution of teaching skills are an important agenda item for such meetings.
Thus an attempt is made to harness data from course perception questionnaires to assist in the self-development of staff.
This use assumes the importance of student impressions, but not their absolute truth; it offers opportunity and incentives for self-development, but no direct penalties; and it provides a mechanism for students to blow the whistle if problems move outside the range of acceptability.
The difficulties associated with questionnaires are usually also applicable to rating scales.
Rating scales are a subset of questionnaires which invite informants to select a number corresponding to the extent of their response, or to select one of a series of descriptions, usually corresponding to an ordinal scale with a neutral midpoint, to which the investigator can easily assign numbers.
A common example of such a series of descriptions is:
Very unsatisfactory;
Unsatisfactory;
Indifferent;
Satisfactory; and
Very satisfactory.
The main advantages of rating scale data are that responses are usually simple and uniform and easy to code, transform, statistically analyse and describe.
These advantages are such that ratings are to be preferred when they can be used without distorting the intentions of the investigation.
Some examples which illustrate successful and unsuccessful uses of these methods on Modular Course evaluation projects may be helpful.
In the Modular Course Employability Survey (1984; see Table 6.
Y) the problem of respondent motivation was addressed by:
choosing the evaluation project on the basis of a group discussion with randomly selected students who were asked to indicate, and justify, what they would like to see evaluated;
employing personnel who had graduated from the course within one year to carry out interviews; and
using the same graduate assistants to administer the rating scales to student respondents personally.
Aspects of the Course to be evaluated by employers and students for contribution to employability were selected on the basis of preliminary interviews with staff and students, but supplemented and refined after a pilot questionnaire administered to a small random sample of students (n=20) had been analysed.
When the main scale had been constructed, student and employer samples were asked to select one from a range of scaled descriptive phrases indicating the employability value of different features of the course.
Because the data were easily convertible into numerical form, it was a straightforward exercise to seek correlations and larger than chance differences in perception between first and third year students, and student and employer samples.
The completion rate for rating scales in this study was 100 per cent for the student samples.
This is exceptional: response rates of 10 per cent and under are not unusual if postal responses are required.
But response rate is to some extent within control: a Modular Course survey of staff satisfaction with modification of a scheme for mapping courses on to timetable hours, yielded an (internal) postal return rate of 35 per cent.
The high return rate here was probably due to brevity of the survey form — only six sample responses were required — and again, to choice of issue.
Unlikely as it may sound, the timetabling scheme aroused strong feelings among staff.
Secondary analysis of data
Qualitative data
Multidisciplinary modular courses require considerable and continuous effort to be devoted to harmonizing and integrating the practices of academic components.
This inevitably produces copious documentation.
Documentation must be as explicit as possible because staff and circumstance seem to take a rabbinical delight in producing difficult cases.
This documentation is itself a rich source of material for evaluation.
It does not suffer from the bias factors operating when documentation is generated, not to regulate practice but to inform reviewers.
One example of how course documentation can be invaluable for evaluation was a documentation analysis carried out on Modular Course Staff Guides and course  resubmission documents in 1984 (see Table 6.2, Modular Course management structures).
The analysis was commissioned by the Dean, in response to concern from members of the MCC that the management and course development role of the Committee was seriously diminishing.
Field Chairs are not paid for their additional responsibilities, nor do they automatically receive any remission of teaching (though most fields have developed arrangements which partially compensate for the considerable demands of the post).
The most important incentives for Field Chairs are thus the opportunity to exercise some control over the educational context within which their subject is taught; the challenge of defending the interests of their discipline; the opportunity to develop expert knowledge of the course structure and regulations through participation in debate; and the advantage of administrative experience for career development.
The central administration of the Modular Course has always been keenly aware of the burden falling on Field Chairs.
It also tended to regard the Modular Course Committee (MCC) as excessively large and difficult to manage.
Consequently, and for thoroughly laudable reasons, there had been a systematic drift of responsibility from MC (‘to its executive subcommittee, MMRC, between 1979 and 1984.
The number of meetings of MCC, for example, had diminished by half, its published responsibilities had altered, and even its relationship to MMRC in the Staff Guide management system flowchart had altered.
None of these changes were deliberate, but none had been approved by MCC.
A comparative analysis of course documents made the extent and systematic nature of the changes quite evident.
The unintended consequences of the diminished role of the MCC were to erode the very functions of Field Chairs which made the post worthwhile, to make them less informed by removing opportunity for MCC debate and replacing it with reports of MMRC, debates, and to reduce the contribution that fields could make to Modular Course development.
The main conclusions of the 1984 study of management structures were debated and accepted.
The result was a reaffirmation of the status of MCC as a senior committee with respect to MMRC; a recognition that changes in Course regulations must receive approval by MCC before appearing in course documents; and restoration of the original frequency of MCC meetings.
Recognition of the importance of Field Chair contributions to course evolution was achieved by designating one MCC meeting per term as a development meeting.
This innovation provided, for the first time, an explicit mechanism for preparing for the future, in addition to responding to present issues.
It also provided a point in the system at which results of evaluation activity could receive appropriate consideration.
Quantitative data
By their very nature modular courses generate large amounts of quantified or easily quantifiable data.
The primary purpose of these data is to record  assessment decisions, to support decision-making by management, or to enable monitoring of quality to occur.
Much of these data, however, are also suitable for hypothesis-testing — indeed the data are of higher quality than those generally used in research studies because it is not usually practicable to ask academics from a wide range of areas to adopt uniform teaching, assessment and reporting practices solely to permit educational research to occur.
One simple example illustrates this point.
The example concerns sex bias, which is of particular interest to the Modular Course at Oxford Polytechnic because of the high proportion of female applicants which it attracts.
In fact the relationship between gender, application rate and admission probability has itself been the subject of an evaluation study (1985; see Table 6.2).
In 1984 Clare Bradley of Sheffield University published a persuasive paper (Bradley 1984) arguing that sex bias affected the assessment of student projects.
This bias was detectable when assessors were relatively unfamiliar with the students being assessed, and were aware of gender information through use of first names.
The bias effect operates to increase the spread of marks for males relative to females.
Its consequence is that grades of both high-performing women and low-performing men are depressed compared with their opposite gender peers.
Dr Bradley was invited to present her findings to a Modular Course seminar; they were publicized in a widely disseminated evaluation newsletter.
As a result, it was decided to:
shift immediately to an initials only format on the title page and assessment blank for student projects;
analyse project marks retrospectively to seek evidence of gender bias; and
reanalyse marks after the change in name style to seek any consequent change in mark distributions.
All of these procedures could be carried out using data which was generated as a matter of course.
No gender differences were in fact detected, but the assessment system was rendered less liable to such biases staff were sensitized to their existence and nature and the course was able to give itself a clean bill of health without any special data collection effort being required.
On a much more ambitious scale, Lindsay and Paton-Saltzberg (1987; see Table 6.2) analysed data from 36,984 student assessments in arts, social studies, science and applied areas, to show that the frequency of high grades decreases and that of lower grades incl-eases as the number of students enrolled on a module increases.
I-his effect occurred over all four academic areas in spite of consistent and striking assessment differences between them.
Apart from providing important evidence about the relationship between resources and performance in higher education, the demonstration of stable between-area assessment patterns has enabled the Modular Course to successively nudge each area into modifications of  assessment practice which gradually bring them closer together.
Similarly, the finding that class size affects performance, and  ancillary evidence on the rate of increase in the frequency of large classes, has directly led to the provision of additional purpose-built accommodation for large classes.
A continuing programme to investigate, evaluate, and disseminate best practice information on teaching large classes has also been developed.
A similar study of modular Stage I assessment data (1986; see Table 6.2) showed that there was  imbalanced modular provision and enrolment over the academic year.
Most strikingly, fully 57 per cent of module failures occurred in term 3, even though only 38 per cent of assessments occurred in that term.
This finding was relatable to Stage I regulations which attempted to encourage students to broaden their educational horizons by requiring them to take 12 modules, but to pass only 10.
The practical effects of this regulation were to cause many students to register for 12 modules but participate seriously in only 10; to cause them to stack their choices, so that modules which they needed or intended to pass were taken in terms 1 and 2, and to bias apparent but not real demand towards term 3.
Once these effects were demonstrated, resistance, which had been spirited, to changing the Stage I regulations to a ‘take and pass 10’ formulation, tended to dwindle away; few were motivated to defend the educational benefits of phantom registration.
Secondary analysis of data has been an extremely useful source of evaluation evidence.
It is cheap and easy to collect and use.
It is necessarily of the same quality as the data used to support managerial control, because it is that data, used for a different purpose; and because the data is of a type already in currency, its use needs no special explanation or defence.
Presentation of evaluation results
Presentation of the results of evaluation has proved over and over again, in Oxford Polytechnic's experience, to be one of the most critical variables in determining whether appropriate change is produced.
In general, evaluation research tends to have low credibility among academics.
Consequently the results of each study have to be sold on the basis of the appropriateness of the methodology employed to the problem addressed.
One implication of this is that evaluation procedures are usually better developed in-house than bought in from other institutions.
An example was the use of the Lancaster Approaches to Studying Inventory which was administered to two large samples of Modular Course students in 1983 and 1984 (see Table 6.2).
The theoretical assumptions of the Lancaster Inventory are considerable, and did not appear to be widely shared by staff on the Modular Course.
As a consequence it was impossible to draw any practical conclusions from the results of this evaluation exercise.
A second implication of the low background credibility of evaluation in higher education is that the methodology of each study must be fully  described.
The Modular Course has gone about this by asking members of the evaluation team to present an account of each major evaluation study and its results to MMRC and MCC, the two senior Course management committees.
This is usually accompanied either by a full written report, or by a brief report with a fuller version lodged with each departmental office, if the complete report is lengthy.
An account of the study and its main findings is separately written for a termly evaluation newsletter which is distributed to all staff.
A further presentation of the study will usually be incorporated into a termly seminar series which focuses on evaluation and course development issues.
All interested staff are thus exposed to the result of each major study, and get a chance to query or challenge on points which they do not immediately accept.
This strategy is not without its dangers.
Because methodology is fully exposed, genuine defects may be revealed, or more frustratingly, discussion sidetracked away from implications.
The experience of the Modular Course is that the risks are worthwhile, because when the evaluation study does carry conviction, consequential course changes are accepted as a natural path for course development to take given the known facts, rather than the latest wheeze of course management.
The use of statistics has proved to be a particularly thorny presentation issue.
Statistical techniques are often essential for fully understanding a complex data set.
In presenting results, however, statistical concepts and terminology can easily alienate or distract.
For example, in the Modular Course evaluation study of ‘workload variation’ in coursework between modules and fields (January 1986; see Table6.2) rating scale responses were subjected to factor analysis.
The results were of considerable interest: ‘surface workload’ was clearly distinguishable from a ‘cognitive stretching’factor related to quantity of new concepts, and assessment load for example.
‘Underload’, associated with a poorer idea of progress, uncertainty about how to deploy time, panic at exams, etc., was perceived almost as negatively as overload.
A general lack of understanding of factor analysis, however, weakened the impact of the study and its effect was minimal.
Similarly, in the need for institutional change study it was clear that need for change has two distinct components: the deficiency level of some institutional subsystem, and its importance to the system as a whole.
To give an example: a leak in the roof of one's garden shed would probably be seen as less in need of urgent action than exactly the same defect in the roof of one's home or car.
This distinction was handled by asking respondents to rate each of two hundred features of the Modular Course and its institutional context, both for importance and for need for change.
Data were then presented as rank-ordered products of the mean ratings.
It was predictable that the onerousness of the rating task held down response rate somewhat (33 per cent of a target population of 200), but less predictably, great suspicion was aroused by the use of multiplication as a way of combining the two components of need for change.
Again, potentially  valuable data were largely wasted because of a mistake in presentation.
The moral is that the need to clearly communicate findings must always take precedence over considerations of technical adequacy.
Conclusions
In an environment as diverse and complex as Oxford Polytechnic's Modular Course, monitoring and review processes are a crucial element in maintaining course quality.
Both processes constantly tend to become perfunctory, routinized and burdensome.
This tendency has to be limited by a number of mechanisms which the course has evolved.
Monitoring and review alone are not sufficient to ensure optimal course quality.
Problem centred evaluation studies using a range of methods are a necessary supplement.
The focus and methodology of such studies tend to shift as the course matures.
Successful evaluation techniques often become absorbed into the routine processes of course management.
Secondary analysis of routinely generated data has proved particularly valuable on the Modular Courses.
The manner in which the results of evaluation studies are presented has a considerable effect on their impact.
Systems
The record-keeping and office procedures implications of the Modular Course when it started in 1973 with an intake of 75 students were modest but have since grown with the Course.
There is now the need to keep track of thousands of individual student module programmes, termly timetables and assessments and of applications for places across hundreds of field combinations.
This growth would have been strangled by the paperwork involved if new computerized systems had not been introduced and continuously developed.
The foresight of the Course founders, in using a computer for a range of student records applications from the very first intake, set the pace for subsequent information technology developments.
That original range was surprisingly wide and included personalized student records,’ timetables and class lists.
However, by 1979 the computerized course support was staggering under the load.
Data files included punched cards (as data files, not just for input); the computer was dated, overloaded and likely to be replaced by one from a different manufacturer; there was little real-time access to data; management information was scarce; there was little in the way of computerized records for Polytechnic students on non-modular courses, and that little was unintegrated with the modular system; there were no benefits or access to data for offices besides the registry; the file structures could no longer cope with the then size of the course (1,100 students); and the data structures were arcane (for example, over-zealous use of bit-packing).
Documentation, training and the involvement of junior office staff in the running of such a system were understandably difficult to achieve.
To remedy these defects a new student management system was designed and introduced in stages from 1980–81.
The design, and all subsequent developments, were guided by the following principles:
to meet the needs of a very wide range of offices and individuals, including: students; teaching staff, admissions tutors; registry, modular office; departmental and faculty offices; library; student services; finance office; examinations; course management; directorate.
to meet the management information needs of the institution as a whole through the seamless integration of modular and non-modular course records, together with the needs of external bodies;
to be flexible in design and use in order to meet new demands for information from within and without the Polytechnic, to adapt to growth and structural change (within both courses and the institution), and to answer effectively any ad hoc enquiry (this flexibility is also required by the method of project management described below);
to develop from a small beginning in manageable steps rather than to spend a long period identifying ‘all’ institutional needs and all required data items followed by software development of a ‘complete’system on an unmanageable scale;
to be designed around the established needs of the Course and its working practices, academic structure and regulations, in order to assist all staff and students to fulfil their roles (on occasion, analysis for proposed developments showed up imperfections in existing procedures and sharpened user perceptions of their roles and working practices);
to put  control in the hands of the users.
This means not only office staff, who bear the brunt of system usage, but teaching staff, who must retain specific decision-making roles, and, last but not least, the students themselves, who must have faith in the system's accuracy and ability to provide records and timetables of appropriate quality at specific times and on demand;
to be designed, developed and maintained to the highest achievable standards of data processing, subject only to resource constraints; and
not to attempt to solve problems that do not exist or whose solution rests with human reorganization.
The student management system in practice
Each student is held responsible for registering his or her own module programme.
To do this effectively requires, besides the array of guides and handbooks and the various counsellors (tutors, field chairs, etc.), well designed forms (for both input and output) and efficient data processing.
Having registered his/her programme a student may request, at almost any point, a freshly printed record (normally available within 24 hours).
In addition, an updated record is provided for each student following the termly examination committees, showing the student's results.
An updated timetable is provided at the start of each term, showing the days, hours and rooms for each registered module.
Both records and timetables will contain messages and instructions specific to individuals if invalid module registrations have been attempted.
These documents — student records and timetables — often have to carry a great deal of information including complex messages and progress summaries.
Their design, together with the content and format of the printed data, has received particular attention.
The ergonomics of form design and use have had a pivotal role in the provision of accurate, presentable and punctual information to all users.
The attention to detail has covered paper sizes, colours and qualities, forms handling machinery, punch holes for ringlock binders, minimal use of codes, preprinted marginal notes, and devices to aid visual impact such as tints, contrasts colour, corner flashes, etc.
On leaving the Course, any student who has passed at least one module will receive a glossy covered printed transcript showing all the modules passed, their credit value, the grades achieved, the fields (if any) studied and the award (if any) made.
Transcripts are also available on demand to support any student in job hunting while still on the Course.
Teaching staff have a number of needs for information, and for assistance with recording assessment data and keeping other course records.
In the termly cycle, a module leader will receive a succession of reports, all with variable selections and sort orders, at predetermined points and on demand.
These reports include:
Module timetable confirming the agreed times and groups and detailing which rooms have been booked.
Class lists showing all students registered on the module, their set (or timetabled group), their other modules, fields, personal tutor.
Star charts showing the untimetabled hours during the week for each student on a module; used for arranging tutorials, alternative class meetings, etc.
Coursework record sheets containing the names of all students on a module, with printed columns for the entry of coursework assessments.
Marksheets on which the final assessment for each student on the module is entered, for subsequent data processing by the registry.
In addition, personal tutors receive copies of their tutees' records and timetables, and admissions tutors receive regular and on demand analyses of applications data to support their decision making and to assist the meeting of both individual field and overall Course intake targets.
The Registry and its organization is central to the effective management of information.
Registry staff must be able to process information without introducing delays, whether it is receiving data from a student and subsequently providing an updated record for that student or taking a request from a lecturer for a list and providing it at short notice or processing an offer made by an admissions tutor so that the candidate hears from PCAS as quickly as possible.
The Registry is the heart of the student management system, maintaining the flow of data to and from a continuously changing spectrum of offices, individuals, committees, management, external bodies, etc.
Here the central student record is maintained; here, the majority of the data that will eventually be used by all those groups and individuals is recorded.
As well as student-related data, details on courses, on modules and their many separate sets of timetables, on tutors, LEAs and employers, on examinations and assessments, on medical certificates received, and on accommodation, are all gathered and processed.
Besides owning the data, Registry staff have considerable control over the operation of the student management system.
They can choose whether to enter data themselves or to use the data preparation service in the computer centre; to enter data using real-time screen-based record editors or to use a monolithic batch mode multifile update system.
They can choose when, and how often, to run updates.
Standard programs in the various user menus cover the functional needs of most areas of work of the office.
For example:
Many programs assist office staff in keeping relatively minor but essential files up-to-date covering data on personal tutors, courses, modules, fields, A level subjects, etc.
Other programs provide updating facilities for many main files, either for groups of records or for individual records selectively presented on screens.
Applications are processed, predominantly on the basis of tape exchange with PCAS, and visits and interviews are arranged, using subsystems to record the details, to print checklists for the many interviewers involved, and to print personalized labels for visitor/ interviewee information packs.
Examination results and awards made are recorded, and annual reports prepared for local education authorities.
Enrolment forms are preprinted for most students before enrolment each autumn.
These, together with marksheets and LEA reports, are produced on a turnround basis; specific computer files are created at the point of printing the forms so that subsequent data entry can be reduced to a minimum of keystrokes.
From all of the data in the system, many different lists, reports, labels and statistics are prepared, on both a routine and an ad hoc basis.
There are a great number of output programs available through a conveniently small number of menus.
Each program contains a dialogue offering a wide range of choices affecting, for example, selection with respect to most data items, sort orders, print items per line, print lines per record, paging, number of copies, type of stationery, destination printer, real-time or batch execution, blackness of print image, redirection of printout to a computer file, creation of reference files to allow the same set of selected records to be used by another program, saving and naming selections for future use, local and remote printing, etc.
In addition, there are housekeeping options in the master menu such as inspection of the print queue and the batch queue; inspection of the files relating to the automatic recovery procedure; options to delete unwanted print files from past program runs (different programs retain different numbers of past print files); tasks associated with the data recovery system, access security and terminal log files; and control of the disc copies of PCAS tapes received.
For experienced student management system users there is a rich opportunity to develop personal computing.
A third generation relational database management system, INFO, can be used for interactive file enquiries, and for writing, storing and running programs.
All enquiries, whether ad hoc or by standard program, can be made of the accumulated file of past students just as easily as of the file of current students.
Registry users of the student management system have come to feel secure in their data processing and take the assistance of information technology very much for granted.
Their confidence in the system derives from consultation over proposed innovations, from training and from the degree of control over their work which has been consciously left with them.
If the system has succeeded it is by enhancing that control.
Timetabling of students into their module classes is a task involving students, teachers and office staff.
It requires considerable software development and computing resources.
This requirement is greater if the processing involved includes, for example, deciding who will teach a class, when the class will be taught, and to what room the class will be assigned.
The requirement will be smaller if the only decision is assigning each  student to a set (variously called a group, laboratory class, split, etc.) for which the timetabled hours and rooms are already determined, and for which the teacher will be (or be provided by) the module leader.
The latter approach is the one used on the Modular Course.
In practice the sequence of events is as follows:
The Registry prepares and circulates predicted numbers of students on next year's modules.
A representative from each subject (module grouping) collates room requirements (overhead projectors, etc.) and set requirements (number of sets and preferred times, although there are rules guiding alternative set times to ensure even use of the teaching week, and balanced numbers in all sets of all modules).
The Registry, through liaison with all such representatives, records these details together with notes on which departmentally owned rooms (e.g. laboratories) have already been booked and which poolable (centrally owned) rooms would be preferred.
Rooms are then booked as part of a coordinated exercise covering both modular and non-modular courses.
The Registry enters the booking data into the timetabling system.
Before each term the Registry runs a timetable creation process.
This takes the module programme of each student in turn, finds the best set for each module, and assigns the student to those sets.
‘Best set’ means several things, especially: absence of clashing hours, and balanced numbers in the sets for each module.
The final stage is to print the students' timetables.
This process simply involves, for each student, assembling the details of hours, days and rooms for each assigned set for each module, and printing it on a grid on a timetable form.
This approach has been popular with teaching staff who are not known for being slow to complain about their administrative load.
The distinctive feature of the method lies in what it does not do.
Lecturers retain control over their destiny.
Each module leader determines which other colleagues if any, will be involved in teaching the module, determines the times of alternative sets (within certain rules), and which departmental rooms (laboratories, etc.) will be used (by agreement with the Head of Department).
Staff can also indicate preferences for any pooled rooms required (e.g. lecture and seminar rooms).
The pitfalls of allowing a computer to attempt these tasks stem in part from their inherent variability.
For example, a lecturer may have irregular commitments outside the Course, or the institution, which are not easy to record in a computer (unless complicated data structures are used) and are even harder to gather accurate information about in the first place.
There are several further ways in which the database of module timetable data can be exploited.
For example, disabled students can be  timetabled into ground floor rooms.
It is also possible, though this is relatively undeveloped at present, to answer questions such as ‘If this laboratory class is moved from Wednesday to Thursday, will the module have more balanced sets?’
There are many problems associated with the use of teaching accommodation that are probably not unique to Oxford Polytechnic: for example, bunching of teaching in the middle of the week with under-use of rooms on Monday and Friday, and rooms not being used at the booked times.
Analysis of the cause of these problems indicates that solutions lie in changes in human organization and so no attempts have been made yet to automate the allocation of rooms to classes.
It is notable, in this context, that the Modular Course timetabling system (including both the ‘slotting’ framework, and the timetabling process described above) favours no part of the week.
Departmental and faculty offices make limited use of the student management system.
Some have requested and been given VDU access with tailored menus, subject to appropriate training and security arrangements being made.
Occasional department-specific data items have been incorporated.
The Modular Course involves all departments, and most students take modules in more than one department.
Departments, being responsible for the subjects in which modules are taught, have information needs at the subject committee level.
This involves, for example, production of detailed print outs for scrutiny at examinations time, including student records with progress messages, module performance analysis and medical certificate summaries.
Fields, in which modules are grouped to form the basis of student programmes, need information to support the work of the Field Chairs.
This will involve various lists and statistics for field reviews and field administration, for example, project registration, field trip arrangements, and module evaluation.
Departments and faculties receive staffing calculated from the student FTEs they teach.
This is a fluid quantity that can slip from a department's grasp as students switch module registrations.
The resourcing exercise involves the preparation and circulation of baseline figures at the census date early in each session, showing student FTEs by subject.
These are calculated from the number of students registered for each module together with its size, single or double, rather than from class hours.
The Library relies on data from the student management system to create borrower file records within its automated circulation control system.
Reports are subsequently produced for library staff to use in updating its student borrower records, for example, to enable a close watch to be kept on student withdrawals to encourage the return of books.
Other name and course order lists are found useful in general library administration such as processing external readership applications for Polytechnic students.
The student identity number used by the Registry is the basis of the Library's borrower number.
Bar coded identity numbers are printed by the registry and stuck on that part of the preprinted enrolment form which is  detached at enrolment each year.
This part is then laminated, with a photograph to become a multi-purpose ID card (for use in the library; presented when collecting LEA award cheques; deposited against software loans at computer centre reception; displayed on candidates' desks during examinations, used to activate overnight access locks, etc.).
Predictions of student numbers on modules in future terms and years assist the Polytechnic bookshop in matching bookstocks to future demands.
Student Services is a user and a provider of lodgings and accommodation data about all students, including those on the Modular Course, and has access to the student management system for this purpose.
The system also allows membership records of former students who have joined the Oxford Polytechnic Association to be maintained.
Staff also use a software model, which embodies hall admissions policy and elements of wardens' experience, to draft lists of candidates to whom hall places should be offered.
Examinations on the Modular course are termly and involve the registry the examinations office and the various examinations committees in considerable use of student management system data processing.
The marksheet for each module is returned to the examinations office by the module's internal examiner.
It is checked and passed to the Registry who, together with the data preparation service, enter and verify approximately 10,000 individual marks and grades within a 36-hour period each term.
For registry staff to monitor effectively the accuracy and completeness of this operation requires detailed record-keeping and effortless access to data.
All of this the system provides.
The next stage is the printing of records for students in each of the various groupings for which formal scrutiny is carried out.
The sheer quantity of calculation and printing required for this stretches the modest administrative processor to its limit for two days.
The MEC itself receives papers only for those students whose progress requires attention.
However, for any other students whose case is raised a VDU immediately provides the Committee with the necessary details.
The credibility of the system has brought streamlining and economy to this task.
There has been no need to supplement the Chair's VDU with printers or copiers or to provide expensive video projection or multiple large-screen monitors to allow the whole Committee to view such data.
A detailed analysis of the performance of all students taking each module each term is prepared for the MEC.
It is also distributed for appropriate action to subject committees.
Every individual student-module result since 1981 (currently over 120,000) is held in the student management system database in a form suitable for analysis for Course review and evaluation purposes.
This has been exploited by the Course Evaluation Officer and other researchers and has informed debate on proposed structural changes to the Course.
The Finance office is able to initiate tuition fee invoicing and to maintain a ledger of fees due and received, using its own student management system  menus.
Interactive access to individual student records is also provided, together with a subset of output programs tailored to the work of the office.
Course management, including the Dean, Assistant Dean and Course Co-ordinator, all have VDU access to those student management system options that can assist their work.
Individual student data are available to assist counselling.
Registry staff prepare the FTE analyses that are an essential part of staffing decisions, dialogue with NAB/PCFC, and admissions management.
The system also provides the Course Evaluation Officer with assistance in sampling and in questionnaire distribution.
The directorate has a continual need for processed information to support decision making, to develop policy and advice for Academic Board and Governors, and to satisfy the appetite of external bodies such as DF.S, CNAA, NAB/PCFC, etc. for numerical information From time to time there is also the need for high quality information to support particular initiatives, such as the (successful) application for accreditation.
Some progress has been made in recording data on the Polytechnic's rooms and buildings, and on the teaching space requirements of individual courses.
These data are analysed, along with the database on course details and students' course and module registrations, using the methodology in DES Design Note 44.
Ad hoc reports are an essential part of any system that aspires not merely to process data routinely but to permit management information to be creamed off the top.
In public sector higher education there is also a steady stream of requirements for special lists or figures.
Such needs would be met in a new system written today through the use of fourth generation languages and their user-friendly report generators.
But established systems written in third generation COBOL, such as the student management system, must rely on other means.
For student management system users there is a choice.
Any office, individual or organization can request special reports from the Registry who will either prepare the reports themselves or will seek the assistance of computer centre staff.
Experienced users have direct access to the main data files using the INFO relational database management system query language.
Its ability to link files of data to each other exploits the indexed-sequential structure of the system very effectively.
For more challenging reports, or ones requiring specialist programming skills, unusual access rights, etc. requests are channelled through a registry representative to the information systems team (currently four F l E) in the computer centre.
This team carries out information-related analysis and programming for all teaching and non-teaching departments.
Ease of preparation of ad hoc reports is exploited by the Registry in the explicit interests of the students themselves.
A protocol agreed with the students' union provides the structure for permitting disclosure of student-based data.
This allows the Registry to meet requests from student societies for lists and labels in support of membership activities, and to respond to requests from project students for assistance with questionnaire  sampling and distribution.
Help has been given to outside organizations such as professional bodies wishing to publicize associate membership to undergraduates, to foreign consulates with scholarships on offer to nationals, etc.
Coping with change.
The transition of the Course to a new structure and regulations in 1985–86 presented a unique data processing challenge.
The size of the advanced module credit was increased by 20 per cent.
Various conditions for achieving each of the course's many awards were changed.
There were over 1,000 ‘transition’ students, who had achieved advanced credits under the old course, who would have to be assimilated to the new course.
Different formulae for this assimilation were proposed and compared using a computer model of the old and new regulations.
Particular formulae were chosen and a number of transition ‘tariffs’ were computed, covering thousands of eventualities.
These were then incorporated into the relevant parts of the student management system software.
Each transition student received, on each term's record, a personalized statement of exactly how the tariffs applied to his/her individual circumstances (see Figure 1.2).
The progress summary of the student's record could then be compared directly with that statement.
This was particularly important to tutors involved in academic counselling, and to the many staff involved in scrutiny of student programmes after each term's examinations.
In spite of its complexity, transition passed by leaving few students, teachers or office staff feeling perplexed.
This might have been due to the support from the student management system.
Or perhaps the transition adventure was just a ripple on the ocean of complexity in which all newcomers to the Course must quickly learn to sink or swim.
Or both.
There are some registry subsystems that contain key features of expert systems.
For example, the COMPOSE model automatically assembles knowledge about an applicant's first-year module preferences, his or her chosen field, ‘safety net’ field and entry qualifications, about which modules are available, their prerequisites and their timetable slots.
The rules about compulsory modules and alternative routes for fields individually and in combination, together with rules embodying the experience of admissions tutors, specific teaching constraints, and academically desirable aspects of module programmes in some subjects, are then applied to the assembled data.
The best possible module programme, out of hundreds of thousands of possible programmes, is then determined and recorded for that applicant.
At the same time, the model ensures that runs of the same module in different terms receive balanced numbers of students.
Security issues, covering data protection, data integrity, security of access, physical security, recovery arrangements, and printout control, have been given close attention.
Periodic security audits involving key users and computer centre staff are carried out, and documentation and training implications are considered.
Besides passwords (for both users and menus) a range of devices are incorporated including disk configuration, directory    -based access control, physical keys, data switch programming, VDU access control and other ‘proprietary’ features.
Log files are kept for every log-in session for every student management system user.
These record all screen and keyboard activity and provide the basis both for programme debugging in the event of the unexpected happening, and for determining whether a user needs advice or further training.
Further journal files are kept of all file activity permitting recovery of virtually all data in the event of catastrophic disc failures or other disasters of comparable severity, using ‘roll-forward’ protocols.
These files are also designed to assist software audit in the event of system failures.
The Computer Centre has carried out the programming work for all of the systems described above.
The project management and systems design has been carried out using staff based within the Modular Course.
These staff have also reported to the Chief Administrative Officer, which has ensured seamless integration between modular and non-modular data processing.
The designers have liaised very closely with computer centre staff.
‘The liaison has been with all of the functional groups within the computer centre: analysis and programming, operations, user services, communications and technical support and data preparation.
The success of the student management system, and the many subsystems that now pervade the management and administration of the Polytechnic, is built on these close links.
Although the links may evolve (for example, to mesh in better with the systems developments and other preparations for corporate status) the close cooperation between users and computer-centre staff continues.
‘The value of this relationship shows itself when users need support in emergencies, or when large new projects have to be undertaken.
The closeness of consumer and producer has made it easier for the Registry to expect and to receive from the Computer Centre a computing service of commercial standards, especially in terms of quality and meeting deadlines.
As in all sections of higher education, resources are severely constrained and the question of’ balance between support for teaching and non-teaching departments has to be answered.
In practice, the balance has varied, in response to changing teaching and non-teaching needs.
Management must be ever watchful to ensure that the balance is never unreasonable.
Scarce programming resources can be swamped by maintenance work on existing systems, to the detriment of work on new developments.
One effective solution to this has been to identify elements of maintenance that can safely be put into the hands of the users.
For example, patrolling disk space, access supervision, tape file control, and session log file administration can all be packaged for safe and effective control by suitably trained administrative users.
They will relish the additional control this gives them over their work.
‘Virtuoso’ users can play a particularly useful role in minimizing calls on support programmers, and in training other users.
The communications infrastructure required by the student management system is also provided by the computer centre: all of the terminals and printers are in the same cross-campus network as the many hundreds of terminals for academic use (in open access terminal rooms, staff offices, laboratories, etc.).
A very high (and carefully monitored) level of security is none the less maintained.
Being part of this broader user community brings benefits.
Use of electronic mail is escalating and supplements the work of the student management system, for example, as a means of' transmission of reports, and of requests for information.
Other general purpose applications software, initially provided to meet teaching needs (such as word processing, and spreadsheets) is also available to student management system terminal owners.
Any terminal in the network may also be used to book one of' the Polytechnic cars, or squash courts.
The future for the student management system is clear.
The present pattern of' add-on development will continue.
Projects currently under consideration include cohort analysis, BTEC' course administration, text storage and retrieval, improved responsiveness of the timetabling system to student needs, allocation of resources (e.g. rooms to departments, or staff' to courses), and examination timetabling.
In addition, links will be developed to the new financial systems that have been installed for the independent Polytechnic.
This will permit, for example, the integration of' student-based data into course-costing exercises.
Routine maintenance and the extension of the system to more departmental users will continue to take up time, as will dealing with the planned 40 per cent growth in the FTEs on the Modular Course between 1986 — 87 and 1991 — 92.
Summary
People, as the users of the student management system, are the most important part of it.
Control of their own work or study must be enhanced, rather than diminished, by the system.
The need for student-related systems to cope with growth and change is met by designs incorporating flexibility in data structures, office procedures, software options, and software support.
The system mirrors the life of the Modular Course and of the institution.
It enables change without dictating it.
Technical note
Student management system programs are written mainly in COBOL77 and run on a Prime 2755 minicomputer rated at 1.6 mips with 4 Mb of main memory and 1.1 Gigabytes of disk storage.
The 2755 is a traditional uniprocessor running the proprietary Primos operating system.
Up to 48 concurrent asynchronous lines are available for printers and VDUs.
These lines pass through the main Polytechnic data switch, a Micom 2000, which  permits approximately 100 end-users to connect to the 2755 (up to 48 simultaneously).
All VDU lines run at 9600 baud.
The VDUs themselves are all of Televideo 925 standard or higher; many now have the higher TVI 955 functionality.
‘The end-users include approximately 60 office automation workstations based on Nibus AT clones with access to the Prime, e.g. for archiving purposes and for email.
The SMS programs are controlled by macros written in PLP (a subset of PL/I) and CPL (Command Processing Language).
These macros are initiated through menus tailored to individual users.
Approximately 20 main data files, and 15 subsidiary tiles, are organized as indexed-sequential with most files having several secondary keys.
Local or ‘slave’ printers are supported and are common for users outside the Registry.
The Registry itself has two addressable network printers: a 400 cps data processing dot matrix, and a lower letter quality thimble printer.
Central laser printing is used on a rapidly growing scale.
The local office lines are grouped together at time division multiplexors connected to the data switch by twisted pairs.
Personal productivity aids for users are mainly network-based and include the INFO rdbms from Doric, S20Y0 spreadsheet from Access Technologies and Composer word processing from Wordmarc.
These three products have a limited level of integration.
There is also locally written email which is heavily used and includes a full JANET interface.
Local personal computing based on AT micros, probably Research Machines Nimbus AX workstations, is planned for 1988–89.
Computer Centre staff manage SMS development using Project Manager Workbench on a Nimbus AX20.
Afterword: ‘Going Modular’
Much of the interest expressed in the Oxford Polytechnic Modular Course by visitors and correspondents is on behalf of departments or whole institutions who are considering ‘going modular’.
Several have established research programmes or ‘task forces’ charged with explaining to their Academic Boards the costs and benefits of such a move.
These highly programmatic intentions pose a dilemma.
The Oxford Polytechnic scheme is sui generis: the extent to which it has developed in a particular context of constraints and opportunities makes many of the decisions it has made and many of the systems it has adopted difficult to transfer to other institutional frameworks.
Among the peculiarities of the Oxford scheme which other institutions find hard to replicate are the following:
The size of the module
By sticking to a small basic unit (100 or 120 hours of student effort) delivered across terms (three per year, and with the development of a summer school, potentially four) Oxford has established a pattern of regular assessment, and regular award-making examinations boards, that depends upon an intensity of academic staff commitment that other institutions would find difficult if not impossible to implement within the current framework of practice and conditions of service.
The cost and complexity of the stud (lent management system
All of the administrative systems developed on behalf of the modular course have been designed and tested in-house, beginning with a simple program for pre-enrolment information and student progress on a microcomputer in 1972 and leading up to the large and sophisticated management system described in Chapter 7.
To make an equivalent investment in one slice, rather than over the 15-year span recorded in this volume, would be an enormous burden.
Oxford's experience in making a major shift of data-processing infrastructure in 1980–81 gives us some ‘feel’ for what would be involved.
Institutional ethos
The success of the Modular Course over the past 15 years has in many respects been the success of Oxford Polytechnic.
The Course is the most distinctive and, on this scale, the most innovative contribution that the Polytechnic has made to the public sector in higher education.
Commitment to it, and its future, is high at central, departmental and individual levels.
The largely voluntary history of its development, set out in Chapter 2, attests to the way in which many courses within the Polytechnic have seen their interests as lying within the modular scheme, and the way in which new subject areas and approaches have then influenced it from inside.
Much of the Polytechnic's negotiation with outside bodies, such as the funding agencies referred to in Chapter 3, reflect this corporate commitment.
It is hard to imagine another institution of comparable size achieving this kind of ethos as a result of a single administrative decision, however consensual its support.
Broadly, there have been two ways of ‘going modular’, each with several internal dimensions and variables.
The ‘creation’ model
This implies the ab initio design of a new course, including (as in the Oxford case) the dissolution or suspension of an old course.
Such a course can then remain relatively isolated, or at least on a par with other courses offered within the same institution on a more traditional basis, or act as a focus for further course development (through the processes of ‘accretion’ or ‘invention discussed in Chapter 2).
The ‘conversion’ model
This implies either an internal (course-led) or external (faculty- or institution-led) decision to recast and develop current courses in a modular form.
Commitment to the development often varies in relation to the extent of internal or external steering of such a change.
There have been several instances of polytechnic or college academic boards adopting a ‘modular policy’ which requires specified courses, over time, to move into a common framework of delivery (usually achieved administratively by common timetabling and academically by convergence of course titles and examination arrangements).
Some conversion experiences have been more successful than others.
One pitfall has been the temptation to adopt a ‘lowest common denominator’ approach to unit length and course delivery, leading to a set of central ‘modular’regulations which, in their efforts to retain local features of individual cases, present the student with an overall scheme of mind-boggling complexity.
There are several such ‘phantom’ modular courses around, which in their presentation to applicants and to enrolled students of a unified title (‘Critical studies', ‘Combined studies’, etc.) imply promises (of internal transfer, for example) which they then cannot deliver.
Other key points within the conversion strategy include the implications for the course or department of ‘opting in’(what controls, for example, are relinquished over admissions, timetabling, examining, or future resource planning?) and the significance for contributing departments of continuing ‘non-modular’ work.
One possibility, usually disastrous for the development of the wider course in terms of resource constraints, is the ‘header-tank’ model, where departments with strong freestanding courses resource and develop these first before turning to the faculty- or polytechnic-wide scheme.
Departmental or institutional motivation for making these decisions is, of course, a crucial consideration and inspires its own typology.
Kogel Waterhouse of Wolverhampton Polytechnic (on behalf of the Midlands Consortium for Credit Accumulation and ‘Transfer) has effectively put this point in historical perspective.
In introducing a workshop on ‘modularity and credit accumulation’ in 1986 he identified two broad phases:
Modular Developments: Phase One
The idea for this workshop came out of a realisation that Modularity was very much back on the agenda in a wide variety of institutions.
I say ‘back on the agenda’, since some of us were engaged in designing Modular systems back in the late '60s and early '70s.
That was the period of expansion — of new ideas and new ventures — when arguments about flexibility and student choice, new subject combinations, new structures and inter-disciplinarity were very much to the fore.
This was the phase which saw the development of the big modular schemes at City of London and Oxford Polytechnics.
It saw the development of a Modular Humanities Degree then DipHE, at Middlesex.
It saw large Modular Combined Studies degrees at Manchester, Sunderland, Central London and other Polytechnics.
It also saw at least two complete institutions-Hatfield Polytechnic and Crewe and Alsager College — adopt modularity as an organising principle for (almost) all their work.
Modular Developments: Phase Two
The second phase of modular developments belongs very much to the '80s.
It is the era of retrenchment, cuts and post-NAB planning.
In the changed climate, the most powerful arguments surrounding modularity have to do with resources, rationalisation, how to maintain options with declining rolls, and ultimately — sheer survival.
An important difference is that modular courses are now not being planned from scratch — they are being made by mergers and amalgamations of pre-existing courses.
This is the era in which the Middlesex modular scheme was put together out of four pre-existing courses — two modular and two non-modular.
When the Lancashire Combined Studies scheme was made by putting together two Combined Studies courses.
When the NELP Multi-subject DipHE was  hacked out of bits of many pre-existing courses.
When Bradford College put together its 6 AFE courses into a single scheme.
And if now a whole institution, as Wolverhampton Polytechnic has done and Essex Institute well might, resolves to modularise its whole course provision, it starts with a portfolio of courses which looks virtually complete.
In the remainder of his paper Waterhouse's intention is to urge preservation of some of the radical and progressive emphases of the pioneers into the new instrumentalist era.
His themes — student control, variable entry, the ladder of intermediate awards, exemption, prior learning and learning contracts — are all still attainable if the ‘conversion’ experience of modularity moves beyond the formal redefinition of courses to the genuine ‘culture of negotiation’implied by the best courses.
What follows is a check list of issues to be considered in preparing for and making the decision.
Its overall theme is the importance of linking motives with implementation, of reflecting the answers to the ‘why?’ questions in the ‘how’?
This set of essays has sketched the development, from small but imaginative beginnings, of a major Modular Course with significant institutional support.
The question of ‘going modular’ does recur even now at Oxford Polytechnic, but on the local basis of whether or not to apply to join a going concern.
As for redefinition or reorientation of the overall enterprise, this material should serve to confirm that such developments are difficult but still possible.
Oxford Polytechnic is not (yet) an entirely modular institution.