

A COMPANY'S SECURITIES
THE NATURE AND CLASSIFICATION OF COMPANY SECURITIES
FREQUENT references have been made to the securities which a company can issue.
It is now necessary to look a little more closely at the exact nature of these securities and to indicate the various forms they may take.
They fall into two primary classes which legal theory tries to keep rigidly separated but which in economic reality merge into each other.
The first of these classes is described as shares; the second as debentures.
The basic legal distinction between them is that a share constitutes the holder a member of the company, whereas the debenture holder is a creditor of the company but not a member of it.
LEGAL NATURE OF SHARES
What, then, is the exact juridical nature of a share?
At the present day this is a question more easily asked than answered.
In the old deed of settlement company, which was merely an enlarged partnership with the partnership property vested in trustees, it was clear that the members' ‘shares’ entitled them to an equitable interest in the assets.
It is true that the exact nature of this equitable interest was not crystal clear, for the members could not, while the firm was a going concern, lay claim to any particular asset or prevent the directors from disposing of it.
Even with the modern partnership, no very satisfactory solution to this problem has been found, and the most one can say is that the partners have an equitable interest, often described as a lien, which floats over the partnership assets throughout the duration of the firm, although it crystallises only on dissolution.
Still, there is admittedly some sort of proprietary nexus (however vague and ill-defined) between the partnership assets and the parents.
At one time it was thought that the same applied to an incorporated company, except that the company itself held its assets as trustee for its members.
But this idea has long since been  rejected.
Shareholders have ceased to be regarded as having equitable interests in the company's assets; ‘shareholders are not, in the eyes of the law, part owners of the undertaking.’
As a result the word ‘share’ has become something of a misnomer, for shareholders no longer share any property in common; at the most they share certain rights in respect of dividends, return of capital on a winding up, voting, and the like.
Today it is generally stated that a share is a chose in action.
This, however, is not helpful, for ‘chose in action’ is a notoriously vague term used to describe a mass of interests which have little or nothing in common except that they confer no right to possession of a physical thing, and which range from purely personal rights under a contract to patents, copyrights and trade marks.
It is tempting to equate shares with rights under a contract, for as we have seen the memorandum and articles of association constitute a contract of some sort between the company and its members and it is these documents which directly or indirectly define the rights conferred by the shares.
But a share is something far more than a mere contractual right in personam .
This is sufficiently clear from the rules relating to infant shareholders, who are liable for calls on the shares unless they repudiate the allotment during infancy or on attaining majority, and who cannot recover any money which they have paid unless the shares have been completely valueless.
As Parke B. said,
‘They have been treated, therefore, as persons in a different situation from mere contractors for then they would have been exempt, but in truth they are purchasers who have acquired an interest not in a mere chattel, but in a subject of a permanent nature…’
The definition of a share which is, perhaps, the most widely quoted is that of Farwell J. in Borland's Trustee v Steel .
‘A share is the interest of a shareholder in the company measured by a sum of money, for the purpose of liability in the first place, and of interest in the second, but also consisting of a series of mutual covenants entered into by all the shareholders inter se in accordance with[section 14].
The contract contained in the articles of association is one of the original incidents of the share.
A share is not a sum of money…but is an interest measured by a sum of money and made up of various rights contained in the contract, including the right to a sum of money of a more or less amount.’
It will be observed that this definition, though it lays considerable and perhaps disproportionate stress on the contractual nature of the shareholder's rights, also emphasises the fact that he has an interest in the company.
The theory seems to be that the contract constituted by the articles of association defines the nature of the rights, which, however, are not purely personal rights but instead confer some sort of proprietary interest in the company though not in its property.
The company itself is treated not merely as a person, the subject of rights and duties, but also as a res , the object of rights and duties.
It is the fact that the shareholder has rights in the company as well as against it, which, in legal theory, distinguishes the member from the debenture holder whose rights are also defined by contract (this time the debenture itself and not the articles) but are rights against the company and, if the debenture is secured, in its property, but never in the company itself.
Farwell J.'s definition mentions that the interest of a shareholder is measured by a sum of money.
Reference has already been made to this and it has been emphasised that the requirement of a nominal monetary value is an arbitrary and illogical one which has been rejected in certain other common law jurisdictions.
The nominal value is meaningless and may be misleading, except in so far as it determines the minimum liability.
Even as a measure of liability, it is of less importance now that shares are almost invariably issued on terms that they are to be fully paid up on or shortly after allotment and are frequently issued at a price exceeding their nominal value.
But reference to liability is valuable in that it emphasises that shareholders qua members may be under obligations to the company as well as having rights against it.
This analysis may seem academic and barren, and to some extent it is, for a closer examination of the rights conferred by shares and debentures will show the impossibility of preserving any hard and fast  distinction between them which bears any relation to practical reality.
Nevertheless the matter is not entirely theoretical, for in a number of cases the courts have been faced with the need to analyse the juridical nature of a shareholder's interest in order to determine the principles on which it should be valued.
The most interesting of these cases is Short v. Treasury Commissioners where the whole of the shares of Short Bros. were being acquired by the Treasury under a Defence Regulation which provided for payment of their value ‘as between a willing buyer and a willing seller.’
They were valued on the basis of the quoted share price, but the shareholders argued that, since all the shares were being acquired, stock exchange prices were not a true criterion and that either the whole undertaking should be valued and the price thus determined apportioned among the shareholders, or the value should be the price which one buyer would give for the whole block, which price should then be similarly apportioned.
The courts upheld the method adopted and rejected both the alternatives suggested, the first because the shareholders were not ‘part owners of the undertaking’ and the second because the regulation implied that each holding was to be separately valued.
It was conceded that had any individual shareholder held a sufficient block to give him ‘control’ of the company then he might have been entitled to a higher price than the total market value of his shares, since he would then have been selling an item of property — control — additional to his shares.
But as no one shareholder had control to sell, the Government was able to acquire control of the company's assets for a fraction of their true value (and for a fraction of what it would have had to pay on a take-over bid).
One thing at least is clear: shares are recognised in law, as well as in fact, as objects of property which are bought, sold, mortgaged and bequeathed.
They are indeed the typical items of property of the modern commercial era and particularly suited to its demands because of their exceptional liquidity.
To deny that they are ‘owned’ would be as unreal as to deny, on the basis of feudal theory, that land is owned — far more unreal because the owner's freedom to do what he likes with his shares in public companies is likely to be considerably less fettered.
Nor, today, is the bundle of rights making up the share regarded as equitable only.
On the contrary, as the next chapter will show, legal ownership is recognised and distinguished from equitable ownership in much the same way as a legal estate in  land is distinguished from equitable interests therein.
Nor must this emphasis on the proprietary and financial aspects of a shareholder's rights obscure the important fact that his shareholding causes him to become a member of an association, normally with rights to take part in its deliberation by attending and voting at its general meetings.
THE PRESUMPTION OF EQUALITY BETWEEN SHAREHOLDERS
The typical company — one limited by shares — must issue some shares, and the initial presumption of the law is that all shares confer the same rights and impose the same liabilities.
As in partnership equality prevails in the absence of agreement to the contrary.
Normally the shareholders' rights will fall under three heads:(i) dividends,(ii) return of capital on a winding up (or authorised reduction of capital) and (iii) attendance at meetings and voting, and unless there is some indication to the contrary all the shares will confer the like rights to all three.
So far as voting is concerned this is a comparatively recent development, for, on the analogy of the partnership rule, it was long felt that members' voting rights should be divorced from their purely financial interests in respect of dividend and capital, so that the equality in voting should be between members rather than between shares.
A stage intermediate between these two ideas was reflected in the Companies Clauses Act 1845 which provided that in the absence of contrary provision in the special statute every shareholder had one vote for every share up to ten, one for every additional five up to a hundred and one for every ten thereafter, thus weighting the voting in favour of the smaller holders.
However, attempts to reduce the proportion of voting rights as the size of holdings increased were doomed to failure since the requirement could be easily evaded by splitting holdings and vesting them in nominees.
It is now recognised that if voting rights are to vary, separate classes of shares should be created so that the different number of votes can be attached to the shares themselves and not to the holder.
Even today, however, the older idea still prevails on a vote by a show of hands, when the common law rule is that each member has one vote irrespective of the number of shares held; a rule which, although it can be altered by the constitution, is normally maintained, if only because the number of a human being's hands cannot be more than two.
For many years it was thought that in the absence of express provision in the original constitution the continued equality of all shares was a fundamental condition which could not be abrogated by an alteration of the articles so as to allow the issue of shares preferential to those already issued.
This idea was, however, finally destroyed in Andrews v. Gas Meter Co .
which established that in the absence of a prohibition in the memorandum, the articles could be altered so as to authorise such an issue.
There is a similar presumption of equality in relation to shareholders' liabilities but it too can be altered by provisions in the memorandum and articles.
In the case of a company limited by shares, normally the only liability imposed on a shareholder as such will be to pay up the nominal value of the shares and any premium in so far as payment has not already been made by a previous holder.
This, however, does not mean that all the shares, even if of the same nominal value and of the same class, will necessarily be issued at the same price, or that, even if they are, all shareholders will necessarily be treated alike as regards calls for the unpaid part.
Section 119 provides that a company if so authorised by its articles may:(a) make arrangements on an issue of shares for a difference between shareholders in the amounts or times of payments of calls;(b) accept the whole or part of the amount remaining unpaid although it has not been called up; or (c) pay a dividend in proportion to the amount paid up on each share where a larger amount is paid up on some shares than on others.
Subject to that, however, calls must be made pari passu .
Directors' authority to allot shares
The principle of equal treatment was carried a stage further when the Second Company Law Directive was implemented by the Companies Act 1980.
This introduced a system whereby existing shareholders had, in some circumstances, to be afforded pre-emptive rights on an issue of further shares.
But as a preliminary to an explanation of the statutory pre-emption provisions it is necessary first to refer to a further reform introduced at the same time,i.e .
to restrictions placed on the authority of directors to allot shares at their whim and pleasure.
This was dealt with relatively simply in what is  now section 80 of the 1985 Act to which the 1989 Act added section 80A.
Section 80 provides that directors shall not exercise any power of the company to allot shares in the company or rights to subscribe for, or convert into, shares in the company unless they are authorised to do so by the company in general meeting or by the company's articles.
This in itself would have achieved little.
What makes it more meaningful is that any such authority, whether given in the articles or by a resolution, must state the maximum number of securities which can be issued under it and the date at which the authority will expire.
That date must not be later than 5 years from the date of the relevant resolution or, if conferred in the original articles, from the date of incorporation, though it may be renewed by the company in general meeting for successive periods not exceeding 5 years.
Moreover, it may at any time be varied or revoked by an ordinary resolution even if that involves an alteration of the articles.
Authority may be given for a particular exercise of the power or for its exercise generally (a distinction of some importance in relation to pre-emptive rights) and may be unconditional or subject to conditions.
Contravention of the section does not affect the validity of any allotment made but any director, who ‘knowingly and wilfully’ permits it, is liable to a fine.
Section 80 is one of the provisions that a private company may relax by an elective resolution under section 379A.
If it does so the provisions of section 80A apply instead of those in subsections (4) and (5) of section 80 and the authority can be given for any fixed period or indefinitely though it can be revoked at any time.
Should the elective resolution cease to have effect, if the authority has lasted for 5 years or more before the election it expires forthwith: otherwise it has effect as if it had been given for a fixed period of 5 years.
Pre-emptive rights
In contrast with the relative simplicity of sections 80 and 80A, the provisions relating to pre-emptive rights (now sections 89 to 96) are complicated and confusing.
However, the basic principle which they enshrine is simple enough and is stated with admirable clarity in note 37.1 to the comparable rule of The Stock Exchange in relation to its listed companies:
‘Importance is attached to the principle that a shareholder should be able to protect his proportion of the total equity by having the opportunity to subscribe for any new issue for cash of equity capital or securities having an equity element.’
That is what sections 89 to 96 seek to achieve.
But to understand the substantive provisions it is necessary to look first at certain definitions in section 94.
In contrast with sections 80 and 80A which apply to all issues, whether for cash or otherwise, and to rights to all classes of shares, the ambit of the pre-emptive provisions extends only to issues for cash of ‘equity securities’ as defined (by a somewhat tortuous process) in section 94.
Subsection (2) of that section says that ‘equity security’ means ‘a relevant share’in the company (other than one taken by a subscriber to the memorandum or a bonus share) or the right to subscribe for or convert into ‘relevant shares’in the company.
Subsection (5) defines ‘relevant shares’ as: ‘shares in the company other than—(a) shares which as respects dividends and capital carry a right to participate only up to a specified amount in a distribution, and (b) shares which are held by a person who acquired them in pursuance of an employees’share scheme or, in the case of shares which have not been allotted, are to be allotted in pursuance of such a scheme.’
And sub-section (4) defines ‘relevant employee shares’ as ‘shares of the company which would be relevant in it but for the fact that they are held by a person who acquired them in pursuance of an employees’share scheme’
In the light of these definitions, section 89(1) becomes intelligible.
What it provides is that a company proposing to allot equity securities  shall not allot them to any person unless it has first offered, on the same or more favourable terms, to each person who holds relevant shares or relevant employee shares, a proportion of those equity securities which is as nearly as practicable equal to his existing proportion in nominal value of his aggregate holdings of relevant shares and relevant employee shares.
The effect of this is that equity shares, or rights to them, can be allotted as subscribers' shares, bonus shares or pursuant to an employees' share scheme without first offering pre-emptive rights.
But, if equity shares or rights to them are to be issued in other circumstances, they first have to be offered to all equity shareholders in proportion to their holdings whether or not these were acquired as subscribers' shares, bonus shares or pursuant to an employees' share scheme.
This is clearly as it should be.
Employees' share schemes for example would be unworkable if, every time a further allotment was to be made pursuant to them, all equity shareholders had to be offered pre-emptive rights.
If, however, equity shares have been allotted under the scheme, the holders should have the same rights to protect their proportion of equity as any other shareholder.
All this is on the assumption that the proposed issue is exclusively for cash; when it is proposed to allot shares as consideration payable to the vendor on the acquisition of a business or real property it would be impossible to make an offer to the existing shareholders on the same terms.
Only one pre-emptive offering has to be made; if it is not accepted in full, shares not taken up may be allotted to anyone; accepting existing shareholders do not have to be given further pre-emptive rights in respect of those unaccepted shares.
The procedure whereby the pre-emptive offer is to be communicated to the shareholders is laid down in section 90.
The offer must be in writing, must state a Period of not less than 21 days within which it can be accepted and withdrawal of the offer before the end of the stated period is forbidden.
In effect, when section 89 applies, the company if it wishes to issue equity shares for cash, has to do so by a rights issue, as described in chapter 13 or a similar process if it is a private company.
However, despite section 89, the statutory pre-emptive rights are far from being entrenched; in certain circumstances they can be modified or waived.
Under section 91, the need to offer pre-emptive rights may be excluded by a provision in the memorandum or articles of a private company — either wholly or in relation to allotments of a particular description.
This seems unfortunate since pre-emptive rights are particularly needed in relation to those private companies which are essentially incorporated partnerships and it is difficult to see why, here, the Act could not have treated private companies in the same way as public ones.
Section 95 deals with the position of public companies and with private companies to the extent that they have not excluded the statutory provisions in their memoranda or articles.
The position differs according to the extent of the authority which has been conferred on the directors.
If the directors are authorised generally they may also be given power, by the articles or by the resolution, to allot equity securities as if section 89(1) did not apply or applied with such modifications as the directors determined.
When they are authorised, whether generally or in relation to a particular allotment, the company may resolve by special resolution that section 89(1) shall not apply to a specified allotment under that authority or shall apply with such modifications as are specified in the resolution.
In either event, the power to exclude or modify pre-emptive rights ceases with the expiration or revocation of the authority conferred under section 80,(or 80A) though it can be renewed by special resolution when, and to the extent that, the authority is renewed.
However a special resolution required under the section may not be proposed unless it has been recommended by the directors, and there is circulated to members entitled to notice of the meeting a written statement by the directors of their reasons for making the recommendation, the amount to be paid to the company in respect of the proposed issue, and the directors' justification of that amount.
The result of sections 91 and 95 is that the statutory pre-emptive rights can be disapplied with relative ease and afford an individual  equity shareholder precious little assurance that his existing pre-emptive rights will be preserved unless his shares carry significant votes to block the passing of a special resolution.
Nor will he necessarily be able to prevent his share of the equity from being diluted even if he is offered pre-emptive rights; he may not be able to afford to buy more shares but cannot prevent the new issue being made unless he has voting control.
A further complication dealt with in the sections relates to the effect on sections 89 to 96 when there are different classes of equity shares and a provision in the memorandum or articles that pre-emptive offers of shares of each class shall be made to members of that class.
Under section 89(2) and (3) the company may allot shares in accordance with that provision which is not to be treated as inconsistent with section 89(1) within the meaning of section 91.
Nor is such a provision invalidated because the method of communicating the offer differs from that prescribed by section 90; but the procedure laid down by that section supersedes that provided in the memorandum or articles.
Furthermore, section 96 provides for pre-emptive procedures operative before 22 June 1982.
One problem here is that now, if pre-emptive provisions other than those prescribed in the Act are to apply, they must be in the memorandum or articles whereas previously they could have been provided in other ways, for example in an agreement between the shareholders or as part of the terms of issue of the shares.
Hence section 96 has to provide savings of ‘pre-1982 pre-emptive requirements’ imposed ‘whether by the company's memorandum or articles or otherwise .’
In the case of a public company subject, at the time of its registration or re-registration, to a pre-1982 pre-emptive requirement, sections 89 to 95 do not apply to an allotment of the equity securities which are subject to such a requirement.
In the case of a private company, a pre-1982 pre-emptive requirement is to be treated as if it were in its memorandum or articles so long as it remains a private company.
Finally, a civil (but not a criminal) sanction is provided by section 92.
When there has been a contravention of subsection (1) of section 89 or of any of subsections (1) to (6) of section 90 or of a provision to which subsection (3) of section 89 applies, the company and every officer of it who knowingly authorised or permitted the contravention are jointly and severally liable to compensate any person, to whom  an offer should have been made under the subsection or provision, for any loss, damage costs or expenses.
Where under section 95, the statutory provisions are validly modified by a company resolution this will equally apply to a contravention of the modified provisions since ‘sections 89 to 94 have effect accordingly.’
Where the company is listed on The Stock Exchange the protection afforded shareholders is greater than under the Act.
In the first place, The Exchange's rules require that the authority to dispense with an offer of pre-emptive rights shall not last beyond the expiration of 15 months or until the next annual general meeting whichever occurs first.
Secondly they require a listed company to obtain the consent of its shareholders if any of its major subsidiaries makes an issue for cash of securities having an equity element which would materially dilute the percentage equity interest of the company and its shareholders in that subsidiary.
Thirdly while both the Act and The Stock Exchange rules allow fractional entitlements to be ignored, they differ as regards the treatment of rights that are not taken up.
The effect of section 89(1) is that the shares concerned may then be offered to anybody.
Under The Stock Exchange rules regarding rights issues, the rights must normally be sold for the benefit of the non-accepting shareholders unless arrangements to the contrary have been specifically approved by the shareholders in general meeting and The Stock Exchange has been consulted.
However, where the amount to which the shareholders will be entitled is small, they may be sold for the benefit of the company or, if no premium exists, allotted to the underwriters.
Another difference between the Act and The Stock Exchange rules is that the latter specifically permit pre-emptive offers to exclude holders of shares when the directors ‘consider it necessary or expedient…on account of either legal problems under the laws of any territory or the requirements of any recognised regulating body or any other stock exchange.’
The nearest  approach to this in the Act is section 93 under which sections 89 to 92 are ‘without prejudice’ to any enactment by virtue of which the company is prohibited (either generally or in specified circumstances) from offering or allotting equity securities to any person.
This however is designed to make it clear that offer must not be made to those whose shares are subject to a restriction order under Part XV of the Act; for the situation to which The Stock Exchange rule is directed, companies have to rely on the ‘as nearly as practicable’ in section 89 (1), and Mutual Life Insurance of N. Y .
v. Rank Organisation .
CLASSES OF SHARES
As will have been apparent, the prima facie equality of shares can be modified by dividing the share capital into different classes with different rights as to dividends, capital or voting or with different nominal values.
By permutations of these various incidents the number of possible classes is limited only by the total number of shares.
On the whole it is not the present fashion for public companies to complicate their capital structures by having a large number of share classes — though much ingenuity is displayed in devising the most attractive methods of marketing issues and in creating types of company securities, other than shares but with rights to convert into shares.
But, both in the case of public and private companies, there may well be two or three different classes and sometimes more.
The division of shares into classes and the rights attached to each class will normally be set out in the company's memorandum or articles (generally the latter) but, in contrast with the Companies Acts of some other common law countries, that is not compulsory.
Instead steps have been taken to ensure that the classes and their rights can be ascertained from the company's public documents.
The effect of what is now sections 128 of the Act is that if particulars of such rights are not set out either in the memorandum or articles, or in a resolution or agreement (a copy of which has to be sent to the Registrar under section 380) they must be given in a statement, in the  prescribed form, sent to the Registrar within a month of allotment of the shares.
If a class is assigned a name or other designation, that too must be given in the statement.
The same applies if and when there is any variation of the class rights.
Preference shares
Where the differences between the classes relates to financial entitlement,i.e to dividends and return of capital, the likelihood is that they will be given distinguishing names, though these may be no more informative than ‘preference’ and ‘ordinary,’(perhaps, in the case of the former, preceded by ‘first’or ‘second’where there are two classes of preference shares).
If a potential investor should assume that ‘preference’ means that he should prefer them to the ordinary shares he would be sorely in need of professional advice.
The advice that he would receive would probably not be couched in terms of relative merits and de-merits of preference and ordinary shares but of ‘prior charges’ and ‘equiries’.
And if the client's needs suggested the former, he would probably be advised to invest not in shares but in debentures.
For preference shares may often be virtually indistinguishable from debentures except that they afford less assurance of getting one's money back or a return on it until one does.
On the other hand, if in addition to being ‘preferential’ they are also ‘participating’they may be a form of equity shares with preferential rights over the ordinary shares (and in consequence should be, and often are, designated ‘preferred ordinary’).
As will have been apparent from the discussion on pre-emptive rights, this borrowing by the stock markets of an expression ‘equities’ derived from the activities of Courts of Chancery has in turn been borrowed by the companies' legislation in its definition of ‘equity securities’and ‘equity share capital.’
Under these definitions, participating preference shares will be equity shares if they participate in distributions ‘beyond a specified amount.’
Whether they do, will depend upon the construction of the memorandum, articles or other instrument creating them.
So will the  determination of whether they have other rights (for example voting) or of whether their preferential dividend, is cumulative (in the sense that if passed in one year it must nevertheless be paid in a later one before any subordinate class receives a dividend) or non-cumulative (in the sense that the dividend once passed, is lost for ever).
Unfortunately, in the past the drafting of the creating documents has often been deplorably lax.
Hence the courts have had to evolve various canons of construction which, even more unfortunately, have fluctuated from time to time, thus over-ruling earlier decisions and defeating the legitimate expectations of investors who purchased preference shares in reliance on the construction adopted earlier.
In former editions of this book the story of these vacillations was traced, in some detail, starting with the virtually irreconcilable decisions of the House of Lords and the Court of Appeal relating to the winding-up of the Bridgwater Navigation Company in 1889–91.
Since, at long last, a reasonably clear finale now appears to have been reached, there is no longer a justification for that indulgence, especially in view of the present unpopularity of preference shares.
It suffices to summarise what the present canons of construction appear to be.
Canons of construction
1.
Prima facie all shares rank equally.
If, therefore, some are to have priority over others there must be provisions to this effect in the terms of issue.
2.
If, however, the shares are expressly divided into separate classes (thus necessarily contradicting the presumed equality) it is a question of construction in each case what the rights of each class are.
3.
If nothing is expressly said about the rights of one class in respect of either (a) dividends,(b) return of capital, or (c) attendance at meetings or voting, then, prima facie, that class has the same rights in that respect as the residuary ordinary shares.
Hence a preference as to dividend will not imply a preference as to capital (or vice versa).
Nor will an exclusion of participation in dividends beyond a fixed preferential rate necessarily imply an exclusion of participation in  capital (or vice versa) although it will apparently be some indication of it.
4.
Where shares are entitled to participate in surplus capital on a winding up, prima facie they participate in all surplus assets and not merely in that part which does not represent undistributed profits that might have been distributed as dividend to another class.
5.
If, however, any rights in respect of any of these matters are expressly stated.
that statement is presumed to be exhaustive so far as that matter is concerned.
Hence if shares are given a preferential dividend they are presumed to be non-participating as regards further dividends, and if they are given a preferential right to a return of capital they are presumed to be non-participating in surplus assets.
The same clearly applies to attendance and voting; if they are given a vote in certain circumstances,(e.g .
if their dividends are in arrears) it is implied that they have no vote in other circumstances.
6.
The onus of rebutting the presumption in 5 is not lightly discharged and the fact that shares are expressly made participating as regards either dividends or capital is no indication that they are participating as regards the other — indeed it has been taken as evidence to the contrary.
7.
If a preferential dividend is provided for, it is presumed to be cumulative.
This presumption can be rebutted by any words indicating that the preferential dividend for a year is to be payable only out of the profits of that year.
8.
It is presumed that even preferential dividends are payable only if declared.
Hence arrears even of cumulative dividend are prima facie not payable in a winding up unless previously declared.
But this presumption may be rebutted by the slightest indication to the contrary.
When the arrears are payable, the presumption is that they are to be paid provided there are surplus assets available, whether or not these represent accumulated profits which might have been distributed by way of dividend, but that they are payable only to the date of the commencement of the winding up.
The effect of applying these canons of construction has been, as Evershed M.R. pointed out, that over the past 100 years
‘the view of the courts may have undergone some change in regard to the relative rights of preference and ordinary shareholders…and to the disadvantage of the preference shareholders whose position has…become somewhat more approximated to [that]of debentureholders.’
Unless preference shareholders are expressly granted participating rights they are unlikely to be entitled to share in any way in the ‘equity’ or to have voting rights except in narrowly prescribed circumstances.
Yet they enjoy none of the advantages of debentureholders; they receive a return on their money only if profits are earned (and not necessarily even then), they rank after creditors on a winding-up and they have less effective remedies against the company.
Suspended midway between true creditors and true members they get the worst of both worlds.
Ordinary shares
Ordinary shares (as the name implies) constitute the residuary class in which is vested everything after the special rights of preference  classes, if any, have been satisfied.
They confer a right to the ‘equity’ in the company and, in so far as members can be said to own the company, the ordinary shareholders are its proprietors, It is they who bear the lion's share of the risk and they who in good years take the lion's share of the profits (after the directors and managers have been remunerated).
If, as is often the case, the company's shares are all of one class, then these are necessarily ordinary shares, and if a company has a share capital it must perforce have at least one ordinary share whether or not it also has preference shares.
It is this class alone which is unmistakably distinguished from debentures both in law and fact.
But as we have seen, the ordinary shares may shade off imperceptibly into preference, for, when the latter confer a substantial right of participation in income or capital, or a fortiori both, it is largely a matter of taste whether they are designated ‘preference’ or ‘preferred ordinary’shares.
Moreover, distinctions may be drawn between ordinary shares, ranking equally as regards financial participation, by dividing them nevertheless into separate classes with different voting rights.
In this event they will probably be distinguished as ‘A’‘B’‘C’(etc.) ordinary shares.
Many public companies have issued non-voting A ordinary shares.
By this device control may be retained by a small proportion of the equity leading to a further rift between ownership and control.
This disturbing development (a response to the threat of take-over bids) gave rise to demands that The Stock Exchange should refuse to list such shares, or, failing that, that the legislature should intervene.
The Jenkins Committee was divided on this issue.
The majority took the view that the case for banning non-voting ordinary shares had not been made out but that such shares should be clearly labelled and that their holders should be entitled to receive notices of all meetings so as to be kept informed.
A minority of three recommended that all equity shareholders should have a right to attend and speak at meetings and that there should be a prohibition on the listing of non-voting or restricted-voting equity shares.
No legislative action has been taken on either recommendation.
However opposition of  institutional investors has caused issues of non-voting shares to be less frequent and many companies have enfranchised their non-voting shares.
Redeemable Shares
As we have seen, all classes of shares may now be issued as redeemable in accordance with Part V Chapter VII of the Act.
When that is done those that are redeemable necessarily constitute a class separate from those not issued as redeemable even though they may be identical in every other respect.
In contrast with the power of a company to purchase its own shares in accordance with that Part, the power to issue redeemable equity shares has been little used and when redeemable shares are to be found they will normally be preference shares.
If the terms of redemption merely provided for their redemption at par, their holders would be highly vulnerable; for if interest rates fell since the date of issue it would clearly pay the company to redeem them and to borrow money at a lower rate of interest than the fixed dividend.
This, following the House of Lords decision in Scottish Insurance v. Wilson & Clyde Coal Co was, in effect, done by capital reductions even though the shares were irredeemable and quoted at above par, for the Lords decided in that case and in Prudential Assurance v. Chatterley-Whitfield Collieries in the same year, that the courts had to confirm the reductions since the preference shareholders were being treated in strict accordance with their class rights.
The obvious unfairness of this led to the practice of providing, on issues of non-participating preference shares by public companies, that on redemption or any return of capital the amount repaid should be tied to the average quoted price in the months before.
This, so-called ‘Spens formula,’ affords reasonable protection in the case of listed companies but preference shareholders in unquoted companies still remain at risk.
Special classes
Although in most cases the shares of a company will fall into one or other of the primary classes of preference or ordinary, it is, of course, possible for the company to create shares for particular purposes and containing terms which cut across the normal classifications.
An example of this is afforded by employees' shares.
Frequent references have already been made to ‘employees share schemes.’
Under the present definition of such schemes, the beneficiaries of them may include not only present employees of the company concerned, but also employees, or former employees, of it or any company in the same group, and the spouses, widows or widowers, children or step-children under the age of 18, of any such employees.
When employees' share schemes first came to be introduced here, the normal practice was to create a special class of shares with restricted rights regarding, in particular, votes and transferability; only in relation to share option schemes, designed as incentive to top management, were ordinary voting equity shares on offer.
Now, however, that is usual in all cases in order that employees' share schemes may enjoy the special tax concessions conferred on ‘approved profit-sharing schemes’ or ‘approved savings-related share option schemes.’
Hence today such schemes will rarely lead to the creation of a special class of share; it is only in relation to their allotment, financing, and provision for re-purchase by the company or the trustees of the scheme that there will be special arrangements which the Act facilitates by exclusions from the normal restrictions on purchase of own shares and on the provision of finance by a company for the acquisition of its shares.
Unclassified shares
In recent years it has become common, when the whole of the stated authorised share capital is not intended to be issued initially, to designate the unissued shares as ‘unclassified shares.’
This practice, borrowed from the United States, recognises that until shares are issued they confer no rights at all, and that the rights ultimately attached to them depend on the company's decision at the time when they are issued.
Conversion of shares into stock
Once the shares or any class of them are fully paid, the company may convert them into stock; in other words the company may merge the relevant share capital, say 10,000 shares of £1 each into  £10,000 of stock.
Formerly, when each share had, throughout its life, to bear a distinctive number, there were practical advantages in so doing.
But the Companies Act 1948 (now the 1985 Act, section 182(2)) enables numbers to be dispensed with once shares are fully paid.
Since, in relation to shares (as opposed to debentures) there were no other practical advantages in conversion, this now rarely takes place though many major public companies which date back to before the 1948 Act still have stock.
For the purposes of the Act ‘shares’ includes ‘stock’and the distinction between them is merely a source of confusion.
LEGAL NATURE OF DEBENTURES
The difficulty in the case of shares is to fit them into any normal legal category; but one is unlikely to be left in doubt whether something is or is not a share.
The converse is the case in relation to debentures.
The legal relationship between a company and its debentureholders is simply the contractual relationship of debtor and creditor, coupled, if the debt is secured on some or all of the company's assets, with that of mortgagor and  mortgagee .
In contrast with a shareholder, the debentureholder is in law not a member of the company having rights in it, but a creditor having rights against it.
In reality, however, the difference between him and a shareholder may not be anything like as clear-cut, for the debenture may give the holder a contractual right:— to appoint a director; to a share of profits (whether or not available for dividend); to repayment at a premium; to attend and vote at general meetings and even to convert his debentures into equity shares.
Moreover, where the debenture is secured by a floating charge on all the undertaking and assets of the  company, he will have a legal or equitable interest in the company's business, albeit of a different kind from that of its shareholders.
Difficulty of defining
The difficulty, however, is to determine whether or not the transaction between the debtor company and the creditor is such as to make the latter a debentureholder, for no one has yet succeeded in defining ‘debenture.’
As Chitty J. lamented over a century ago:
‘I cannot find any precise definition of the term, it is not either in law or commerce a strictly technical term, or what is called a term of art.’
It is, nevertheless a term frequently used in statutes — including the Companies Act which contains, in Part V, Chapter VIII, seven sections under the heading Debentures as well as frequent references throughout the Act to debentures and debentureholders.
One would therefore expect to find an attempt to define what debentures are.
But all one gets is:
‘In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears…‘debenture’ includes debenture stock, bonds and other securities of a company, whether constituting a charge on the assets of the company or not.’
This attempt to ‘define’ by inclusions has been carried a stage further by the Financial Services Act which, for its purposes, employs both inclusions and exclusions.
While neither Act can be said to  define what is the primary meaning of ‘debentures,’ both give some pointers to what, both in law and in commerce, would, for most purposes be regarded as their essential feature; namely that debentures are a type of transferable security (in this respect resembling shares) whereby a company can raise finance in the form of loan capital instead of share capital.
In practice, the absence of a precise definition has given rise to surprisingly few problems and to even fewer reported cases.
That may change; for, in recent years, developments in banking and commercial circles have led to the invention of a remarkable array of new and highly sophisticated types of ‘securitised’ loan investments as a result of which finance, which would formerly have been raised by a straightforward bank loan (for most purposes not a debenture) may be obtained through the issue of instruments, some of which for most purposes unquestionably are debentures and others of which may or may not be.
However, if the courts display the commonsense approach that the House of Lords did in the one relevant reported case of any importance, the probability is that we shall get by without much trouble.
That case,Knightsbridge Estates Ltd .
v. Byrne concerned a mortgage on houses, shops and a block of flats by a company to secure a loan of £310,000.
The loan was to be repayable by 80 half-yearly instalments spread over 40 years but became immediately repayable if the mortgagor should sell the equity of redemption.
The company was forbidden from selling any of the properties free from the mortgage or from granting leases for more than 3 years without the consent of the mortgagee.
Five years later the company wished to pay off the mortgage in full and argued that the term making the mortgage irredeemable for 40 years was void as a clog on the equity of redemption.
Under what is now section 193 of the Act,
‘a condition contained in debentures…is not invalid by reason only that the debentures are thereby made irredeemable or redeemable only on the happening of a contingency (however remote) or on the expiration of a period (however long) any rule of equity to the contrary notwithstanding.’
The question therefore was whether this mortgage was a debenture.
The speeches in the House of Lords pointed out that one would have expected to find this section in a Part of the Act dealing with company charges rather than in that dealing with debentures, and accepted that the mortgage would not be a ‘debenture,’ for the  purposes of some of the other sections.
Nevertheless, it was held that the legislative intention must have been to exclude from the equitable rule any mortgage by a company.
In the words of Lord Romer,
‘if it is thought desirable that debentures in their popular meaning may be made irredeemable, it would seem to be both absurd and inconsistent to forbid a company to make its ordinary mortgages of land also irredeemable.’
Accordingly the mortgage was a ‘debenture’ for the purposes of section 193.
The normal debenture, however, is very different from a single mortgage of land., It generally consists of one of a series of securities ranking pari passu with each other.
The expression ‘debenture’ is applied indiscriminately to the instrument creating or evidencing the indebtedness and to the debt itself and the bundle of rights vested in the holder to secure its payment.
These rights, as we have seen, may include a charge on all or some of the company's assets.
If there is no such charge it will normally be described as a ‘bond’ or a ‘loan note’but, as the ‘definitions’in the Companies Act and the Financial Services Act at least make clear, it will in law be a ‘debenture.’
When there is a charge, it will probably be a floating charge, the peculiar features of which are left to Chapter 16 on Company Charges.
Debenture Stock
Reference has already made to the, largely meaningless, distinction between ‘shares’ and ‘stocks.’
There is a similar distinction between ‘debentures’ and ‘debenture stock’but here it is far from meaningless and debenture stock has considerable practical advantages.
If a public company wishes to raise £1m, it could seek to do so by an issue of a series of, say £1, £10, £100, or £1000 debentures, each representing a separate debt totalling in aggregate £1m.
This would result in an enormous bundle of paper for the company to process and subscribers to handle.
And, if a subscriber for a single debenture wanted to sell half of it, he would not be able to make a legal transfer of that half.
If, however, the company creates £1m of  debenture stock it can issue it; to subscribers in such amounts as each wants, giving each a single certificate and he can sell and transfer any fraction of it.
A further advantage is that whereas with a series of debentures with a charge on the company's assets it will be necessary to say expressly in each debenture that it is one of a series each ranking pari passu in respect of the charge; debenture stock achieves that result without express provision.
Trustees for debentures holders
The deed required on the creation of debenture stock may be a deed poll executed by the company alone, but it is now invariable practice for the deed to be made with trustees.
This, too, is normally done when there is an issue of a series of debentures.
In other words, trustees, normally a trust corporation, are interposed between the company and the debentureholders.
Any charge can then be in favour of the trustees who hold it on trust for the debentureholders.
Such an arrangement has many advantages.
In the first place it will enable the security to be by way of specific legal mortgage or charge on the company's land as well as by way of equitable floating charge on the rest of the assets.
Clearly the ideal security is one so constituted, but a legal interest cannot be vested in thousands of debentureholders, nor can the deeds be split up amongst them.
If, however there are trustees, the legal mortgage can be vested in them, on trust for the beneficiary debentureholders, and the trustees retain custody of the title deeds.
Again, if there is to be a specific charge on shares in subsidiary companies (which may be a necessary precaution) trustees are needed in order that someone independent of the holding company shall be able to exercise the voting rights attached to the shares.
Secondly, it will provide a single corporation or a small body of persons charged with the duty of watching the debentureholders  interests and of intervening if they are in jeopardy.
This is obviously far more satisfactory than leaving it to a widely dispersed class of persons each of whom may lack the skill, interest and financial resources required if he is to take action on his own.
It will also be possible, by the trust deed, to impose on the company additional obligations, regarding the submission of information and the like, which might not otherwise be practicable.
Similarly, the trustees can be empowered to convene meetings of the holders in order to acquaint them with the position and to obtain their instructions.
Complaints have been made in the past that the trustees are all too often content to act as passive recipients of their remuneration rather than as active watchdogs.
The Cohen Committee admitted that these complaints were not altogether unfounded but all that has resulted is section 192 of the Act which invalidates provisions in trust deeds (or elsewhere) which purport to exempt a trustee from, or to indemnify him against, ‘liability for breach of trust where he fails to show the degree of care and diligence required of him as a trustee having regard to the provisions of the trust deed conferring on him any powers, authorities or discretions.’
There is here a conspicuous contrast with the stricter rules under Federal legislation in the United States and with the duties imposed on trustees of unit trusts under the Financial Services Act.
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF COMPANY SECURITIES
Because of the peculiar nature of company securities, particularly shares their acquisition and disposal raise issues which need to be dealt with as a branch of Company Law.
This Chapter discusses the most important of them.
It describes the present position but draws attention under the heading De-materialisation of Listed Securities to the aims of the TAURUS project which may be achieved shortly after this edition is published and which will change the position markedly so far as concerns fully paid securities of listed companies.
BECOMING A SHAREHOLDER
The Act assumes that, in the case of a company with the share capital, becoming a shareholder is the same as becoming a member.
That is not necessarily so in relation to the few surviving companies limited by guarantee and having a share capital.z And there is no inherent reason why it should be so with companies limited by shares; indeed a very sensible method of promoting voluntary ‘co-determination’ would be to provide means whereby employees could become members without also having to buy shares in the company, thus risking the loss of their savings as well as their jobs if their employer-company becomes insolvent.
But while the Act does not specifically prohibit a constitution on those lines, it clearly does not contemplate it.
The basic principle which the Act lays down is that to become a member, and thereby a shareholder, there must be agreement and entry on a register of members which every type of registered company is required to maintain and which, in relation to a company with shares is also a register of shareholdings.
Until entry on the register an acquirer is not, in law, yet a member or shareholder.
To this, there are two exceptions.
The first relates to subscribers' shares.
Each subscriber to the memorandum of a limited company with a  share capital is required to take at least one share and against the name of each must be shown the number of shares that he takes.
The subscribers are then ‘deemed to have agreed to become members of the company and on its registration shall be entered in such in its register of members.’
The effect of this has been held to be that, even if the company omits to put them on the register they become members and holders of the number of shares stated.
This is of little importance since in practice only two shares will be subscribed for.
The second exception relates to share-warrants to bearer.
Section 1889 provides that a company, if so authorised by its articles, may issue with respect to any fully-paid shares a warrant stating that the bearer of the warrant is entitled to the shares specified in it.
If similarly authorised, it may provide, by coupons attached to the warrant or otherwise, for the payment of future dividends.
Title to the shares specified then passes by manual delivery of the warrant, which is a negotiable instrument.
On their issue, the company removes from its register of members the name of the former registered holder and merely states the fact and date of the issue of the warrant and the number of shares (or amount of stock) to which it relates.
The bearer of the warrant from time to time is unquestionably a shareholder but to what extent, if at all, he is a member of the company depends on a provision to that effect in the articles.
Hence shareholding and membership are not necessarily co-terminous if share warrants are issued.
However, again subject to the articles, the bearer of the warrant is entitled, on surrendering it for cancellation, to have his name and shareholding re-entered on the register.
In practice this second exception is unimportant because bearer securities have never been popular with  English investors or English companies and are rarely issued and hardly ever in respect of shares, as opposed to bearer bonds,(i.e. debentures) which are sometimes issued to attract Continental investors who have a traditional liking for securities in bearer form.
It is fortunate that bearer shares are such a rarity for if they became common it would play havoc with many provisions of the Act.
The register
Since, in practice, shares in British companies are ‘registered’ and not ‘bearer’and since the process of becoming (or ceasing to be) a member and shareholder is incomplete until entry on the register, the statutory provisions regarding its maintenance are of importance.
In summary, they are as follows:
In addition to showing the name and address of every member and the date on which he was registered as a member or ceased to be a member, in the case of a company with a share capital the register must also state the number and class of shares (or amount of stock) held by him and the amount paid-up on each share.
The register may be kept at the company's registered office or at another office of the company or at the office of professional registrars to which the company has delegated this task, but, if kept otherwise than at the company's registered office, notice must be given to the Registrar of the place where it is kept and of any change of that place.
If the company has more than 50 members then, unless the register is kept in such form as to constitute an index of names of the members, such an index must also be kept in the same place as the register.
The register and index have to be open for inspection during business hours by any member without charge and by any other person on payment of a small fee and a copy of it or any part of it has to be supplied to anyone on payment of a modest charge.
This  is a legitimate help to any member who wishes to communicate with any of his fellow members and to a take-over bidder.
But unfortunately it also enables traders who wish to attempt to sell their wares by ‘junk-mail,’ or telephone calls, to obtain, more cheaply than in any other way, a ‘sucker-list’of potential victims by buying a copy of the membership register of, say, British Telecom or British Gas.
A company may close the register for any time or times not exceeding in total 30 days in any year.
Advantage of this can be taken by widely-held public companies to enable them temporarily to freeze the list of those who are entitled to receive an annual dividend or to vote at an annual general meeting.
The register is ‘prima facie evidence of any matters which are by this Act directed or authorised to be inserted in it.’
It is not, however, conclusive evidence for, as we have seen, membership is dependent both on agreement to become a member and entry in the register and if the entry does not truly reflect the agreement or there was no valid agreement the register ought to be rectified.
Hence section 359 provides a summary remedy whereby, if:
‘(a) the name of any person is without sufficient cause entered in or omitted from a company's register of members, or (b) default is made or unnecessary delay takes place in entering on the register the fact of any person having ceased to be a member, the person aggrieved or any member of the company, or the company may apply to the court for rectification of the register.’
This wording is defective because it ignores the fact that the register is not just a register of members but also a register of shareholdings and that a likely error is in the amount of a member's shareholding.
However commonsense has prevailed and in Re Transatlantic Life Assurance Slade J. felt able to hold that ‘the wording…is wide enough in its terms to empower the court to order the deletion of some only of a registered shareholder's shares.’
It must follow that it is similarly empowered to order an addition to the registered holding.
On an application the court may decide any question relating to the title of any person who is a party to the application whether the question arises between members or alleged members, or between members or alleged members on the one hand and the company on the other hand, and may decide ‘any question necessary or expedient to be decided for rectification….’
Moreover, the court may order payment by the company of ‘damages sustained by any party aggrieved.’
There is some uncertainty as to the extent to which the company can rectify the register without an application to the court.
But in practice here again common sense prevails.
Sections 352, 354 and 355 clearly envisage, and indeed demand, alterations without which the register could not be kept up to date and fulfil its purpose, and although there is no express provision for alterations of members' addresses that takes place all the time.
Indeed it would be quite absurd if companies cannot correct any mistake if all interested parties agree.
It must be emphasised, however, that although the register provides prima facie evidence of who its members are and what their shareholdings are, it provides no evidence at all, either to the company or anyone else, of who the beneficial owners of the shares are.
The registered member may well be a trustee or nominee but of that the company neither knows nor is entitled to let anyone know;, for ‘No notice of any trust, expressed, implied or constructive shall be entered on the register or be receivable by the Registrar’ in the case of companies registered in England and Wales.
It has now been recognised that often the company, and indeed the regulatory authorities and the public, may need to be able to find out who the beneficial owners are and other sections, dealt with later, seek to enable them to find out.
But the register with which we are presently concerned is of little help; in the case of a listed company the majority of the shares will probably be registered in the names of nominees.
The register, like other records that a company is required to maintain, may be kept either in bound books or by recording the matter in any other way and, in particular, may be on a computer or other electronic device so long as the material can be reproduced in legible form and is so reproduced for purposes of inspection or supply of a copy.
It is also subject to the powers of the Secretary of State to make provision by regulations as to obligations of a company under the Act to make documents available for inspection or to provide copies of them.
The wording of the section suggests that this power could not be used to restrict the right to inspect or obtain copies, for example by requiring good cause to be shown thus preventing share registers being used as ‘sucker-lists,’ but is intended to ensure that the matter is reproduced in a way which is as ‘user-friendly’as possible without imposing undue burdens on the company.
Acquisitions from the company
Shares may be acquired either (a) from the company itself on an issue by it or (b) by taking a transfer from an existing shareholder.
Dealing first with (a), the normal modus operandi in the case of new issues by public companies has been described in Chapter 13: a would-be shareholder will apply in response to the prospectus, listing particulars or circular; if the application is accepted he will be sent an allotment letter; and this completes the needful agreement to become a member and shareholder.
But he will not yet be either, since he will not, at that stage have been ‘entered on the register’ and, it may be that he never will be.
In practice, the letter of allotment will be renounceable;i.e .
for a short period stated in it, his rights can be renounced in favour of someone else.
Printed on the back of the letter there will be forms enabling the allottee to  renounce, and the person to whom they are ultimately renounced to confirm that he accepts the renunciation and agrees to be entered on the register.
Normally the original allottee will not insert the name of the person to whom they are to be renounced and the effect is then to produce something similar to a short-term share warrant to bearer; it is not a negotiable instrument but once the renunciation is signed by the original allottee, the rights can be assigned by manual delivery of the allotment letter without a formal transfer.
Before the stated period ends, however, it will be necessary for the name of the ultimate holder to be inserted, his signature obtained, and the allotment letter lodged with the company or its registrars.
Only when the allottee or the ultimate person to whom his allotment has been renounced, has been entered on the register will anyone became a shareholder and member.
And even then he will find difficulty in selling his shares until, later still, he receives a share certificate affording the only evidence of his title to the shares that he will be able to produce under the present antiquated system.
Becoming a member and shareholder on an issue by a private company (or a closely-held public company whose shares are not listed or dealt in on the U.S.M.) is subject to the same legal requirements of agreement plus entry on the register but in practice both will be achieved with less formality and, in the case of private companies, without the issue of allotment letters.
If someone wants to become a shareholder and the company wants him to, he will be entered on the register and issued with a share certificate without more ado.
Acquisitions from a shareholder
We now turn to the second method of becoming a member and shareholder,i.e .
by taking a transfer of shares from an existing member and shareholder.
Once again, the transaction will not be complete until the transferee is entered on the company's register as the holder of the shares (and until then the transferor will not cease to be a member or the legal holder of the shares).
Neither the agreement to transfer nor delivery of a signed transfer form will pass the legal title.
Registration can be confidently expected to occur in due course unless the company's articles impose restrictions on the transferability of its shares.
This is most unlikely if the shares are  listed but very probable if the company is a private one.
If there are any restrictions, a purchaser should not pay until he is satisfied that he will be registered, for there is no implied warranty to that effect by the seller.
In other circumstances all that needs to be done if the transaction is a domestic one, whereby, say, a shareholder transfers his holding as a gift to a member of his family or sells it to an acquaintance, is for the transferor to hand over to the transferee a signed share transfer together with the share certificate which the transferee will lodge with the company and the register will then be amended by adding the transferee and noting that the transferor has ceased to be a member or shareholder in respect of the shares.
Generally, however, anyone wishing to buy or sell listed shares will want to do so at the best price obtainable and for that purpose to use the facilities of The Stock Exchange instead of himself seeking out a willing counterparty.
He will then enlist the services of a member firm of The Stock Exchange.
The former mandatory distinction, between brokers, who acted only as agents for their clients, and jobbers who acted only as market-making principals, has disappeared; as a result of ‘Big Bang’, firms may now act as either, so long as they disclose to the client whether they are acting as agents or principals.
By pressing the appropriate buttons on their office computers linked to The Exchange's automated quotations system (SEAQ) they can execute their clients' instructions at the best available price quoted by market-makers in the shares concerned.
They will then notify their clients by sending them contract notes — a ‘bought’ note in the case of a purchase and a ‘sold’note in the case of a sale — accompanied, in the case of a purchase, by a request for payment prior to the next settlement date (unless they are already holding their client's funds) or, in the case of a sale, by a transfer form for signature and return and a request for the share certificate (unless they already hold it).
If the transferor bothers to read the transfer form he will find that it differs slightly from the one that he would have used if he transferred his shares to his wife or children.
It will bear the heading TALISMAN and will purport to transfer the shares to ‘SEPON  Ltd.’
This is because The Stock Exchange, from, 1979 onwards, began to modernise its clearing-system by introducing progressively what is known as TALISMAN.
This now covers all market deals in fully paid listed shares or loan stock.
The detailed working of this system is of little interest or concern to the investing public, or to readers of this book.
It suffices to say that SEPON is the subsidiary company of The Exchange which acts as its clearing-house.
It holds a pool of the securities of each listed company and on dealings on The Exchange each seller transfers to SEPON, thus momentarily augmenting its pool and out of it SEPON transfers the appropriate amount of shares to each purchaser.
The transfer forms which the company will receive for registration enable it to amend its register in the light of the transactions.
But the securities, while passing in and out of the SEPON pool are as ‘fungible’ as a sum of money.
While this is a considerable improvement on the former method, it does nothing to reduce the paper-work involved or to shorten the time before a buyer is entered on the company's register and receives his share certificate — which will take weeks and sometimes months.
For some 25 years it has been recognised that the overall settlement system is antiquated in comparison with that of other major financial centres and that, if The Exchange is to maintain and enhance its position as one of the World's major international exchanges, further and more radical reforms are needed.
Happily at long-last something is being done.
Dematerialisation of listed securities
What is proposed is generally described as the ‘dematerialisation’ of shares.
The proposals were outlined in a publication of The Stock Exchange in March 1990 entitled ‘Project TAURUS: A prospectus for settlement in the 1990s ’(hereinafter referred to as Project Taurus).
The intention was to introduce by the end of 1993 a system, TAURUS, complementing TALISMAN, whereby, once a bargain in fully-paid listed securities was struck, the buyer would become, and the seller, in respect of the shares sold, would cease to be, a member and shareholder.
This would no longer depend on entry on, or removal from, the individual company's register and share certificates would become a thing of the past.
Instead, holdings and dealings would be recorded electronically in an account, corresponding to a bank account, with one of a number of ‘account operators,’ linked to TAURUS, from whom shareholders would be able to obtain at any time documentary evidence of the state of their accounts.
Apart from this, and, presumably, apart from the need for member firms to send their clients ‘bought’ or ‘sold’contract notes, the whole process would be paperless.
And, moreover, it would be far less labour-intensive and much more rapid especially as the present 14-day settlement would be replaced by a rolling 3-day settlement.
TAURUS will have a far more noticeable impact on investors than did TALISMAN.
And it will take private investors some time to get used to it.
But they should welcome it if in fact their dealings cost them materially less than at present.
It is clear that further legislative changes will be needed before TAURUS is introduced but precisely what these will be remains to be worked out.
However section 207 of the Companies Act 1989 enables such changes to be made by regulations.
Indeed, that section is worded exceptionally widely and would empower the Secretary of State to undertake root-and-branch reforms of the whole process of transferring shares, whether or not these were listed on an exchange.
The likelihood, however, is that the transfer of shares which are not listed, or admitted to dealings on the U.S.M. (or other recognised investment exchanges) will be left unchanged.
Hence it remains necessary to explain in further detail the present legal provisions and to highlight some of the problems to which they can give rise.
Share certificates
Section 185(1) of the Act provides that, unless the terms of issue of the securities otherwise provide, a company shall, within two months of allotment or receipt of a transfer, complete and have ready for delivery certificates resulting therefrom.
To this there are certain  exceptions in subsections (2) to (4).
These are designed to deal with the situations where, under the TALISMAN system, a certificate is not issued to a particular type of transferee, or the company is entitled to and does refuse to register a transfer.
Section 186, as substituted by the Companies Act 1989, provides:
‘A certificate under the common seal of the company (or, in the case of a company registered in Scotland, subscribed in accordance with section 36B) specifying any shares held by a member is —;(a) in England and Wales, prima facie evidence, and (b) in Scotland, sufficient evidence unless the contrary is shown, of his title to the shares.’
The wording of this is very curious, since it suggests that the section applies only if the certificate is under the common seal.
This, however, cannot be correct since section 36A, inserted by the 1989 Act, provides that a company need not have a common seal and that whether it has or not ‘a document signed by a director and the secretary of the company or by two directors and expressed (in whatever form of words) to be executed by the company has the same effect as if executed under the common seal of the company.’
Moreover, section 40 (as amended by the 1989 Act) enables a company, which has a common seal, instead to use for sealing documents evidencing securities, an ‘official’ seal which is the replica of its common seal with the addition of the word ‘Securities.’
Hence the section 186 applies so long as the certificate is authenticated as executed by the company by the use of the common seal, the official seal or signatures of two directors or one director and the secretary (or, in the case of Scottish companies, under the still wider provisions of section 36B).
Since, like the membership register, a share certificate is prima facie evidence only, it is far from being a document of title in the sense that a share warrant is.
Where there is a conflict between the register and the certificate, the former is stronger prima facie evidence than the latter but neither is decisive; ownership of the shares depends on who is entitled to be registered.
Suppose, say, that A, who is registered and is entitled to be registered, loses his  certificate, obtains a duplicate from the company and transfers to B who is registered by the company.
Subsequently A finds the original certificate and, either because he has forgotten about the sale to B or because he is a rogue, then purports to sell the shares to C. The company will rightly refuse to register C whose only remedy will be against A (who may by this time be a man-of-straw) unless he can successfully invoke against the company the so-called doctrine of estoppel by share certificate .
A share certificate will contain two statements on which the company will know that reliance may be placed.
The first is the extent to which the shares to which it relates are paid up.
The second is that the person named in it was registered as the holder of the stated number of shares.
The company may be estopped from denying either statement if someone in reliance upon it has changed his position to his detriment.
This will rarely benefit an original recipient of the incorrect certificate because receipt of his certificate normally marks the conclusion of the transaction and is not something on which he relied in deciding to enter into it and because he should be aware of the true facts.
But in exceptional circumstances it may do so.
More commonly it may afford a transferee who, in reliance on the transferor's share certificate, has bought what he believed, wrongly, to be fully-paid shares a defence if the company makes a call upon him.
The company will also be estopped if the transferee has relied on a false statement in his transferor's certificate that the transferor was the registered holder of the shares on the date stated in the certificate.
But the certificate is not a statement that the named shareholder has continued to be a shareholder since that date.
Hence the company will not be estopped in the example given above; it has not made any false statement.
Already the estoppel doctrine has little or no relevance to transactions on The Stock Exchange under the TALISMAN system; The Exchange and the member firms will ensure that the parties get what they have bargained for.
And when TAURUS is in operation, it will cease, with the disappearance of share certificates, to have any relevance to off-market dealings in listed shares of companies which have joined TAURUS.
Certification of transfers
If only to explain what section 184 of the Act is all about a brief reference is needed to a further aspect of the present system.
A seller will be unwilling to part with the transfer and share certificate until the buyer has paid the price but an off-market buyer will be unwilling to pay until he gets both documents.
This presents no problem if the seller has a certificate or certificates representing the precise amount sold to a single buyer.
There is a difficulty, however, if the seller is disposing of only part of his holding represented by a certificate or if he is disposing of all his holding but to several buyers.
To solve the problem a practice grew up of lodging the certificate or certificates with the company or its registrars who endorsed each transfer with a statement that certificates covering the transaction had been lodged.
Delivery of a certificated transfer is treated by a buyer and by the company as equivalent to delivery of a transfer and the relevant certificate.
On registration by the company a buyer receives a new certificate and the seller a balance certificate for any shares he retains.
Unfortunately confidence in this practice was somewhat sapped when the House of Lords decided that, if the officer of the company who certified the transfer did so fraudulently and for his own purposes when sufficient share certificates had not in fact been lodged, the company was not liable.
However an attempt was made to restore confidence in it by what is now section 184.
This makes it clear that certification, like a share certificate, is not a representation that the transferor has title to the shares but is a  representation that certificates have been produced to the company showing a prima facie title and that the company will be liable to compensate any person who acts on the faith of it, provided that it was issued by someone authorised by the company to issue certified transfer and was signed by someone authorised to sign.
Restrictions on transferability
Of far greater practical importance are questions which may arise when the company's articles of association impose restrictions on the freedom of transferability of its shares.
Except in relation to partly paid shares this is unlikely in the case of public companies; but is almost invariably done in relation to private companies.
Generally, the directors will be empowered to refuse to register transfers and frequently this will be accompanied by provisions affording the other members or the company rights of pre-emption, first refusal or even compulsory acquisition.
Such provisions require the most careful drafting if they are to achieve their purpose; and have not always received it, thereby facing the courts with difficult questions of interpretation.
However, the following propositions can, it is thought be extracted from the voluminous case law.
(a) The extent of the restriction is solely a matter of construction of the articles of association.
But, since shareholders have a prima facie right to transfer to whomsoever they please, this right is not to be cut down by uncertain language or doubtful implications.
If, therefore, it is not clear whether a restriction applies to any transfer or only to a transfer to, say, a non-member, or to any type of disposition or only to a sale the narrower construction will be adopted.
(b) On the other hand the courts will not carry a literal construction of the articles so far as to defeat their obvious purpose.
In one case the articles conferred a right of pre-emption on the other shareholders when any shareholder was ‘desirous of transferring his ordinary shares.’
Certain shareholders sold their shares to a take-over bidder, received the purchase price and gave him irrevocable proxies to vote on their behalf, but, in the light of the  articles, transfers were not to be lodged for registration.
The House of Lords held that in the context ‘transferring’ obviously meant assigning the beneficial interest and not the technical process of having a transfer registered.
The shareholders had clearly manifested an intention to sell their shares and could not continue with the sale without giving the other shareholders a right to exercise their option under the articles.
But this decision was distinguished in a later case where, in all relevant respects, the wording of the article was similar but the shares were held by the executors of a deceased shareholder.
The administration of the estate was completed and the executors now held the shares as bare trustees for two beneficiaries.
Neither had any wish that the shares should be transferred to him but it was argued that, on the basis of the House of Lords' decision, the passing of the beneficial interest to them was a ‘transfer’ of which notice should have been given, thus entitling other members to acquire the shares at a fair price.
Vinelott J. and the Court of Appeal refused to construe the provisions as extending to that situation.
(c) Where the regulations confer a discretion on directors with regard to the acceptance of transfers, this discretion, like all the directors' powers, is a fiduciary one to be exercised bona fide in what they consider — not what the court considers — to be in the interest of the company, and not for any collateral purpose.
But the court will presume that they have acted bona fide, and the onus of proof of the contrary is on those alleging it and is not easily discharged.
(d) If, on the true construction of the articles, the directors are entitled to reject only on certain prescribed grounds and it is proved that they have rejected on others, the court will intervene.
And interrogatories may be administered to determine on which of certain prescribed grounds the directors have acted, but not as to their reasons for rejecting on these grounds, and not if the articles provide, as they often do, that they shall not be bound to state their reasons.
If the directors do state their reasons the court will investigate them to the extent of seeing whether they have acted on the right principles and will overrule their decision if they have acted on considerations which should not have weighed with them, but not merely because the court would have come to a different  conclusion.
If the regulations are so framed as to give the directors an unfettered discretion the court will interfere with it only on proof of bad faith and since the directors will not be bound to disclose either their grounds or their reasons, the difficulty of discharging the onus of proof is especially great.
(e) If, as is normal, the regulations merely give the directors power to refuse to register, as opposed to making their passing of transfers a condition precedent to registration, the transferee is entitled to be registered unless the directors resolve as a board to reject.
Hence in Moodie v. Shepherd (Bookbinders) Ltd .
where the two directors disagreed and neither had a casting vote, the House of Lords held that registration must proceed.
The directors have a reasonable time in which to come to a decision, but since section 183(5) of the Act imposes an obligation on them to give to the transferee notice of rejection within two months of the lodging of the transfer, the maximum reasonable period is two months.
The positions of transferor and transferee prior to registration
In the case of an off-market transaction it may be of importance to determine the precise legal position of the transferor and transferee pending registration of the transfer which, if there are restrictions on transferability may never occur.
As we have seen, only if and when the transfer is registered, will the transferor cease to be a member and shareholder and the transferee will become a member and shareholder.
However, notwithstanding that registration has not occurred, the beneficial interest in the shares may have passed from the transferor to the transferee.
In the case of a sale the transaction will normally go through three stages:—(1) an agreement (which, particularly if a block of shares conferring de facto or de jure control is being sold, may be a complicated one)(2) delivery of the signed transfer and the certificate by the seller and payment of the price by the buyer and (3) lodgment of the transfer for registration by the company.
Notwithstanding that the transfer is not lodged for  registration or registration is refused, the beneficial interest in the shares will, it seems, pass from the seller to the buyer at the latest at stage (2) and, indeed will do so at stage (1) if the agreement is one which the courts would order to be specifically enforced.
The seller then becomes a trustee for the buyer and must account to him for any dividends he receives and vote in accordance with his instructions (or appoint him as his proxy).
This, however, begs several questions.
The first arises because at stage (2) delivery of the documents may not necessarily be matched by payment of the full price; the agreement may have provided for payment by instalments and the seller will then retain a lien on the shares as an unpaid seller.
This will not prevent an equitable interest passing to the buyer but the court will not grant specific performance unless the seller's lien can be fully protected and until paid in full he is entitled to vote the shares as he thinks will best protect his interest.
Instead of being a bare trustee his position is analogous to that of a trustee of a settlement of which he is one of the beneficiaries.
The second begged question is whether the foregoing can apply when the articles provide for rights of pre-emption or first refusal when a shareholder wishes to dispose of his shares.
In such a case the transferor (perhaps with the full knowledge of the transferee 9) has breached the deemed contract under section 14 between him and the company and his fellow shareholders.
There are observations of the House of Lords in Hunter v. Hunter to the effect that accordingly the transfer is wholly void even as between the transferor and transferee.
However, in two later cases courts have refused to follow this and, it must surely be right (at any rate if the price has been paid) that the buyer obtains such rights as the transferor had.
This will not benefit the buyer if all the shares are taken up when the transferor is compelled to make a pre-emptive offer, but it does not  follow that all of them will be taken up and, if not, the transferee has a better claim to those shares not taken up than has the transferor.
When the transaction is not a sale but a gift there need be no agreement.
Even if there is, it will not be legally enforceable under English law because there will be no valuable consideration and because under the so-called rule in Milroy v. Lord ‘there is no equity to perfect an imperfect gift.’
One might have supposed, therefore, that if the donor has chosen to make the gift by handing to the donee a signed transfer and the share certificate, rather than by a formal declaration of trust in favour of the donee, the gift would not be effective unless and until the transfer was registered.
In two modern cases, however, it has been held that so long as the donor has done all he needs to do, the beneficial interest passes from him to the donee.
Priorities between competing transferees
In the case of off-market transactions questions may also arise in determining the priority of purported transfers of the same shares to different people.
In answering these questions the courts have relied on two traditional principles of English property law:i.e .
(1) that as between two competing holders of equitable interests, if their equities are equal the first in time prevails and (2) that a bona fide purchaser for value of a legal interest takes free of earlier equitable interests of which he as no notice at the time of purchase.
In applying these principles to competing share transfers, a transferee prior to registration is treated as having an equitable interest only but registration converts his interest into a legal one.
Hence if a registered shareholder, A, first executes a transfer to a purchaser, B, and later to another, C, while both remain unregistered B will have priority over C. If, however, C succeeds in obtaining registration before B, he will have priority over B so long as he had no notice, at the time of purchase, of the transfer to B. If C did have notice, although he has been registered his prima facie title will not prevail over that of B who will be entitled to have the register rectified (assuming that there are no grounds on which the company could  refuse to register B) and in the meantime C's legal interest will be subject to the equitable interest of B. If both transfers were gifts, the position would presumably be different; the gift to B would leave A without any beneficial interest that he could give to C and, not being a ‘purchaser,’ C could not obtain priority by registration; his legal interest, on his becoming the registered holder, would be subject to the prior equity of B.
It should perhaps be pointed out once again that even registration affords only prima facie evidence of title.
If the registered transferor, A, was not entitled to the shares, what will pass when he transfers to B or C is not, strictly speaking, either a legal or equitable interest but only his imperfect title to it which will not prevail against the true owner.
If, for example, the transfer to A was a forgery the true owner will be entitled to be restored to the register.
Hence a transferee can never be certain of obtaining an absolute title in the case of an off-market transaction.
But his risk is slight so long as he promptly obtains registration of the transfer.
And this he can do unless there are restrictions on the transferability of the shares or unless there are good reasons for failing to apply for registration.
The principal example for the latter occurs when the shareholder wants to borrow on the security of his shares.
This can be done by a legal mortgage, under which the shareholder transfers the shares to the lender (who registers the transfer) subject to an agreement to re-transfer them when the loan is repaid.
Generally, however, this suits neither party; the lender normally has no wish to become a member and shareholder of the company and the borrower does not want to cease to be one.
Hence a more usual arrangement is one whereby the shareholder deposits with the lender his share certificate and, often, a signed blank transfer, this usually being accompanied by a written memorandum setting out the terms of the loan.
The result is to confer an equitable charge which the lender can enforce by selling the shares if he needs to realise his security.
Custody of the share certificate is regarded as the essential protection of the lender and it is not clear precisely how continuation of this popular method of providing security will be practicable in relation to uncertificated  listed securities on the introduction of TAURUS — short of repealing section 360 of the Act and requiring ‘account operators’ to note equitable interests.
If that were done the lender's protection would be enhanced.
The Company's lien
As we have seen, a public company is no longer permitted to have a charge or lien on its shares except (a) when the shares are not fully paid and the charge or lien is for the amount payable on the shares, or (b) the ordinary business of the company includes the lending of money or consists of the provision of hire-purchase finance and the charge arises in the course of a transaction in the ordinary course of its business.
Neither exception is of much importance in the present context.
Hence it is only in respect of private companies that problems are still likely to arise when their articles provide, as they frequently do, that ‘the company shall have a first and paramount lien on shares, whether or not fully-paid, registered in the name of a person indebted or under any liability to the company.’
Since the decision of the House of Lords in Bradford Banking Co .
v. Briggs, Son and Co .
it appears to be accepted that the effect of such a provision is that:
(a) Once a shareholder has incurred a debt or liability to the company, it has an equitable charge on the shares of that shareholder to secure payment which ranks in priority to later equitable interests and, it seems to earlier ones of which the company had no notice when its lien became effective; and (b) in determining whether the company had notice, section 360 has no application; if the company knows of the earlier equitable interest (because, for example, a transfer of the shares has been lodged for registration even if that is refused) it cannot improve its own position to the detriment of the holder of that known equitable interest.
An interesting modern illustration is afforded by Champagne Perrier Jouet v. Finch & Co .
There the company's articles provided for a lien in the above terms.
One of its shareholders had been allowed to run up substantial debts to the company resulting from trading between him and the company and it had been agreed that he could repay by instalments.
Another creditor of the shareholder subsequently obtained judgment against him and a charging order on the shares by way of equitable execution.
It was held that the company's lien had become effective when the debts to it were incurred (even though they were not then due for repayment) and as this occurred before the company had notice of the charging order, the company's lien had priority.
As this case shows, an equitable charge on shares in a private company with articles conferring a lien on the company is likely to be an even more undesirable form of security than shares in private companies always are.
It may, however, be the only security obtainable, for an attempt to obtain a legal charge will almost certainly be frustrated by the refusal of the directors to register the transfer.
If, faute-de-mieux, it has to be accepted, notice should immediately be given to the company, making it clear that this is a notice which it cannot disregard in relation to any lien it may claim, and an attempt should be made to obtain information about the amount, if any, then owed to the company.
Transmission of shares by operation of law
The Act recognises that shares may be transmitted by operation of law and that, when this occurs, the prohibition on registering unless a proper instrument of transfer has been delivered does not apply.
The principal examples of this are when a registered shareholder (a) dies or (b) becomes bankrupt.
As regards(a), the Act further provides that a transfer by the deceased's personal representative, even if he is not a member of the company, is as valid as if he had been.
The company is bound to accept probate or letters of administration granted in any part of the United Kingdom  as sufficient evidence of the personal representative's entitlement.
However, he does not become a member unless he elects to apply to be registered and is registered as a member.
In the meantime, the effect is, as Table A, article 31 puts it, that he has
‘the rights to which he would be entitled if he were the holder of the share, except that he shall not, before being registered as the holder of the share, be entitled in respect of it to attend or vote at any general meeting of the company or at a separate meeting of the holders of any class of shares in the company.’
If the shares are those if a listed company this anomalous position can be ended rapidly because, unless the shares are not fully paid, there will not be any restrictions on transferability and the personal representative will either obtain registration of himself or execute a transfer to a purchaser or to the beneficiaries.
In relation to a private company, however, it may continue indefinitely and prove detrimental to the personal representative, the deceased's estate and sometimes, the company.
The personal representative may suffer because it may not be possible for him fully to wind up the estate and to obtain a discharge from his fiduciary responsibilities.
The estate may suffer because it may be impossible for the personal representative to sell the shares at their true value, especially if any attempt to dispose of them would trigger rights of pre-emption or first refusal.
The company may suffer because, as we have seen, unless such rights have been most carefully drafted, they will not come into operation so long as no action regarding registration is taken by the personal representative and because, if the company had only two members and directors, the death of one may mean that no quorate meetings can be held, and the company may face a petition to wind it up.
Clearly in relation to private companies  reform of this branch of the law is urgently needed.
At the least, this should include an obligation on directors who refuse to register personal representatives or transferees from them to state their reasons.
All that statutory reforms have done as yet is to make piecemeal extensions of the remedies afforded to members so that they can be invoked by personal representatives of members.
The position on bankruptcy of an individual shareholder is broadly similar.
His rights to the shares will automatically vest in the trustee in bankruptcy as part of his estate.
But, as in the case of a personal representative, until he elects to become registered and is, he will not become a member of the company entitled to attend meetings and to vote.
In contrast, however, with the position on the death of a member, the bankrupt will remain a member and be entitled to attend and vote — though he will have to do so in accordance with the directions of the trustee.
Hence there will, in this case, be no reduction in the membership of the company.
As in the case of personal representatives, the company's articles will probably provide that any restrictions on transferability apply on any application to be registered and to any transfer by him and these restrictions may handicap the trustee in obtaining the best price on a sale of the shares, particularly if the articles confer pre-emption rights.
If a personal representative or trustee in bankruptcy elects to be registered, and is, he becomes personally liable for any amounts unpaid on the shares and not merely representationally liable to the extent of the estate.
Trustees in bankruptcy, but not personal representatives, may disclaim onerous property, which the shares might be if they were partly paid or subject to an effective company lien.
Applicability to debentures
The foregoing discussion in this chapter has been primarily directed to the acquisition and disposal of shares.
But much of it is equally  applicable to debentures and many of the statutory provisions expressly apply equally to them, though it is clear that when they do so ‘debentures’ is usually used in its narrow sense of debenture stock or a series of identical debentures and not in its wider meaning of a single mortgage, charge or bond.
So far as the former are concerned, the Act (as does the Financial Services Act) assumes that public issues of debentures will be undertaken by the same methods as issues of shares and it provides that a contract to take up debentures, like one to take up shares, may be enforced by an order for specific performance.
It also assumes that debentures or debenture stock will be transferred in much the same way as shares.
Hence subsections (1),(2),(5) and (6) of section 183 (relating to the need for written transfers, except when the transmission is by operation of law, and to the recognition of personal representatives) expressly apply.
So do sections 184 (certification of transfers) and 185 (duty to issue certificates).
And estoppel, similar to estoppel by share certificate, clearly could arise from statements in certificates of debenture stock or in debentures.
One could also be faced with problems, similar to those in relation to shares, regarding equitable and legal ownership of debentures and the priority of competing transferees.
But the great difference here is the lesser role played by registration.
Unlike the membership register a company is not compelled to maintain a register of debentureholders.
The Act assumes that a company probably will maintain a register if it issues debenture stock or a series of debentures and the Act contains provisions, similar to, but not identical with, those relating to the membership register, concerning where the register shall be kept and who shall be entitled to inspect and obtain copies of it.
But it says nothing about the register being evidence of ownership, and it is not clear what role, if any, it plays in converting an equitable interest to a legal one.
On general principles relating to assignments of choses-in-action, a transfer of a debenture should be an equitable assignment only, until it becomes a legal assignment when the company receives notice of it.
In principle, therefore, the legal interest should pass from transferor or transferee when the company is given notice of it, and that date, rather than the later date of actual registration, should be the relevant one in determining its priority over earlier unnotified transfers.
Other differences flow from the fact that whereas the rights of shareholders depend mainly on the provision of the company's articles, which will have been drafted in the interests of the company, those of debentureholders depend upon the terms of a contract between lender and borrower and its terms will have to be acceptable to the lender.
Hence in practice there will be no problems arising from restrictions on transferability or from a company's lien; debentures will invariably provide that the money expressed to be secured will be paid, and that the debentures are transferable, free from any equities or claims between the company and the original or any intermediate holder.
Another contrast with shares is that if shares are redeemed or re-purchased by the company they have to be cancelled, whereas the Act provides that, unless it is otherwise agreed, redeemed debentures may be re-issued with their original priority.
The great contrast, however, is that debentures secured by charges on the company's property throw up problems regarding the priority between conflicting charges.
These problems are dealt with in the next chapter.
COMPANY CHARGES
Borrowers are often obliged to provide security for the repayment of their debts and in this respect a company is no different from any other borrower.
Almost invariably debentures issued by a company will be secured by a charge over the company's assets.
However, there are sufficiently unique features associated with the granting of security by a company that justify it being treated as a separate topic.
In particular, the floating charge is practicable only if created by a body corporate, there is a separate system for the registration of company charges, there are distinct statutory procedures for the enforcement of the floating charge, certain provisions of the Insolvency Act 1986 affecting company charges are unique to corporate insolvency, and the floating charge can be used tactically in order to veto the making of an administration order.
Coupled with these, the granting of security by a company is subject to the law relating to corporate capacity and director's duties.
As regards these latter matters, it will be assumed for the remainder of the chapter, unless the contrary is stated, that a company has capacity to grant the security and that the directors were not acting in breach of their duty to the company or exceeding their authority.
Some comment is also needed on nomenclature.
‘Charge,’‘security’ or ‘security interest’will be used interchangeably in the sense in which charge is defined in the Companies Act 1985, namely as any form of security, fixed or floating, over a company's property present or future.
THE LEGAL NATURE OF SECURITY INTERESTS
It is necessary to deal briefly with what is a complex area of the law and that is the types of security interests recognised by English law.
Some knowledge of this topic is essential in order to understand the nature of the rights conferred on a secured charge holder, the  priorities of charges, and the system for the registration of company charges.
Although a number of security interests are clearly accepted as being recognised by English law, there is some doubt at the penumbra as to what constitutes a security interest and, in particular, as to whether there is a numerus clausus of such interests.
Browne-Wilkinson V.-C., without claiming that it was comprehensive, accepted the following as a description of a security interest:
‘Security is created where a person (‘the creditor’) to whom an obligation is owed by another (‘the debtor’) by statute or contract, in addition to the personal promise of the debtor to discharge the obligation, obtains rights exercisable against some property in which the debtor has an interest in order to enforce the discharge of the debtor's obligation to the creditor.’
This brings out what is perhaps the essential feature of a security interest, namely, that ultimately it gives the holder of the security a proprietary claim over assets, normally the debtor's, to secure payment of the debt.
The position of a secured creditor is to be contrasted with that of an unsecured creditor who merely has a personal claim to sue for the payment of his debt and to invoke the available legal processes for the enforcement of any judgment that he may obtain.
Security interests can be divided broadly into consensual and non-consensual securities.
As the name implies, consensual security interests arise by way of agreement of the parties.
There is general acceptance that as regards consensual security English law recognises at least the following: the mortgage, the charge, the pledge and the lien.
In contrast to consensual security interests are those security interests that arise by operation of law.
The classification of this category is not free from difficulty but it includes at least a common law lien and a lien arising by operation of law.
It is not possible in a text of this nature to go into the details of security interests in any great depth but a number of questions arise with respect to the creation of such interests by a company.
(i)
First, is the charge fixed or floating?
An example of the fixed charge is the mortgage and no more need be said about it here.
The floating charge will be dealt with later.
(ii)
Second, is the interest created by the charge equitable or legal?
This has a bearing on the priorities of different chargees and of course the equitable charge holder can be defeated by the bona fide purchaser for value
(iii)
Third, is the security interest possessory in the sense that possession, either actual or constructive, of the property subject to the security is necessary in order to confer a security interest on the security holder?
Obviously, if all security interests were possessory it would make secured borrowing virtually impossible as a debtor would be deprived of the ability to use the assets subject to the security in the course of business (but English law has for long recognised non-possessory security interests).
The classic example of a possessory security is the pledge which involves the pledgee (the security holder) taking possession of the goods of the debtor (the pledgor) until the debt is paid or the pledgee takes steps to enforce the pledge.
The lien also in many situations is possessory although it is possible to have a non-possessory lien.
(iv)
Fourth, what type of ‘proprietary’ interest is vested in the chargee by the charge?
This has a direct bearing as to remedies.
The remedies of the floating charge holder will be dealt with in greater detail later.
But some brief comment is needed on the remedies available to the holders of other types of security interests.
First is to be contrasted the mortgage and the charge and in this context charge is being used in its technical meaning and not in the broader sense set out at the beginning of this chapter.
Although the words ‘charge’ and ‘mortgage’are often used interchangeably, there is technically an essential difference between them: ‘a mortgage involves a conveyance of property subject to a right of redemption, whereas a charge conveys nothing and merely gives the chargee certain rights over the property as security for the loan.’
The essential difference between an equitable charge and a mortgage is as regards remedies; since a charge, unlike the mortgage, does not involve a conveyance of a proprietary interest, a chargee cannot foreclose or take possession.
The remedy of a chargee is to apply to the court for an order for sale or for the appointment of a receiver.
The principal remedy of a pledgee is that of sale of the pledged goods and he can also sub-pledge the goods.
A lien holder merely has the right to detain the goods subject to the lien until the debt has been paid.
(v)
Fifth, is the security interest one that is created by the act of the parties or is it one created by operation of law?
This point has already been referred to above.
It is of critical importance with respect to the registration of company charges since charges created by a company over its assets are treated differently from charges over a company's assets arising other than by the creation of the company.
This point will be dealt with in greater detail later.
(vi)
Lastly, is the charge registrable under the provisions for the registration of company charges.
Again this will be dealt with in greater detail later.
The above is a very compressed survey of what constitutes a security interest.
To complicate the picture even further, there are a number of other devices which, although not strictly security interests in the sense of vesting some type of proprietary interest in the creditor or which give him possessory control over assets of the debtor company, nevertheless act as security.
These devices often put a creditor in a position superior to that of other unsecured creditors in the event of a company's insolvent liquidation.
Two illustrative examples of such devices are (i) the negative pledge clause in unsecured lending and (ii) retention of title by a seller of goods.
The first of these is an agreement by a debtor company and its unsecured creditor that the company will not create any securities which have priority to the claim of the creditor.
Although this does not vest a security interest in the creditor, it has been claimed (rightly) that it ‘behaves’ like a security interest since it is an attempt to preclude the debtor from freely using its assets and thus, as with a security interest, it provides the creditor with a measure of protection.
The retention of title is an arrangement whereby the seller of goods retains title to the goods until at least the buyer of the goods pays for them.
Some of the problems raised by this type of security will be dealt with later in the discussion on registration.
The purpose of taking security
There are a number of compelling reasons for a creditor to obtain a charge and not rely solely on his personal action against a debtor company.
First, in the event of the insolvency of a company a secured creditor will at least have priority to unsecured creditors and will, according to the seniority of his claim, have priority over any less senior security holders.
This is a direct consequence of the fact that a security interest confers some type of proprietary interest on its holder.
Priority-gaining in the event of a company's liquidation is one of the principal reasons for taking security.
Second, the secured creditor may have the right of pursuit.
This arises where a company in violation of the rights of a chargee disposes of the property subject to the charge and it entitles a chargee to pursue his claim into the proceeds of the disposition.
Third, a security interest gives its holder the right of enforcement.
What this entails is that once a charge becomes enforceable, the chargee may thereupon take whatever steps are available to enforce the charge since English law places no significant impediments in the way of the right of enforcement of a charge.
This right of enforcement is further enhanced by the fact that English insolvency law permits a chargee to remain outside the insolvency proceedings and to enforce his charge independently of such proceedings.
Lastly, a charge affords a chargee a measure of control over the business of the debtor company.
The company may have to report regularly to the chargee and if the company gets into financial difficulties, the chargee may be made privy to management decisions.
In addition, the charge may be so all-embracing that it confers on the chargee as a matter of fact the exclusive right to supply the debtor company with credit.
A charge will obviously deter a second financier from providing the company with funds where its charge would rank after a charge that the company has already created over its assets.
Also, unsecured creditors will often be deterred from seeking a winding-up since such creditors would readily appreciate the futility of such action where the company's assets were charged up to the hilt.
The floating charge
The general nature of a floating charge has already been explained; it is an equitable charge on some or all of the company's present and future property which leaves the company free to deal with the property subject to the charge in the ordinary course of business.
Such a charge is, therefore, a particularly valuable means whereby a business concern can raise money without removing any of its property from the business.
Also, it facilitates the granting of security over assets which in the normal course of a company's business are circulating, for example, stock in trade.
The charge remains floating and the company free to use the assets subject to the charge until the charge is converted into a fixed charge.
This is referred to as the crystallisation of the charge.
The normal crystallising event is the taking of steps to enforce the charge but there are others and these will be dealt with later.
No particular form of words is necessary to create a floating charge; it suffices if the intention is shown (a) to impose a charge on assets both present and future,(b) the assets are of such a nature that they would be changing in the ordinary course of the company's business, and (c) the company is free to continue to deal with the assets in the ordinary course of its business.
The phrase ‘ordinary course of business’ is construed widely: it may even cover the sale of the company's whole undertaking in exchange for securities in another company provided such sale is authorised by the objects clause in the company's memorandum.
For a clear grasp of the nature of a floating charge, two important factors must be kept in mind.
First, probably the most significant feature for identifying the floating charge is that the company retains management autonomy with respect to the assets subject to the charge.
Thus the essence of the charge is not determined by the nature of the property over which it is created but rather by the degree of freedom accorded to the company to deal with this property in the normal course of business.
This is illustrated by Siebe Gorman & Co.
Ltd .
v. Barclays Bank Ltd .
Where the court held that a fixed charge had been created in favour of a bank over book debts (in this case bills of exchange) where the charge provided that the company could not charge or assign these debts and, most importantly, had to pay the proceeds into an account with the chargee bank which the company could not operate without the consent of the bank.
It was the absence of the ability to use the book debts in the normal course of business that deprived the charge of the character of being floating.
However, the fact that there is some restriction on the power of the company to deal with assets subject to a charge does not preclude it from being a floating charge.
To preclude a charge from being a floating charge, the restriction must substantially deprive the company of the power to deal with its assets in the normal course of business.
The second factor of importance with respect to the nature of a floating charge is that although a floating charge relates to future assets it is a present charge and not a future one.
In Re Margart Properties Ltd .
a bank enforced its floating charge after the commencement of the company's winding-up and the liquidator argued that the payment of the proceeds of the realisation was invalid because of what is the equivalent of section 127 of the Insolvency Act 1986 which invalidates any disposition of a company's property after the commencement of winding up.
The argument failed for the very good reason that the disposition of the company's property took place when the charge was created and not when the charge was enforced; the floating charge is an existing charge and not one arising in the future when the charge is enforced or when it crystallises.
Vulnerability of the floating charge
The holder of a floating charge is not solely concerned with the rights which it provides against the company but equally importantly he is concerned with the priority it provides against other charge holders.
As regards the latter aspect, the floating charge provides less than perfect security.
Because of the management autonomy accorded to the company with respect to the charged assets, the company can create security interests that have priority to the floating charge: a floating charge will be deferred to any subsequent fixed legal or equitable charge created by the company over its assets.
Similarly, if debts due to the company are subject to a floating charge, the interest of the floating charge holder will be subject to any lien or set off that the company creates with respect to the charged assets prior to crystallisation, for a floating charge is not regarded for this purpose as an immediate assignment of the chose in action, it becomes such only on crystallisation.
If a creditor has levied and completed execution the debentureholders cannot compel him to restore the money, nor, until the charge has crystallised, can he be restrained from levying execution.
The floating charge holder will take the company's property subject to the rights of anyone claiming by title paramount, so that a landlord can re-enter and can distrain on chattels in the leased premises if rent is unpaid, notwithstanding that the chattels are comprised in a charge which has crystallised.
But if a receiver has been appointed by the court, the court's leave must be obtained, for it is then in possession through its officers.
To firm up their security against subsequent security interests created by the company and which would otherwise have priority, floating charges almost invariably contain a provision that restricts the right of the company to create charges that have priority to or rank  equally with the floating charge (called a negative pledge clause).
Such restrictions, which are quite common but strictly construed, limit the company's actual authority to deal with its assets and accordingly remove the basis on which floating charges are postponed to later charges.
Nevertheless, it has been held that they may still be postponed to later mortgages, notwithstanding the limitation of the company's actual authority.
If the later mortgage is legal, the mortgagee will obtain priority by virtue of his legal interest unless he has notice not only of the floating charge but also of the restriction in it.
If it is equitable, the chargee may be preferred on the ground that the company has been allowed to represent that it is free to deal with the assets in the normal course of business as though they were unencumbered.
For example, if the title deeds are left with the company, an equitable mortgagee by deposit will take priority.
Most of the problems in this area have now been resolved by the requirement that undertakings by a company not to create subsequent charges having priority to an existing charge have to be registered in the company's register of charges and this will constitute notice to any person who is taking a charge which also has to be registered.
Whatever the nature of protection provided by registration, it is also a wise precaution for a chargee to deprive a company of the title deeds to its properties — this is another advantage of having trustees who can take possession of the deeds.
Some limit was placed on the company's power to create charges having priority to the floating charge by the decision of Sargant J. that a company could not create a floating charge on the same assets ranking in priority to or pari passu with the original floating charge.
This decision was subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal, but limited to cases where the assets comprised in both charges are the same, and it appears that a general floating charge on the whole of the undertaking may be postponed to a subsequent floating charge on a particular class of assets where the first charge contemplates the creation of the later charge.
In Scotland, however, where the same property (or any part of the same property) is subject to two floating charges they rank according to the time of registration unless the  instruments creating the charges otherwise provide.
Also, where the company subsequent to granting a floating charge containing a negative pledge provision purchases property leaving part of the purchase secured by a mortgage, the mortgage will take priority, even if the mortgage has actual notice so long as what the company acquired was the equity of redemption subject to the mortgage.
Given the vulnerability of the floating charge the question arises as to why a creditor should bother to obtain one.
While obviously the fixed charge accords superior protection, there are sound reasons for taking a floating charge.
First, where a subsequent holder of a registrable charge is deemed to have notice of a negative pledge clause then this accords priority to the floating charge holder.
Second, the charge provides security against unsecured creditors.
Third, the floating charge holder will be able to take steps to enforce the charge and, as will be seen, this accords him considerable control over the company's affairs.
Fourth, the holder of a floating charge will have some measure of control over the company even without taking any steps to enforce it.
Lastly, the holder of a floating charge will be able to block the appointment of an administrator.
Crystallisation
Crystallisation is the term used to describe the process by which a floating charge is converted into a normal fixed charge.
A crystallised charge will bite on all the assets covered by the charge since normally a floating charge does not provide for crystallisation over part only of the assets to which it relates.
The effect of crystallisation is to deprive the company of the autonomy to deal with the assets subject to the charge in the normal course of business.
The events of crystallisation, on which there is general agreement, are (i) the making of a winding up order,(ii) the appointment of an  administrative receiver,(iii) the company's ceasing to carry on business,(iv) the taking of possession by the debentureholder and (v) the happening of an event expressly provided for in the debenture, often referred to as ‘automatic crystallisation.’
Automatic crystallisation is not a term of art but covers at least two situations which at first blush appear dissimilar; one is where the charge is made to crystallise on the happening of an event provided for in the charge without there being any need for a further act by the chargee and the other is where the charge is made to crystallise on the serving of a notice of crystallisation on the company.
However, these events have one important common feature and that is they will normally not be known to a person dealing with the company and therefore it seems appropriate to treat them together.
Although there was some doubt as the validity of automatic crystallisation provisions, the matter seems to be settled beyond dispute by the judgment of Hoffman J. in Re Brightlife Ltd .
upholding the validity of a provision enabling the floating charge holder to serve a notice of crystallisation on the company.
He saw crystallisation as being a matter of agreement between the parties and on this reasoning there can be no objection to a charge being made to crystallise on the happening of a specified event.
In so far as insolvency law is committed to the principle that property within the apparent ownership of the company should be treated as the company's in the event of its insolvent liquidation, permitting party autonomy to effect automatic crystallisation undermines this policy.
It has been claimed that automatic crystallisation is unfair in the sense that it could prejudice subsequent chargees who do not know, and indeed who may have no way of knowing, that the charge has crystallised.
Whether this is indeed the case is not clear cut.
As Professor Goode has pointed out, the fact that the charge has crystallised will affect the relationship between the chargee and the company but it does not necessarily affect a third party since if the company is left free to deal with the assets in the normal course of its business then the chargee  should be estopped from denying the company's authority to do so.
Even if this argument is unsuccessful, it should be kept in mind that it is not all security interests which will be prejudiced by automatic crystallisation but only those lacking priority to a crystallised floating charge.
Lastly, the matter may now be dealt with by statute as the Secretary of State can pass regulations requiring notice to be given to the Registrar of events which affect the nature of the security under a floating charge and can provide that the happening of such events shall be ineffective until the prescribed particulars have been delivered.
It is unclear as to whether the making of an administration order crystallises a floating charge.
Arguably the appointment of an administrator for the more advantageous realisation of the company's assets than a winding-up has this effect since this constitutes a virtual cessation of business.
Although there is no authority on this, it is submitted that this is not the case since the provisions on administration (particularly the right of the floating charge holder to block the appointment of an administrator) obviously envisage that crystallisation must arise from the act of the floating charge holder or the terms of the charge.
Also, it would frustrate an administration where an administrator is appointed for the purpose set out in section 8(3) (a) of the 1986 Act.
There are certain events that do not cause crystallisation.
Default in the payment of interest or capital are not crystallising events although, given the validity of an automatic crystallising clause, there is no objection in principle to a charge by its terms being made to crystallise on the happening of a stipulated event of default.
However, even though default may not result in crystallisation the  company will be in breach of contract and the chargee will have appropriate contractual remedies.
In many situations the chargee may have a contractual remedy even though the charge has not crystallised; for example, the holder of an uncrystallised charge can always ‘intervene and obtain an injunction to prevent the company from dealing with its assets otherwise than in the ordinary course of its business.’
The crystallisation of an earlier floating charge does not crystallise a subsequent floating charge since the subsequent chargee may pay off the earlier charge or agree to indemnify the company which continues to carry on business despite the crystallisation of the earlier charge with respect to any liability incurred towards the earlier chargee.
Statutory limitations on the floating charge
There are certain statutory provisions that further add to the vulnerability of the floating charge.
These provisions relate to (i) preferential creditors — which affects the priority of the charge;(ii) defective floating charges — which affects the validity of the charge;(iii) the right of an administrator to override a floating charge —; which affects the enforcement rights of the charge;(iv) costs of the liquidation — which diminishes the assets available for the floating charge holders.
It is proposed to deal with these matters seriatim.
(i) Preferential creditors As a matter of policy, insolvency law has to determine (a) what constitutes insolvency proceedings and (b) whether any particular class of creditors should be given protection in the insolvency of a company and accorded a statutory preference over some or all of the company's creditors.
The relevance of this policy to the rights of floating charge holders is that the procedure for enforcement of a floating charge is to some extent treated as an insolvency proceeding.
Also, as already pointed out, debentureholders with a floating charge closely resemble shareholders and form a class of those interested in the company rather than of those who merely have claims against it.
Consequently it has been thought unjust that they should obtain priority over employees (one of the categories of preferential creditor) who have priority to the  shareholders in the event of the company's liquidation.
Hence it is provided that on winding up, a voluntary arrangement, or appointment of an administrative receiver under a floating charge, preferential debts, which include certain payments to employees, will have priority over the claims of ordinary creditors and shall similarly have priority over any floating charge.
The preferential debts of the employees are set out in Schedule 6 to the Insolvency Act 1986 and include four months' wages and accrued holiday remuneration.
In the case of a floating charge the relevant date for quantifying the preferential debts is the date of the appointment of the receiver by the debentureholders.
Anyone who has advanced money for the payment of the employee debts which would have been preferential is subrogated to the rights of the employee.
It is important to note that the preferential creditors are given priority where a receiver is appointed with respect to a charge ‘which, as created, was a floating charge’; thus the fact that the charge has crystallised at the time a receiver is appointed does not result in preferential debts being denied their statutory priority.
The Secretary of State for Employment is required to pay employees unpaid remuneration and other entitlements and entitled to recover this in priority to the debentureholder.
More controversially, the Crown for certain unpaid taxes and other levies is also accorded the status of preferential creditor.
It is argued  that these are debts owed to the community and as such should be accorded a preference.
This was roundly rejected by the Cork Committee who considered that the wrong done to individual creditors could well outweigh any prejudice to the community in depriving the Crown of its preference.
As regards withholding taxes,(e.g .
VAT and PAYE), where the company acts as a tax collector rather than a taxpayer, the Cork Committee considered that the Crown should be given a preference as other creditors had no legitimate expectation of payment from this source.
The Insolvency Act 1986 embodies these reforms and the Crown's preferred position is confined to taxes or social security contributions collected by the company for transmission to the Government.
The provisions relating to the payment of preferential creditor creates a statutory duty and if a debentureholder or a receiver realises assets he will be personally liable to the extent of these assets if preferential creditors are not paid.
Where the company can exercise the right of set-off against a preferential creditor who is also owed a non-preferential debt by the company, the set-off must be exercised against the debts rateably in proportion to the amounts of the preferential and non-preferential claims of the creditor.
(ii) defective floating charges It has also been thought unjust to allow an unsecured creditor to obtain priority to other creditors by obtaining a floating charge when he realises that liquidation is imminent.
The temptation and the opportunities to attempt to salvage something out of the wreck are particularly great in the case of the directors themselves.
So long as assets remain available they will have caused the company to borrow on mortgage, but when the company's credit is exhausted they may attempt to keep the company afloat by themselves making unsecured loans to it.
Finding that their efforts are doomed to failure, what more natural than that they should cause the company to execute a floating charge in their favour to secure the loans so that if anything is left, after the claims of the prior chargees are satisfied, they take it rather than the unsecured creditors?
To  prevent this, section 245 of the Insolvency Act 1986 provides that a floating charge created in favour of an unconnected person within 12 months of the commencement of the winding-up or the making of an administration order shall be invalid (except to a prescribed extent) unless it is proved that the company was solvent immediately after the creation of the charge.
If these conditions are not satisfied the charge is valid only to the extent of any cash, goods or services supplied to the company, or the discharge of any liability of the company, where these take place ‘at the same time as, or after, the creation of the charge.’
This phraseology was held by Hoffmann J. in Re Shoe Lace Ltd .
to import contemporaneity and not causality.
The question was whether the reasonable business man would have considered that the new value was extended at the same time as the execution of the charge and not whether the new value was extended because of the  existence of the charge.
In many ways the latter approach would be preferable since the essential question is whether the charge was intended to secure some new value and the requirement to register it within 21 days of its creation would suffice to protect those dealing with company.
Hence those who take a floating charge from a company which cannot be proved to be solvent, and which does not survive for a further year, cannot thereby obtain protection in respect to their existing debts, but only to the extent that they provide the company with new value and thus increase the assets available for other creditors.
The directors, in the example given previously, cannot retrospectively convert themselves into secured creditors in respect of moneys which they have previously advanced without demanding security.
Nor will it avail them to advance further money on a floating charge on the understanding that this is to be used to repay existing loans; a creditor cannot by use of the floating charge transmute an unsecured  into a secured debt by attempting to manipulate the saving provisions of section 245.
It is important to note that not all value is ‘new value’ for the purpose of section 245 as the latter is confined to money, goods or services and excluded are, for example, intellectual property and rights under a contract.
Where the floating charge is in favour of a ‘connected person’ it is easier for an administrator or liquidator to challenge the charge.
The period within which the charge is vulnerable is two years after its creation and there is no need to show that at the time the charge was created the company was insolvent.
The definition of connected person is somewhat complex but it includes a director, the director's relatives and companies within a group.
The statutory limitations in (i) and (ii) only apply to floating charges and not to fixed charges.
The policy justification for this has been questioned.
The Cork Committee considered that section 245 should not be extended to fixed charges since the charge would relate to the company's existing assets whereas the floating charge could cover future assets.
Why this should make a critical difference is far from clear since a company can create a fixed charge of accounts receivable or a mortgage of future property.
The exclusion of fixed charges from section 245 arguably reflects the favouritism shown to secured creditors in English company law, although to make a secured charge subject to the claims of preferential creditors would obviously affect both the terms of credit and the amount of credit available, and this may justify the present position.
A fixed charge may of course be attacked as a preference where it is given to secure past value but not as a transaction at an undervalue since the assets of the company are not diminished by the creation of the charge.
Both these statutory limitations may affect companies other than those registered under the Act if, but only if, they are being wound up under it.
(iii) The third statutory limitation on the right of a floating charge holder is section 15 of the Insolvency Act 1986 which empowers an administrator to sell property subject to a charge which as created was a floating charge without the need to obtain a court order.
As protection, the floating charge holder is given the same priority with respect to any property representing directly or indirectly the property disposed of as he would have had with respect to the property subject to the floating charge.
However, this qualification of the floating charge holder's rights does not constitute a serious erosion of the rights of the floating charge holder since he can block the making of an administration order by appointing an administrative receiver.
(iv) The last statutory limitation on the rights of the floating charge relates to costs of the liquidation.
It is a principle of insolvency law that the expenses of a company's liquidation are payable out of the assets of the company in priority to all other claims.
And since these costs can be substantial, it is important to determine what constitutes the company's assets out of which such costs can be paid.
In Re Barleycorn Enterprises Ltd .
the court held that assets subject to a floating charge constituted assets of the company for the purpose of paying the costs of the liquidation.
These costs, combined with the claims of the preferential creditors, entail a substantial erosion of the entitlement of the floating charge holder.
Registration of charges
Introduction Part XII of the Companies Act 1985 contains provisions requiring a company to register certain charges with the Registrar of Companies.
This requirement has been a feature of the Companies Acts since 1900.
The present provisions were introduced by Part IV of the Companies Act 1989 which inserted a new Part XII into the 1985 Act and it is to the 1989 interpolations that reference will be  made throughout this chapter.
For some time to come, there will obviously be two systems for the registration of charges operating side by side since the 1989 reforms are not retrospective.
Other than to draw attention to salient differences, it is not proposed to deal with the pre-1989 system in any detail.
Registration of charges fulfils a range of purposes.
It provides a picture of the state of the incumbrances on a company's property, something which is obviously of interest to those contemplating entering into a secured lending transaction with the company.
Registration is also of interest to credit analysts, liquidators, receivers, shareholders, and prospective investors.
In addition, registration operates to protect the security holder by providing him with a certain degree of protection as to the validity and priority of his charge once it is registered; this in turn benefits the company by enabling it to give the chargee the guarantee of such protection.
Also, if registration creates, at the minimum, a presumption that the charge has been validly registered, this facilitates the chargee assigning the charge either outright or by way of security.
It is to be doubted if unsecured trade creditors have much, if any, interest in the state of encumbrances on a company's property as they normally will only be interested in whether the company can pay its debts as they fall due.
The mechanics registration It is the duty of the company to submit prescribed particulars of a charge requiring registration to the Registrar who, in turn, is under a statutory obligation to maintain a register setting out these particulars.
The register is in the form of a file and the person seeking registration does not have to submit the original charging documents.
This type of notice filing is intended to be simple, inexpensive and expeditious and to put persons on notice that a charge has been registered so that they can take whatever steps they consider appropriate to protect their interests.
The register of  charges is open for public inspection and any person for a fee is entitled to a certified copy of it.
What has to be registered Section 396, which sets out the charges that have to be registered, enumerates a list of registrable charges and any charge not on the list does not have to be registered.
It would equally be possible to require the registration of all charges (with perhaps some specified exceptions) but this approach, while guaranteeing comprehensiveness, is not free from difficulties.
It is not possible to predict the types of security interests that will be created in the future and requiring registration of some such unforeseen interests could be unnecessarily burdensome; even with respect to the known types of legal charge, particularly those conferring the right to possession, it would produce overkill; and lastly it is claimed that to require the registration of all charges could dry up certain types of secured borrowing.
Also, at the end of the day there may not be a great deal of difference between a system which requires all charges subject to exceptions to be registered as opposed to the present one which requires specified charges to be registered subject to the power of the Secretary of State to add to or delete from their number.
The purpose of the registration provisions is to ‘secure the registration of charges on a company's property.’
Section 395 contains a generic definition of what constitutes a charge and a partial definition of what constitutes property.
Charge is defined as any form of security interest not arising by operation of law and property is defined as including future property.
As was pointed out earlier, there is some uncertainty as to what constitutes a security interest; it is submitted that the courts will adopt something along the lines of the definition of Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V.-C. set out at the commencement of this chapter.
The uncertainties caused by what constitutes a security interest are greatly reduced by the fact, as pointed out above, that it is a numerus clausus of charges that has to be registered so if the charge is not within the list it is not registrable.
Most of the major types of charge have to be registered and these on  any definition are clearly security interests.
Thus charges on land, charges on goods, charges on intangible movable property, a charge for securing an issue of the company's debentures and a floating charge have to be registered.
Intangible movable property includes a charge on the book debts of the company or those assigned to it but the Act contains no definition of what constitutes a book debt.
Registration is also required of any property acquired by a company which is subject to a charge of a class requiring registration.
What need not be registered There are a range of charges that do not need to be registered.
Charges arising by operation of law (to be contrasted with those created by the company) fall into this category.
Also excluded from registration are (i) a charge on goods where the chargee is entitled to possession of the goods or of a document of title to them,(ii) a deposit of a negotiable instrument by way of security to secure payment of a book debt and (iii) a lien on subfreights.
The first is excluded because possession by the chargee will render the asset unusable by the company as security in favour of another creditor; the second because registration would  destroy the negotiability of the instrument; and the third because these interests arise and disappear quite quickly and registration would be simply too burdensome and provide little new information as those dealing with charterers would normally assume the existence of such charges.
Also not included are fixed charges on bank accounts and, more importantly, fixed charges on shares held in a subsidiary.
As to the latter, the Jenkins and Diamond Reports took diametrically opposed positions.
Diamond came out against such registration on the grounds,inter alia , that it could mislead in circumstances where shares subject to a fixed charge are held in a company which becomes a subsidiary after the charge has been created.
This is an undoubted problem, but to use it to preclude registration of a charge of shares in a subsidiary is to make the best the enemy of the better.
Lastly, it must always be kept in mind that there will be no need to register financing devices which the law of personal property does not treat as charges; for example, title reservation.
The question remains as to whether the register of charges maintained by the Registrar of Companies accurately reflects the extent of the incumbrances on a company's property.
Although not exhaustively comprehensive, it does give a reasonably accurate picture and its most serious defects arise not from the register as such but because English law lacks a satisfactory system for classifying personal property security interests.
Also, at the end of the day it is arguable that all that the register needs to show are the principal charges over the company's property since anyone dealing with the company can seek to find out the full extent to which the company's property has been charged once put on notice that some charges have been created.
There is always the chance that the company will not give honest answers but the extent to which debtor dishonesty is a danger should not be exaggerated.
Effect of (i) non-registration (ii) late registration and (iii) defective registration
(1)Non-registration Failure to comply with the various registration requirements leads, as one would expect, to liability to fines.
But the most potent sanction is that non-registration in the register maintained by the Registrar of charges created by the company (as opposed to existing charge on property acquired by the company) destroys the validity of the charge.
Unless the prescribed particulars of the charge are delivered to the Registrar within 21 days of the creation of the charge, it will be void against the administrator, liquidator, or any person who for value acquires an interest in or right over the property subject to the charge.
The charge is void whether or not the event which gave rise to its voidness occurred during or after the end of the 21-day period.
And it is submitted that it will be void even against a subsequent chargee who has notice.
The sufferer is, of course, the chargee, not the company,; hence the provision previously mentioned allowing any person having an interest in the charge to register it.
If, however, the company or the chargee fails to do so the consequences are grave indeed for the chargee; in effect, he loses his security.
To reduce this hardship the Act provides that if the charge is void to any extent for non-registration the whole of the sum thereby secured becomes immediately repayable on demand.
This, of course, also provides the company with an incentive to register.
As between two registrable charges which have not been registered within 21 days, the first to register will obtain priority and a charge is not void against a person taking an interest in property which is made expressly subject to the charge.
It is important to note that a void charge still remains valid against the company and there is no reason why the chargee should not take steps to enforce it.
An unsecured creditor has no standing to prevent the holder of a void charge from enforcing it but, somewhat anomalously, such a creditor gets protection against an unregistered charge if the company goes into liquidation or administration.
Since an administrator and liquidator (particularly the latter) are more or less statutory trustees for unsecured creditors, it could be argued that there is nothing anomalous about this.
This, however, begs the question of what are the ‘trust’ assets.
The justification for this is probably that it provides the chargee with an additional incentive to ensure that his charge is registered.
(ii) Late registration Failure to register a charge within the 21-day period does not preclude its subsequent registration; a charge can be registered outside the 21-day period at any time prior to the company's liquidation or the appointment of an administrator without the need to obtain a court order.
However, for a chargee such an out-of-time registration has risks.
First, there is the risk that a subsequent chargee will be registered first and thus gain priority.
Secondly, if the company is insolvent when the charge is registered out of time, it is vulnerable to challenge by the administrator or the liquidator.
Broadly speaking, it can be challenged in the same way as a floating charge or a preference can be challenged under the Insolvency Act 1986.
The court has no jurisdiction to order that a charge registered out of time has priority to a charge which has already been registered.
(iii) Defective registration It may be that the charges register fails to disclose accurately particulars of the charge; for example, it may contain inaccurate particulars of the amount secured, or the property subject to the charge.
This can have important consequences for the charge holder.
Where the registered particulars of a charge are not complete and accurate, the charge is void to the extent of the rights not disclosed as against an administrator, liquidator or a person who acquires for value an interest or right over the property subject to the charge.
The court has a curative power.
It can order the charge to be effective:(i) as against an administrator and liquidator, if it is satisfied that the inaccuracy did not prejudice any unsecured creditor or that no person became an unsecured creditor during the period when the registered particulars were defective and (ii) as against a person who acquires an interest, if that person was not misled by the unregistered particulars.
The broad effect of this is that a defect will normally be cured as against the administrator and liquidator (since unsecured creditors will not normally rely on the register of charges) but not against persons who acquire an interest (who will normally rely on the register of charges).
There is one defect that will not affect the chargee and that is one which is caused by the Registrar's officials, happily a rare event.
This is because (as we have seen) registered particulars means the particulars delivered for registration and where these are accurate the chargee will not be prejudiced by any defects arising from transcribing the submitted particulars on to the register.
Effect of registration
Registration does not cure any flaw in the charge itself as between the parties so that the validity of the charge remains challengeable by the company.
In addition, registration does not create a priority point in the sense that the chargee is guaranteed priority from the date of registration; this is because if A registers have charge on 21 January he has no guarantee that the company has not created a charge prior to this which may be registered within 21 days and thus have priority.
Registration does, however, have considerable importance:
(i)
first, while registration may not be a priority point, failure to register, as we have seen, renders the charge void and therefore registration is a necessary, although not sufficient, condition to obtain priority;
(ii)
second, where on registration of a charge the Registrar (as he can be required to do) issues a certificate of registration stating the date on which particulars of a charge were delivered to him, this is made conclusive evidence that the particulars were delivered no later than the date stated on the certificate and a presumption that they were delivered no earlier.
This certificate is of critical importance since the date of delivery of the particulars is determinative of whether the  charge has been registered within 21 days after the date of its creation.
In addition, the certificate enhances the liquidity of the security interest since an assignee of the interest will want to be assured that the charge has been validly registered.
However, the certificate does not constitute, as it did under the pre-1989 position, conclusive evidence that the charge has been validly registered.
Because it was felt necessary to deal with the uncertainties that this would create for those acquiring the interest of a chargee of a company's assets, and also to enhance the transferability of charges created by companies, section 406 provides that a chargee in exercising a power of sale may dispose of property freed of any interest which has arisen because the charge has become void against an administrator, a liquidator or a person who has acquired an interest in it.
In addition, a purchaser from the chargee is not concerned to determine whether the charge has become void.
Section 406 also sets out the order in which the proceeds of sale must be distributed; broadly, distribution must be in favour of security holders in order of priority but any residue has to be returned to the company and not to the holder of the void charge.
(iii)
thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, any person taking a registrable charge over the company's property (and only to such persons) will have notice of any matter requiring registration and disclosed.
To take an example, a person taking a lien on subfreights is not affected by the register since this is not a registrable charge but a person taking a floating charge would be.
Modifications to the register
Provision is made for the registration of further particulars relating to a charge, something of some importance given the effect of defective registration on the rights of the chargee.
If the Registrar finds that the further particulars are in order, he must note the date of their receipt and send to the company and any person interested in the charge a copy of the particulars and the date on which they were  delivered.
As regards the registration of  further particulars a number of points need to be emphasised.
First, section 401 applies to provisions which supplement or vary the particulars of an existing charge and therefore in some situations it will be necessary to distinguish between this and the creation of a new charge.
Second, there is no time period within which the particulars have to be delivered and no criminal sanction for failure to deliver them.
The only consequences will be those relating to the effect of omissions and errors in the registered particulars.
This is to be contrasted with the requirements as to registration on the creation of a new charge and the consequences of late registration of such a charge.
Third, the Registrar's certificate will be given the same effect as regards further particulars as it has with respect to the creation of a charge.
A memorandum of satisfaction that the charge has been discharged can also be registered; it must be signed by both the chargee and the company and if a fraudulently signed memorandum is registered it is submitted that it will not affect the chargee as it would not be a ‘duly’ signed memorandum.
Both particulars and memorandum of satisfaction have to be signed by the chargee and the company and there is provision to obtain a court order where one of the parties refuses to sign the particulars.
Enforcement of debentures — receivers
The methods of enforcing a security interest depend upon the nature of the rights which it confers and are often in no way peculiar to company law.
However, company law does provide a distinct procedure for the enforcement of a floating charge by the appointment of an administrative receiver.
Almost invariably the first step in the enforcement of a charge is for the debentureholders or their trustee to obtain the appointment of a receiver.
This appointment will normally be made by the debentureholder under an express or implied power in the debenture, or by the court.
Where the appointment is pursuant to a provision in the debenture then it must be clear that the conditions justifying the appointment have  arisen otherwise the receiver will be a trespasser and also liable for conversion.
Once the conditions for the enforcement of a charge have arisen English law places few constraints on the right of the security holder to enforce his charge and in this respect it is pro-security holder.
Thus if the chargee is entitled to payment on demand he is not required to give the company a reasonable time in which to raise the funds to make payment and is only required to give the company time in which to put into effect the mechanics of payment.
In addition the chargee is not obliged to refrain from exercising his rights merely because by doing so he could avoid loss to the company nor does failure to exercise them when the security is declining in value constitute a breach of any duty that he may owe to the company.
If nothing has occurred to render the security enforceable but the debentureholder's position is nevertheless in jeopardy, an application to the court may be necessary, for the court has a discretionary power to appoint a receiver in such circumstances.
The normal procedure is for one of the debentureholders, on behalf of himself and all other holders to commence a debentureholder's action, the first step of which will be the appointment of a receiver.
‘Jeopardy’ will be established when, for example, execution is about to be levied against the company.
or when it proposes to distribute to its members its one remaining asset.
It would be tempting to say that, when there is a floating charge, ‘jeopardy’ should be assumed whenever the circumstances make it unreasonable, in the interests of the debentureholder, that the company should retain power to dispose of the property  subject to the charge.
This is in fact the statutory definition under Scottish law, but the English decisions hardly go so far, for the fact that the assets on realisation would not repay the debentures in full has been held insufficient.
In cases where appointment out of court is possible this is certainly preferable from the viewpoint of the debentureholders as a body.
The procedure in a debentureholders' action is lamentably expensive and dilatory, since the receiver, as an officer of the court, will have to work under its closest supervision and constant applications will have to be made in chambers throughout the duration of the receivership, which may last years if a complicated realisation is involved.
Since the 1986 Act allows a receiver, even though appointed out of court, to obtain the court's directions, it is difficult to envisage circumstances in which an application to the court can be justified if the cheaper alternative is available, and the professional adviser who recommended it would be laying himself open to grave risk of criticism.
In the discussion which follows it will be assumed that what is being referred to is a receiver appointed out of court.
A receiver appointed out of court can be either a receiver or an administrative receiver, the difference between them being that the latter is a receiver appointed under a charge which as created was a floating charge.
Function and status of receiver and administrative receiver
Part III of the 1986 Act regulates both types of receiverships, although the provisions applicable to them are not identical.
As the administrative receiver is unique to company law (and is probably the most common type of receiver appointed with respect to companies) it is proposed to concentrate on this type of receiver.
The 1986 Act views the appointment of an administrative receiver as being in some respects similar to insolvency proceedings and regulates it accordingly.
Thus administrative receivers must be qualified to act as insolvency practitioners and can only be removed from office by the court.
Also, like the liquidator, the administrative receiver can compel those involved in the affairs of the company to provide him with information relating to the company's affairs and is also obliged to report to the Secretary of State if he forms the opinion  that the conduct of a director makes him unfit to act as a director of a company.
However, the appointment of a receiver must not be equated with that of a liquidator:(i) where a receiver is appointed the company need not go into liquidation and if it does the same person who acted as receiver will normally not be appointed liquidator;(ii) liquidation is a class action designed to protect the interests of the unsecured creditors whereas, as we shall see, receivership is designed to protect the interests of the security holders who appointed the receiver and it is for this reason that a receiver can be appointed even where the company is in liquidation;(iii) liquidation terminates the trading power of the company whereas this is not the case with receivership;(iv) a liquidator has power to disclaim onerous property, something not possible in the case of receivership;(v) a liquidator in a compulsory winding up is an officer of the court whereas this is not the case with a receiver unless appointed by the court;(vi) lastly, it is easier to obtain recognition of liquidation as opposed to receivership in proceedings in foreign courts.
These are the most important differences but there are others particularly with respect to liability on contracts.
An administrative receiver might be considered to be the agent of those who appointed him but this is not the case; section 44 of the 1986 Act makes him the agent of the company.
The reason for this is to avoid those who appointed the administrative receiver being treated as mortgagees in possession or being held liable for the receiver's acts which would be the case were the receiver to be treated as their agent.
As many have pointed out, the receiver's agency is a peculiar form of agency.
This is because the primary responsibility of the receiver is to protect the interests of the security holders and to realise the charged assets for their benefit.
The powers of the administrative receiver are extensive and he will have complete control over the management of the company.
In addition he can apply to the court for an order empowering him to dispose of property subject to a prior charge.
In the exercise of his powers a receiver is under a duty to the debtor company to take reasonable care to obtain the best price reasonably possible at the time of sale; this duty is also owed to a guarantor of the company's debts.
However, as the receiver in exercising his power of sale is in a position analogous to that of the mortgagee, he is not obliged to postpone sale in order to obtain a better price or to adopt a piecemeal method of sale.
The basis of the receiver's duty set out above was initially considered to involve the extension of the common law of negligence to supplement equity, but the courts now treat it as something which flows from the nature in equity of the relationship between the mortgagee and mortgagor.
A person dealing with an administrative receiver in good faith is not bound to inquire if the receiver is acting within his powers.
Unlike a winding-up, the board of directors does not become functus officio on the appointment of a receiver but the directors' powers are substantially superseded since they cannot act so as to interfere with the discharge by the receiver of his responsibilities and accordingly their powers are suspended ‘so far as is requisite to enable a receiver to discharge his functions.’
Given the extent of the powers of the administrative receiver, the directors will have a minuscule aperture within which they are free to exercise their powers.
However, they do possess certain residual powers and, for example, it has been held that they can bring an action on behalf of the company against a debentureholder for the improper exercise of his powers.
This authority has been doubted because of the conflict  that would arise were the receiver and the directors to have different views on whether an action should be brought and also on the handling of any counterclaim.
Whatever the status of the Newhart decision, it is clear that it will be confined to very narrow limits since to allow any such action would interfere with the primary duties of the receiver to protect the interests of the security holder.
Also, as the directors remain in office, the receiver would probably be under an obligation to provide the directors with the information that they need to know to enable them to comply with their reporting obligations under the Companies Act.
The receiver will be obliged at the end of his receivership to hand over to the company any documents belonging to the company but not those brought into existence for the discharge of his own professional duties or his duties to the chargee.
The receiver's liability with respect to contracts
This raises two separate issues.
The first relates to contracts already in existence when the receiver is appointed.
As the administrative receiver is the agent of the company, his appointment does not terminate the company's contracts.
Thus, for example, contracts of employment are not terminated unless the receiver does something which is inconsistent with the continuation of the contract, for example a sale of the company's business.
The receiver is not, however, obliged to fulfil existing contracts and because of this it is claimed that in this regard he is better placed than the company which of course must stand by its contracts.
The reason for this is one of priorities; if the receiver were obliged to fulfil existing  contracts it would mean that the unsecured creditors would be in a position to require fulfilment of their contracts before the receiver could realise the security.
Such an outcome would place priorities on their head and, accordingly, the receiver should be seen as acting in the right of the debentureholder.
However, although unclear, it may be that the receiver has a limited duty to continue to trade where this would not jeopardise the chargee's interests and a failure to do so would impose gratuitous damage on the company.
Not to extend his duty in this way would stretch the pro-creditor bias of receivership to ridiculous lengths.
Where the receiver enters into a new contract this will be binding on the company.
More importantly, the receiver is liable on any contract that he enters into on behalf of the company unless the contract otherwise provides.
As regards contracts of employment, it is provided that he is to be liable on any contract of employment adopted by him but nothing he does or omits to do in the first 14 days of his appointment is to be taken as adoption of the contract.
What this means is far from clear.
Adoption is different from novation and also appears to be distinguishable from merely acting as though the contract were binding on the company.
What it appears to import is some positive act which is short of entering into a new contract and as such it does not fit neatly into the conceptual apparatus of contract law.
Publicity of appointment and reports
Where a receiver or manager is appointed then this must be stated in various business documents relating to the company.
Also all receivers have to make prescribed returns to the Registrar and the administrative receiver has to report to creditors including unsecured creditors.
A receiver who fails to comply with his reporting obligations can be ordered to do so and, more importantly, he can be disqualified from acting as a receiver or manager.
There is no similar obligation to report where a debentureholder enters into  possession and it has been recommended that this omission be corrected.
Other registers
There are a number of other registers that are relevant with respect to certain specialist charges; the most important of these registers are those maintained under the Land Registration Act 1925 and the Land Charges Act 1972.
It is not intended to go into them in any detail here.
It is important to note that a company must itself maintain a register of charges which is more extensive than that maintained by the Registrar of Companies (since it covers all charges irrespective of type) but failure to register a charge in it does not invalidate the charge.
Part Five
INVESTOR And CREDITOR PROTECTION
INTRODUCTION
THE purpose of this Part is to consider the protection afforded to investors in, and creditors of, a company.
Many of the matters discussed appear in the Companies Act under the heading ‘Management and Administration,’ and the orthodox textbook arrangement is to consider them merely as aspects of the company's internal machinery.
Such subjects as accounts, audits, meetings and resolutions could well be dealt with in this way, for even in the absence of mandatory legal rules business convenience would demand the voluntary adoption of very similar practices.
But in the case of companies these practices have been converted into legal regulations because this has been thought necessary to protect those interested in the company and those having dealings with it.
And, from the viewpoint of the lawyer, their primary importance lies in their effectiveness as a means of avoiding disputes and preventing injustices.
Hence the discussion which follows is deliberately directed towards this aspect of them.
The danger of this approach is that it may give the erroneous impression that companies are constantly embroiled in internecine strife, and that investors and creditors are habitually maltreated by dishonest or incompetent company controllers.
On the contrary, the majority of limited companies, both public and private, are honestly and conscientiously managed.
The succeeding chapters consider the extent to which the legal rules conduce to this desirable result and provide adequate redress in the case of the small number of companies less scrupulously and competently operated.
If they suggest that the legal sanctions against the abuse of power by company controllers are not wholly adequate, it must be remembered that it is but rarely that power is abused.
The British believe that they have a genius for constitutional government with a minimum of constitutional laws, and for working majority rule without oppression of minorities.
Until recently company law, with its relative freedom from stringent regulations, reflected this national belief.
It can hardly be said to do so any longer.
But no system can wholly protect fools from their own folly or from the knavery of others, and the advantages of trying to do so as fully as possible have to be weighed against the disadvantages of imposing fetters on business conducted honestly and efficiently.
The problems of protecting (a) investors, both shareholders and debentureholders, and (b) creditors, cannot be kept entirely distinct.
Of the additional safeguards now to be considered the primary one, both to investors and creditors, is the publicity which, to a greater or lesser extent, attends the functioning of the company.
Hence it forms the subject of the first chapter of this Part.
PUBLICITY AND ACCOUNTS
ON the basis that ‘forewarned is forearmed’ the fundamental principle underlying the Companies Acts has been that of disclosure.
If the public and the members were enabled to find out all relevant information about the company, this, thought the founding fathers of our company law, would be a sure shield.
The shield may not have proved quite so strong as they had expected, and in more recent times it has been supported by offensive weapons, such as inspections or investigations instigated by the Department of Trade and Industry.
But, basically, disclosure still remains the principal safeguard on which the Companies Acts pin their faith, and every succeeding Act since 1862 has added to the extent of the publicity required, although, not unreasonably, it varies according to the type of company concerned.
This publicity is mainly secured in four ways:
(a)
by official notification in the Gazette;
(b)
by provisions for registration at Companies House;
(c)
by compulsory maintenance of various registers and the like by the company; and
(d)
by compulsory disclosure of the financial position in the company's published accounts and by attempting to ensure their accuracy through a professional audit.
In these ways, and in certain others of less importance which will be referred to briefly, members and the public (which, for practical purposes, means creditors and others who may subsequently have dealings with the company and become its members or creditors) are supposed to be able to obtain the information which they need to make an intelligent appraisal of their risks, and to decide when and how to exercise the rights and remedies which the law affords them.
Official notification
This is a concept relatively new to English company law having been introduced by section 9 of the European Communities Act 1972 to comply with the First Company Law Directive.
As a result of that  and later Directives there are now many cases in which the Registrar must cause to be published in the Gazette notice that he has received for registration various types of documents.
The notice merely records the name and registered number of the company, the nature of the document and the date of its receipt.
To see the document itself it will be necessary to resort to Companies House or the company itself.
Nor is it an effective method of notifying the members, creditors or the general public, few of whom read the Gazette.
When it is thought vital that members or creditors should receive notice, the Act requires them to be given notice by the company; in relation to the general public the best that can be done is to require publication in newspapers.
Registration at Companies House
The most common method of obtaining information about a company is by searching its file at Companies House in Cardiff or London (or Edinburgh if the company is registered in Scotland).
Most of the information (and more besides) could be obtained from the company itself but generally the first step will be to Companies House.
At one location it is possible to inspect not only the file of the company known to the searcher but also those of any related companies that this inspection reveals.
And, especially perhaps, it enables searches to be undertaken without any of the companies knowing about it.
It is unnecessary, and would make tedious reading, to list all the sections of the Act which require a company to deliver documents for registration.
Many such sections have been mentioned already.
Here it suffices to say that the aim is to ensure that a company is required to do so when it is thought that the matter is one that the public needs to know.
Hence a search of its file should enable reasonably up-to-date information to be obtained on such matters as: its constitution (the memorandum and articles, as amended); its officers; the address of its registered offices; its issued share capital; charges on its property; and, in most cases, its latest annual accounts.
Subject to the payment of a fee prescribed from time to time by statutory instrument, any person is entitled to inspect and to obtain  copies of ‘any records kept by the registrar for the purposes of the Companies Acts’; no distinction is drawn between the rights of members and inspection by other persons.
And a copy of any registered document, duly certified by the Registrar ‘is in all legal proceedings admissible in evidence as of equal validity with the original document and as evidence of any fact stated therein of which oral evidence would be admissible.’
Annual Returns
In addition to the documents which have to be delivered to the Registrar shortly after the occurrence of the events which they record, every company is required to make an Annual Return.
As well as a means of publicising information this is a document of some importance administratively, since without it the register would be cluttered, to a greater extent than it is, with files of moribund companies abandoned by their members.
Failure to file the annual return alerts the Registrar and enables him to take appropriate steps leading to the companies' removal from the register.
As a source of information, the return collates much that should have been delivered for registration when the relevant transactions occurred, so that a searcher may find it unnecessary to search back beyond the latest annual return on the file.
It also enables some additional or more recent information to be obtained.
The 1989 Act substituted a new and somewhat simplified Chapter III (Annual Return) for that in the original Part XI of the 1985 Act.
Briefly summarised the effect of the new Chapter is as follows:
Every company, whether or not it is required to file annual accounts, must deliver to the Registrar successive returns in the prescribed form made up to its ‘return date,’i.e .
the anniversary of its incorporation or, if its last return was made up to a different date, the anniversary of that date.
This must be signed by a director or the  secretary of the company and must be delivered within 28 days after the return date.
If a proper return is not so delivered the company is guilty of an offence and liable to a fine and a daily default fine so long as the contravention continues.
And any director or the secretary of the company is similarly liable unless he shows that he took all reasonable steps to avoid the commission or continuance of the offence.
Section 364 specifies the ‘general’ information which the return must state.
This includes the address of the company's registered office and particulars of the directors and secretary.
It also, and this is new, includes ‘the type of company and its principal business activities,’ the type to be ‘given by reference to the classification prescribed for the purposes of this section,’while the principal business activities ‘may be given by reference to categories of any prescribed system of classifying business activities.’
Also new is the requirement that a private company which has elected under the substituted section 252 to dispense with the laying of accounts before a general meeting or, under section 366A, to dispense with the holding of annual general meetings, must so state in the return.
If the company has a share capital, in addition to the general information the return must give the ‘particulars of share capital and shareholders’ specified in section 364A.
This enables much the same information to be obtained as that obtainable from the company's membership register but only as at the return date.
If up-to-date particulars are needed, the searcher will have to inspect, or obtain a copy of, the company's membership register.
But, to enable the searcher to know where the register is kept, if that is not at the registered office, the general part of the return has to state where that is.
In the case of a company without share capital the return will give no particulars of the members; to ascertain that, resort must be to the company.
However, section 365(1) empowers the Secretary of State by regulations to ‘make further provision as to the information to be given in a company's annual return, which may amend or repeal the provisions of sections 364 and 364A.’
So further changes seem likely.
The principal weakness of these provisions is that companies (especially, but not exclusively, private ones) are deplorably dilatory in delivering returns to the Registrar so that at any one time a majority of companies are in arrear to a greater or lesser extent.
However, in recent years a blitz on such companies has been mounted with the result that there has been some improvement.
Nevertheless, if a creditor, with grounds for suspecting that a company is in financial difficulties, makes a search he is all too likely to find that no recent annual returns or accounts have been filed.
Companies' Register and Records
Most of the information obtainable from Companies House can instead be obtained from the company and so can further information especially if the searcher is a member of the company.
Nevertheless a member, even of a private company, unless he is also a director is not entitled, as he would be if he were a member of a partnership, to inspect the books and records of the company except to the extent that the Act specifically provides.
But there are an increasing number of documents and registers which he, and, indeed, other persons, are entitled to inspect (in the case of a member generally without payment) and to obtain copies on payment.
These include, for example, directors' contracts of service, and the registers of:— the directors and secretary, directors' holdings of, and dealings in, the company's securities, and (in the case of a public company) the register of 3 per cent .
shareholders.
The last two registers afford important information, not obtainable from Companies House, in relation to beneficial ownership and not just registered ownership, and are particularly valuable to a searcher who suspects that some major transaction,(e.g .
a take-over bid) is in the offing.
Furthermore, the register of charges which the company is required to maintain may be more illuminating than that at Companies House since it must now contain entries of all charges on the company's property whether or not they require to be registered at Companies House and copies of any instrument creating or evidencing a charge must also be kept.
Both the register and the copies are open to inspection by any creditor or member without payment and by any other person on payment, copies being obtainable on payment.
The maximum fees that companies can charge for inspection or copies are now prescribed by regulations (the former practice of stating them in the primary legislation did not work well in an inflationary climate) and these regulations clarify the obligations of companies regarding inspection and copies.
Other methods
Before turning to the all-important Accounts, mention must be made of other methods whereby information about a company is required to be disseminated.
One which the Act employs in relation to information which can be briefly conveyed, is to require it to appear on all business communications of the company.
Thus its name, number, the fact that its liability is limited (if such be the case) and the address of its registered office must be stated on all business letters or order forms.
Again, if the company is listed, it will be subject to additional duties to keep its security holders and, indeed the public, informed of all major developments and if it does not The Exchange may publish the information.
Apart from legally required publicity there is media publicity which may occur whether the company wants it to or not.
All the national  newspapers and many of the provincial ones now devote an increasing number of columns to ‘City’ or ‘Business’matters.
The columnists have keen noses for scandals and once their interest is aroused they follow the scent with sleuth-like pertinacity and commendable disregard of the risks of suits for defamation.
The result may be that, what a company had hoped to treat as a minor domestic matter which could be brushed under the carpet, is exposed to the harsh light of day.
This may not always be in the best interests of the company but as, on the whole, the Press acts in this area with reasonable restraint, it generally is in the best interests of investors and the public.
Finally, it should be pointed out that one of the grounds on which under section 432 the Secretary of State may appoint inspectors to investigate and report on the affairs of a company is that ‘the company's members have not been given all the information with respect to its affairs which they might reasonably expect’— whether or not that information is such that they have an express statutory right to be told it.
A failure to give such information might also be relevant on a petition to wind-up the company on the ‘just and equitable’ ground or to grant relief on the ground that the affairs of the company are being conducted in a manner unfairly prejudicial to members.
Accounts
A staggering transformation has occurred in the course of the 20th Century in the ambit of statutory provisions regarding company accounts, as will be apparent to anyone who compares the exiguous provisions in the 1908 Act with the profusion of sections and Schedules in the Companies Act 1985 as amended, supplemented and re-arranged by the 1989 Act.
This has resulted from the recognition
(a)
that the price of limited liability ought to be the maximum possible disclosure of information regarding the company's financial position,
(b)
that within the EC that information ought to be presented in a standardised fashion so that like can be compared with like irrespective of the member State in which the company was incorporated, but
(c)
that some concessions regarding (a) should be afforded to small companies so as to relieve them of burdens and expense that they might find intolerable.
All this chapter attempts is to offer guidance on how to find the way through the statutory provisions which, understandably, tend to be expressed in accountants' language rather than that of lawyers.
The United Kingdom chose dutifully to implement the Fourth Directive on Company Accounts without waiting, as some other member States did, for the adoption of the Seventh Directive on Group Accounts.
Hence, when the latter was implemented by the 1989 Act, Part VII of the Act and the related Schedules needed copious revision and the opportunity was seized to undertake a major re-arrangement of the Schedules.
Despite taking two bites, the implementation of the Directives was achieved with less trauma than in some other member States whose existing requirements were less advanced than those of the United Kingdom.
Particularly was this so because the British accountancy profession played a more constructive role in the preparatory stages of the two Directives than our professional bodies had hitherto taken in relation to EC proposals.
We even succeeded in securing the adoption of our basic principle that accounts must present a ‘true and fair view’— notwithstanding that we were unable to explain precisely what that expression meant.
Accounting records
This chapter concentrates primarily on accounts as a means of publicising information and hence on the annual accounts through which that publicity is achieved.
But Part VII of the Act starts with a prescription of a company's obligation to maintain current accounting records; and logically enough, because, although these are not open  to inspection by members or the public, unless they are kept it will be impossible for the company to produce verifiable annual accounts.
Hence section 221 provides that every company shall keep records sufficient to show and explain the company's transactions, to disclose, with reasonable accuracy at any time, its financial position and to enable its directors to ensure that any balance sheet and profit and loss account will comply with the provisions of Part VII.
The records must contain day-to-day entries of all money received or expended and of the matters to which that related and a record of the company's assets and liabilities.
If the company's business involves dealing in goods the records must also contain a statement of stock held at the end of the financial year and statements of stocktakings from which that was prepared, and, except in the case of goods sold in the ordinary course of retail trade, statements of all goods sold or purchased, in sufficient detail to enable the other party to be identified.
A company which has a subsidiary undertaking to which these requirements do not apply must take all reasonable steps to secure that the subsidiary keeps such records as will enable the directors of the parent company to ensure that any balance sheet and profit and loss account prepared under Part VII complies with the Act's requirements.
Failure to comply with the section renders every officer of the company who is in default guilty of an offence unless he shows that he acted honestly and that, in the circumstances in which the company's business was carried on, the default was excusable.
Section 222 provides that accounting records are at all times to be open for inspection by officers of the company.
If any such records are kept outside Great Britain, there must be sent to Great Britain (and be available for inspection there by the officers) records which will disclose with reasonable accuracy the position of the business in question at intervals of not more than six months and will enable the directors to ensure that the company's balance sheet and profit and loss account comply with the Act.
All required records must be  preserved for three years if it is a private company or for six years if it is a public one.
Annual accounts
Part VII then turns to matters concerning annual accounts.
Sections 222–225 prescribe how a company's ‘financial year’ is to be determined.
Despite its name it is not a calendar year or, necessarily, a period of 12 months.
What period it is depends on its ‘accounting reference period’ as determined in accordance with section 223, which in turn depends on its ‘accounting reference date’as determined in accordance with sections 224 and 225.
We therefore start with sections 224 and 225.
Under section 224 a company may at any time before the end of nine months from the date of its incorporation give notice to the Registrar specifying what its accounting reference date is to be.
If it fails to do so, in the case of a company incorporated before April 1990, the reference date is 31st March and in the case of a company incorporated thereafter, it is the last day of the month in which it was incorporated.
This date determines the date on which its accounting reference period ends in each calendar year.
But it will not necessarily begin 12 months before.
A company's first accounting reference period must be a period of not less than six months or more than 18 months beginning with the date of its incorporation and ending with its accounting reference date.
It is only its subsequent accounting reference periods that have to be of 12 months duration beginning immediately after the end of the previous accounting reference period and ending on the accounting reference date.
Moreover section 224 is ‘subject to the provisions of section 225’ which permit a company by notice in the prescribed form to specify a new accounting reference date in relation to the current reference period and subsequent ones.
Indeed, if the change is to enable the accounting reference periods of parent and subsidiary undertakings to coincide or because an administrator has been appointed, it may operate in respect also of the immediately preceding accountancy reference period.
Any such notice must state  whether the current (or preceding, when allowed) reference period is to be shortened, so that it will end on the first occurrence of the accounting reference date, or lengthened, so that it will end on its second occurrence, but unless an administration order is in force the period cannot be extended so as to exceed 18 months.
Nor, normally, can an accounting reference period be extended if it has already been extended during the previous five years.
The end-product, as stated in section 223, is that the company's first ‘financial year’ begins with first day of its first accounting reference period,(i.e .
the date of its incorporation) and ends on the last day of the reference period and that subsequent financial years begin with the day immediately following the end of the previous financial year and end with the last day of its next accounting reference period ‘or on such other date not more than seven days before or after the end of that period as the directors may determine .’
But for the words italicised ‘financial year’ and ‘accounting reference period’would mean exactly the same thing; as it is they need not.
But the difference cannot be more than seven days, since although the next financial year begins from the end of the last, it has to end within seven days of the next accounting reference period.
As we have seen, the Directives compel us to apply group accounting to undertakings which are not necessarily companies.
Accordingly section 223(4) provides that, in relation to one that is not, references to its financial year are to any period in respect of which its constitution or the law under which it is established requires a profit and loss account to be made up.
And, finally section 223(5) provides that the directors of a parent company shall secure that, except where there are good reasons to the contrary, the financial years of each of its subsidiaries coincide with that of the parent company.
Unless this is so any form of meaningful group accounting is difficult to achieve.
Form and content of annual accounts.
Section 226 imposes on the directors of every company the duty to prepare for each financial year of the company a balance sheet and a profit and loss account (its ‘individual accounts’) and section 227  imposes a like duty on directors of a company which is a parent company additionally to prepare a consolidated balance sheet and profit and loss account (‘group accounts’) The basic and over-riding principle is that the balance sheets must give a true and fair view, in the case of individual accounts ‘of the state of affairs of the company at the end of the financial year’ and in the case of group accounts ‘of the state of affairs as at the end of the financial year of the undertakings included in the consolidation as a whole, so far as it concerns the members of the company.’
Similarly the profit and loss accounts must give a like view of the profit or loss of the company or of the undertakings included in the consolidation for the financial year again ‘so far as it concerns, the members.’
These latter words may be thought puzzling; accounts are intended to protect creditors as well as members.
But so long as English law refuses to recognise that parent companies are under a legal as well as a moral obligation to meet the debts of their subsidiaries the group accounts are largely irrelevant so far as creditors are concerned since they normally have resort only against the individual company with which they have dealt.
Subject to the foregoing, the form and content of the balance sheets and profit and loss accounts and additional information provided by way of notes must comply with Schedule 4 in relation to individual accounts and with Schedule 4A in relation to group accounts.
Pursuant to the Directives' aim to promote comparability of the accounts of companies of the various member States, companies are required to adopt one of two prescribed formats for the balance sheet and one of four for the profit and loss account but in doing so they may use either the prescribed ‘historical cost accounting rules’ or the ‘alternative accounting rules’which pay greater recognition to the impact of inflation by a type of current cost accounting.
Such is the importance attached to the true-and-fair principle that, when compliance with the relevant Schedule and other provisions of the Act would not be sufficient to give a true and fair view, the  necessary additional information must be given in the accounts or notes to them.
And if, in special circumstances, compliance with a provision of the Schedules would be inconsistent with the requirement to give a true and fair view the directors must depart from that provision to the extent necessary, giving, in a note to the accounts, particulars of the departure and the reasons for, and effect of, it.
Although normally every parent company must prepare consolidated group accounts which must include all its subsidiary undertakings, there are narrowly defined exceptions.
Under section 228 when a parent company is itself a subsidiary and its immediate parent is established under the law of a member State, it may, if certain conditions are fulfilled, be exempt from the requirement to prepare group accounts.
But these conditions are strict.
The exemption applies only (a) if the company is a wholly-owned subsidiary or (b) if the parent holds more than 50 per cent.
of its shares and the other shareholders have not served notice requesting the preparation of group accounts and the company's securities are not listed on a stock exchange in any member State.
Moreover strict conditions are laid down to ensure that the company is included in consolidated accounts drawn up and audited in accordance with the Seventh Directive and made available to the British public.
Similarly in certain circumstances a subsidiary may, under section 229, be omitted from the consolidation.
This is so, for example, if its inclusion is not material for the purposes of giving a true and fair view or if, in effect, the parent is not able to exercise dominance over the subsidiary or holds its interest in the subsidiary exclusively with a view to resale, or the information necessary for group accounts cannot be obtained without disproportionate delay or expense.
And a subsidiary must be excluded from the consolidation if its activities are so different from those of the rest of the group that its inclusion would be incompatible with the obligation to give a true and fair view.
Under section 230 certain derogations from the provisions of Schedule 4 apply to the individual accounts of a parent which is required to prepare consolidated accounts (and has done so) thereby rendering those provisions otiose.
Section 231 requires information specified in Schedule 5 to be given in notes to the accounts regarding what are referred to in the headings to the section and the Schedule as ‘related undertakings’— an expression which the Act does not define but which includes parent and subsidiary undertakings, associated undertakings, joint ventures, and undertakings in which the company has a substantial holding.
Similarly section 232 requires the information specified in Schedule 6, regarding the emoluments and other benefits of directors and their associates, to be given in notes to the accounts.
The annual accounts must be approved by the directors and signed on behalf of the board by a director.
If the approved accounts do not comply with the Act, every director who was a party to their approval and who knows that they do not comply or is reckless as to whether or not they comply is guilty of an offence and every director at the time the accounts were approved is taken to be a party to their approval unless he shows that he took all reasonable steps to prevent their approval.
Furthermore if there is a breach of the requirements as to signature of the balance sheet the company and every officer in default is guilty of an offence.
The director's report
Under section 234 the directors must, in addition, prepare a report for each financial year.
This must contain a fair review of the development of the business of the company and its subsidiaries during the financial year and the position at the end of it, must state what amount (if any) they recommend should be paid as dividend, and what amount (if any) they propose to carry to reserves.
In addition it must give the names of all persons who at any time during the financial year were directors of the company and describe the principal activities of the company and its subsidiaries and any changes therein during the course of the year.
Furthermore, it must give additional information on the matters mentioned in Schedule 7 to the Act.
Schedule 7 is divided into five parts, some of which require information which goes far beyond the purely financial.
Thus Part III requires information to be given about the employment, training and promotion of disabled persons, Part IV about the company s arrangements for health, safety and welfare of employees, and Part V about ‘employee involvement,’i.e .
the extent to which employees are systematically given information, consulted, and encouraged to join employee share schemes.
None of these is relevant to an appraisal of the company's financial position.
Nor, indeed is the requirement in Part I for separate disclosure of the amounts of charitable or political donations; in view of the minimal amounts needed to trigger this requirement and the modest amounts normally donated, they would very rarely be material to a true and fair view of its financial affairs.
It is, however, a recognition that employees are entitled to information regarding the financial health of their employers and that the public and the Government should be enabled to judge to what extent the company is recognising social obligations and complying with social legislation.
The auditors' report
The final document that has to accompany the annual accounts is the auditors' report thereon.
This has to be addressed to the company's members and to state whether in the auditors' opinion the annual accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Act and, in particular, whether they give a true and fair view.
The report must also state whether the auditors consider that the information given in the director's report is consistent with that in the annual accounts and, if they are not satisfied, they must say so in the report.
In preparing this report they must carry out such investigations as will enable them to form an opinion on (a) whether proper accounting records have been kept by the company and whether proper returns adequate for their audit have been received from branches which they have not visited and (b) whether the  company's individual accounts are in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
If they are not of those opinions they must say so.
If they have failed to obtain all the information and explanations which, to the best of their knowledge and belief, are necessary for the purpose of their audit their report must so state.
Moreover, if the requirements of Schedule 6 (disclosure of emoluments and benefits of directors) are not complied with in the accounts, ‘the auditors shall include in their report, so far as they are reasonably able to do so, a statement giving the required particulars.’
The auditors' report must state the names of the auditors and be signed by them and their names must be stated on all issued copies of the report.
The copy delivered to the Registrar must also be signed by the auditors.
And, now that the Act expressly recognises that a firm, as such, may be appointed and that increasingly accountancy firms are incorporated, it is expressly stated that what is then required is a signature in the name of the firm by a person authorised to sign on its behalf.
Publicity of accounts and reports
The next group of sections deals with the various types of publicity that have to be given to the annual accounts and reports.
It starts with section 238 but it may be more illuminating to start here with section 240 which draws a distinction between the publication of ‘statutory accounts,’(i.e .
the annual accounts and reports considered above, copies of which have to be delivered to the Registrar under section 242) and ‘non-statutory accounts,’(i.e .
any other purported balance sheet or profit and loss account dealing with a financial year of the company or group).
Section 240 seeks to ensure that recipients of the latter will not confuse them with statutory accounts.
If a company publishes any of its statutory accounts they must be  accompanied by the auditors' report and if it is required to prepare statutory group accounts it may not publish its (statutory) individual accounts unless they are accompanied by its statutory group accounts.
In contrast, any publication of non-statutory accounts must be accompanied by a statement indicating:(a) that they are not statutory accounts,(b) whether statutory accounts have been delivered to the Registrar,(c) whether the auditors have reported on those statutory accounts, and (d) whether any such report was qualified or contained a statement under section 272 or 273.
An auditors' report under section 235 must not be published with any non-statutory accounts.
The sections to which we next turn are concerned with publication of the ‘statutory’ accounts only.
First, section 238(1) provides that any member, holder of the company's debentures and any person who is entitled to receive notice of general meetings shall, not less than 21 days before the accounts are to be laid before the general meeting under section 241, be sent copies of them.
This is subject to the minor exceptions in subsections (2) and (3), and to adaptations when a private company has validly elected under section 252 to dispense with laying of accounts before general meetings or when shareholders of listed companies have elected under section 251 to receive summary financial statements instead.
If copies are sent less than 21 days before, they may be deemed to have been duly sent if so agreed by all the members entitled to attend and vote.
Secondly, section 239 entitles any member or debentureholder to be furnished, on demand and without charge, with a copy of the last accounts in addition to that to which he is entitled under section 238.
Thirdly, under section 241 the statutory accounts must be laid before the company in general meeting (unless the company is a private one which has elected to dispense with this requirement under section 252).
Section 244 provides that this normally has to be done within 10 months after the end of the accounting reference period to which the accounts relate (if it is a private company) or within six months (if it is a public one).
But there are concessions in respect of the first accounting reference period, or on a change of the accounting reference date, or in the case of a company carrying on business or having interests outside the British Isles.
Moreover, the Secretary of State may allow an extension in special circumstances.
Fourthly, copies of the annual accounts and reports have to be delivered to the Registrar under section 242.
This has to be done before the end of the time allowed for laying them before the general meeting and if any of the documents is not in the English language a certified translation must be annexed.
Compliance with section 242 is the most important of the four since it is the one which makes the statutory accounts available to the general public.
While all four have provisions for penalties for non-compliance, those in section 242, as supplemented by section 242A, are the most stringent.
If the requirements of section 242 are not complied with on time, any person who was a director immediately before the end of the time allowed is liable to a fine and, for continued contravention, to a daily default fine.
Furthermore, under subsection (3) if the directors fail to make good the default within 14 days after the service of a notice requiring compliance, the court, on the application of the Registrar or any member or creditor of the company, may make an order directing the directors or any of them to make good the default within such time as may be specified and may order them to pay the costs of and incidental to the application.
Any person charged with an offence under the section has a defence if he can prove that he took all reasonable steps for securing that the accounts were delivered in time.
But, to spike the guns of barrack-room lawyers, it is expressly stated that it is not a defence to prove that the documents prepared were not in fact prepared in accordance with the Act.
To these criminal sanctions against directors, section 242A adds civil penalties, against the company.
The amount of the penalty, recoverable by the Registrar, varies according to whether the company is private or public and to the length of time that the  default continues; the minimum being £100 for a private company and £500 for a public company when the default is for not more than three months and the maximum £1000 for a private and £5,000 for a public company when the default exceeds 12 months.
There are obvious attractions in affording the Registrar an additional weapon in the form of a penalty recoverable by civil suit to which there is no defence once it is shown that accounts have not been delivered on time.
But in principle it seems inexcusable to penalise the company for breach of a duty not owed by it but by its directors and intended to protect, among others, the company and its members.
Moreover the amount of the penalty seems derisory — at any rate in the case of public companies — and it is difficult to believe that, as a deterrent against failing to file on time, this new sanction will prove any more effective than those that the Registrar formerly had and still has.
Revision of defective accounts
Another innovation by the 1989 Act is the introduction of statutory provisions regarding the correction of defective accounts.
It has never been doubted that if directors discover that the accounts that they have presented are defective they can, and should, correct them.
But there had been no statutory provisions regarding it.
Now we have such provisions concerning both voluntary revisions (section 245) and revisions under compulsion (sections 245A-245C).
Section 245 provides that if it appears to the directors that any annual accounts of the company or any directors' report did not comply with the provisions of the Act they may prepare revised accounts or a revised report.
If copies of the previous accounts or report have been laid or delivered the revisions must be confined to the correction of those respects in which they did not comply with the Act and the making of any consequential alterations.
The section provides that the Secretary of State may make provisions by regulations in relation to revised accounts and reports which, in particular, may:— make different provisions according to whether the previous documents are replaced or merely supplemented by a statement of corrections; deal with the functions of the auditors; require the directors to take specified steps in relation to circulation to members and others entitled under section 238; laying before a  general meeting and delivery to the Registrar; and the application of provisions of the Act (including penalties).
Under section 245A, where copies of the annual accounts have been sent out, laid, or delivered to the Registrar and it appears to the Secretary of State that there is or may be a question whether they comply with the Act he may give notice to the directors indicating the respects in which it appears to him that the question may arise and specifying a period of not less than one month for the directors to give him explanations or prepare revised accounts.
If at the end of the specified period, or such longer period as he may allow, they have not satisfied him in one way or the other, the voluntary process ends and he may apply to the court.
Section 245B provides that, as an alternative to an application to the court by the Secretary of State, such an application may be made ‘by any person authorised by him for the purposes of this section.’
In either case, the court may declare that the accounts do not comply and may order the directors to prepare revised accounts.
The order may give directions on: auditing, the revision of the directors' report or any summary financial statement, steps to be taken to bring the order to the notice of persons likely to rely on the original accounts, and on such other matters as the court thinks fit.
Finally, section 245C deals with the authorisation of ‘any other person’ for the purposes of section 245B.
The Secretary of State may authorise any person appearing to him:—(i) to be ‘fit and proper,’ and (ii) to have an interest in, and satisfactory procedures directed to, securing compliance by companies with the accounting provisions and for receiving and investigation complaints.
Authorisation may be general or in respect of particular classes of case.
Such authorisation has been conferred on the new Financial Reporting Review Panel, a subsidiary of the Financial Reporting Council.
Exemptions, exceptions and special provisions
The 1989 Act substitutes a new Chapter II, headed as above, in Part VII of the Act.
It is mainly concerned with concessions to smaller companies and with the special treatment (not dealt with here) of banking and insurance companies and groups.
But it also includes an interesting innovation in relation to companies listed on The Stock Exchange and to this we turn first.
Summary financial statements
Under the new section 251, a company, any of whose shares are officially listed, need not, in such circumstances as are specified by regulations and subject to complying with conditions so specified, send copies of the accounts and reports to members but may instead send them a summary financial statement, derived from the company's annual accounts and directors' report, in such form and containing such information as may be specified in the regulations.
In fact, various conditions are laid down in the section itself; in particular that the nature of the document must be made clear, and that it must contain a statement by the company's auditors of their opinion on whether the statement is consistent with the accounts and reports and complies with the section and the regulations.
It must also state whether the auditors' report was qualified or unqualified and, if it was qualified, must set out the report in full with any further material needed to understand the qualification.
Use of the section is purely optional and even if the company adopts it each member must be sent copies of the full accounts and reports if he wants to receive them.
The importance that the Government place on this section is shown by the fact that it was among the first provisions of the 1989 Act to be brought into operation and the regulations made under it were among the first to be published.
The commendable objectives were (i) to present private investors with a document which they might find more helpful to them than the full statutory accounts,(ii) to reduce an appalling waste of paper, since undoubtedly a great many such investors consign the glossy brochures containing the accounts (ii) to their waste-paper baskets after only the most cursory of glances (if any) and, perhaps,(iii) to reduce the company's postage — though it is  unlikely that any saving on that could be commensurate with the cost of preparing an additional document and, in effect, having it audited.
It will be interesting to see whether these objectives are attained.
As regards the first, it seems unlikely.
A perusal of the Regulations suggests that the summary will be a pretty lengthy one and expressed in equally impenetrable accountants' and lawyers' jargon.
What most private investors need is not a summary (which is generally less intelligible than the document it summarises) but an explanation; and this they will not get.
This is openly admitted by the Regulations which require that the summary should state prominently that ‘This summary financial statement does not contain sufficient information to allow for a full understanding of the results…and state of affairs…
For further information, the full annual accounts, the auditors’ report on those accounts and the directors' report should be consulted.’
And the statement encourages those who have received it to ask in addition for the free copy of the latest statutory accounts by requiring that it must contain a conspicuous statement of their rights under section 239.
As for the conservation aim, there will initially be a greater, not a lesser, consumption of paper, if members are to be persuaded to be content with the summary, it will be necessary to undertake what the Regulations call a ‘relevant consultation’ which involves sending to each member both the full accounts for the financial year and a summary financial statement plus a postage-paid card on which he can make his choice for the future.
If he does nothing, he will be deemed to have opted for the summary statement.
Hence there is likely thereafter to be some saving of paper in future years so long as most members do not also demand copies of the full accounts under section 239.
But one cannot help thinking that a far greater contribution to the preservation of the World's rain forests would be made if companies could be  persuaded to make their annual brochures less glossy and to print them on re-cycled paper.
The other points to note on the Regulations are:(i) that advantage cannot be taken of the section if a provision, ‘however expressed,’ of the company's memorandum or articles requires copies of the full accounts to be sent to members or which prohibits the sending of summary financial statements (ii) that provisions, similar to  those in relation to the full accounts, apply to approval by, and signature on behalf of, the directors of the summary, and (iii) that, up to the end of 1991, most listed companies do not seem to have opted to adopt the innovation.
Small and medium-sized companies and groups
The first four sections of Chapter II of Part VII replace, with amendments, the concessions to smaller companies originally afforded by the 1981 Act as permitted by the Fourth Company Law Directive.
To qualify as ‘small’ or ‘medium-sized’in any financial year a company must meet the qualifying conditions in that year and its previous financial year (if there was one).
These conditions in the case of individual company accounts are that the company must satisfy at least two of three requirements relating to the maximum size of:(i) its turnover,(ii) its ‘balance sheet total’ and (iii) the average number of its employees during the year.
Even if it meets these conditions, it will not be entitled to the concessions unless, at no time during the year, has it, or any member of the group of which it is a member, been a public company, a banking or insurance company or an authorised person under the Financial Services Acts and, if it is a parent company, unless the group qualifies as a small or medium-sized group.
The conditions for qualification as a small or medium-sized group are broadly similar except that the maximum size of each of the three criteria is greater.
If, in accordance with the foregoing, a company is eligible as a small or medium-sized company, the concessions to which it is entitled are:
(a)
exemption from the requirements of paragraph 36A of Schedule 4;
(b)
exemptions to the extent provided by Schedule 8 with respect to the delivery of individual accounts to the Registrar under section 242; and
(c)
exemption from the requirement to prepare group accounts in respect of a year in which the group headed by the company is a small or medium-sized group  so long as the auditors have reported that in their opinion the company is entitled to the exemptions and their report is attached to the company's individual accounts.
Only (a) and (b) require a brief explanation.
As regards(a), the new paragraph 36A of Schedule 4 provides:
‘It shall be stated whether the accounts have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards and particulars of any material departure from those standards and the reason for it shall be given.’
For many years the Accounting Standards Committee (the ASC) of the accountancy bodies had been producing valuable Statements of Standard Accounting Practice (SSAPs) and had done its best to ensure that they were observed — not always successfully since the Statements had no statutory recognition.
Now they have.
A later section (section 256) defines them as ‘statements of standard accounting practice issued by such body or bodies as may be prescribed by regulations’ and goes still further by empowering the Secretary of State to make grants, ‘to or for the purposes of bodies concerned with (a) issuing accounting standards,(b) overseeing and directing the issuing of such standards or (c) investigating departures from such standards or from the accounting requirements of this Act and taking steps to secure compliance with them.’
As a result, the former ASC has been converted into another recognised body, the Accounting Standards Board as another subsidiary company of the Financial Reporting Council.
The case for exempting small and medium-sized companies from the obligation to comply with the Standards does not appear to be particularly strong; but exempted they are.
As regards(b) it should be noted that all it does is to permit small and medium-sized companies to prune the accounts to be delivered to the Registrar and thus made public.
Far from relieving the companies from burdens and expense it adds to them; for those companies that  take advantage of it will have to prepare two distinct sets of accounts and reports, the full version to circulate to their members and the expurgated version to be made available to the general public.
What it does, in effect, is to enable such companies to conceal from outsiders detailed information regarding profitability and turnover, something of which they have a (much exaggerated) fear that it will be used by their competitors to the company ‘s disadvantage.
It represents, however, a retreat from the basic principle that the price of limited liability should be full financial disclosure — a principle which after a long struggle, was adopted in the 1967 Act.
This retreat goes far in relation to small companies because, under Part I of Schedule 8, they are wholly exempt from delivering copies of the profit and loss account and the directors’ report while the balance sheet and the information that has to be given in notes to the accounts can be substantially abbreviated.
In contrast, under Part II of Schedule 8, medium-sized companies have to deliver a copy of the full balance sheet, and a profit and loss account which, however, can combine various items prescribed by Schedule 4 under a single item (gross profits) and can omit particulars of turnover.
Dormant companies
The one type of company which can totally dispense with the provisions of the Act relating to auditing of the accounts is a so-called ‘dormant company.’
Under section 250 it is treated as dormant ‘during a period in which…there is no transaction which is required by section 221 to be entered in the company's accounting records; and a company ceases to be dormant on the occurrence of such a transaction.’
The most obvious and common example of such a company is a ‘shelf company’ while it remains on the shelf.
But there may be legitimate reasons for incorporating a company which is intended to remain dormant indefinitely or for retaining on the  register a company which for the time being has ceased to carry on business but which the members may wish to use at some time in the future for the same or some different business.
A company does not obtain the exemption merely by being dormant.
In addition it must have passed a special resolution making itself ‘exempt’ and that resolution may not be passed if it is a public company, a banking or insurance company or an authorised person under the Financial Services Act.
If the company has been dormant from the time of its formation, the special resolution will be effective if passed before the first general meeting at which accounts are to be laid.
If it has been dormant since the end of the previous financial year and it is entitled in respect of its individual accounts to the exceptions conferred on a small company by section 246 (or would be so entitled but for being a member of an ineligible group) and it is not required to prepare group accounts for that year, the resolution is effective if passed at a general meeting at which the accounts for that year are to be laid.
Moreover, not only is the dormant company then entitled to the exemption from auditing but, if it would have been entitled to the exemptions of a small company under section 246 but for the fact that it is a member of an ineligible group, it will also be entitled to those exemptions; until it ceases to be dormant or no longer qualifies to make itself exempt under section 250.
It hardly needs saying that if there is no audit there will not be any auditors' report to be sent to members, laid before a general meeting, or delivered to the Registrar.
This is recognised in the section which, however, requires the copy of the balance sheet delivered to the Registrar to state immediately above the signature that the company was dormant throughout the year.
Private companies: dispensing with laying accounts
The elective regime for private companies introduced by the 1989 Act enables a private company to elect to dispense with the laying of accounts and reports before a general meeting in accordance with section 241.
So long as the documents have been sent to all those entitled to attend a general meeting in accordance with section 238, it is a pointless farce to require a formal general meeting to be held in order that they may be ‘laid’ unless a member wants to raise  questions about them at a meeting, or the auditors want to have an opportunity of talking to the members about them.
Hence section 252 provides that a private company (whether or not small or medium-sized) may elect (by elective resolution in accordance with section 379A) to dispense with the laying of accounts, and this dispensation applies in respect of the financial year in which the election is made and to subsequent financial years so long as it remains in force.
References in other provisions of the Act to laying of accounts are then to be read as references to the sending of copies under section 238.
However, the rights of any member or of the auditors to insist on a general meeting are entrenched by section 253.
This requires that the accounts sent to members under section 238 shall be sent not less than 28 days before the end of the period allowed for laying and delivery of them and shall be accompanied by notice of their right to require them to be laid before a general meeting.
Before the end of the 28 days any member or auditor may serve notice on the company requiring a meeting to be held for that purpose.
If the directors do not, within a further 21 days, proceed duly to convene the meeting, the person who gave notice may himself do so.
The meeting must be convened in the same way, as nearly as possible, as that in which meetings are to be convened by the directors and must be held not later than 3 months from the date of service of the notice.
Any reasonable expenses incurred by the person who gave notice have to be made good to him by the company and recouped by the company out of any fees or other emoluments of the directors in default.
Unlimited companies
In general, the accounting provisions of Part VII of the Act apply to every company, limited or unlimited.
But, in the case of the latter it has been recognised that as regards the obligation, now in section 242, to deliver accounts and reports to the Registrar (thus making them available to the public) they (like partnerships) are entitled to  exemption.
However, inroads into that exemption, have been made when they are part of a group.
Section 254(1) provides that the directors of an unlimited company are not required to deliver accounts and reports to the Registrar if certain conditions are met.
These conditions are that at no time during the relevant accounting reference period —;
(a)
has the company been, to its knowledge, a subsidiary undertaking of an undertaking which was then limited, nor
(b)
have there been, to its knowledge, rights exercisable by or on behalf of two or more limited undertakings which if exercisable by one of them would have made the company a subsidiary of it, nor
(c)
has the company been a parent company of an undertaking which was then limited.
The reason for the inclusion of ‘to its knowledge’ in (a) and (b) and its exclusion from (c) is that a subsidiary could well be ignorant, through no fault of its own, that it is a subsidiary, whereas a parent company ought to know what subsidiaries it has.
The object of (b) is to require delivery of the accounts of an unlimited company if two or more limited companies would, if they had been a single entity, have been the parent of the unlimited company under the criteria in section 258, although technically the unlimited company is not a subsidiary of any of them.
The only other exclusion from the exemption is that it does not apply if at any time during the relevant accounting period the unlimited company carried on business as the promoter of a trading stamp scheme within the meaning of the Trading Stamps Act 1964.
To single out such companies seems curious; one would have thought that there is a stronger case for excluding unlimited companies which are authorised persons under the Financial Services Act.
Banking and insurance companies
The remaining sections of Chapter II of Part VII deal with the special provisions applying to banking and insurance companies.
these may prepare their accounts in accordance with Schedule 9 (as amended) instead of Schedule 4.
Supplementary provisions
The 1989 Act adds a new Chapter III, under the above heading, to Part VII.
This contains section 256 (accounting standards) already referred to in this chapter.
It also contains section 258 and 259 which, in conjunction with Schedule 10A, define ‘parent and subsidiary undertakings’ and section 260, defining ‘participating interest.’
These have been dealt with in Chapter 6 above.
Attention should, however, be drawn to sections 257 and 261.
The former affords the Secretary of State the widest powers to modify, by Regulations, any of the provisions of Part VII.
If they are made more onerous an affirmative resolution of each House of Parliament is needed: if not, they are effective unless annulled by a resolution of either House.
Section 261 clarifies the position of notes to the accounts; references in the Act to the accounts; include any notes to the accounts containing information which the Act requires to be given and which it requires or allows to be given in a note to the accounts.
Such notes may be included in the accounts or in separate documents annexed thereto.
CONCLUSION
There is no doubt that members and creditors (actual or potential) of companies are afforded ample opportunities to obtain a great deal of financial and other information about the companies concerned.
What is questionable is whether they make the best use of this information, particularly of that which, if they were competent to extract it, could be deduced from the companies' published accounts.
This may not matter too much if they have professional advisers on whom they could rely.
These advisers are more likely to be accountants, rather than lawyers whose principal role in this  respect is likely to be in advising on the interpretation of the statutory provisions rather than on the financial state of the companies which the information reveals.
But any worthwhile advice on the latter is dependent on the accuracy of the information disclosed.
Hence the  importance of audits by competent and independent auditors — to which we turn in the next chapter.