

AFFRAY
1.
INTRODUCTION
The History of the offence
At common law, affray consisted of fighting in public to the terror of innocent bystanders, or the display of force without actual violence but with the same effect on bystanders.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, the offence had fallen into desuetude, but it was resurrected and found to be a handy prosecutorial weapon against gang fights, because it enabled the prosecutor to circumvent the limitations imposed by the laws of complicity.
Although the provenance of the offence was the subject of some doubts, its existence was affirmed by the House of Lords in Button and Swain, and the offence was judicially extended in several ways shortly before it was abolished by the Act.
Thus, it was held that there was no need for a fight — in the sense of two willing participants attacking one another— actually to take place as part of the offence; where one person was attacking another and the public fear was sufficiently aroused, it should not be a defence for the attacker to assert that his victim was acting in self defence.
The logic of this is defensible enough where there are members of the public to be terrified, but it was subsequently held that the offence need not take place in public, on the grounds that bystanders might become just as terrified in private as they would in public .
Finally, the requirement that a bystander should be terrified was qualified where the offence occurred in public, so that it was not necessary to prove either that a bystander was actually terrified, or even present, or even that a bystander was even likely to be present.
The reason offered for this was that, by definition, a public place was one where the public were likely to be.
This overlooks the point that, since the decision of the House in Button and Swain it was not necessary to prove  that the offence took place in public.
Even this attritional logic left one ‘gap’ in the law; where the affray took place in private as opposed to public, it could be argued that there was the need for the presence of an actual (as opposed to a hypothetical) bystander.
The cumulative effects of section 3(4) (which provides that no bystander need be or be likely to be present) and 3(5) (which says that affray is capable of commission in both public and private places) complete the march of logic, with the result that if a person assaults another in private(for example in a domestic assault) and uses violence (of such a degree that the other members of the household would be frightened if they were there), he is technically guilty of an affray.
The public order essence of the offence has been wholly lost, and affray has become a form of aggravated assault.
That prosecutorial discretion will almost certainly rescue the offence from this absurdity is no proper substitute for such catch-all drafting.
Typically, the common law offence was charged in cases of pitched street battles between rival gangs and for revenge attacks on individuals, and, spontaneous pub and club brawls.
Frequently, the indictment also included charges alleging one or more of the offences against the person.
Even though the statutory offence that replaces it reduces the public order characteristics of the offence and raises doubts as to whether affray is properly characterised as a public order offence at all, the likelihood is that it will continue to be employed in the prosecution of spontaneous brawls that result in no great injury in circumstances where the evidence of specific offences against the person is deficient.
The justification of an offence of affray
At common law, the justification of the offence of affray rested in the public fear (terror, in the terminology of the common law) that fighting in public was apt to arouse.
The offence took its title from the French ‘effrayer,’ to frighten, and its essence was that the defendant deliberately took part in fighting or other acts of violence of such a character as to cause alarm to the public.
As was seen in the previous section, the legal ingredients of the offence were successively whittled away so that public alarm became of relative insignificance, although the offence was apt to be charged in cases of group disorder.
The Law Commission nevertheless recommended the retention of the offence for use against fighting, principally because of the procedural advantages that the offence possesses for the prosecutor.
Where there has been a gang fight, as a result of which one of the participants is injured, it is sometimes impossible to prove who was responsible for causing the injury (because of the general mêleé, and because of identification difficulties when the incident occurred at night).
In such circumstances, the offence of affray is a useful alternative either to one of the offences against  the person, or some minor public order offence.
The prosecutor does not have to charge named persons with assaults on other named persons.
If injury has actually been caused, it is not necessary to show that a particular defendant caused them, as it is when an offence against the person is alleged.
The other procedural advantage is said to be that it is open to a prosecutor to include a series of incidents in the one charge, rather than as a series of assaults.
The other advantage of affray for the prosecutor is that it requires a less exacting proof of mens rea than is required for the offences against the person.
It is sufficient for the prosecutor to prove that the defendant intended to participate in an act of fighting.
As the Law Commission observed, it is possible to justify the continued existence of the offence on such grounds only where the penalty for participating in the fight is relatively light, and whereas the penalty was life imprisonment at common law, it is now three years.
This corresponds to what the Court of Appeal had evolved in its sentencing practices as the spontaneous kind of affray, which did not necessarily attract particularly
Basic definition of affray
Section 3 of the Act provides as follows:
‘(1) A person is guilty of affray if he uses or threatens unlawful violence towards another and his conduct is such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety.’
The offence is for the first time triable either way, and is punishable on indictment with either three years’ imprisonment or a fine and summarily with six months imprisonment and a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum.
It also carries a power of arrest; a constable may arrest without warrant anyone whom he reasonably suspects is committing affray.
As defined, affray is no longer an offence of group disorder at all— it may be committed by a single individual attacking another.
It is not wholly clear whether it is permissible for the tribunal of fact to take into account the surrounding circumstances and the conduct of any person defending himself in assessing the level of violence being used, and the frightening quality of the incident.
The section refers only to ‘his conduct’ as being the cause of the fear.
But it may be argued that ‘conduct’ includes the circumstances in which the conduct takes place, including such matters as the time of day or night in addition to the ferocity of the attack.
2.
ELEMENTS IN COMMON WITH VIOLENT DISORDER
Uses or threatens
The prosecutor must prove that the person charged actually uses or threatens some violence.
Evidence that the defendant was suffering from injuries, or that his clothes were torn, would be some evidence that he had participated in the fight.
The prosecutor is not required to prove who the particular victim of the defendant's violence actually was.
There is a fine line to be drawn here, especially since the offence of affray is subject to the ordinary principles of complicity.
Mere presence at the scene of the disorder is insufficient to establish liability.
It has even been held that presence remains no more than evidence of encouragement even when it is accompanied by a secret intention to help if necessary one of the participants in an affray.
So long as the defendant does not communicate his intention, he commits no offence.
Unlawful violence
The offence of affray can be committed by using or threatening unlawful violence, which is the same concept (with two qualifications) as that required for riot and violent disorder.
The exceptions are that, unlike riot and violent disorder, the offence can be committed only when the violence is directed towards the person rather than property, and the threats cannot be by words alone; they must be at least accompanied by threatening gestures.
The first of these exceptions captures the essence of the common law offence of fighting.
The second also reproduces what was thought to be the common law.
The Law Commission provisionally recommended that mere displays of force should be excluded from the offence, largely, it would seem, since there were several other offences by which such behaviour could be prosecuted, and because there were no modern prosecutions for this form of the offence ‘save in quite exceptional circumstances.’
On consultation, it was persuaded otherwise; to limit the offence to the actual use of violence would exempt the person who threw a punch that missed, or who brandished a razor.
The Commission was also impressed by the great confusion that would be caused when there were a number of participants engaged in street fighting, since it would often be difficult to prove who actually used the violence as opposed to merely threatened it.
It is difficult to resist the observation that in view of the anaemic definition of the offence, affray cannot properly be characterised as being committed by a number of people fighting in public, even if that is the most commonly charged form of it.
To use that characterisation as a justification for removing from the definition any requirement of actual fighting as an element in the definition is bootstrap reasoning of an advanced order.
Although liability for affray is excluded where the threats are by words alone, it would be a somewhat unusual altercation in which both participants stood stock still whilst uttering their imprecations and threats.
It is suggested that merely shaking one's fist at another should not be treated as amounting to threats of violence.
A more marginal case is where the defendant is seen to be raising his fists in anticipation of the fight.
Swinging a punch with the intention of striking the other is clearly caught, and it does not matter whether the punch lands or falls short.
Although there appears to have been no prosecution for attempted affray, there is no reason in principle why the inchoate offence should not apply.
Self defence is clearly available.
It is submitted that the fact that the participants consent to the use of violence against one another does not make their conduct lawful.
Such consent would not be an answer to a charge of assault, and the policy reasons that forbid consenting adults to engage in fighting for the purposes of assault should apply equally in the case of an affray.
If it were still the case that affray required that the incident should take place in public, the case would be cast-iron.
In Woodrow, it was held that affray is a continuing offence, so that where an indictment charged the defendants with a single offence and particularised several incidents that had occurred at different places and over a period of several hours, the indictment was not bad for duplicity.
This seems to be at variance with John Jones where a number of incidents over a period were held to be duplicitously charged as a single count of affray.
The principle must be that although affray is a continuing offence, where the participants can no longer be said to be using or threatening violence towards another person, the offence is complete.
If there is a clear break between one attack and another, the prosecutor would be wise to include two affray counts rather than one.
Such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness to fear for his personal safety
The degree of violence that must be proved is the same as that which would substantiate a charge of violent disorder or even riot.
The offence is clearly aimed at more than merely fighting in public.
Given the gradations in penalty available, this sets the threshold for liability at a surprisingly high level, and it may be wondered whether an individual defendant on his own will often be able to perpetrate that degree of ferocity, although the Act clearly contemplates this as a possibility.
However, where more than one person is involved as an attacker, section 3(2) provides that:
‘(2) Where 2 or more persons use or threaten the unlawful violence, it is the conduct of them taken together that must be considered for the purposes of subsection (1).’
At common law, it was required that the bystanders should be terrified.
This is no longer necessary; fear for one's personal safety is a much lower level of alarm.
Mere distress or concern is however insufficient to constitute fear for one's safety.
Absence of bystanders
Section 3(4) provides that:
‘No person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be likely to be, present at the scene.’
This resolves the point that had to some extent been an open question before the Act.
The Court of Appeal had decided that, where the offence takes place in , there was no reason to require the presence of any bystander, actual or likely, since by definition a public place was a place where the public were likely to be.No objection could be taken to this when the offence actually took place in public; now, of course , it need not.
The evidence of actual bystanders of what they saw and felt is some evidence of what the hypothetical bystander would have been likely to feel.
Public or private place
So far as the law of affray is concerned, the provision in section 3(5) that the offence may be committed in private as well as in public states the existing law on the point, and arguably ‘corrects the error’ that had crept in to the law a century or so earlier.
The section puts it beyond argument that there is no defence that the affray took place in private.
This has the remarkable consequence that if a man attacks his wife (or vice versa) in the privacy of their own home, the offence of affray appears to be committed if the evidence is that there was violence of a sufficient degree.
But the proper charge in such an event is, clearly, the appropriate offence against the person.
The mental element
Section 6(2) has already been dealt with in connection with violent disorder, and readers are referred to the earlier discussion.
To recapitulate briefly, it need not be shown that the person fighting intended to put bystanders (if there are any) in fear by what he does.
It is sufficient if he is shown to be intentionally using violence or if he is aware that his conduct may be violent.
Gesticulating wildly in a crowded space, so that others are frightened that they might be struck by the defendant, is not punishable unless it can be shown that the defendant was at least aware that his conduct might be having such an effect.
The extended definition of violence in section 8(b) applies to affray; the words in section 8(a) ‘except in the context of affray’ apply to that paragraph only.
This means that to prove the requisite degree of mens rea for an affray, it will he sufficient for the prosecutor to prove that the defendant knowingly took part in a fight.
3.
THE DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF AFFRAY
Violence towards another
The origins of affray as being committed by fighting are preserved by the requirement that the violence used or threatened must be directed at Another person, and not (unlike violent disorder and riot) at property.
This is the effect of sections 3(1) and 8(a), the relevant part of which provides that:
‘except in the context of affray, it includes violent conduct towards property as well as violent conduct towards persons.’
This means that missile throwing, although technically perhaps falling within the ambit of this offence, would place on the prosecutor the burden of proving that the missile was directed at a human being rather than at property.
In those circumstances, it would be simpler for the prosecutor to charge violent disorder, providing that there are sufficient numbers present together.
Although the characteristic case of an affray involves fighting in public, there may be in cases where there is no actual violence applied to the person of another, since the offence is capable of commission by those who threaten violence.
At common law, it was an affray where a person armed himself with ‘dangerous and unusual weapons,’ so that displays of force were technically affray.
A gang walking around in public brandishing bicycle chains could have been convicted.
The requirement under consideration precludes this, since there is no threat of violence towards another person involved in such conduct.
Threats by words alone
Although displays of force such as the brandishing of an offensive weapon could be a common law affray, a mere altercation using threatening language could not constitute an affray at common law.
The Act is intended to preserve this state of affairs in section 3(3), which provides that:
‘For the purposes of this section a threat cannot be made by the use of words alone.’
How real a limitation on the scope of the offence this will prove to be remains to be seen.
People rarely utter threats without accompanying them by threatening gestures of some sort, and the combination of words and gestures, even without the display of a weapon, is clearly within the terms of the Act.
Prosecutors may feel that in serious cases of what has hitherto been threatening conduct under the Public Order Act 1936, section 5 might be proceeded against as affrays.
Sentencing practice
The maximum penalty for the offence is now three years’ imprisonment or a fine, or on summary conviction, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine up to the statutory maximum.
Originally, the Law Commission had proposed that the offence should carry a penalty of ten  years, but later accepted that this was difficult to defend in terms of principle.
Before the Act the courts had, as a matter of sentencing practice, isolated two different types of affray.
One was a spontaneous mêleé of the kind that tends to erupt at pub closing times or in dance halls.
These were regarded as relatively minor, and the sentences reflected this; only exceptional violence justified a sentence of more than 18 months imprisonment.
The other type of offence involved in effect a preconceived and premeditated pitched battle, often accompanied by the use of weapons.
These were occasionally visited with heavy penalties, but generally only in situations where an offence against the person such as unlawful or malicious wounding could have been proved.
The reduction in penalty from the theoretically available life to three years will mean that prosecuting policy will have to be revised in these types of affray, and that prosecutions will have to be brought either for riot or violent disorder, or for offences contrary to the Offences Against the Persons Act 1861, sections 18, 20 and 47.
CAUSING FEAR OF VIOLENCE, OR PROVOCATION OF VIOLENCE
1.
BACKGROUND TO THE OFFENCE
History
The somewhat unwieldy title of this chapter, and the difficulty of finding a brief but accurate label to designate the offence created by section 4 reflect the fact that the section is concerned with two quite separate species of wrongdoing.
It is in part an offence of intimidation by threats, abuse or insults — a species of assault.
The second, and quite different variety of wrongdoing involves provoking the use of unlawful violence by others, by the use of threats, abuse or insults.
Only section 7(2) prevents us from treating it as two separate offences.
The offence created by section 4 is intended to replace the Public Order Act 1936, section 5.
Since it is couched in similar terms to its predecessor in its reference to ‘threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour,’ at least some of the case law on the previous section is still pertinent.a But in several respects, it is crucially different from that familiar standby of public order law.
The new offence requires that the conduct be used ‘towards another person’ which the old offence did not, there is a different mental element, violence replaces breach of the peace, and the new offence can be committed in private as well as in public.
Section 5, enacted to deal with Fascist marches in the East End of London, had become unsatisfactory for several reasons.
One defect was that it required proof of the likelihood of a breach of the peace as a result of the defendant's conduct.
This had two vices; the common law concept was vague, and it seems highly likely that the offence was sometimes used to prevent nuisances of a relatively minor kind not aimed at by Parliament.
Several decisions of the higher courts had, shortly before the Act, injected  greater clarity into the law and linked breach of the peace more firmly to the notion of violence to persons or property.
But there were still uncertainties surrounding the notion, and rather than try to define it further, the new offence dispenses with the requirement of breach of the peace altogether, and replaces it with ‘unlawful violence.’
Another serious defect in the previous law, pinpointed by the Law Commission, was that when the section was read literally, liability was seen to turn on the question whether the victim was likely to respond in a way that constituted a breach of the peace in the face of threats, abuses and insults.
When the victim was an inoffensive law abiding citizen, therefore, or a constables who, by virtue of his training, is unlikely to respond to what the defendant was doing by committing a breach of the peace, there was little real likelihood of a breach of the peace, and no offence was committed, in spite of the defendant's intolerably bullying behaviour.
The reformulated law makes it plain that an offence is committed if the defendant conducts himself in a way that causes his victim to anticipate that the defendant is about to use unlawful violence.
In addition, the new section captures the essence of the old law, that the conduct is caught if it is intended or likely to provoke others to cause unlawful violence.
As will be considered further, it is not at all clear, however, that the newly formulated offence entirely cures what might be called the policeman defect.
Because it imposes constraints by reference to what a person says, the section clearly sets limits to freedom of speech, and if too stringently enforced, is a potential threat to the civil liberties of the individual.
In Jordan v. Burgoyne Lord Parker C.J. made the point that the expressions ‘threatening, abusive or insulting’ are all ‘very strong words,’and Lord Reid in Brutus v. Cozens repeated the warning against too expansive a reading of the section, observing that ‘vigorous and it may be distasteful or unmannerly speech or behaviour is permitted so long as it does not go  beyond any of these limits.’
Speech that might be regarded as insulting because it attacks the cherished views and beliefs of the audience at which it is directed is in particular jeopardy from this section.
The offence is not designed to penalise the expressions of opinion that happen to be disagreeable, distasteful, or even offensive, annoying or distressing.
The language (or conduct) must be threatening, abusive or insulting.
So long as these considerations are borne in mind by those whose task it is to apply the section, and the public order requirements of the offence are rigidly insisted upon by the courts, only such speech as is likely to give rise to immediate unlawful violence is in jeopardy, and that should be outside the protection afforded freedom of speech in a democracy.
Definition of the offence
Section 4 of the Act provides:
‘(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he —(a) uses towards another person threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or (b) distributes or displays to another person any writing, sign or other visible representation which is threatening, abusive or insulting, with intent to cause that person to believe that immediate unlawful violence will be used against him or another by any person, or to provoke the immediate use of unlawful violence by that person or another, or whereby that person is likely to believe that such violence will be used or it is likely that such violence will be provoked.’
The offence carries a power of arrest where a constable reasonably suspects that a person is committing an offence under the section, is triable summarily only, and punishable with six months or a fine to level 5.
Subsections 1(a) and (b) broadly replicate the earlier law, and are readily enough comprehensible.
But the second part of the subsection, which seeks to reproduce the essence of the previous law — allowing for the substitution of ‘violence’ in place of‘breach of the peace’— is potentially  confusing, because it contains both subjective and objective requirements as alternatives.
The whole clause is not qualified, as it appears to be on first reading, by the opening words ‘with intent.’
If a person acts with the intention of frightening or provoking, there is no difficulty.
But if his defence is that it was not his intention to cause fear of violence or to provoke its use, his conduct might still come within the ambit of the subsection by virtue of its latter part.
This objective aspect of the subsection is in fact the most practically important.
The whole is complicated by the fact that, by virtue of section 6(3), the prosecutor has to prove a degree of mens rea that was probably not a requirement of the previous law.
2.
THE PHYSICAL ELEMENT
Uses towards another
The conduct in question must be used towards another person (which will include a group of persons).
This was not an express requirement in the previous legislation, and it is not obvious why it should have been introduced into the new law.
It harmonises the section with the other offences in this Part of the Act (apart from section 5), and sharpens the public order element of the offence.
Violence is altogether more likely to arise where the conduct is actually directed towards another person.
The expression emphasises that the offence is not a ‘victimless’ one, but requires the actual presence of persons who are or are likely to be threatened, abused or insulted.
One difficulty that the new phrase might cause to the prosecutor arises where a person has been apprehended as part of a large and threatening group.
Under the previous law, the conduct of the members of the group taken together could be assessed in deciding whether or not the behaviour was threatening.
Under the new law, liability is further particularised by the expression in question, so that it must be shown that the conduct was used towards another.
Even though the prosecutor is able to rely upon the principles of complicity to establish that the particular defendant was guilty, he still has to show that the defendant was encouraging others to use the conduct in question.
Another effect of the phrase would seem to be that it enables the person uttering the remarks or engaging in the behaviour to assert that he was unaware of the presence of his audience, which duplicates the requirements of intention now built into the section.
Our ordinary sense of language suggests that it is not possible for a person to use words or conduct ‘towards another person’ if he is unaware of that person's existence.
Some support for this interpretation may be found in the fact that section 5 affords a speaker or actor the specific defence that he was unaware and had  no reason to suspect that his conduct may have been witnessed, and it would be anomalous if there were no similar defence for the more serious offence.
There would still be the difference between the two sections that, whereas section 5 plainly places the probative burden on the defendant, under section 4, the defendant would have no more than an evidentiary burden to raise the issue, in which case it would be for the prosecutor to establish that he knew that witnesses were present.
If this is the correct interpretation, it would mean that a case like Masterson v. Holden would probably be differently decided on this point.
There, two homosexuals were seen engaging in acts of intimacy early one morning in Oxford Street.
There was evidence that passers-by were annoyed, and were on the verge of resorting to violence when the police intervened.
The magistrates concluded that such conduct was ‘insulting’ and the Divisional Court declined to reverse this holding of fact.
There was no evidence that the defendants were aware of the existence of those whom their conduct offended, although the court said that there was evidence from which the magistrates were entitled to infer that the appellants ‘must have known that other people would be likely to be present.’
The magistrates had found that ‘the appellants appeared wholly unaware of other persons in the vicinity,’ and even if there was evidence that they ought to have known, that is not necessarily the same as actual awareness.
It is difficult to see how conduct could be said to be ‘used towards’ another person of whose existence one was oblivious.
Where the conduct consists of a distribution or display, that distribution must be ‘to another person.’
This also amends the previous law, and presents some potential difficulties.
Does a person who exhibits his display to the whole world display to another person?
Even granted that the singular can include the plural, so that‘another’ can include ‘others,’a standing display is not necessarily displayed towards others.
Suppose, for example, that a person has in his front window, a large and objectionable  racist poster, clearly visible from the street.
His argument that he was not displaying it towards another gains strength from the fact that, under section 18 (which is explicitly concerned with the offence of stirring racial hatred) the word ‘display’ is not similarly qualified.
It may therefore be necessary to proceed against him under the latter section, supposing that the requisite intention can be established, or under section 5.
Certainly, the exhibitor could be required to remove the offending poster by virtue of section 5.
The same problem arises where a person is wearing an insulting emblem on his clothing.
If there is an offence at all in such circumstances, it is probably under section 5 rather than section 4.
Words or behaviour
Although the Act uses the expressions ‘words or behaviour’ disjunctively, it is plain not only that either on its own will do, but also that words and behaviour may be considered cumulatively.
The section means words and/or behaviour.
Goose-stepping, giving a nazi salute and shouting ‘Seig Heil’ have a significance when taken together which is not present when each element is considered separately.
Certain kinds of behaviour, even when considered on its own, may have a symbolic significance that its witnesses find insulting.
That symbolism can be taken into account in assessing the ‘threatening, abusive or insulting’ quality of what is being done.
Distributes or displays
Where the offending message is in written form, the offence is committed where the defendant ‘distributes or displays’ it.
The offence would be committed by a single act of distribution, and the recipient may be a single person.
This contrasts with the racial hatred offence, where the distribution must be to the public or a section of the public.
A contrast might also be made with section 5, which penalises ‘display’ only.
Persons who hand out leaflets clearly distribute them, and so might be guilty under section 4.
Writing sign or visible representation
This phrase, which appears sufficiently comprehensive to apply to any visible image, was not included in the original Public Order Act 1936, but was introduced only when incitement to racial hatred was first made a criminal offence.
It will clearly include such relatively ephemeral representations as placards and banners, as well as slogans daubed on walls.
It need not be confined to the written word — symbols such as the swastika, and other offensive images will suffice.
It would also include slogans on clothes, but not the adoption of an offensive uniform.
Threatening
In view of the frequency with which section 5 was prosecuted, there is surprisingly little authority as to what constitutes threatening behaviour.
According to Lush J., ‘it is the very essence of a threat that it should be made for the purpose of intimidating or overcoming the will of the person to whom it is addressed.’
The threat need not be one offering physical violence, since it may be such as to provoke another to engage in violence, although it usually will be an offer of force of some kind leading the victim  to believe that violence against him or another person is about to be used or provoked.
Indeed, as the new offence is defined, it creates what is essentially a statutory form of assault.
It seems tolerably clear that, in principle, the offence is capable of commission by words alone, although conduct will give additional force to any words that are uttered.
Not every act of rowdyism is necessarily a threat.
In Hudson v. Chief Constable, Avon and Somerset Constabulary, the defendant was one of a group of football supporters who ‘became excited, jumping up and down and clapping his hands above his head.’
He fell forward, as a result of which there was a crowd surge and the people in front of him stumbled down the terraces.
The Divisional Court concluded that nothing in that statement of facts constituted a threat, and the conviction was quashed.
It would appear from the report of Hudson that the defendant had simply overbalanced in his excitement.
But suppose he had deliberately pushed those in front of him.
Can the actual use of deliberate force constitute a threat, or more accurately ‘threatening behaviour?’
The question will assume practical significance because of the potential overlap with the offence of violent disorder, to which section 4 constitutes an alternative offence.
The point arose in Oakwell where the evidence against the defendant on a charge of threatening behaviour was that he was seen fighting with another.
This clearly might have been proceeded against as an affray, and counsel's argument before the Court of Appeal appears to have been that once violence had actually been used, the proper course would have been to charge that offence.
The Court concluded, rightly it is submitted, that the mere fact that the defendant happens to have committed another offence in addition to the one with which he has been charged should not preclude a conviction.
Counsel's second argument was that all the evidence presented to the court was that the defendant had been seen engaging in actual violence, but not threatening it, as the section requires, On this submission the Court concluded that there was sufficient evidence in the narrative presented to the jury from which they were entitled to conclude that there was threatening behaviour.
It is not clear what the Court meant by this.
One possibility is that the fight was in all probability preceded by an exchange of threats, however brief, and the jury would be entitled to infer this even if there was no direct evidence of it.
A second possibility is that the use of violence itself amounts to threatening behaviour.
This is more problematic, since threats generally refer to some future contingency rather than the present, and the section requires belief that violence ‘will be used’ The Court of Appeal certified that a point of law  of general public importance was involved in the question whether an offence under section 5 can be committed by a person who is already breaching the peace by the acts complained of.
The House of Lords did not grant leave to appeal, the point remains a difficult and important one but the Act may have clarified the point, at least where the scuffle is an ongoing one.
Whereas the essence of the previous law was that the threat was required to cause the breach of the peace, now it is enough if the conduct causes a person to believe that there will be violence, which might include continued violence if the scuffle is already in progress when the witness appears on the scene.
In those circumstances, he believes that violence will be used, and that is sufficient.
Another possible way of resolving the difficulty where the sole evidence is that the defendant was actually fighting is to say that, in the course of the fight, there is a series of threatening gestures, each one of which constitutes a fresh offence.
This reasoning seems slightly artificial where the essence of what is alleged is fighting, and the better course may be to charge the person fighting with assault, or affray, or both.
Where there is a single act of violence rather than an ongoing event, the law is slightly more problematic; its application to a case of missile throwing, for example, is not certain.
A person who throws a missile at a football match can clearly be guilty of violent disorder (provided always that there are three or more present using or threatening violence), since his conduct can be regarded as violence by virtue of the extended definition of ‘violence’ in the Act.
But such behaviour is not obviously threatening (although it is almost certainly disorderly), and it may be doubted whether a conviction of the section 4 offence is proper unless the conduct complained of is such that it is likely to lead to further violence.
Where a group of persons is acting in a threatening manner, the pre-Act cases established that conduct of the defendants taken together should be considered.
In McMahon v. Dollard the two defendants were part of a group of ‘rockers’ dressed in the appropriate ‘uniform’of black leather jackets, and chanting anti ‘mod’slogans.
In their progress they took up the whole width of the footpath.
The Divisional Court treated their conduct as an act of group violence, so that each member of the joint group was guilty of threatening behaviour.
One obstacle to adopting the same course under the new Act is that, in the cases of riot, violent disorder and affray, where the conduct of joint defendants is to be assessed together, the Act actually says so.
By implication, therefore, the opposite is the case when the Act does not say so, as is the case in the section under consideration, Expressio unius, exclusio est alterius is the Latin maxim governing the  point.
That is, where one has been explicitly mentioned, the other is impliedly excluded.
The difference is to be explained by the historical origins of the various sections.
If the pre-existing law is permitted to prevail, it will serve to emphasise how little like a code the Act really is.
Can one ‘threaten’ for the purposes of the section by offering to do that which is lawful?
For example, would the section apply where, in the course of a heated dispute between neighbours, one of the participants were to ‘threaten’ to call in the police, or to refer the matter to his solicitors, with the result that the other protagonist resorted to violence.
Two possible solutions to this potential difficulty may be suggested.
One may be to say that, although the use of the word ‘threatening’ is primarily a matter for the tribunal of fact, as a matter of law a person cannot be held to threaten when his threatened conduct is ‘lawful.’
Alternatively, it might be said that since it is unreasonable of a person to respond to such a threat by unlawful violence, it can be said that the conduct is not ‘likely’ to have such a result.
Conditional threats are covered by the section, unless the condition expressed is such as to make it abundantly plain that the person uttering it had no intention of carrying out his threat.
The person to whom it is addressed cannot be expected to conduct a minute linguistic analysis of what is said to him where this is accompanied by aggressive gestures.
A threat expressed in the form ‘if I catch you when there are no police about’ addressed to an adversary is not caught by the section, since it is not a threat of such as to cause the victim of it to believe that he will be the object of ‘immediate’violence.
But it may be likely to provoke the victim into the use of violence, in which case it would be caught by the section.
Abusive
The point has been made that ‘abusive’ and ‘insulting’are semantically very similar, and can be used more or less interchangeably (the information or indictment can use the blunderbuss language of threatening, abusive or insulting without offending the rule against duplicity).
In a sense, then, it is unnecessary from a practical point to distinguish between the various forms of offensive words or behaviour.
But it is necessary to establish that the words or behaviour in question fall within the terms of one or other (or perhaps both) of these epithets.
Can a true statement be abusive or insulting?
Yes, must be the answer.
A person who is illegitimate may very well resent being called a bastard, although it happens literally to be true.
Of course, if the person making the observation is unaware of the illegitimate status of the person to whom he is addressing his remarks, he would not be guilty of the offence since he would lack mens rea.
Insulting
Of the three epithets employed by the section, ‘insulting’ has received most attention from the courts.
It was in respect of this word that the House of Lords in Brutus v. Cozens developed its doctrine that ‘ordinary words’ are the province of the tribunal of fact.
The potential mischief of uneven application that such a doctrine opens up was examined earlier.
In Brutus v. Cozens, the House declined to attempt to define what is meant by insulting, and later courts have not sought to do what the House would not, although they have sought to give guidance as to what the term might mean.
In Parkin v. Norman where the defendant had engaged in masturbation within sight of a plain clothes policeman in a public lavatory, McCullough J. put the matter as follows:
‘The Act does not make it criminal to use offensive or disgusting behaviour whereby a breach of the peace is likely to be occasioned.
It requires…‘insulting behaviour.’
What then is an insult?
We do not propose to attempt any sort of definition, particularly after the speeches in Brutus v. Cozens, but some consideration of its characteristics are necessary in the light of counsel's submissions that behaviour of the type here is not insulting.
One cannot insult nothing.
The word presupposes a subject and an object and, in this day and age, a human object.
I An insult is perceived by someone who feels insulted.
It is given by someone who is directing his words or behaviour to another person or persons.
When A is insulting B, and is clearly directing his words and behaviour to B alone, if C hears and sees is he insulted?
He may be disgusted, offended, annoyed, angered and no doubt a number of other things as well; and he may be provoked by what he sees and hears into breaking the peace.
But will he be insulted?
The appellant's conduct was aimed at one person and only one person.
He obviously hoped, and after a little while would presumably have believed, that the person to whom it was directed was another homosexual.
Whatever he was trying to do, he was not trying to insult him.
Whatever another homosexual would have felt, he would not, presumably, have felt insulted.
In fact, the second person was a police officer.
Was he insulted?
He had gone in there in plain clothes to catch anyone he saw doing this sort of thing, and he caught one.
It seems to us quite unrealistic to say that he would have felt insulted.
Suppose, as was possible, that the person to whom the behaviour was directed had been a heterosexual using the lavatory for its proper purpose.
He would almost certainly have felt disgusted and perhaps angry, but would he have felt insulted?
The argument that he would is that the behaviour was tantamount to a statement ‘I believe you are another homosexual,’ which the average heterosexual would surely regard as insulting.
We regard this as the only basis on which the behaviour could fairly be characterised as ‘insulting.’'
It will be seen from this passage that the question whether or not conduct can be insulting may depend upon a complex mixture of objective fact and the maker's intention which the new Act does not entirely manage to disentangle.
A person is not now guilty of the offence unless he is at least aware that his conduct may be insulting.
Even though he does not intend to insult, or is not seeking to insult, he can be guilty of the offence if he is aware that his conduct is or might be insulting.
Equally, it would be no defence to the charge of insulting behaviour founded upon, for example, handing out leaflets seeking to persuade soldiers to desert that it was not the leafleter's intention to insult, so long as the leaflet was in fact insulting, and the person distributing it was at least aware that it might be regarded as insulting by the person to whom it was addressed.
What then does insulting mean?
Glanville Williams offers the following elaboration:
‘language or conduct is not said to be insulting unless it is intended to show contempt or disesteem, or is understood by the hearer or observer to show this attitude.’
It is suggested that this captures the core of what it is for conduct to be insulting.
The witness of an insult, or the victim of it, will feel that his dignity is impugned and regarded as a matter for contempt by the person whose conduct he witnesses.
A definition of that sort might allow the person addressed to take into account the fact that the person making the utterance was seeking to make a serious point, or engage him in reasoned discussion, or was acting unintentionally.
Even making allowances for these factors, a person might be insulted if the actor makes it plain by his words or conduct that he holds in contempt those (including the victim) who do not share his point of view.
In Masterson v. Holden it was held that the conduct was insulting because the magistrates might properly have taken the view that such objectionable conduct in a public street may well be regarded as insulting in that it suggests to a witness that he or she is somebody who would find such conduct in public acceptable himself or herself.
If that is so, then it may be doubted whether the earlier decision of Bryan v. Robinsons was correctly decided.
In that case, the hostess of a club selling non-alcoholic beverages importuned three passers by.
The persons solicited in this way reacted with annoyance, perhaps indicating that they supposed that they were being solicited for the purposes of prostitution (the magistrates having found as a fact that ‘it would be impossible for anyone so touted or solicited without enquiry to appreciate the purpose of the solicitation, and that a solicitation for this purpose in the circumstances of time and place was such an affront that it might provoke a breach of the peace.’)
These findings of fact were given remarkably short shrift by Lord Parker C.J. who held that the conduct could not amount to insulting behaviour.
If it is insulting to suggest to a person that he is a homosexual, is it not equally insulting to suggest to a man that he is the sort of person who might be susceptible to solicitation in the streets by women?
Lord Parker's response to that suggestion was that no offence had been committed in any event because, even if it could be said that such conduct was insulting (which he doubted) most men approached in such a way are not likely to resort to violence.
The objective conditions
If it cannot be shown that the person uttering the remarks intended to induce his victim to believe that he was about to engage in violence himself, or intended to provoke the object of his remarks into using unlawful violence, what will be termed here the objective conditions come into operation.
These focus on the propensities of the defendant's conduct to instil fear of violence, or alternatively to provoke it, whatever the defendant's intention may have been.
Abstracting the references to intention from the section, it can be reconstructed to read that a person is guilty if he uses language or conduct towards another person that is threatening, abusive or insulting in circumstances:
‘whereby that person is likely to believe that such violence (i.e. immediate unlawful violence against him or another) will be used or it is likely that such violence will be provoked.’
This establishes two grounds of liability; for the first, it must be likely that  the person at whom the conduct is directed believes that the use of violence is imminent.
For the second, it must be shown that it is likely that violence will be provoked.
Each will be considered in turn.
Whereby that person is likely to believe
The expression ‘towards another person’ which has already been considered narrows the scope of the offence by comparison with the previous law.
It is the person towards whom the words or conduct are directed — an actual rather than a hypothetical person — who must be likely to believe that the violence will be used, either against himself or another.
If a policeman encounters a person using threatening language against another, he must make a judgment as to whether or not the addressee of the threats is likely to believe that the threats will be implemented.
It is insufficient that the person addressed should fear or be likely to fear violence against property.
This means that the section is in this respect more restricted than was section 5.
A breach of the peace included a threat made to a person's property in his presence.
A threat to a person's property in his presence might very well provoke the use of force by way of self-protection, which would seem to qualify.
The difficulty is that the violence referred to by the subsection must be immediate ‘unlawful’ violence, and a person is entitled to employ a certain amount of force in the protection of his property.
This means that if a person is threatening another's property in such a way that he is likely to cause another to act in self defence, he commits no offence.
The logic of this is not easily discerned.
The best evidence that the victim — the person towards whom the threats, abuses or insults were directed — did believe that he was about to be subjected to immediate violence would come from the mouth of the victim himself, but it is not necessary to produce a bystander as a witness in court to prove the point; it can be a matter for inference from the narrative of events presented to the court.
Where the allegation is that the person to whom the remarks were addressed was likely to form a given belief, it means ‘likely to form’ and not ‘did form.’
If the particular addressee of the remark happens to be unusually unimaginative or drunk, the conduct may still fall within the terms of the section.
It is the risk to public order inherent in the defendant's words or conduct that represents the harm struck at by the section.
A constable may be a victim for the purposes of this offence, in certain circumstances, under this limb of the objective condition.
This alters the previous law, where it was held in effect that where a policeman was the only witness to what had occurred, no offence was committed.
In the case in which the defect in the law was first exposed, Marsh v. Arscot the defendant who was drunk began using a stream of abusive language  directed at the policemen who were investigating his suspicious presence in a car park.
It was held that no offence was committed; Parliament was concerned in section 5 with cause and effect, and the causal sequence was not present in the situation confronting the court because, even if the defendant himself was engaging in a breach of the peace, he was not likely to cause or occasion a further breach.
Where policemen were the only witnesses to what had occurred, there was most unlikely to be a breach of the peace, since the policemen were unlikely to engage in the use of unlawful violence.
The new law remedies this defect, to a certain extent.
It will be argued that if a policeman is confronted by a situation in which he fears that violence will be directed towards him if he intervenes, or it is likely that there will be such violence, the offence is committed.
In G. v. Chief Constable for Stroud for example, the defendant (a youth of 15) was using public recreational facilities designed for younger children.
He was asked to leave, but declined to do so, and the police were called.
After some prompting, the defendant gave the police his name and address, and then at his mother's prompting began to leave the scene, using foul language as he went.
He was told by the police to desist, but did not do so, and when arrested, used considerable force to resist.
The justices found that there had been a breach of the peace before the police arrived, because the mother-in-law of the person who had asked the defendant to leave the swings had been ‘alarmed’ by the defendant's conduct.
This was held to be incorrect, but irrelevant; incorrect, because a mere sense of alarm was insufficient to give rise to a fear of a breach of the peace, and irrelevant because the justices had found (or there was evidence from which they could have found) that the constables reasonably believed that the defendant's own behaviour was likely to constitute a breach of the peace.
If the justices had applied the wrong criteria as to what constituted a breach of the peace in the case of the mother-in-law, it is difficult to see how the court could have been so sure that the justices had applied the right criteria to the decision of the policeman.
The plain truth is that in such a situation, when the defendant was actually walking away from the scene, no further breaches of the peace were likely to be occasioned by him.
Should the same scenario arise under the new law, it is suggested that the following analysis applies.
The police are entitled to tell the person walking away from the scene to discontinue using his filthy language, which would in all likelihood constitute an offence under section 5 of the new Act.
If they fear that in calling for quiet, and seeking to ensure it where the subject declines to desist, they might themselves be the objects of violence, the offence is made out.
Indeed, it is sufficient that it is likely that they will fear the use of violence.
Another but more legally complicated way of arriving at the same result under the subsection is to say that, when the police seek to intervene, it is likely that a belief is likely to arise in the mind of the first victims, that violence towards the police is a likely outcome of the defendant's conduct.
Where a policeman is surrounded by a group of youths, one of whom he is attempting to pacify or arrest, and the youth uses language such that the policeman is or feels threatened, it is submitted that an offence is committed.
Even if the defendant himself can plausibly say that he did not intend to use violence, it is sufficient if he uses the language or behaviour in a situation where the addressee is likely to believe that violence will be used against him either by the speaker or by other persons.
Only where the person using the foul language makes it plain that he has no intention of resorting to violence, and there is no bystander who is likely to be provoked by what the defendant is doing, is no offence committed under this section.
Where the victim of the threats, abuses or insults is a law abiding citizen who is unlikely to be provoked into using violence, an offence may nevertheless be committed under this limb of the subsection.
This was perceived to be a ‘loophole’ in the previous law, and according to the White Paper, the new formulation under consideration is designed to resolve this problem.
But it is not wholly clear that the problem has disappeared.
If, for example, two people watch young tearaways behaving in an abusive manner towards them from a safe distance across the street, a conviction would be proper only if they were really likely to fear that violence would be likely to be used against them (or another).
It is likely that violence will be provoked
The expression to be considered in this section stands in splendid isolation at the end of the subsection.
Although it appears to be grammatically linked to the remainder of the subsection, it is not qualified by much of what appears before it.
It does not mean that the person at whom the conduct is directed must believe that it is likely that violence will be provoked.
It is enough if the defendant has used threatening, abusive or insulting language or conduct such that it is likely that violence will be provoked.
This is an altogether more simple reading of the section, and would apply where the policeman comes across a person who is using abusive language, and comes to the conclusion that it is likely that somebody in the audience will intervene to put a stop to it, using unlawful violence (citizens may have the power to prevent a breach of the peace, but not to preserve the public quiet).
If the person seems likely to overreact to the abuse or insults, and to use more force than he is entitled to employ, then it is likely that unlawful violence will be used, and the offence is committed.
One of the defects under the previous law was that where the person being addressed was a police constable no offence was committed, since a constable would be unlikely, because of his training, to react by being  provoked into breaking the peace.
He is no more likely to be provoked into acts of violence, even though he is made the subject of abusive and insulting remarks and conduct, and it is suggested that in this respect the law remains precisely the same.
Unless the circumstances are such that he fears that violence is likely, no offence is committed.
The difficulty is well illustrated by the facts of Nicholson v. Gage, in which a Peeping Tom was caught in a public lavatory looking through a hole in the wall into the women's lavatory.
He was seen doing so by a policeman and arrested, but it was held by the Divisional Court that he should not have been convicted, since on those facts (even accepting that the conduct was insulting) no breach of the peace was likely.
For the same reason, no offence is committed under the new law either.
The Peeping Tom was not himself likely in the circumstances to resort to violence, and the constable was certainly not.
It is possible that a third person might have entered the lavatory and been provoked into violence by what the defendant was doing — the woman's partner, for example.
But it really stretches the bounds of possibility too far to say that it is likely that this will happen.
In Parkin v. Norman, McCullogh J. said that ‘it is to be noted that the words of the statute are ‘whereby a breach of the peace is likely to be occasioned’ and not ‘whereby a breach of the peace is liable to be occasioned.’
This is a penal measure and the courts must take care to see that this former expression is not treated as if it were the latter.’
Where the ‘victim’ of the threats, abuse or insults is a well-behaved, law abiding member of the public, he or she is unlikely to be provoked to use unlawful violence by the speaker's comments, and no offence is committed under this limb of the section.
But if the prosecutor can show an intention to provoke unlawful violence, as by causing a policeman to over-react, a prosecution will succeed because of the defendant's intention to be considered presently.
Under the previous law, the offence was committed where the onlooker believed that violence was intended to be provoked or ‘whereby a breach of the peace is likely to be occasioned.’
Section 4 is worded somewhat differently, and uses the term ‘provoked’ where hitherto ‘occasioned’was used.
It is arguable that this change in terminology might be an occasion for the rethinking of the doctrine enunciated by Lord Parker C.J. in Jordan v. Burgoyne that the speaker must take his audience as he finds it.
There can be little doubt that the speaker in that case intended to provoke the immediate use of unlawful violence by those whom he was addressing.
It would have suited his purposes admirably well to have had the police arrest them for responding to his antagonism.
There can be little doubt that, however understandable their response would have been, a violent response would have been an unlawful one.
A person may be the occasion of violence without necessarily provoking it.
If counter-demonstrators determined to thwart the right of a person to speak unpopular opinions resort to  force as a result of what he is saying, the speaker is not for that reason alone to be regarded as using threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour ‘whereby it is likely that such violence will be provoked.’
It may be likely that the audience will respond adversely, entitling the police to request the speaker to desist.
But it may be doubted whether he necessarily commits an offence under section 4 should he fail to do so.
Imminence of fear or provoked violence
The victim of the threatening, abusive or insulting behaviour must believe that violence is imminent, since the section refers to ‘immediate’ unlawful violence.
This clarifies the pre-existing law.
This requirement is appropriate in a Public Order Act, and resolves the point left open by the court in Ambrose.
That case well illustrates the dangers of conceptions such as‘likelihood’ that an event will or will not occur.
The appellant had used offensive language to a 12 year old girl who had run home and complained to her father.
The father said in evidence that he had felt very angry and felt like assaulting the appellant, who was convicted under section 5.
It was held that the words used were incapable of being insulting (even though they were rude and offensive), and the Court left open the question currently under discussion.
The section resolves the point, although the question of what is or is not immediate is, of course, still a matter of degree.
Unlawful violence
A person who threatens lawful violence cannot be convicted under this section.
If he disturbs a trespasser, for example, and tells him that he is about to use force to expel the intruder, there is no doubt that the intruder realises that he is being threatened, and that violence is about to be used against him.
But it is not unlawful force, and the intruder is aware that it is not, and no offence is committed.
Public or private — the dwelling exception
Under the previous law, the offence could be committed in public only.
Distinguishing between public and private places caused the courts a great deal of difficulty.
The Government took the view that the distinction between public and private was meritless, partly because in the course of the miners' dispute, summonses brought under the 1936 Act, section 5 were dismissed because the persons charged were able to show that they were on National Coal Board or other private property, and no offence  was committed even though the victims of the threats were on the public highway.
Other instances offered as giving rise to meritless acquittals were where protestors invaded military bases or private farmlands.
In order to exclude domestic disputes, there is a proviso that the offence cannot be committed inside a private dwelling.
Section 4(2) reads:
‘(2) An offence under this section may be committed in a public or a private place, except that no offence is committed where the words or behaviour are used, or the writing, sign or other visible representation is distributed or displayed, by a person inside a dwelling and the other person is also inside that or another dwelling.’
What constitutes a dwelling for the purposes of the section is further spelled out in section 8, which provides:
‘Dwelling’ means any structure or part of a structure occupied as a person's home or as other living accommodation (whether the occupation is separate or shared with others) and does not include any part not so occupied, and for this purpose ‘structure’includes a tent, caravan, vehicle, vessel or other temporary or movable structure.’
The effect of the section is now plainly that neighbours in the garden or yard who threaten, abuse or insult one another may be convicted of the offence under this section.
Indeed, it would seem that members of the same family who quarrel in the garden may be guilty of the offence.
For the purposes of this legislation, the principle that an Englishman's home is his castle bears a very restricted scope; a person is safe from conviction only inside his own front door, and then, only when his victim is also inside the house.
He commits the offence if the ‘victim’ of his conduct is outside the door.
A person who stood at his window shouting threats, abuse or insults would commit the offence so long as the victim was in the garden or elsewhere outside the structure of the dwelling.
There is also a somewhat curious exemption from liability where the victim is in ‘another dwelling.’
If the victim is in an adjoining house, or in one across the street, no offence is committed.
If the victim emerges from his own dwelling, and his protagonist repeats his threats or insults, the offence is committed.
Similarly, the case of displays or visible representations, the offence is committed if the material is visible to the public generally, but not, apparently, if it can he seen only by persons inside another dwelling.
But in this instance, the exception is more apparent than real, since if the person insulted or abused can read the display from his garden, the offence is committed (assuming, of course, that it satisfies the other requirements of the section).
Only  those displaying offensive materials in the windows of multi-storey apartment buildings would seem to be safe from conviction.
3.
THE MENTAL ELEMENT
Background
The mental element of this offence has already been touched upon in the discussion of the requirement of ‘towards another,’ which, it was suggested, entailed an awareness on the defendant's part of the existence of the person threatened, abused or insulted.
In addition, the section contains two further references to intention, which will be dealt with in this Part.
Section 4(1) provides that the offence is committed if the defendants act with intent to cause a person to believe that immediate unlawful violence is about to be used, or with intent to provoke such unlawful violence.
This probably repeats the existing law.
In addition there is specific provision in section 6(3), which provides that the defendant must as a minimum be aware that his conduct is or might be threatening, abusive or insulting.
This probably changes the existing law, making the offence more difficult to prove.
With intent
The current meaning of the word ‘intent’ has been discussed in connection with violent disorder.
Applying what was explained there, it may be said that a person intends to cause a person to believe that immediate unlawful violence will be used against him when he (the person uttering the threats, etc.,) either desires to cause such an effect, or when he realises what impact his conduct is almost certain to have and nevertheless persists with it.
Similarly where the charge is that he intends to provoke another to use such violence.
It may be noted that a person may intend to cause a particular outcome, even though its occurrence is unlikely.
This means that if a person intends to cause a policeman to react unlawfully, and uses threats, abuse or insults in an attempt to cause the policeman to overreact, he commits the offence if the other ingredients are proved to have occurred.
It would not be enough that the actor merely intends to have himself arrested, for example by way of protest.
There, his intention is that the policeman should act lawfully, and that is not sufficient.
But sometimes, protesters may act with the intention of causing unlawful conduct on the part of the police, with a view to making complaints at a later stage.
They have the requisite intention under the section if that is what they intend to do.
In the situations where the actor does not desire the result, but merely sees it as a foreseeable outcome of his conduct, the House of Lords has said that there is merely evidence from which the tribunal of fact can infer that he intends.
This intent requirement is, of course, an alternative to the objective  conditions, on which the prosecutor is far more likely to place reliance.
Although it may be important for sentencing purposes to know whether the conduct was deliberate or otherwise, it does not affect liability, so long as one or other of the conditions is satisfied.
Section 6(3)
Before the Act, there was some doubt as to whether or not a person had to be aware that his conduct or language was or might be regarded as being threatening, abusive or insulting.
The matter has been resolved in principle by section 6(3) which provides:
‘A person is guilty of an offence under section 4 only if he intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting, or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting.’
As a result of this section, it is now open to a person to claim that he was unaware of the effect that his words or conduct might be having, in which case it is then for the prosecutor to prove beyond reasonable doubt that he was so aware.
Where the prosecutor relies on a continuing course of conduct, as will often be the case with offences under this section, a claim that the actor had failed to advert to the consequences that his conduct was having will lack plausibility.
The fact that the defendant was intoxicated, and his awareness was impaired for this reason will not avail, since the Act expressly provides that it should not do so.
Where the defendant claims that as a result of intoxication, he did not realise that his conduct was or might be regarded as threatening, abusive or insulting, the magistrates must make a determination as to what they considered that the defendant would have realised had he been sober, and the conclusion that he would have realised will be virtually inevitable.
If the defendant can plausibly assert that he is sufficiently without perception even when he is sober, he must be acquitted.
The awareness provision would not necessarily mean that the defendant in Parkin v. Norman lacked sufficient mens rea.
There was no intention to be insulting — quite the reverse — but it might readily be inferred that the defendant must have realised and did realise that his homosexual overtures might not be welcomed by the person at whom he was directing them.
The  court held that no offence was committed in that case, since the person at whom the conduct was directed was an undercover policeman who was unlikely to be provoked to violence, and no offence would be committed under the Act either, for the same reasons.
Had the victim been someone other than a policeman, however, who might more readily have been provoked by the defendant's conduct, the defendant would have had sufficient mens rea under the section, since he would have been aware that his conduct might be insulting.
Whether any particular conduct is or is not threatening, abusive or insulting is, of course, a matter of objective judgment for the tribunal of fact.
So far as mens rea is concerned, the issue is not whether the defendant himself considered that the words or conduct in question was insulting, but whether he realised that the persons whom he was addressing might do so.
This may cause difficulty where the audience were annoyed or distressed by what the defendant was doing.
In Williams where the defendant was convicted of handing out leaflets advising American servicemen to consider deserting, several people responded angrily.
It is suggested that the reaction would be sufficient to alert the defendant to the fact that others may regard his conduct as insulting; that is, he was aware of all the facts by virtue of which the tribunal of fact comes to the conclusion that his conduct was insulting, and that is sufficient.
His claim that he did not consider it insulting is, technically, a mistake of law, and as such no excuse.
OFFENSIVE CONDUCT
1.
BACKGROUND TO THE OFFENCE
The title of the offence.
Section 5 of the Act creates a relatively minor offence which is likely to be of considerable practical significance.
In this book, it will be called ‘offensive conduct,’ because although the marginal note speaks of ‘harassment, alarm and distress,’and although it was commonly referred to in the Parliamentary debates as the ‘disorderly conduct’clause, this is not the most accurate description.
Section 5(4) gives the police a power of arrest in certain circumstances for ‘offensive conduct.’
The Act then defines ‘offensive conduct’ to mean ‘conduct the constable reasonably suspects to constitute an offence under this section.’
It would therefore seem sensible to refer to the offence by the descriptive label that Parliament itself has provided.
This provides a neat solution to the brief description of what is otherwise a somewhat amorphous offence in its definition and contours.
The origins of the offence
The definition in terms of‘threatening, abusive or insulting behaviour,’ is modelled upon the Public Order Act 1936, section 5, but its scope is much wider than the old offence, and is meant to be.
This is signalled in part by the introduction of ‘disorderly behaviour’ as a constituent of the new offence, and by the abandonment of the requirement of a breach of the peace, and its replacement with the requirement that the conduct should take place ‘within the hearing or sight of a Person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby.’
This is a much lower threshold of liability than the notion of violence that underlay the common law concept.
Before the Act, section 5 of the 1936 Act was supplemented by a miscellany of powers to be found in local legislation, which empowered the police to deal with minor nuisances and acts of hooliganism.
However, as a result of the reorganisation of local government effected by the Local Government Act 1972, section 262, most of this legislation had lapsed or been repealed, and it was felt necessary to enact something to replace it.
Section  5 is the result.
This was a Government proposal, first made in the White Paper, which gave as instances of misbehaviour that might not be the subject of control without some such provision:
‘hooligans on housing estates causing disturbances in the common parts of blocks of flats, blockading entrances, throwing things down stairs, banging on doors, peering in at windows, and knocking over dustbins; groups of youths persistently shouting abuse and obscenities or pestering people waiting to catch public transport or to enter a hall or cinema; someone turning out the light in a crowded dance hall, in a way likely to cause panic; rowdy behaviour in the streets late at night which alarms local residents.’
It must be emphasised that the question whether or not such conduct is now covered by section 5 cannot be determined by this statement of governmental intentions.
The proposal was not even expressed in Bill form in the White Paper, and the proper interpretation of the legislation once enacted is a matter for the courts.
At most, the White Paper can be used to identify the mischief at which the legislature was aiming.
It should perhaps be added that the amended section 4 would not necessarily have caught the conduct in question, because of its definition in terms of violence which might follow from the defendant's conduct.
The point of the new section is that acts of hooliganism may cause harassment, alarm or distress to those who witness it.
The victims being weak, vulnerable, or simply law abiding are not likely as a result to resort to violence, however great the provocation by threats, abuse or insults.
Yet the experience to which they have been subjected is one of which it is proper for the criminal law to take notice.
Because of the potential breadth of the language in which the section is drafted, it affords scope for injudicious policing; considerable common sense and restraint on the part of the police will be called for in the application of the section.
In advocating the creation of the new offence, the Government made it plain that it did not wish to promote legislation too similar in this respect to the discredited ‘sus’ laws.
However, the Bill did not incorporate all of the safeguards against this possibility that were adumbrated in the White Paper, and it was substantially redrafted in the light of opposition objections in the course of its Parliamentary passage.
In addition to the requirement that the conduct be ‘disorderly,’ it is  subject to the objective requirement that the conduct must be such that it is, independently, ‘within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby.’
This is more than a mere measure of the offensive character in question.
It requires the presence of an actual victim.
Definition of the offence
Section 5 of the Act provides as follows:
‘(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he —(a) uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or (b) displays any writing, sign or other visible representation which is threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby.’
Although the section is similar to section 4, several important distinctions between the two offences may be noted.
There is the difference that the conduct in question need not be directed ‘towards another person’ as is required for section 4.
The conduct struck at by the section may cause misery without being aimed at any particular victim.
Nor is the offence under section 5 expressed to be committed by the distribution of offensive matter, as opposed to its display.
Presumably, it will be committed if the distribution of offensive literature were itself sufficiently ostentatious to constitute a display.
A court should be slow to draw any such inference, however, since Parliament has in section 4 indicated its intention that an offence should be committed only where the distribution of literature is likely to lead to the use of violence.
Pickets handing out leaflets to passers by may thereby cause harassment, alarm or distress, but they should not be held to be guilty of an offence on that account alone.
If, however, their conduct is itself disorderly, they may commit the less serious offence.
But the principal difference between the two is that the section 5 offence is not designed to prevent violence; its aim is to prevent harassment, alarm or distress.
2.
THE ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENCE
Threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour
The meanings of these expressions was considered in the previous chapter, and it may be expected that they will be interpreted in essentially the same way in this context.
Even though the offence is a relatively minor one, the words remain ‘strong’ ones, and the criminal sanction should not be invoked unless its use is really called for.
Disorderly behaviour
Whereas the other forms of offensive conduct may be by words or conduct, ‘disorderly behaviour’ is specified to be capable of commission by behaviour only.
In truth, language cannot be disorderly, at least on its own.
Where the misconduct complained of consists of both words and conduct, it seems likely that both will be considered by the magistrates in deciding whether or not what the defendant did amounted to disorderly conduct.
It would be artificial in the extreme were the courts to seek to separate words from conduct, as the section seems to envisage.
It is extremely difficult to say in advance whether or not any particular action or series of actions will be regarded as disorderly conduct.
The word ‘disorderly’ appears to fall into that category of ‘ordinary’words of which Lord Reid spoke in Brutus v. Cozens.
which may well mean that the higher courts will be reluctant to spell out for magistrates and the police exactly what conduct does or does not fall within the ambit of the section.
Such a state of affairs would be highly unsatisfactory, given the civil liberties implications for both the police and the individuals who are subject to the Act.
There is a great deal of potential here for criminalising conduct that amounts to little more than arguing with a policeman, which it should be one of the aims of public order law to prevent.
There may be a strong temptation for those responsible for the implementation of the Act to reason that if conduct is not ‘orderly,’ then it must be ‘disorderly.’
But these are not precise antonyms, and it must be borne in mind that the purpose of the use of the word is to stigmatise certain types of behaviour as criminal.
That the Oxford English Dictionary should define disorderliness in terms of‘violating moral order, constituted authority, or recognised rule’ simply serves to reinforce concern that the section may be seen to create an offence whose commission is in the eye of the beholder.
The Government adverted to this problem in its White Paper, recognising that ‘it is not easy to define in a manner which conforms with the normally precise definitions of the criminal law, but which at the same time is sufficiently general to catch the variety of conduct aimed at.
The Government recognises that there would be justifiable  objections to a wide extension of the criminal law which might catch conduct not deserving of criminal sanctions.’
The spirit of these comments, which reflect the traditional attitude of the courts towards the imposition of criminal liability, might properly be borne in mind by the courts in giving content and scope to the new legislation.
In deciding whether or not conduct is disorderly, the magistrates may take into account factors such as the place where the incident occurs, and the time of day.
Behaviour that might be tolerated at New Year's Eve celebrations or at a football match could be regarded as disorderly at a solemn thanksgiving ceremony.
Mere drunkenness will not of itself amount to disorderliness, although it might readily give rise to disorderly conduct.
Within sight or hearing of a person likely to be caused
The evidence must show that there was a bystander within sight or hearing of the defendant who might be caused harassment, alarm or distress as a result of what the defendant was doing.
The bystander requirement in section 5 is not simply an objective hypothetical measure of the quality of the defendant's conduct, as in the first three sections of the Act; rather, the policeman or other witness who gives evidence of the defendant's misconduct must satisfy the magistrates that there was a person present who was likely to be harassed, alarmed or distressed.
If the person who was the victim is prepared to give evidence that he experienced harassment, alarm or distress, so much the better.
The victim's evidence is not conclusive on the point, since the question is whether the conduct was likely to have one of the requisite effects.
Nor is it necessary that the ‘victim’ should give evidence.
This was a matter of some controversy during the passage of the Bill.
Because of the vague character of ‘disorderly conduct,’ the White Paper proposed that actual feelings of harassment or alarm must be experienced by the bystander, and the best evidence of that would be direct testimony from the victim.
The difficulty with such a proposal, however, is the question of proof.
The vulnerable persons whom it is the aim of the section to protect are precisely those least likely to be prepared to attend court to give evidence, if only for fear of later reprisals.
Experience with previous legislation framed in similar terms showed that the courts in practice were often prepared to dispense with the evidence of a ‘victim,’ and accepted instead the word of a complainant (usually a policeman) that the victim appeared to have been harassed or annoyed.
This was a disreputable subterfuge, yet it appears that the same sort of procedure is enjoined by the new Act.
At most, the prosecution witness is obliged to testify that there was a person present or in the vicinity who was likely to have been subjected to the sensations described.
The section is unclear on a related point.
The conduct must take place within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused the sensations in  question; does this mean that the conduct must actually be seen or heard by the person whom it is intended to offend?
Suppose, for example, that a person were to walk behind another person who suffered from a physical deformity (such as a limp) imitating it, for the amusement of his friends.
Had the target turned round, he would have seen the conduct and been distressed by it.
It is submitted that the offence is made out in such circumstances, and that a policeman would be justified in calling upon the ‘joker to desist (under subsection 4).
That is, conduct may be within the sight or hearing of another, even though the other may not actually have heard it.
The section might otherwise be very difficult to work in cases where, for example, the defendant(s) were engaged in kicking over dustbins on an estate.
Although the police do not need to be certain that a person has heard or seen what is going on before they can call for quiet under the Act (since it is sufficient that they have reasonable cause to believe that an offence is being committed), they would afterwards have to conduct house to house enquiries before they could truthfully say that the conduct was actually heard or seen by a bystander.
Harassment, alarm or distress
The requirement that the victim might suffer harassment, alarm or distress is a much lower threshold than the violence or possibility of violence that is the touchstone of the other offences under Part I of the Act.
Each of the terms has a significance that should not be overlooked in the application of the Act.
Mere annoyance or irritation caused by inconvenience is not sufficient.
Although in this connection too the higher courts are likely to say that the terms used are matters of fact for the magistrates, it will be open to those courts to say that in certain circumstances, the reactions of the victim were not likely to be those of harassment, alarm or distress.
It may be doubted, for example, that a single act could give rise to a sensation of harassment; it would be an unusual use of language to say that a person was harassing another by a single act (such as a wolf whistle), since that term generally connotes an element of persistence.
As a corollary the object of the conduct may feel upset or annoyed, but not harassed.
Upset and annoyance seem rather less strong emotions than ‘distress,’ which connotes some degree of perturbation and emotional upset.
Although alarm is not expressed to relate to any particular source of concern, we do not usually speak of alarm in a vacuum.
A person who is alarmed experiences a sudden fear or apprehension of danger — some sort of anxiety.
There is no reason why a policeman should not be regarded as the victim of this conduct.
It may perhaps be more difficult to alarm him than it would be to alarm the vulnerable persons whom the offence is principally designed to protect.
But unlike the Public Order Act 1936, section 5, the  test here is not whether or not the victim is likely to be provoked into responding violently, but whether he is likely to experience alarm, distress or harassment as a result of what is being done and said.
Even if it can be said that, in the course of his duty, a policeman will become hardened to certain sorts of ritual taunts and insults, there is no reason to doubt that he can also experience harassment and distress.
Public or private place
As with the offence under section 4, domestic disputes are excluded from the operation of the section and the private dwelling exemption also applies in this context.
Readers are referred to the earlier discussion.
3.
THE MENTAL ELEMENT
The mental element
For an offence of such relative insignificance, the mental element is one of considerable complexity, and possibly places a greater onus on the prosecutor than is warranted.
To begin with, section 6(4) provides:
‘A person is guilty of an offence under section 5 only if he intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting, or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting or (as the case may be) he intends his behaviour to be or is aware that it may be disorderly.’
With the change in wording necessitated by the inclusion of ‘disorderly,’ this is in virtually identical terms to the provision in relation to section 4, and would therefore seem to open up the same possibilities for argument that that section does through section 6(3).
A person is permitted under the section to argue that he was unaware that his conduct was likely to be regarded as disorderly by those who witness what he is doing.
Where there is a protracted course of conduct, and those who witness it respond angrily to what is occurring, there will perhaps be no difficulty.
But where there has been a single incident, the claim to ignorance may carry some plausibility, and be difficult for a prosecutor to overcome.
There is a difference between sections 4 and 5 that the conduct impugned does not need to be used ‘towards another’ under section 5.
One consequence of this distinction is that the prosecutor bears no burden of showing that the defendant was aware of the existence or presence of another who was likely to be harassed, alarmed or distressed.
This reading of the section is reinforced by the existence of the defence in section 5(3) (a) that the actor had no reason to believe that there was any person within sight or hearing likely to suffer harassment, alarm or distress.
When the two subsections are juxtaposed, however, they seem to create a difficulty.
It might be asked how a person could be proved to be ‘aware that his conduct may be disorderly’ when he genuinely but thoughtlessly is  unaware of the existence of a bystander.
In Masterson v. Holden for example, it was not shown against the homosexual couple in Oxford Street that they were actually aware of the presence of bystanders who were incensed at what the defendants were doing, even though they had every reason to be so aware.
In such circumstances, the prosecutor would appear to have two arguments open to him.
He could ask the magistrates to infer that the defendants were actually aware of the presence of bystanders, and that they were as a corollary aware that their conduct was disorderly.
Alternatively, he could argue that a defendant has sufficient awareness for the purposes of section 6(4) if he knows of the circumstances by which it is said that his conduct is disorderly.
Even though the defendant does not regard the nature of his own conduct as being disorderly, he has a sufficient mens rea to satisfy the section by being aware that he is using offensive language, or kicking over dustbins or turning out the lights in the cinema, or whatever else may be alleged to constitute the disorderly behaviour.
He then has the defence under section 5(3) that he was unaware of the bystander's presence, but carries the burden of establishing his defence.
4.
DEFENCES
The defences outlined
Section 5(3) affords to the defendant a number of defences relating to lack of fault that are not available on a charge under section 4.
The section provides:
‘It is a defence for the accused to prove —(a) that he had no reason to believe that there was any person within hearing or sight who was likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress, or (b) that he was inside a dwelling and had no reason to believe that the words or behaviour used, or the writing, sign or other visible representation displayed, would be heard or seen by a person outside that or any other dwelling, or (c) that his conduct was reasonable.’
These are defences in the strict sense that they place on the defendant a burden of proving his innocence, on the balance of probabilities.
Paragraph (a) has already been examined in the context of the mental element in the offence, and will not be considered further.
Paragraph (b) supplements the domestic dwelling exemption in section 5(2).
Presumably, it is necessary because the offence does not require proof that the conduct in question was used ‘towards another person.’
The defendant who accidentally offends a passer-by or the neighbour has quite a heavy burden to discharge, having to show that he was not negligent in acting as he did.
Paragraph (c) is a quite extraordinary delegation (if not abdication) of  legislative responsibility, of which the courts may have some difficulty in making sense.
It prompts in the lawyer the question, ‘reasonable, having regard to what’?
If circumstances such as time and place are relevant to the question whether the conduct is disorderly in the first place, what sorts of factors should the court (or the policeman on the spot) take into account in deciding whether or not the conduct was ‘reasonable’?
The test is clearly an objective one, in the sense that it is for the magistrates to say after the event whether or not what the defendant did was reasonable.
One factor that might be taken into account, it is suggested, is the actor's purpose in behaving as he did.
This means that it is open to a defendant to argue that his conduct was reasonable because he was attempting to obtain or communicate information.
Ultimately the test to be applied is that of the magistrates, and they may also take into account such factors as the likelihood that disorder might ensue as a result of what the defendants were doing, and the reasons prompting the constable to intervene in the first place.
5.
THE POWER OF ARREST
The power of arrest defined
Sections 5(4) and (5) contain somewhat unusual powers of arrest.
They provide:
‘A constable may arrest a person without warrant if —(a) he engages in offensive conduct which the constable warns him to stop, and (b) he engages in further offensive conduct immediately or shortly after the warning (5) In subsection (4), ‘offensive conduct’ means conduct the constable reasonably suspects to constitute an offence under this section, and the conduct mentioned in paragraph (a) and the further conduct need not be of the same nature.’
A number of features of this power require comment.
At the time when he calls for the actor to desist, the constable must already have reasonable grounds to believe that an offence has occurred.
In the circumstances, he must already have sufficient evidence to enable him to proceed by way of summons, and could also arrest if the general arrest conditions of PACE are satisfied.
There may also have been a breach of the peace and the prospect of its repetition, so that the common law powers will also continue to apply.
In circumstances of group disorder, in particular, it may be quite impractical to expect the constable to issue a request for the actor to desist before making his arrest.
But there is nothing to preclude a charge being brought under section 5 even though the arrest was not effected under the section.
The Act does not appear to require the constable to warn the offender  that he may be arrested if he fails to desist as required.
‘Warn’ is therefore used in a slightly unusual sense if that is the correct interpretation, since it usually connotes reference to a consequence that will arise in the event of non-compliance.
Even if it is not technically required, it would no doubt be sensible police practice to spell out the fact that an arrest is imminent in the event of non-compliance.
A constable need not be in uniform when he effects the arrest (and calls for the defendant to desist as a preliminary), although if an off-duty policeman does attempt to implement the Act, strict conditions should be observed as to what he must do and say to make it plain that he is a constable.
There is otherwise a grave danger that the people whom he addresses might well regard the policeman as a rival lout.
A difficulty of interpretation arises over the question whether it must be the constable who warns who effects the arrest.
Where two constables are present seeking to restore order, and one warns the offender to desist, it must be quite common for a colleague to effect the arrest.
Unhappily, the section does not appear to authorise him to do so, since it refers in paragraph (a) to ‘the constable,’ a reference back to the constable who has issued the warning in the first place.
Had paragraph (a) repeated the indefinite article, and said that ‘a’ constable warns him to stop, the point would have been plain.
If the courts are to make the section wholly efficacious, therefore, they may have to interpret ‘the’ to mean ‘a.’
Alternatively, they may regard the single warning given by one policeman in the presence of a colleague as issuing from both.
There is in truth an element of fiction in both of these courses, and it may be sensible for policemen acting in concert to adopt the stratagem of issuing a joint warning, as for example by telling the actor that ‘we are warning you to stop what you are doing.’
The constable need not have witnessed the conduct in question before he utters his warning; he could act on the basis of a report that he received from a person who has been caused harassment, alarm or distress, or on the report of somebody who has witnessed it.
He would then have reasonable cause to believe that an offence had been committed.
Furthermore, even if the person warned did not repeat the conduct about which he had been warned, he could be arrested if he engaged in a different act or course of offensive conduct.
The section does not specifically empower the policeman to give directions as to how the actor should conduct himself in the future (as by leaving the spot).
This must be found in his powers to prevent a breach of the peace, or in his powers to prevent an obstruction to the highway.
6.
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERLY CONDUCT OFFENCES
Misconduct at public meetings
Police powers to control public meetings and the offences that might be committed at such meetings are the principal subject of this book.
In addition to the general law, there are two specific statutory provisions, one dealing with public meetings of any description, and the other with election meetings only.
Section 1 of the Public Meeting Act 1908 provides:
‘(1) Any person who at a lawful public meeting acts in a disorderly manner for the purpose of preventing the transaction of the business for which the meeting was called together shall be guilty of an offence…(2) Any person who incites others to commit an offence under this section shall be guilty of a like offence.
(3) If any constable reasonably suspects any person of committing an offence under the foregoing provisions of this section, he may if requested to do so by the chairman of the meeting require that person to declare to him immediately his name and address and, if that person refuses or fails to so declare his name and address or gives a false name and address he shall be guilty of an offence under this subsection.’
The offences under subsections (1) and (2) are punishable with imprisonment for a term of six months, or a £1,000 fine, and are therefore triable summarily only.
Section 1(3) carries a level one fine only.
There is no power of arrest under the section, so that arrest is available only where the general arrest conditions of PACE are satisfied, or the disrupters are committing some other arrestable offence.
The offence could be used against counter-demonstrators who set out to ‘smash’ their opponents or to stop them from expressing the point of view that they set out to express.
There has been an historical reluctance on the part of the police to enforce the section, which is perhaps to be regretted.
Where persons set out deliberately to prevent others from conducting perfectly lawful business, they do the cause of freedom of speech a disservice.
Heckling, or seeking temporarily to disrupt the speaker are insufficient to amount to such an offence.
There must be an intention to prevent the transaction of the business, so that the speakers are forced to stop.
The use of the word ‘lawful’ to qualify the public meeting in question does not add a great deal.
In Burden v. Rigler justices acceded to a submission that a meeting on the highway was ipso facto unlawful, and dismissed the proceedings.
It was held by the Divisional Court that they should not have done so, and the case was remitted with directions to the magistrates to ascertain whether or not the ingredients of the offence were made out.
The offence under the Public Meeting Act does not apply to election meetings.
Specific provision is made by the Representation of the People Act 1983, which makes it an ‘illegal practice’ under electoral law.
What constitutes a ‘public meeting’ as opposed to a private one for the purposes of these sections is not spelt out any further in the legislation.
Public drunkenness
Public drunkenness is an offence under the Licensing Act 1872, section 12 which reads:
‘Any person who in any public place is guilty, while drunk, of disorderly behaviour may be arrested without warrant by any person and shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level three.’
The offence is commonly associated with the persistent drinker and alcoholic, but is by no means limited to such persons in its application.
Whether or not a person is ‘drunk’ is a question of fact and degree.
Although the Shorter Oxford Dictionary says that it means that the person has drunk ‘intoxicating liquor to an extent which affects steady self-control,’ it is arguable that the person must have taken intoxicating liquor to excess so that he has lost the power of self control.
It has been held that the term relates to being under the influence of intoxicating liquor, and the offence is not capable of commission where the intoxication is induced by a substance other than alcohol, such as a solvent.
Disorderly conduct bears the same significance as it does in the section 5 offence, and is likely to involve conduct such as shouting or singing in such a way as to alarm persons near by, uncertainty of gait, staggering, lurching  or swaying, and behaviour that causes people to take evasive action.
For the constable, the advantage of this section is that it confers an immediate power of arrest.
A disadvantage, from the policeman's perspective, is that the offence must take place in a public as opposed to a private place.
By virtue of Sports Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985, section 2(2), it is an offence to be drunk in or while trying to enter a designated sports ground during the period of a designated sporting event.
These include virtually all English and Welsh football grounds at which professional football is played, and all professional football matches in England and Wales, or matches abroad in which English and Welsh clubs are taking part.
Disrupting religious ceremonies
The Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act 1860, section 2 makes it an offence to engage in ‘riotous, violent or indecent behaviour’ in places of worship belonging to the Church of England and places of worship certified under the Religious Worship Registration Act 1855.
The Burial Laws Amendment Act 1880, section 7 penalises the same sorts of behaviour at any burial under the Act (burials without Church of England rites).
Both of these offences are currently under review by the Law Commission, which canvassed suggestions that the existing law should be modernised to prevent the disruption of religious services or offensive conduct in places of public worship.
Whether any further legislation is necessary in view of the enactment of the Public Order Act 1986 is a matter that needs to be considered afresh.
Misconduct on public transport
Statutory authority is given to the various public transport authorities to regulate the conduct of those who use their services.
It is an offence under bylaw 17(4) of bylaw 2 of the British Railway Board Bye Laws to molest or wilfully to interfere with the comfort or convenience of other passengers.
The Public Service Vehicles (Conduct of Drivers, Conductors and Passengers) Regulations makes it an offence for a person to ‘use obscene and offensive language, or to conduct himself in a riotous or disorderly manner.’
Town Police Clauses Act 1847
The Town Police Clauses Act 1847, section 28, remains law, penalising the most extraordinary  agglomeration of obstructions and street nuisances.
Since many of the acts penalised are likely to amount to offensive conduct within the terms of section 5, it is to be regretted that the opportunity was not taken to examine this jurisprudential anachronism which, although it no longer carries a power of arrest, should perhaps be either modernised or repealed in its entirety.
PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLIES
1.
INTRODUCTION
Background to Part II
The use of the streets and other public places as venues in which to air grievances and complaints (and to celebrate achievements) has a long and hallowed history.
Media coverage in the television age ensures that public attention is captured whilst slogans are shouted and wrongs exposed.
The policing of processions, marches, demonstrations and meetings of various sorts represents a considerable call on modern police resources, especially in the Metropolitan Police area of London, whose central location makes it particularly attractive to groups wishing to express a point of view in public.
Under our system, it falls to the police to ensure that such events are organised in such a way that disorder does not ensue, and that so far as is possible, the event can take place with as little dislocation to the ordinary life of the community as is compatible with the proper exercise of freedom of speech in public.
For the most part, a balance between these potentially conflicting aims is achieved through cooperation between the police and march organisers rather than through the use of the law.
With the exception of the Public Order Act 1936, section 3, there was no national legislation to deal explicitly, let alone comprehensively with this sensitive and potentially controversial area of social existence.
Instead, reliance was placed on the use of general police powers to prevent disorder; the common law duty to preserve the peace (and the correlative offence of obstructing a constable in the execution of his duty where the demonstrator declined to comply with the constable's reasonable instructions issued pursuant to his mandate), and the offence of obstructing the highway.
The existing law
At common law, a distinction was drawn between processions and static meetings and assemblies, more particularly where these took place on the highway.
Since those engaging in a procession were using the highway for its primary purpose of passing and repassing, 7 their use of it was prima facie a protected one.
But a static gathering was likely to amount to an obstruction, which could be cleared by the police exercising common law powers.
Partly because of this distinction in favour of processions at common law, it was seen to be necessary for the police to be given statutory powers to control potentially disruptive processions (but not meetings) in the Public Order Act 1936.
Power was conferred upon the chief officer of police to impose conditions on the holding of public processions where he had reasonable grounds to believe that serious public disorder was likely to ensue from the holding of a procession.
If the chief officer was of the opinion that the resources available to him were inadequate to prevent the feared disorder, he could take certain steps to have the procession banned altogether.
There was no nationwide obligation imposed on organisers to warn the police in advance that such a march was to take place.
Instead, local legislation in various local authority areas imposed such obligations, and there were varying time limits as to flow soon before the date of the proposed procession notice was required.
As a result of the Local Government Act 1972, section 262, much of this legislation was repealed (and in some localities replaced) successively in the years leading up to 1986.
There were no corresponding statutory powers of control in relation to static meetings and assemblies.
Police controls over such gatherings had to be exercised on the spot, rather than in advance.
But local authorities are generally empowered to make regulations and by-laws for the use of public places where meetings might be held (such as parks and squares), and the assertion of quasi-private property rights are generally sufficient to exclude the claims of those seeking to exercise rights of freedom of speech in public.
A summary of changes effected by the 1986 Act
Part II of the Act extends and modernises the system of controls on processions and meetings hitherto found in the Public Order Act 1936 and miscellaneous pieces of local legislation.
For the first time, there is a national requirement that the police must be told by the organisers of a procession what they propose to do.
The principal justification offered for this is that it triggers discussion between the police and organisers, and prevents demonstrators from springing surprises on the police.
The legislation gives the police statutory powers for the first time to impose conditions on public meetings (although not to ban them outright).
Nor does the Act impose a requirement of advance notice of meetings and assemblies.
Much of this Part of the Act is administrative in character, but it clearly has a considerable bearing on the scope of the rights to public meeting and assembly in Britain, and accords statutory recognition to the central position of police in the determination of the proper exercise of freedom of speech in public.
The ultimate sanction for failure to comply with the various controls are criminal in character, even if the penalties available are relatively slight.
The elements of the administrative structure will be sketched as a preliminary to discussion of the offences created by this Part of the Act.
2.
THE ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
Advance notice of public processions
Section 11(1) of the Act requires advance written notice to be given to the police of any public procession ‘intended’ to demonstrate support for or opposition to the views or actions of a person or body, which is being held to publicise a cause or to mark or commemorate an event ‘unless it is not reasonably practicable to give any advance notice of the procession.’
This restriction to certain defined events would appear to  exclude commercial gatherings, and aimless events (once depicted as ‘happenings’).
It may perhaps be questioned whether such restrictions were necessary, since a procession is capable of causing disruption whatever the purpose of those organising it may happen to be.
But without some such provision, school crocodiles would fall within the terms of the Act, and this would be unnecessarily time consuming for all concerned.
Processions commonly or customarily held, and funeral processions are exempt from the notice requirement, presumably because the police will already be fully aware that they are to be held, and do not therefore fall within the ‘triggering’ rationale of the requirement.
That is, the justification for the enactment of an advance notice requirement is that it forces the organisers to discuss with the police arrangements for the conduct of the procession which enable the event to be held in such a way as to minimise the risks of disorder.
What constitutes a procession that is commonly or customarily held?
Plainly, events such as the Durham Miners' Gala, which has been held for decades fall within the rubric.
An event that has been occurring for only five years before the enactment of the 1986 Act is of a more dubious standing.
But it might well be thought that if a procession has been regularly held even for such a comparatively short period of time, the police are aware that it is likely to take place, and it is therefore outside the rationale behind the advance notification requirement.
Even without notification, the police would be entitled to impose conditions on the holding of the procession.
There are detailed requirements as to what the notice must contain, including the date when it is intended to hold the procession, the time when it is due to start (but not finish), the proposed route and the name and address of the organiser.
These details facilitate planning, and give the police greater opportunity to protect those who wish to engage in tree speech; the police are enabled to warn those who might be significantly inconvenienced by a proposed march to take avoiding action.
No estimate of numbers need be given, although this is clearly of considerable importance in making tactical decisions about how the procession is to be policed.
The notice must reach a police station in the area where the procession is to be commenced not less than six clear days before the intended date of the procession.
The section does not create what might be referred to as a permit requirement, since subject to what is said below, it does not empower the police to refuse permission to hold the procession, as is the law in certain other jurisdictions.
Nor does the fact that notice has been given confer any immunity on the participants from the operation of the general criminal law.
Imposing conditions on processions
By section 12, the senior police officer is empowered to impose conditions on the proposed march if he reasonably believes that it may result in serious public disorder, serious damage to property or serious disruption to the life of the community, or alternatively that the purpose of persons organising the march is to intimidate others ‘with a view to compelling them not to do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act they have a right not to do.’
This may be done either in advance, or by the senior police officer on the spot where the procession is in progress.
By comparison with the previous law, which confined the ground to that of serious public disorder, this greatly extends the matters that the chief of police may take into account in deciding whether or not to impose conditions.
There is a danger that, if the powers are used too freely, the symbolic significance of a demonstration may be lost.
For example, if the proposed route of the march takes the participants past an embassy or a particular factory against whose occupants the organisers wish to protest, the prescription of a different route or terminus may obviate the whole point of the demonstration, and amount to in effect a disguised ban.
There might then be a further danger that the instructions will be ignored, leading to even greater disorder.
Such conditions might well be, as the police are in practice aware, counter-productive.
What constitutes ‘serious damage to property’ is obviously a matter of degree, but it probably means something rather more serious than a few broken windows.
Serious disruption to the life of the community is a much more difficult question of judgment.
Taken literally, it involves nothing less than a judgment about the competition for alternative uses of public resources, and involves the individual police officer making a judgment about what the ordinary ‘life of the community’ entails.
It means more than serious inconvenience, or even widespread inconvenience (so that people might not be able to park where they usually do, or drive down a particular street or perhaps miss a train as a result of the demonstration).
None of these are in themselves ‘serious disruptions’ to the life of the community.
But if access to the ordinary commercial activity of a shopping precinct were to be blocked for a considerable period at a particularly busy time of day, so that people were prevented from conducting their ordinary business and social affairs, there is a disruption of sufficient significance to  warrant the imposition of conditions.
One of the difficulties that the senior police officer must consider when deciding whether or not disruption is serious is that, if it seems likely that very large numbers of marchers will be involved, the strength of public support in favour of the particular cause must be weighed against the degree of disruption caused.
He may not take into account the disproportionate cost of policing the demonstration nor the content of the processor's message.
The law requires the chief of police to make educated guesses about the likelihood that disorder, damage or disruption will occur.
Quite apart from what the organisers tell him of their intentions, he may have sources of information that have a bearing on how he comes to a conclusion about predicted outcomes.
In deciding whether or not the conditions exist for the issuing of conditions, the chief of police may take into account such factors as disturbances that have arisen in the past when the same organisation processed on a previous occasion.
He may presumably take into account his previous experience of the particular applicants, if they have organised marches in the past.
If they have provided inadequate stewarding on previous occasions, for example, he might make it a condition that more stewards and better prepared ones are provided on the occasion in question.
Presumably, he is entitled to take into account the likelihood of opposition to the march in question, although this is problematic.
If it seems likely that a particular march will encounter a large and aggressively hostile opposition, the proper course is for the police to organise in such a way as to protect the marchers against the opposition.
If the route chosen by the marchers is such that there are places where the policing could not be adequate to prevent serious disorder, then conditions could be imposed.
Where the grounds upon which it is intended to impose conditions are the intimidatory purposes of the persons organising, the chief constable is entitled to take into account the previous conduct of the organisers, including relevant criminal convictions if the organisers have any.
The wording of section 12(1) (b) is, however, slightly unfortunate in requiring the intimidation of others ‘with a view to compelling them not to do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act they have a right not to do.’
The section is intended to give the police power to impose conditions on ‘coercive’ marches which will not necessarily give rise to disorder; a National Front march through a predominantly Asian district may well prompt many of the citizens simply to board up their properties and remain indoors.
The difficulty is that although sometimes it is possible to point to an intention to compel action on the part of the target, as when the aim is to prevent employees from working, or to force a local councillor to vote differently, or to stop another organisation from marching that intention is not invariably present.
Sometimes the purpose is simply intimidatory, as with the   racist march, rather than an attempt to coerce persons into taking or not pursuing any particular course of action, and it is difficult to see that conditions could be imposed on a ‘ racist ’ march on this ground alone.
In those circumstances, a chief constable who wishes to impose conditions would be justified in taking into account the risk of serious disorder and serious disruption to the life of the community, and impose conditions as to route on those alternative grounds.
It would have been preferable, it is suggested, had the power been given to control intimidatory marches without more.
The directions that he may give must appear to him necessary (but not reasonably necessary) to prevent such disorder, damage, disruption or intimidation, and may specifically include instructions not to enter a particular area.
The conditions are not limited to such matters and the timing of the procession or the numbers who may participate, so long as they are referable to the purposes mentioned.
They might very well, for example, relate to the sorts of implements that may be carried on the procession which even if they are not offensive weapons at the beginning of the procession may become so during its course.
It is open to the senior police officer present to impose conditions under this section whilst the march is in process, and on the same grounds as those on which he may act in advance.
This was a power suggested by Lord Scarman, but only on the grounds of threats to public order.
It remains to be seen whether this new power will be used in such a way as to augment the existing powers that the police enjoy to give directions to prevent the occurrence of a breach of the peace.
Prohibiting processions
Section 13 of the Act, which permits the senior police officer to seek to have processions banned, is in essence very similar to section 3(3) of the Public Order Act 1936.
If the chief of police reasonably believes that any conditions that he may impose will not prevent ‘serious public disorder,’ he shall apply to the district council for an order prohibiting for a specified period (not exceeding three months) the holding of all public processions or a specified class of processions.
The council may, with the consent of the Home Secretary make an order in the terms applied for or as modified by the Secretary of State.
In the City of London or the Metropolitan Police District, the Commissioner for London or the Metropolitan Police Commissioner (respectively) applies directly to the Home Secretary.
As was the case under the previous law, there is no power to ban specific as opposed to classes of marches, or all marches, and a proposal to the effect that there should be such a specific power was rejected, on the grounds that it would place the police in a situation where they would be subject to allegations of political motivation and partiality whenever they exercised the power to seek a ban on a particular march.
In practice, rather than seek bans, the police operate on a ‘first come, first served’ basis.
That is, if a group announces that it will organise a counter demonstration in opposition to one of which the police have been notified under section 11, the police can if necessary subject the late comers to conditions imposed under sections 12 or 14 that effectively prevent the two groups from clashing, or permitting them to meet only in carefully controlled conditions.
Unlike the power to impose conditions on processions, the grounds upon which a ban may be sought are still restricted to those of serious public disorder which the senior police officer believes that he will be unable to prevent, even taking into account the imposition of conditions under section 12.
This refers to disorder on a widespread scale, and the officer should take into account not merely his own resources, but those that can be made available to him through the use of the mutual aid provisions of the Police Act 1964.
The new provision differs from the old in one significant way, by altering the terminology in which the Act is couched from the senior police officer's ‘opinion’ that he is unable to prevent the serious public disorder to ‘reasonably believes’that the imposition of conditions will not enable him to preserve order.
Because of the more objective terminology in which this is couched, it invites the readier use of the powers of judicial review.
Whether this will in practice make a great difference may be doubted, since it seems unlikely that a court will come to the conclusion that a chief constable of police has come to a decision that he could not reasonably arrive at, which is the critical test for the exercise of the powers of judicial review.
The risk that, if the marches goes ahead and results in serious disorder is not one that the courts could be expected to undertake.
Only if the chief constable expressed his order in terms such as that he considered any injury to his men to constitute serious public disorder might the courts be prepared to intervene.
Imposing conditions on public assemblies
For the first time in English law, the police are empowered by the Act to impose conditions upon public assemblies, both in advance of the assembly, and during the course of the gathering.
The grounds upon which the powers to impose conditions may be exercised are very similar to those which are available in relation to processions; section 14 provides that if the senior police officer believes that a public assembly may result in serious public disorder, serious damage to property or serious disruption to the life of the community, or that the purposes of the persons organising it is to intimidate others with a view to compelling them not to do an act they  have a right to do, or to do an act they have a right not to do, he may impose conditions as to the place of the assembly, its maximum duration or the maximum number of persons who may constitute it as may appear to him necessary to prevent the disorder, damage, disruption or intimidation.
There is no power under the section to impose any other sorts of conditions, such as those relating to the sorts of implements that may be carried at the assembly, or as to the apparel that may be worn, although these may fall within the general law relating to the possession of offensive weapons or the wearing of uniforms.
The powers conferred by section 14 are new, at least in their statutory form.
It is a difficult question to know how far they merely duplicate the existing common law powers that arise from the obligation imposed upon the police to preserve the peace, which plainly permit the police to give instructions to limit the numbers at a gathering if that should be necessary to prevent an imminent breach of the peace.
Insofar as the section enables instructions to be given well in advance of the public assembly, it might be thought to augment the existing powers, since the breach of the peace (or other disorder) may be some days distant when the conditions (which must be in writing when they are given in advance) are issued.
Where the gathering is already under way when the decision to impose conditions is taken, the section permits the ‘most senior in rank of the police officers present at the scene’ to impose the conditions.
It remains to be seen whether this becomes a modified form of dispersal power.
For example, it would appear to be open to the senior officer to inform the organisers of the meeting in question that the numbers of the meeting are too great, and require the organisers of the meeting to assist the police in dispersing the mob.
Failure to comply with that request would amount to an offence under section 14(4).
There is no obligation imposed on the organisers of an assembly to notify the police in advance that they intend to hold such a gathering.
An assembly is defined as being a gathering of ‘20 or more persons in a public place which is wholly or partly open to the air.’
They need not have a common purpose, although they will frequently do so.
A football crowd of sufficient dimensions is within the ambit of the section.
The definitions does not cover gatherings that are wholly indoors, since these can usually be controlled readily enough by the monitoring of exits and entrances.
In Roffey it was held that a procession was an ‘assembly’ for the purposes of the Air Navigation Order 1954, and the commentary on  that case points out that a procession was regarded as an assembly for the purposes of the old offence of unlawful assembly.
It is unclear whether the section gives the chief officer of police the power to limit the numbers present at the assembly below the 20 who must be present to constitute the assembly.
It would appear that he can do so, since section 14(1) provides that he may impose without apparent qualification limits on ‘the maximum number of persons who may constitute it.’
Against that, however, the view may be taken that the word ‘it’ refers to a public assembly, and since the gathering will no longer constitute such an assembly if the numbers fall below 20, it would be ultra vires the powers of the police to attempt to limit the numbers below the requisite numbers.
A person who was prosecuted for organising a public assembly contrary to section 14(4) or for taking part in such a gathering or inciting another to do so, would be able to argue that what he was involved in was not an unlawful assembly within the definition.
If the police wish to limit an assembly to below the number 20, they will be forced to use their common law powers to prevent a breach of the peace, which survive the Act intact.
As with the conditions imposed under section 12, there is a danger that if they are too readily imposed, the powers could be used to implement disguised bans.
The point of a demonstration may be nullified if the target of the protest is not within the sight or hearing of the demonstrators, and it may be expected that it would only be in exceptional circumstances that conditions would be imposed preventing such a gathering.
Challenging the conditions
No right of appeal is afforded by the Act against the imposition of conditions on either processions or assemblies nor on the power to impose bans.
But the exercise of the powers conferred by the Act is subject to judicial review by the higher courts.
Lord Diplock has characterised the essential nature of this power as follows.
‘one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds on which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review.
The first ground I would call ‘illegality,’ the second ‘irrationality’and the third ‘procedural impropriety.’
That is not to say that further development on a case by case basis may not in the course of time add further grounds.’
Spelt out slightly more fully (and at the risk of oversimplification), this means that a decision is open to review where it has been arrived at as a result of a mistaken view of the law, or where the decision is one that could not reasonably have been arrived at, in the sense that the person deciding must have taken into account irrelevant considerations, or failed to take  into account relevant ones, or where he has failed to observe the dictates of natural justice which require him to give the parties a hearing before arriving at his decision.
Both sections 12 and 14 allow the senior police officer to impose conditions only if he ‘reasonably believes’ that the stipulated events will occur, and the Government White Paper expressed the view that the new law would ‘ensure that demonstrators have an effective means of challenging any decision by the police to impose conditions which is not justified by a real risk of serious disorder, disruption or coercion.’
In addition, a challenge may be issued by a person who is prosecuted with one of the offences to be considered that the conditions were improperly imposed in the first place.
In connection with the powers of review, a number of points should be made.
Even though the process of applying to the High Court may be a somewhat slow one (in a context where speed of response may be all important), the application for review may enable the court to give useful guidance for the future relating to, for example, the meaning of a term like ‘serious disruption to the life of the community.’
A distinction should be drawn between the imposition of conditions under sections 12 and 14, and a ban imposed under section 13.
The grounds upon which a ban is imposed relate to public disorder only, and if the banning authorities can be shown to have taken irrelevant considerations into account in deciding whether to exercise the power to ban, they have acted ultra vires.
The banning procedure has a considerable political input, in the sense that both the district council and the Home Secretary act as controllers of the decision taken by the senior police officer.
By contrast, the decision to impose conditions is taken by the policeman, and it may be that the courts will not defer so readily to the judgment of a single person as to what the scope of his powers actually is.
Technically, the Act does not oblige the person imposing the conditions to specify which of the alternative grounds he relies upon for his authority to do so, although where the event is to be held in the future, the directions given by the chief of police must be in writing.
But it may perhaps be expected that where true grounds are that the police officer fears ‘serious disruption to the life of the community’ his order will say so.
It is expecting a great deal of the courts to ask them to review the operational judgment of a chief of police who indicates  that he reasonably believes that his forces are insufficient to prevent serious public disorder or serious damage to property.
In Kent v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, a blanket ban had been imposed for 28 days in the light of the Brixton disorders of 10–13 April, and disorder at several Bank Holiday fairs.
In holding that the ban was not ultra vires, Sir Denys Buckley J. made the points that the order-making authority should put clearly before the courts the considerations which led to the making of the order.
But even where, as here, the reasons offered ‘seemed meagre,’ the court unanimously declined to interfere.
The burden of proving that the authority had misused its powers rested with the applicant for judicial review.
If the courts are understandably reluctant to interfere where ‘serious disorder’ is concerned, what constitutes ‘serious disruption to the life of the community’is much more a matter of judgment, and not one in which the police are necessarily more expert than the courts.
Against the need for a society in which persons are free to go about their business unmolested might be weighed other considerations such as the importance to be placed on freedoms of speech and assembly.
If the reasons given by the chief officer of police are such that a court concludes that no reasonable officer could form the judgment that serious disruption would ensue, it is possible that the courts will prove readier to intervene than they ever were under the previous legislation, which referred to ‘serious public disorder’ only.
In practice, however, the scope of the Act is more likely to be tested by the blunderbuss of prosecution and conviction.
3.
THE OFFENCES
The offences outlined.
The Act creates several offences, all of which are committed by organisation, participation or incitement in a controlled or banned procession, or controlled meeting in breach of the conditions imposed.
The offences are subject to defences that may be summarised as being ‘no-negligence’ defences, that is, that the organiser was not responsible for any default that may have occurred in the conduct of the meeting or procession.
In summary, the offences are:
1.
Organising a public procession when the requirements as to notice have not been complied with, or organising a procession that differs from that which the notice has been given.
2.
Organising a procession, and knowingly failing to comply with the conditions imposed.
3.
Participating in a procession and knowingly failing to comply with a condition imposed, or inciting another to do so.
4.
Organising, participating in or inciting another to participate in a banned procession.
5.
Organising a public assembly and knowingly failing to comply with a condition imposed, taking part in a public assembly and knowingly failing to observe a condition imposed, or inciting another to participate in such a procession.
Penalties, procedure and powers of arrest
All of the offences created in Part II of the Act are triable summarily only.
The penalties imposed upon organisers and inciters are far heavier than those imposed upon mere participants.
A person who organises a procession without complying with the notice requirements is guilty of a level three offence only.
By contrast, a person who organises a procession or a meeting and knowingly fails to comply with the conditions imposed commits an offence punishable with three months' imprisonment or a level three fine.
Inciting another to take part in such a procession or meeting is punishable with the same level of penalty.
Where the procession has been banned, the penalty for the inciter is slightly higher, a level four fine in addition to the three months' imprisonment.
Merely taking part in a procession or assembly and knowingly failing to observe the conditions, and knowingly taking part in a banned procession are all punishable with level three fine only.
There is no power of arrest for the offence under section 11 (organising without notice).
But a constable in uniform may arrest anybody found committing any of the offences under section 12, 13 and 14.
When is it not ‘reasonably practicable’ to give notice for the purposes of section 11(1), and 11(6)?
Where a procession is organised without notice, no offence is committed if it was not ‘reasonably practicable’ to give such notice, either at all, or within the specified six clear days.
The burden of proving that it was not  reasonably practicable would appear to fall on the defendant.
This saddles the defendant with the task of proving that it was not practicable that the procession should have been postponed.
The exemption is a recognition of the desirability of spontaneity in certain circumstances; where there are sudden events such as the ‘release of pollutants, a traffic accident, a shipment of nuclear waste or a visit by a political leader,’ the response to such events must be immediate if it is to be effective, and the giving of notice is in such circumstances not reasonably practicable.
A particular point of contention is likely to arise where a group claims that it was unaware of an intention to hold a march by a group to which it holds opposing views until some time within the notification period.
In such circumstances, it would still be under an obligation to give notification of its intention to march, and the courts should perhaps hold that no offence is committed under section 11(7) if notice has been given, however shortly before the proposed ‘counter march,’ where this would still permit the imposition of conditions by the police, if necessary, under section 12.
This would mean that the courts could take into account, as in other contexts where the expression is encountered, the purposes for which the notification is required.
‘Commonly or customarily held’
There is likely to be some uncertainty in the initial months of the operation of the Act as to whether or not any particular procession is commonly or customarily held.
No figure can be put on the number of years for which such a procession must have been held to qualify for the exemption; any figure that is imposed is likely to be arbitrary.
It might be said that if the police are aware that the procession is likely to take place because it has occurred in the past, the ‘triggering’ justification for requiring advance notice is satisfied, and the chief of police could require compliance by indicating to those who have organised such marches on previous occasions that he is prepared to use his powers under section 12 to ensure co-operation if necessary.
‘Procession’
What constitutes a ‘procession’ for the purposes of the various offences is not further defined in the Act.
Unlike the law relating to ‘public assemblies,’ no minimum number of participants is required.
One person on his  own could not constitute a procession, but if a person were to march on his own, having publicised the fact widely in advance, it would seem that he might be said to be organising a procession if, Pied Piper like, he were to draw a crowd of supporters and followers.
Paradoxically, if such a person were to fail to give notice, he might then be said to be committing an offence even though, because of the hypothesised publicity, it is most unlikely that the police will not already know about his proposed march.
In Flockhart v. Robinson Lord Goddard C.J. said that it is ‘not a mere body of persons; it is a body of persons who are moving along a route.’
Whether or not they must have a common purpose to constitute a procession is perhaps a moot point, g but it will be remembered that unless the procession is to be held which is ‘intended’ to fulfil one of the purposes mentioned in section 11(1), no notice is required.
A procession of ‘hippies’ proceeding from one town to the next would not constitute a ‘procession’for these purposes.
It may be doubted whether a picket in which the members move around in a circle amounts to a procession; the term denotes the intention on the part of the participants to move from one location to another.
Clearly this is a matter of degree.
If the participants intend to circle a block, arriving eventually back at the starting point, they probably would be processing.
Organises
It is notoriously simple for those who initiate gatherings to disclaim any organisational purpose or activities.
The advance notice requirement circumvents this by obliging the processors to nominate one or more of their number as an organiser.
Such nomination is not decisive.
Generally, a person organises a procession or an assembly when he makes the necessary arrangements for the conduct of the event by initiating it, planning the route or location, or assists in doing so.
Although the term might seem naturally to denote prior arrangement, it was held under the previous law that the word is ‘not a term of art’ and that a person can organise spontaneously by giving directions on the spot as to such matters as the route to ken, when to stop and when to advance and so forth.
This being so, liability would not be restricted to those persons named in the advance notice of the procession given in accordance with section 11, but would also be imposed on marshalls or stewards who, for example, knowingly incited participants to ignore the conditions imposed.
Incites
The concept of incitement is a familiar one in the criminal law.
It denotes the encouragement of an individual to do or to omit to do an act.
This may be by way of‘proposal, request exhortation, gesture, argument, persuasion, inducement, goading or the arousal of cupidity.’
The offence is committed whether or not the incitement is effective, but it must be at least communicated to the person incited.
The incitement provisions in the Act do not really extend the law greatly, since it is in any event a common law offence to incite another to commit an offence, even a summary offence.
The general rule is that the penalty available in such circumstances is the same as that for the substantive offence incited, in this case level three, and since the legislature, thought that greater punishment than that was appropriate, specific provision is made for three months' imprisonment, or a level 4 fine.
Takes part in
A person takes part in an event when he is a willing participant in it.
A question might arise as to whether spectators can be given directions under sections 12 or 14, or be guilty of offences of failing to comply with such conditions.
A journalist, for example, or a first aid attendant, or a person acting as an ‘observer’ for an organisation such as the N.C.C.L. does not really take part in the event itself, although he may occasionally make the police task of keeping order more difficult.
A more certain course, in such a case, would be for instructions to be given pursuant to the breach of the peace powers, and a prosecution for obstruction of the constable in the execution of his duty in the event of non-compliance.
Knowingly
There is no requirement in the Act for the police to tell the individual that the procession or assembly is being held in breach of the conditions imposed.
Since the mental element required for the commission of the the offences of organisation and participation is knowledge which the courts increasingly interpret to require an awareness of all the circumstances by virtue of which it is said that an offence is committed, it may well be sensible police practice to issue a warning before arresting and prosecuting with an offence under this Part of the Act.
The defences
The offences of organisation and participation are made subject to what might be seen as a kind of impossibility defence.
The relevant sections state that ‘it is a defence for him to prove that the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.’
This clearly places the burden of proof upon  the defendant, to establish his innocence on a balance of probabilities.
A person who was swept along by the crowd (in a literal bodily sense), or who encountered unexpected barriers when attempting to comply with police conditions, would be able to avail himself of this defence.
RACIAL HATRED OFFENCES
1.
INTRODUCTION
Background
Legislation making the making of racialist sentiments a criminal offence was first introduced in Britain in 1965 by the Race Relations Act.
The common law offence of sedition, which consists of stirring hatred amongst different classes of Her Majesty's subjects had fallen into disuse, and an unsuccessful attempt to use it to prosecute for the making of anti-semitic remarks appears to have discouraged prosecuting authorities from seeking to persuade the courts to mould the common law to deal with new problems posed by those who promote ill-will in an increasingly multi-racial society.
For reasons to be explained, the original legislation was found to be defective, and was amended in 1976 (and placed into the legislative context of the Public Order Act 1936), but even after amendment it still gave rise to complaints that it fell short of the aspirations of its promoters in its effects.
When the Bill was introduced into Parliament in December 1985, it made some important but relatively minor adjustments in the pre-existing law relating to racial hatred offences.
During proceedings in Committee in the House of Commons, it became apparent that there was all-party support for extending the law rather further than was initially proposed, and this Part of the Bill was substantially redrafted.
The various laws relating to incitement to racial hatred hitherto scattered in such diverse places as the Public Order Act 1936 (as amended) the Theatres Act 1968 and the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 were drawn together in a single Act.
For fear that those who disseminate  racist propaganda would turn to newer mediums of communication, it was decided to deal explicitly and  comprehensively with all forms of communication such as films, tapes, records and video recordings, f not all of which would unambiguously have fallen within the proposed law.
In effect, Part III became a self contained code of the offences relating to racial hatred.
A rapidly re-drafted Part III was introduced into the House of Lords at the Committee stage, after the summer recess, and was therefore deliberated upon with some speed.
The Act effects several important changes to the pre-existing law.
For the first time, it makes it an offence to possess racially inflammatory material, and films, videos and records are brought explicitly within the ambit of the Act.
The Act confers powers of entry, search and seizure on the police, and places the burden of proving lack of intent to incite racial hatred on the defendant in several of the offences.
It also alters the definition of what amounts to distribution, so that members of  racist organisations can no longer shelter behind the plea that they intended to circulate their seditious material amongst their own number.
This is controversial, since it inhibits an escape valve for those who wish to discuss their views with those of a like mind.
It was considered that there was too great a danger that the material would, once created, reach and affect a wider audience.
Civil liberties implications
Underlying the offences now found in Part III is the assumption that a serious threat to public order is inherent in certain forms of expression.
The assumption is controversial, and there are obvious dangers that freedom of expression will be unnecessarily curtailed.
Where speech is made criminal by direct reference to its contents, the way is opened for those in authority to censor minority or officially deprecated opinions.
The legislature has sought to steer a course between these conflicting considerations by building public order elements into the definitions of the offences in the requirement that the conduct be threatening, abusive or insulting, and in the requirement that ‘hatred’ should be an intended or likely outcome of the expression impugned.
The difficulty then is perceived by some to be that the law does not reach those persons who couch their racialist sentiments in moderate terms rather than virulently abusive ones, whereas — so the argument runs — this propaganda is equally insidious.
The fear is that, as Lawton L.J.
put it in Relf ‘in this class of case, constant repetition of  lies might in the end lead some people into thinking that the lies are true.
It is a matter of recent history that the constant repetition of lies in Central Europe led to the tragedy which came about in the years 1939 to 1945.’
The stance adopted by the Act does not concede the full force of the argument that ‘there may be a need for a clear legislative recognition that expression of unashamedly  racist sentiments, as such, is an aspect of freedom of speech too costly in terms of long-term social disharmony to be tolerated in a pluralistic society where ultimately the possibility of democracy and civil liberty may depend on wholehearted public commitment to the fostering of social solidarity.’
Instead, it compromises; expressions of opinion, however distasteful or offensive they may be, are not within the ambit of the legislation without the additional public order elements.
The Attorney-General's consent
The political sensitivity of prosecutions in this area is reflected in the fact that no prosecutions can be brought under this Part of the Act (in England and Wales) without the consent of the Attorney-General, I who will no doubt bear in mind that proceedings should not be brought when this is likely to penalise or inhibit legitimate controversy.
In 1965, an undertaking was given that only serious breaches of the Act should be proceeded against.
No similar undertaking has been expressed in 1986, and it remains to be seen what prosecution policies will be adopted in the light of the new law.
Government spokesmen in both Houses were at pains to stress that the Government was concerned with the public order aspects of the law.
The argument that, since the Crown Prosecution Service was established, the Attorney-General's fiat was unnecessary was rejected by the Government on the grounds that, since the Act was being considerably strengthened, prospects of increased use of the law must be considered.
It was argued that it would be undesirable to open up the possibility of private prosecution, and that the sensitivity of the area was such that it was imperative that prosecution policy be consistent.
These arguments do not carry complete conviction, since the requirement of the D.P.P. 's consent would preclude private prosecution, and consistency was one of the aims behind the establishment of the Crown Prosecution Service in the first place.
But the Service was in its infancy when the matter was under consideration, and  there is something to be said for the status quo in those circumstances.
The offences outlined
The Act creates six offences, all of which involve the use of language or material that is ‘threatening, abusive or insulting,’ each of which will be considered in turn.
These are the use of words or behaviour, or the display of inflammatory written material, the publication or distribution of racially inflammatory written material publicly performing a play containing inflammatory material, distributing, playing or showing a recording containing such material, broadcasting or including inflammatory material in a cable programme service and possessing it with a view to publishing or distributing it.
Procedure, sentence and powers of arrest
Each of the offences is triable either way and punishable with imprisonment for two years on conviction on indictment, and summarily with six months and a fine to the statutory maximum.
Section 27(2) provides that for the purposes of the rule against duplicity, each of the offences created by sections 18 to 23 create one offence.
Proceedings under this Part of the Act will usually be initiated by way of summons; only section 18 carries a power of arrest.
Unlike the previous law, companies may be convicted of offences under this Part of the Act, so that the perpetrators of racial hatred are unable to hide behind their organisation's corporate nature to avoid personal liability.
Where a person is convicted of an offence relating to the display of material under section 18, or of one of the offences contrary to sections 19, 21 or 23, forfeiture of the material is mandatory.
The material is impounded until the expiry of the ordinary time within which an appeal may be instituted, after which it may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of.
Where a prosecution is brought under section 20 (theatres) or section 22 (cable broadcasting), the provisions of the earlier legislation as to such  matters as using scripts as evidence, making copies of scripts and records and powers of entry and inspection remain applicable.
The meaning of racial hatred
To give guidance on the meaning of ‘racial hatred,’ section 17 provides:
‘In this Part ‘racial hatred’ means hatred against a group of persons in Great Britain defined by reference to colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origins.’
The word ‘hatred’ which is not further defined is a word of some strength.
It means rather more than disharmony, ridicule or derision; the Act is not meant to penalise those who tell tasteless  racist jokes.
The Shorter Oxford Dictionary defines it to include ‘active dislike, detestation; enmity, ill will, malevolence.’
As one study puts it, ‘in effect, hatred is enmity.’
The formulation of the categories of person who must not be vilified, which is similar to the formulation adopted by the Race Relations Act 1976, section 3(1), does not include religious groupings, so that incitement to religious hatred is therefore outside the ambit of the British law; attacks on Roman Catholicism or Anglicanism are not covered.
The distinction between a racial group as opposed to a religious one is by no means clear cut.
Shortly after incitement to racial hatred became criminal for the first time in 1965, for example, some commentators questioned whether Jewish persons were covered by the Act, pointing to the argument that the Jewish community has a religious rather than a racial identity.
In a New Zealand case, it was held that Jewish persons are protected by the phrase ‘ethnic origins,’ and there is no real reason to suppose that the law  is not the same in Great Britain.
A common religion and a common cultural tradition are two of the factors identified by the House of Lords in the leading case of Mandla v. Dowell Lee as characteristic of the existence of a racial group, in that case Sikhs.
There is some difficulty over whether or not gypsies fall within the definition.
That term is sometimes used loosely to refer to travellers and persons of nomadic habits, and in Mills v. Cooper a Divisional Court accorded the term such a meaning for the purposes of the Highways Act, which made it an offence for a gypsy to encamp on a highway.
The Court declined to confine the term to persons of Romany origin.
It seems reasonably clear, however, that persons who are of Romany origin constitute an ethnic grouping and are within the protection afforded by the Act for that reason.
The group of persons against whom the hatred is stirred must be in Great Britain.
This would not exempt a person who, for example, launched his crusade against Sikhs in India if the effects of his conduct were felt by Sikhs in this country.
2.
INFLAMMATORY WORDS, BEHAVIOUR OR WRITTEN MATERIAL
The offence defined
Section 18 reads as follows:
‘(1) A person who uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or displays any written material which is threatening, abusive or insulting, is guilty of an offence if (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.’
The offence is in outline very similar to the pre-existing offence under the Public Order Act 1936, section 5A, although it adds ‘behaviour’ to the list of proscribed activities for the first time.
It shares many of the features of the offence under section 4, although the penalty at two years' imprisonment is greater.
There are other differences.
Whereas the earlier section requires that the language or conduct be used ‘towards another person,’ the section currently under consideration does not do so; it is enough that the language be broadcast generally.
A person who is displaying an offensive banner in his front window so that it is visible to all the world clearly ‘displays’ within section 18 even if not under section 4.
The meaning of ‘threatening, abusive or insulting’ should be the same in both contexts, and is in both cases a matter for the tribunal of fact.
The  combative quality of these expressions has the effect, it might be argued, that those who couch their racialist observations in moderate language commit no offence, even though it might be likely to result in stirring up racial hatred.
It might be thought that, in such an event, a jury (or magistrate, should the defendant elect summary trial), will find that the language is, at least, insulting to those likely to read and be offended by it, and could enter a convention on these grounds.
‘Written material’
Written material ‘includes any sign or representation’ so that illustrations, symbols or signs (such as swastikas) are within the ambit of the section.
The conduct of persons who daub walls with  racist graffiti is also nominally caught, although for practical reasons it may be simpler for the police to arrest and a prosecution brought for criminal damage, which carries a higher penalty if the damage done is sufficiently great, always supposing that the culprit can be apprehended.
The requirement of the Attorney-General's consent is likely to be, in reality, a significant inhibition.
Similarly with banners and lapel badges; the amount of work that is involved in preparing a case for the consent of the  Law Officer make arrest and charge under section 4 or 5, in practice seem an altogether more attractive alternative for the policeman on the spot.
Public or private
Like its counterpart in section 4, the offence can be committed either in public or in private, subject to the private dwelling exemption.
Private conversations are therefore excluded from the scope of the Act.
It is difficult to see, in any event, how such private conversations could really be intended to stir hatred, or be likely to do so.
A person who harassed a neighbour with  racist abuse would nevertheless have no defence that he was not acting in public if his words were,(as he knew) audible to the person next door.
Although there is a power of arrest, it would appear that when there is a private meeting, there is no power of entry to effect an arrest under the section.
This is perhaps surprising in view of the fact that the penalty carried by the section is more severe than the equivalent under section 4 for which there is a power of entry.
3.
THE MENTAL ELEMENT
Background
The requisite mental element in the offences created in this Part has proved troublesome from the outset, and a brief historical excursus is essential to a full explanation of this aspect of the Act.
When incitement to racial hatred was first criminalised in 1965, the legislation made it a requirement that an intention to incite racial hatred be proved.
The Act had the effect of penalising extremely crude forms of racial abuse where such an intention could reasonably easily be inferred because of the overtness of the language or conduct in question.
An incidental effect was that more subtle forms of propaganda began to appear, from which it was difficult for a jury to infer that the defendant intended to stir up racial hatred.
Since material was couched in more moderate tones than hitherto, it was difficult to disprove claims that the speaker was intending to engage in reasoned debate.
The law became, in the words of Lord Scarman, ‘merely an embarrassment to the police,’ and a change in this aspect of the law was advocated.
Largely as a result of these influential criticisms, the law was altered so that the requirement of intent was abrogated.
Instead a person could be held to commit an offence if he used words or published written matter which were threatening abusive or insulting in situations where, ‘having regard to all the circumstances, hatred is likely to be stirred up against any racial group in Britain.’
This made the task of the prosecutor somewhat easier, but it had the paradoxical effect that a person who distributed such material with a mischievous intention could argue that the recipients of his material were unlikely to be influenced by it, and he was therefore not guilty if his audience were already corrupt, or were members of an anti-racist organisation, or if the publication or spoken words were so contrary to human decency that they would be likely to provoke sympathy for the intended victim rather than hatred of him.
In an attempt to counter defences such as this, the Act reintroduces the requirement of an intent to stir up racial hatred as an alternative to the objective formula.
Throughout this Part of the Act, a sharp differentiation is made between the person who intends to stir up racial hatred, and a person who behaves in such a way that racial hatred is likely to be stirred up by his behaviour.
If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the jury that the defendant had the intention, he has very little opportunity to exculpate himself on the  grounds that he lacked mens rea, as will be explained further presently.
By contrast, certain defences are provided for the person who is not proved to have formed the intent, but whose language or conduct is likely to give rise to racial hatred.
A general issue concerning the mental element for the offence is whether the defendant must intend that his conduct should be threatening, abusive or insulting, or be aware that it might be.
In the case of a defendant who uses words, a person can hardly fail to be aware of what he is saying, although he may possibly not know that what he is displaying (if it be a book) contains offensive material of which others are aware but he is not.
Before the Act, the question whether the prosecutor was required to establish knowledge or awareness was unsettled.
Under the Act, the position is also rather complicated, but reasonably clear.
By contrast with the offences in Part 1 of the Act which specifically provide for a requirement of mens rea, no such explicit provision is made in this Part of the Act.
As a result, it seems clear that the prosecutor need not establish at the outset that such was the defendant's intention or awareness.
But in certain circumstances, the defendant may exculpate himself from liability either by raising doubts as to whether he had such an intention or awareness, or by establishing on a balance of probabilities the defence that he lacked mens rea.
The point can be shown by the juxtaposition of two subsections of section 18, which provide.
‘(4) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a defence for the accused to prove that he was inside a dwelling and had no reason to believe that the words or behaviour used, or the written material displayed, would be heard or seen by a person outside that or any other dwelling.’
‘(5) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section if he did not intend his words or the written material to be, and was not aware that it might be, threatening, abusive or insulting.’
The pattern established by these subsections is repeated in later sections in this Part of the Act.
It will be observed that the first subsection is couched in the language of ‘defence.’
This would seem to cast a burden of proof upon the defendant to establish, on a balance of probabilities, that he comes within the scope of the section, which is in any event couched in very  restricted terms.
A defence is available only where the defendant was in his own or another's house, and he failed to realise and had no reason to be aware that he would be overheard.
The second subsection, by contrast, places an evidential burden on the defendant (or the ‘accused,’ as the Act somewhat anachronistically refers to him) to assert that he did not intend, and was not aware of the impact that his conduct was having or might have.
That is, if the prosecutor proves that the words or material were in fact threatening, abusive or insulting, and if the  defendant wishes to assert that he did not realise that this was so, the onus is upon him to raise the issue.
It is then for the prosecutor to prove that the defendant did so intend or was aware.
In the case of displayed material, for example, it would be open to a shopkeeper prosecuted for displaying a magazine entitled ‘The British Heritage’ to show that he believed that it was concerned with the stately homes of England rather than the  racist propaganda that it actually does contain.
Where the defendant is aware of the contents, however, as he generally will be with prosecutions under this section, the prosecutor must show that the defendant was aware that others might find his words to be threatening, abusive of insulting.
The intent to incite racial hatred
The defect in the Act which the reintroduction of the intention to incite racial hatred was intended to remedy was that where the recipient of the material was for one reason or another unlikely to be moved to racial hatred, no offence was committed.
Once manufactured and distributed, the material may always find its way to the hands of others who are less equable, so that its effect may be to stir up racial hatred indirectly.
It is not wholly clear that the Act has the effect intended for it.
A person who distributes inflammatory material to equable recipients can argue with some plausibility that he intended to display his contempt for the views of the recipient, or was seeking to indicate in forcefully graphic terms that he held a different point of view from the one espoused by his audience.
Where he is addressing the converted, so to speak, he can say that his intention may have been to reinforce or confirm views already held rather than to stir up hatred.
It would be unfortunate if the courts were to permit these arguments to prevail.
So far as the arguments about those who already hold  racist views are concerned, there is a possibility that they will be stirred to action by what is said or written.
Even if that were not so, the words of Lawton L.J.
in Relf on the cumulative effect of the constant repetition of lies should be borne in mind.
The intention of stirring hatred is not confined to the purpose of doing so.
In the Canadian case Buzzanga the defendants were convicted of wilfully promoting hatred against the French-Canadian group of which  they were themselves members.
They had distributed a pamphlet in support of a French language school, intending by their pamphlet to create ‘controversy, furor and an uproar’ as a means of precipitating government action.
It was held that the defendants were guilty of wilfully promoting racial hatred if they foresaw that hatred was a certain or morally certain consequence of what they were doing, even though it was not their purpose to promote hatred.
Whereby racial hatred is likely to be stirred up
Strictly speaking, this alternative ‘mental’ element is not a mens rea requirement at all, although it is properly enough described as a fault element.
The assessment to be made is an objective one.
The reference to ‘all the circumstances’ was not included in the Bill, but had been in earlier legislation, and was reinstated for fear that the courts might read into the omission a legislative intention that was not truly held.
Presumably, it must include the audience that might be expected to be subjected to the words or material, as well as the audience who were actually present.
The time and place are also factors that might have some bearing on whether or not racial hatred was likely.
A fair and accurate report of an event by a newspaper would also be the less likely to fall foul of the legislation because of the place in which it is published.
It may be doubted, however, whether there would be anything in the nature of a public good or public interest defence available as a result of this provision, much less a defence that the words uttered were true.
If their tendency is that they are likely or intended to stir up racial hatred, that is sufficient.
4.
PUBLISHING OR DISTRIBUTING MATERIAL
Background
The conduct struck at by section 19 was made an offence in the 1965 legislation, and was a more frequently prosecuted form of incitement to racial hatred than the utterance of words.
Section 19(1) reads as follows:
‘A person who publishes or distributes written material which is threatening, abusive or insulting is guilty of an offence if —(a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.’
The threatening, abusive or insulting character of the material, and the mental elements have already been considered, and readers are referred to earlier sections of the book.
Distributes or publishes
The activities struck at by the section are further defined in section 19(3) as follows:
‘References in this Part to the publication or distribution of written material are to its publication or distribution to the public or a section of the public.’
Under previous legislation, it was a defence for the publisher to show that his intention was to publish only to members of a private association or group of which the publisher or distributor was a member.
In practice, this provided a shield behind which those whose intention it was to distribute material generally were able to disguise their activities.
That exemption has now been removed, and it may be wondered what is achieved by leaving in the Act references to the audience whom the defendant addresses, rather than penalising publication or distribution to the public at large.
Publication to a single person is, impliedly, insufficient to constitute the offence.
It may be argued that this is an appropriate restriction, since the law catches only those who disseminate or broadcast their propaganda on a wide scale, and not those whose correspondence is entirely private.
Members of an association are clearly a ‘section of the public.’
and distribution to them is within the ambit of the law.
How large a group, though, is ‘the public, or a section of the public’?
Would it be enough, for example, that a person published material to a handful of his neighbours urging them to make life difficult for a black person who has recently moved into the neighbourhood?
The matter was considered by the Court of Appeal in Britton where a youth had left pamphlets late one evening in the porch of the house of a single member of Parliament whom he believed to be responsible for bringing coloured immigrants into Britain.
The court concluded that this was not a publication to the ‘public’ generally, or to a section of the public, even taking into account the fact that the M.P.
was accompanied at his home by three members of his family.
No change made in the Act affects this, and on this point.
Britton would seem still to represent the law.
The decision has been criticised, it being said that the section of the public to whom publication is in fact made is not a matter of concern.
As a criticism of the courts, this seems misconceived or at least misplaced.
If Parliament had meant to say that any distribution or publication should suffice, it could very easily have said so; the courts are bound to make sense of the words that Parliament has in fact used.
In Britton, the actions of the defendant took place late at night, and at some distance from the street, and the court took the view that these facts militated against calling this a distribution, although it said that had there been evidence that the documents were visible to whoever passed by, this might amount to publication, with which the particular defendant had not been charged.
A person ‘publishes’ an article when he sells it, or otherwise distributes it by giving it away, letting it on hire or lending it.
Ignorance of contents
A publisher or distributor may very well be unaware of the contents of what he is circulating, although he might be thought to have some obligation to ascertain what is contained in what he is peddling.
To meet this, there is a ‘no negligence’ defence available to the publisher in section 19(2), which reads:
‘In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the content of the material and did not suspect, and had no reason to suspect, that it was threatening, abusive or insulting.’
The conditions for the application of the defence are cumulative rather than alternatives, so that if the publisher fails to meet any one of them, the defence fails.
It is not enough for the defendant to show that he was aware of the contents of what he was distributing or publishing, but did not himself think that it was insulting if the jury or magistrate should come to the conclusion that he suspected or had grounds to suspect otherwise.
This is in contrast to section 18, which permits the defendant to claim that he was not aware that his words were threatening, abusive or insulting.
5.
THEATRES
Background
Theatrical performances were brought within the ambit of the criminal laws relating to racial hatred by the Theatres Act 1968, which terminated the Lord Chamberlain's role as the official censor.
The Act was not amended by the Race Relations Act 1976, which meant that the mental element required for the commission of the offence remained restricted to intention to cause racial hatred, as opposed to the likelihood that racial  hatred would be stirred up.
To date, there have been no prosecutions for this version of the offence of inciting to racial hatred.
The legislation is aimed principally at those who present or direct plays rather than at the person who actually performs them; the latter commits an offence only if without reasonable excuse he performs otherwise than in accordance with the director's instructions.
The offence defined
Section 20(1) provides:
‘If a public performance of a play is given which involves the use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, any person who directs the performance is guilty of an offence if —(a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or (b) having regard to all the circumstances (and in particular, taking the performance as a whole) racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.’
The section requires little comment since it is couched in terms so similar to the offences already considered.
There is, however, one slightly unfortunate addition to the section, namely the phrase that requires the performance to be assessed ‘as a whole.’
This was the phraseology employed in the Theatres Act 1968, but when the Bill was hurriedly amended, it was decided to bring the Theatres Act terminology into line with the remainder of the Act, and substitute ‘having regard to all the circumstances.’
This would probably have been sufficient to enable the courts to assess the performance as a whole, but the Bill was nevertheless further amended in the House of Lords so that both expressions now appear.
The unfortunate side effect is that the Act appears not to require as assessment of the utterance as a whole elsewhere in the Act, especially in relation to sections 21 and 22.
Exempted performances
Certain performances that would qualify within the definition of plays are expressly exempted.
These are rehearsals, and performances given solely or primarily for the purpose of making a recording or to enable the performance to he broadcast or included in a cable programme, unless it was attended by persons other than those participating for such purposes.
This restates the previous law, and it may be supposed that, in the  situations envisaged, there are good reasons why the conduct should not be regarded as criminal.
It might be necessary to witness a rehearsal before an assessment of the overall impact of the play can be made, and if the purpose of the performance is so that it can be publicly reproduced on a different occasion, the circumstances in which that publication will take place will have a bearing on the offensive character of the artefact in question.
Given that the decision has now been taken by Parliament to extend the law to cover recordings, broadcasts and cable programmes, it may be wondered whether the exemption for these should have been automatically carried over into the new law.
Persons to whom the section applies
The section applies to ‘presenters’ and ‘directors,’but not to actors unless the latter depart from the script, in which case they become ‘directors’for the purposes of the Act.
Nor can the performer be guilty of an offence by aiding and abetting the director; the ordinary principles of complicity are expressed not to apply.
Why this denial of individual autonomy should be permitted, when it is not in the case of a person who uses the offending words under section 22 (cable broadcasting services) is unclear.
The original Theatres Act 1968 exemption may well have been devised with obscene plays in mind where the editorial judgment of the director may well be decisive.
It is no defence for the director to say that he was absent when the play was performed, unless he can take advantage of the special defence that he did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the performance would involve the use of the offending words or behaviour.
Defences
Section 20(2) affords defences as follows:
‘If a person presenting or directing the performance is not shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence for him to prove —(a) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the performance would involve the use of the offending words or behaviour, or (b) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the offending words or behaviour were threatening, abusive or insulting, or (c) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the circumstances in which the performance would be given would be such that racial hatred would be likely to be stirred up.’
6.
FILMS, SOUND TAPES, VIDEOS AND RECORDS
Background to and definition of offence
The extent to which the newer means of communication might fall within the terms of the offences relating to written material was problematic.
There was no real evidence before the Standing Committee that such material was currently being produced or in circulation, but the fear was expressed that, if the ‘private member's club’ defence were to be removed from the most common form in which such material was currently produced, namely books, magazines and pamphlets, it would not be long before such clubs began to produce their propaganda in new media.
Because of the uncertainties, and to forestall the predicted developments, it was decided at the Committee stage of the Bill to redraft it to ensure that these were  explicitly within the new law.
Accordingly, section 21 states:
‘(1) A person who distributes, or shows or plays, a recording of visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or insulting is guilty of an offence if —(a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.
(2) In this Part, ‘recording’ means any record from which visual images or sounds may, by any means, be reproduced; and references to the distribution, showing or playing of a recording are to its distribution, showing or playing to the public or a section of the public.’
Technically a showing of such a film in private to members of a  racist club or group would fall within the terms of the section, since the showing would be to a section of the public.
This is not positively expressed to be the law, unlike section 18, which expressly provides that the offence may take place in private as well as in public, and affords a private dwelling exemption.
It is also unlike section 20, which requires the ‘public performance’ of a play.
In the absence of any legislative indication one way or the other, it must be assumed that the offence may be committed in public and in private.
But there would be no power of entry without a warrant if it were suspected that such an offence was taking place, even though there is such a power for the less serious offence under section 4.
There is a defence that the distributor, displayer or player who had no intention to stir up racial hatred was ignorant of, and had no reason to suspect that the contents of the item in question were threatening, abusive or  insulting, and the section does not apply where the showing or playing of the recording is solely for the purpose of inclusion in a cable programme service.
7.
BROADCASTS AND CABLE BROADCASTS
Background and definition
Cable broadcasting is a relatively new phenomenon.
Whereas ordinary television is transmitted through the airwaves generally, cable television is, as its name implies, transmitted via cable into those premises equipped to receive it.
It was envisaged by Parliament that the services might be developed in a more selective way, becoming available only to those who chose to have such a facility, and it was contemplated that there would not be the same obligations of good taste and balance that are required of existing television broadcasters.
Section 22 is in all its essentials virtually identical to the provision in the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984.
It provides:
‘(1) If a programme involving threatening, abusive or insulting visual images or sounds is broadcast, or included in a cable programme service, each of the persons mentioned in subsection (2) is guilty of an offence if —(a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.
(2) The persons are —(a) the person providing the broadcasting or cable programme service,(b) any person by whom the programme is produced or directed, and (c) any person by whom offending words or behaviour are used.’
The defences
The statute affords a number of defences, which are intended to reflect the degree of control that the various participants might have over the transmission of the programme.
In the case of the cable service operator, and the producer and director of the programme in question, the defendant must show that he neither knew nor reasonably suspected that the programme would contain the offending words, or, if he did know, that he had no reasonable opportunity to remove the offending words.
In addition, it is open to the producer or director to show that he did not know or reasonably suspect that the offending programme would be included in a cable  programme, or that in the context of the broadcast the programme would probably provoke racial hatred.
So far as the performer is concerned, he has the defence that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that a programme involving the use of the offending material would be included in a cable broadcast, or that the circumstances in which such material was included would be such that racial hatred would be likely to be stirred up.
All of these defences apply only where the person is not shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred, and all of the participants have the defence that they had no reason to suspect that the material was threatening, abusive or insulting.
In addition an exemption is afforded for the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Independent Broadcasting Authority, or for any immediate re-transmission of a programme broadcast by either of those authorities.
The reason for this is not only that these organisations are inherently unlikely to broadcast such material, but also that they are subject to different controls as to the content of what they broadcast.
8.
POSSESSING RACIALLY INFLAMMATORY MATERIAL
Background
The offence of possessing racially inflammatory material is new.
Difficulty had been experienced in making the previous law work, because it depended on the need to prove a particular act of distribution, not to members of a club or association of which the defendant himself was a member.
Section 23 is very similar in terms to the other sections in this Part.
It provides as follows:
‘(1) A person who has in his possession written material which is threatening, abusive or insulting, or a recording of visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or insulting, with a view to—(a) in the case of written material, its being displayed, published, distributed, broadcast or included in a cable programme service, whether by himself or another, or (b) in the case of a recording, its being distributed, shown, played, broadcast or included in a cable programme service, whether by himself or another, is guilty of an offence if he intends racial hatred to be stirred up thereby or, having regard to all the circumstances, racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby.’
(2) For this purpose regard shall be had to such display, publication, showing, playing, broadcasting or inclusion in a cable programme service as he has, or it may reasonably be inferred that he has, in view.’
Subsection 2 is rather oddly tacked on, and provokes the question ‘for what purpose’?
The answer would seem to be for the purpose of ascertaining the possessor's intention, and for deciding whether in all the circumstances, racial hatred is likely to be stirred up.
In applying subsection 2, the quantity of material is one of the factors that the tribunal can bear in mind when assessing the defendant's intention, or the likelihood that racial hatred will be stirred up.
Large quantities of the same pamphlet might the more readily suggest that the defendant's purposes were not wholly innocent ones.
By contrast, a person who has been handed a single leaflet in the street is clearly outside the ambit of the section.
Where material is possessed for legitimate educational or research purposes, or in a library, there is clearly no intention to incite racial hatred.
Whether or not racial hatred is likely to be stirred up may depend in part on the circumstances in which and to whom the library will make the material available.
As with the offence under section 22 (cable and broadcasting), the section does not apply to the BBC or the IBA
The power of search
Extensive powers of entry, search and seizure are associated with the possession offence by virtue of section 24.
Nothing is actually said in the Act to the effect that the object of the search may be  seized , but this must be read subject to the powers of seizure conferred by PACE.
Section 19 of that Act, in particular, confers general powers of seizure.
Under that section, the constable would be empowered to seize only if it is ‘necessary’ to do so in order to prevent the evidence being concealed, altered, lost or destroyed.
Exemptions for Reporting
Fair and accurate reports of proceedings in Parliament are expressly exempted from the operation of this Part of the Act, which also does not apply:
‘where the matter consists of or is contained in a fair and accurate report of proceedings publicly heard before a court or tribunal exercising judicial authority, provided the report is published contemporaneously with those proceedings or, if it is not reasonably practicable or would be unlawful to publish a report of them contemporaneously, is  published as soon as publication is reasonably practicable and lawful.’
As the provisions are framed, they are not quite defences; the section merely says that the offences cannot be committed when they represent a fair and accurate report.
At most, therefore, there is in evidential burden on the defendant, and it would be for the prosecutor to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the report was unfair or inaccurate, or that the proceedings were not before a tribunal exercising judicial authority.
ASSAULTING OR OBSTRUCTING A CONSTABLE IN THE EXECUTION OF HIS DUTY
1.
INTRODUCTION
The offences outlined
A number of offences frequently encountered in the field of public order prohibit interference with a police officer in the execution of his duty.
Assaulting a constable, or obstructing or resisting him in the execution of his duty are all specific statutory offences.
Although augmented now by police powers to give instructions in the control of processions and assemblies and the new crime of offensive conduct it seems likely that they will continue to be of immense practical importance.
The offences are to be found in section 51 of the Police Act 1964, which provides as follows:
‘(1) Any person who assaults a constable in the execution of his duty, or a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or to both.
(3) Any person who resists or wilfully obstructs a constable in the execution of his duty, or a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or to both.’
All the offences are triable summarily only.
2.
COMMON INGREDIENTS OF THE OFFENCES
The scope of the policeman's duty
One element common to all forms of the offence is that the forbidden conduct must take place when the policeman is acting ‘in the execution of his duty,’ which raises the questions; what duties are imposed upon a  policeman, and how do they come to be imposed for these purposes?
The broad answers are that the duties of the policeman are manifold, and they arise both by the operation of statute and the common law.
Even though the offences under consideration have a statutory source, they have been the subject of a good deal of judicial development, reflecting the gradual and incremental changes in the social and legal functions that the police force has been expected to undertake since its inception.
The courts have rarely appeared constrained by the fact that, as they have developed the law by extending the constable's duties, they have in effect considerably broadened the ambit of the criminal law.
Even now, the categories of duty cannot be regarded as being closed; they have been held to include a general duty to enforce the law, to detect and prevent crime and to bring the offender to justice, to prevent harm to persons and property and to preserve evidence.
In the light of this ever-expanding catalogue, it can be asked what limits there are to the scope of the policeman's duty.
The answer to that depends in turn on the precise nature of the duty, which is the subject of the next section.
The nature of the policeman's duty
For the jurist, the word ‘duty’ has a number of possible meanings.
When used in any rigorous sense, it bears connotations of obligation, and in its pristine Hohfeldian sense, it is the strict correlative of a right.
So far  as the scope of the duty in the offences of assault, resistance and obstruction is concerned, the law has developed in such a way that the obligation is not confined to duties stricto sensu, i.e. something that the officer is compelled by law to do.
Rather, the courts have held that it is enough if the constable has a power to act as he does, and that he is not acting illegally in the exercise of that power at the time of the act complained of.
The precise nature of the policeman's duty was explicitly before the court in Coffin v. Smith.
The police had been called to a youth club where they had been asked by one of the supervisors to assist in excluding trespassers before the evening's festivities got under way.
The appellants left when requested by the police to do so, but remained loitering outside the door of the club.
One of the appellants was asked to move, but he declined.
After several further requests, the male appellant began to move off, but then returned and punched the policeman in the chest.
The argument on appeal from the ruling of the justices that there was no case to answer — a decision that Donaldson L.J.
confessed to having initially found ‘prima facie perverse and incomprehensible’— was that a police officer is not acting in the execution of his duty if he is doing something that he is not compelled by law to do.
The argument was that in this instance, the police were under no obligation to assist a person to eject a trespasser from his premises, and hence were not acting in the execution of their duty when the constable was assaulted.
The Divisional Court held that the appeal must succeed, taking the view that the police officers were acting in the execution of their duty when they assisted the youth leader to eject the appellants and others from the youth club.
It was conceded by the court that this finding was on a strict view irrelevant, since there was a break between the clearing of the premises and the assault with which the appellant had been charged, which was a separate incident.
Even at the later stage, the police were continuing to act within the execution of their duty, the general duty of the police to preserve the peace.
‘In a word,’ as Donaldson L.J.
put it:
‘a police officer's duty is to be a keeper of the peace and to take all  necessary steps with that in view.
These officers, just like ordinary officers on the beat, were attending a place where they thought that their presence would assist in keeping the peace….
They were simply standing there on the beat in the execution of their duty when they were assaulted.’
The conclusion at which the justices had arrived was therefore incorrect, but in view of the time that had elapsed between the hearing and the appeal, the case was not remitted to the magistrates.
There are a number of difficulties with this judgment.
To begin with, there was no evidence from either of the policemen concerned that he feared a breach of the peace.
Indeed, one of the lay witnesses said that he considered a breach of the peace unlikely even if the police had not been there.
If the circumstances are such that the likelihood of a breach of the peace is obvious, there need be no direct evidence on the matter.
But in this case, the evidence seemed to go the other way, and was the express reason why the magistrates dismissed the charges.
A possible basis for the decision, it is suggested, is that in instructing the appellants to leave the spot outside the premises, the police were acting to prevent an offence as they have a duty to do, namely to require the appellant to stop obstructing the highway.
Failure to comply with that instruction might give rise to a charge of obstructing the police in addition to that of obstructing the highway.
That issue was not, however, raised in the case, and cannot formally be regarded as the reasoning underpinning the decision.
The principal importance of the decision, however, lies in the support that it affords to the proposition that it is not necessary for the duty of the policeman to be found in a specific rule of the common law or statute.
According to the court, it was sufficient that the police were ‘standing there on the beat in the execution of their duty’ for liability to attach.
The court approached the issue in accordance with the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in Waterfield and Lynn (a prosecution for assaulting a constable in the execution of his duty) where Ashworth J. stated the law as follows:
‘In the judgment of this court it would be difficult, and in the present case it is unnecessary, to reduce within specific limits the general terms in which the duties of police constables have been expressed.
In most cases it is probably more convenient to consider what the police constable was actually doing and in particular whether such conduct was prima facie an unlawful interference with a person's liberty or property.
If so, it is then relevant to consider whether (a) such conduct falls within the general scope of any duty imposed by statute or recognised  at common law and (b) whether such conduct, albeit within the general scope of such a duty, involved an unjustifiable use of powers associated with the duty.’
On this analysis, the constable's duty is a defeasible one.
The issue for the court to decide is whether or not the constable is doing anything that constitutes a prima facie interference with the person's liberty, person or property, as by detaining him, searching him or otherwise touching him, or constraining his behaviour in some other way.
If the court comes to the conclusion that there is such an interference, it must then decide whether or not the constable has lawful justification for his conduct, which can be found either in statute or the common law.
Purporting to apply these principles in Coffin v. Smith, the court concluded that the police were in this case on duty (since they were in uniform), and were doing nothing prima facie unlawful.
It was not therefore necessary to ask whether or not the conduct was justifiable or otherwise.
The ruling that the police were not doing anything which was prima facie an unlawful interference with a person's liberty or property is surely questionable.
Being constrained upon penalty to leave the place where one would prefer to remain is surely such an interference, calling for justification.
It may well be that the police did have justification in their reasonable fear that a breach of the peace would ensue if they did not remain where they were, and if they did not issue instructions to the appellants to leave.
In deciding the second of tests posed by the court in Waterfield, the court will consider not merely whether or not the power exists, but whether it has been properly exercised, and hold that, if the manner in which an admitted power is exercised is improper, it takes the constable outside the execution of his duty again.
If he is trespassing, or seeking to detain and question a person when he has no authority to do so, or challenging another to a fight, his conduct will be outside the scope of his duty, and any assault on him cannot come within the terms of section 51(1).
The improper  exercise of a power of arrest will have a similar effect.
In Lowe, for example, the policeman had said when arresting ‘that's enough, you're locked up.’
It was held that this was insufficient information to give an arrestee, and the constable who arrested in those circumstances had gone beyond the scope of his duty since he was exercising his admitted power improperly.
A constable who gives inadequate reasons for conducting a search that he would otherwise be entitled to undertake is also acting outside the scope of his duty.
If more force than is necessary is used by the policeman, that too will take him outside the scope of the duty.
The characterisation of the policeman's duty adopted in Coffin equates the nature of the policeman's duty with his merely being on duty, which is a related but essentially different concept.
On the view there adopted, duty becomes a purely temporal concept.
That is, it is sufficient that the constable is assaulted during his working hours, and the policeman's ‘duty’ becomes ‘whatever the police officer considers to be necessary for doing the job.’
Not every act that he performs in the course of his daily police routine can be ‘in the execution of his duty’ within the contemplation of the statute.
When a constable gives directions to a tourist, for example, or rescues a stranded cat from a tree, he is performing the sort of social service that the police are nowadays expected to undertake.
If a passerby were to decline to lend the constable his map or his ladder to assist, he may be wilfully obstructing the constable; but he would not he obstructing the constable in the execution of his duty.
If only because the offence is defined in terms of‘duty’ the concept must be in some way limited to the ways that the law obliges the constable to act, in however attenuated or weak a sense of that word.
The potential tor the undesirable development of the line of reasoning adopted in Coffin is illustrated by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Moore.
The defendant cycled through a red light and refused when requested to do so, to give his name and address to the police.
He was arrested for and charged with obstructing a constable in the  execution of his duty, and his conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court of Canada.
It cannot be doubted that the constable was ‘on duty’ when he stopped the cyclist, and he was no doubt under some sort of obligation to stop the cyclist to enable him to bring the defendant before the court ultimately.
But the cyclist was under no obligation to give the constable his name and address, and although the constable is perfectly at liberty to ask his questions, the citizen is under no obligation to answer them.
If a person is convicted in such circumstances, his right to remain silent is abrogated and set at nought.
Jurisprudentially, the effect is that the offence has become obstructing a constable in the use of his powers, and that is not what the section prohibits.
For these reasons, Coffin is perhaps better seen as a case in which the Divisional Court, contrary to the evidence, concluded that the situation was such that a breach of the peace was likely, and that the officers were seeking to prevent that at the time when the assault took place.
Their active presence was intended to cause the appellants to leave the scene.
One important question remains unsettled, namely, whether there can be a conviction for assault on a constable when the constable is not actually on duty in the technical sense that he has reported for his shift at the requisite time.
In Albert v. Lavin it was assumed that the defendant was guilty of assaulting in the execution of his duty an off-duty policeman who was seeking to prevent a breach of the peace.
Is it possible to extrapolate from this decision, and to say that an offence is committed whenever the constable is seeking to exercise a statutory power of arrest such as, for example , the power of arrest conferred by section 5?
The argument for saying that there should be liability in such circumstances is that a constable does not cease to have certain general duties because he happens to be ‘off duty’ for the time being.
When he sees an arrestable offence being committed, or an offence that carries a conditional power of arrest, he would be in dereliction of his duty if he did not intervene to prevent the misconduct.
He is therefore at much at risk from violence in his office of constable out of uniform and office hours as he is in them.
If, as was argued earlier, the notion of duty should be seen as functional rather than purely  temporal, it should therefore extend to all situations where the constable is engaged in obligatory police work.
If the person whose liberty is interfered with does not know that the person who constrains him is a constable and believes that he is under attack, he will have the defence that, since he acted in self defence, he committed no assault.
The duty to preserve the peace
There can be no doubt at all that the constable has a well-established duty to preserve the peace.
The powers that exist to enable him to carry out this task are expressly preserved by the Act, and it is essential to consider their scope in some detail.
They may be summarised as follows: if it appears that facts existed from which a constable could reasonably have anticipated a breach of the peace, as a real and not as a remote possibility, and the constable did in fact anticipate such a breach, he is under a duty to take steps (whether by arrest or otherwise) as he reasonably thinks are necessary to prevent the breach of the peace from occurring or, as it may be, from continuing.
A person who makes the task of the constable more difficult when he is seeking to carry out that duty is obstructing the constable in the execution of his duty.
These principles were established in a series of cases, of which the most important — because it broke the ground in the first place — is the decision in the Divisional Court of Duncan v. Jones.
The appellant, in accordance with her previously announced intention, was about to address a meeting to be held across the street from the entrance to an unemployed training centre, attracting a crowd of some 30 people.
She was told by the Chief Constable of the district (who was accompanied by the Inspector who became the respondent in the appeal) that a meeting could not be held on the spot, but could be held some 175 yards distant, around the corner.
It was not alleged by the inspector that there was any obstruction of the highway, nor that any person present at the gathering had either committed, incited or provoked a breach of the peace.
Some 15 months earlier, however, a meeting had been held at the same spot, and after that meeting, a disturbance took place at the training centre (although the report of the  case gives no indication of the scale or the cause of the previous disturbance).
It was accepted that the Chief Constable and the inspector actually and reasonably apprehended that a breach of the peace would result if the meeting of July 30, 1934, the subject of these proceedings, were held.
The justices found that the appellant must have known of the possibility that a breach of the peace was a probable consequence of her conduct, and that she was not unwilling that this should come about.
Because of the apprehension of a breach of the peace on the part of the inspector, it was held, there arose a duty on him to prevent a breach of the peace, and because the appellant had sought to hold the meeting in defiance of his instructions, she was guilty of obstructing him in the execution of his duty.
This went further than previous decisions, which had hitherto required some independent illegality in the conduct of the person whose conduct was called in question.
The unlawfulness was generally to be found in the offence of unlawful assembly, but it might also have been another offence such as nuisance caused by obstruction of the highway.
Neither of these was alleged against the defendant in this case.
The effect of the decision, therefore, was to create an entirely new class of criminal behaviour, dependent on the instructions of a constable who feared a breach of the peace.
This may well be a socially beneficial outcome, but it sets the criminal law dangerously at large unless the exercise of the powers thereby conferred is the subject of careful scrutiny by the courts.
Although the general principles underlying the decision have several times been endorsed by the superior courts, the decision itself has never been the subject of a direct challenge, and its implications have not been fully confronted by the higher courts.
Further, it may be doubted whether the Chief Justice of the day fully appreciated the implications of his decision for freedom of speech in public.
Lord Hewart C.J., in the course of his judgment said:
‘There have been moments during the argument in this case when it appeared to be suggested that the court was being confronted with a grave case involving what is called a right of public meeting.
I say ‘called’ because English Law does not recognise any special right of public meeting either for a political or any other purpose.
The right of assembly, as PROFESSOR DICEY puts it (LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION (8TH Edn.) p. 499), is nothing more than a view taken by the courts of individual liberty of speech.
If I thought that the present case raised the question which has been held in suspense by more than one writer on constitutional law — namely, whether an assembly can properly be held to be unlawful merely because the holding of it is expected to give rise to a breach of the peace on the part of persons opposed to those who are holding the meeting — I should wish to hear much more argument before expressing an opinion.
It seems to me that this case does not even touch that important question.’
Why his Lordship should have concluded that the facts did not give rise to the issue is unclear, but subsequent events have shown that the decision has been of much greater importance for the scope of the right of public meeting than his Lordship imagined it would be.
In Piddington v. Bates the power was employed to enable the police to station no more than two pickets at the entrance to a factory.
It was held that the defendant who had sought to push through the police cordon was committing the offence of obstructing a constable in so doing.
The same power has been used to control potentially unruly crowds going to football matches, and to turn back would-be picketing miners at some distance from the scene where they wished to express their displeasure.
As sections 12 and 14 of the Public Order Act 1986 implicitly recognise, these are powers of considerable constitutional significance, since they involve the imposition of conditions on persons who are engaging in otherwise perfectly lawful behaviour.
The law, as established in Duncan v. Jones, gives the police insufficient guidance as to when and against whom they should exercise their powers of control.
In practice, it may well be, that the police give effect to the spirit of the decision in Beatty v. Gilbanks that a man should not be held to commit an unlawful act when he does an act that is otherwise lawful merely because those who oppose him respond with violence or the threat of it.
To what extent they are under a legal obligation to do so will be the subject of the following section.
Reviewing the constable's decision
Where the peace is threatened, the law confers upon the constable a very wide range of powers to take preventive action.
At its broadest, it has been said:
‘every citizen in whose presence a breach of the peace is being, or reasonably appears to be about to be, committed has the right to take reasonable steps to make the person who is breaking or threatening the peace refrain from doing so; and those reasonable steps in appropriate cases will include detaining him against his will.’
What steps are reasonable in any particular case will obviously depend on the circumstances in which the policeman (or the citizen) finds himself, but these might include requiring trespassers to leave, requiring a speaker to move from his chosen spot, or to desist from speaking altogether, calling for quiet when noise seems likely to provoke a breach of the peace; in short, anything that is necessary to prevent the breach from occurring.
As  sanctions in the event of non-compliance, the peace keeper has powers of arrest, or detention short of arrest.
From the foregoing, it will be apparent that the prospect of a breach of the peace licenses what would otherwise be unlawful conduct on the part of the policeman, and the question arises as to how carefully, and on what grounds, the courts will give guidance as to the use of the powers, and subject their use to review.
This inquiry cannot be conducted in isolation from the general developments that have occurred in connection with judicial review of executive authority, an area in which the courts have been extremely active.
The courts have themselves shown a willingness recently to subject the decisions of the police to the general principles developed in other areas of the law.
A policeman may be able to restore the public calm without having to resort to an arrest.
On the other hand, the decision to arrest may sometimes be the line of least resistance rather than the only realistic course of action.
To what extent is the constable guided by the law as to how he should exercise his discretion?
In two respects, it is open to the courts to insist that the constable's decision must be a reasonable one; there must first be reasonable grounds on which the constable is entitled to rely in deciding in the first place whether or not a breach of the peace is likely to occur.
Once he has come reasonably to the conclusion that this will happen, the question whether his decision to issue the particular instructions that he gave was a reasonable one in the circumstances is subject to a further test of reasonableness.
There is authority for saying that the courts (in practice usually the magistrates) can and should intervene at both of these potential control points.
In Piddington v. Bates, Lord Parker C.J. said:
‘It seems to me the law is reasonably plain.
First, the mere statement by a constable that he did anticipate that there might be a breach of the peace is clearly not enough.
There must exist proven facts from which a constable could reasonably have anticipated a breach of the peace.
Secondly, it is not enough that his contemplation is that there is a remote possibility but there must be a real possibility of a breach of the peace.’
In Albert v. Lavin the question posed for the House of Lords was ‘whether a constable who reasonably believes that a breach of the peace is about to take place is entitled to detain any person without arrest to prevent that breach of the peace in circumstances which appear to him to be proper.’
In answering that question in the affirmative, Lord Diplock  insisted that the word ‘reasonable’ should also appear in front of the verb ‘appear.’
When they exercise powers of review, the courts are not attempting to decide whether or not the original decision was right or wrong.
They are deciding whether or not the decision was properly arrived at, taking into account all relevant factors, and not taking into account irrelevant ones.
The question for the courts was whether or not the decision was one at which the individual official could reasonably have arrived.
What factors may the policeman take into account in deciding whether or not a breach of the peace is likely?
What should he bear in mind in deciding what instructions to issue?
Some of these issues were tested in the case of Moss v. McLachlan in which a group of picketing miners travelling in convoy were stopped by a police cordon on the M1 motorway and requested to turn back.
The incident took place in the course of the miners' strike, within several miles of four collieries, and the policeman in charge said that he had reason to fear that a breach of the peace would occur if the miners continued on their journey.
When they declined to do as requested and sought to push through the police cordon, the appellants were arrested, and later convicted of obstructing the police in the execution of their duty.
On appeal, it was argued for the miners that the instructions to turn back were unlawful, and the police had no power to require them to turn back.
Consequently, it was argued, the police were not acting in the execution of their duty at the time of the arrests.
The argument for the appellants was that there was no evidence from which the police could reasonably have apprehended an imminent breach of the peace.
Their contention was that the constable must have a specific fear in mind; ‘he must be able to say which pit, which miners and when,’ and that it must have been clear from the words and deeds of the appellants themselves (and the others associated with them on the spot) that a breach of the peace would ensue.
The Divisional Court expressed its conclusion in the following terms:
‘the situation has to be assessed by the senior police officers present.
Provided they honestly and reasonably form the opinion that there is a real risk of a breach of the peace in the sense that it is in close proximity both in place and time, then the conditions exist for reasonable preventive action including, if necessary, the measures taken in this case.’
In making his assessment that a breach was likely to occur, the senior policeman was entitled to take into account not only the conduct of the appellants themselves, and that of the people by whom they were accompanied, but also what they had heard and seen on television and read in the newspapers about the way in which the miners’ strike was conducted, ‘and to exercise their common sense and judgment on that material’as well as what they saw with their own eyes.
All of this was relevant material, properly considered by the police.
As to the argument that, in order for the duty to take action to arise, the breach of the peace must be ‘imminent,’ the Court cited the opinion of Lord Parker C.J. to the effect that the police must anticipate ‘a real, not a remote, possibility’of a breach of the peace before they are justified in taking preventive action.
In this respect too, the court is exercising its power of review, by identifying more closely for the police the questions that they must ask themselves in deciding whether or not they are entitled to take preventive action.
Imminence must be a relative concept, and will ordinarily involve close proximity in terms of place and time.
The breach will usually take place in the very presence of the constable who carries out the arrest.
But it need not do so.
If a person were to announce to a policeman that he was about to go to the house of his sworn enemy and beat the living daylights out of him, it would not make sense if the law were that the policeman had to follow the suspect to the locus in quo and only then arrest him.
His powers of prevention must arise before that point is reached.
Where the second point of review is concerned, namely whether the actions taken by the constable were reasonable in the light of his apprehensions, the courts are diffident about interfering, for a number of reasons.
Again, it must be remembered, the courts exercise a power of review rather than a power of appeal.
Public disorder incidents are frequently transitory and fleeting events; the constable has to make quick decisions as to what course of action to adopt for the best.
In G. v. Chief Constable for Stroud the Divisional Court made the point that in deciding whether or not the constable's decision was a reasonable one, full allowance must be made for the circumstances in which the police find themselves in emergencies.
For these reasons, it might well be that the courts will be reluctant to interfere with the judgment of the policeman on the spot, especially if he is an experienced officer.
Sometimes, the prospect of a breach of the peace may form the basis of pre-planned preventive action.
In Moss v. McLachlan for example, the setting up of road blocks, etc., was clearly part of a coordinated police strategy, not wholly governed by the decisions of the policeman on the spot (although, as the quote from Moss v. McLachlan illustrates, it was the assessment of the senior police officers present that was being made the subject of review).
Even allowing for the reluctance of  the courts to subject operational police decisions to judicial review, it may be apparent that the police have failed to take into account in their decision making a relevant consideration, or have taken into account an irrelevant one, which would leave the decision open to review.
What factors should inform the decision making of the police in this difficult area?
The denial of the importance of freedom of speech by the Chief Justice in Duncan v. Jones suggests that it is open to the constable to take the surest means to prevent a breach of the peace, and can take whatever steps he chooses.
Since that case was decided, the nature of constitutional guarantees has subtly changed in the constitution of the United Kingdom, which has since become a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights, Article 11 of which guarantees to citizens of the signatory countries a right to freedom of assembly.
Although it is a matter of emphasis and weighting rather than clear-cut law, it might be argued that this also alters police responsibilities.
For example, where disrupters of a public meeting are themselves behaving unreasonably, and possibly illegally, there should be some sort of obligation to proceed first against the disrupters rather than the speakers, if that can be done.
If there were a obligation on the police to operate a policy of protecting those first into the forum, freedom of speech would be the better preserved.
The correctness of the decision in Duncan v. Jones has been doubted in Australia, where it was pointed out that the effect of the decision is that ‘members of Parliament could be forbidden to address hostile audiences during election campaigns.’
For these reasons, it is possible to hope that the House of Lords might, if called upon to do so, reconsider the decision in a way that makes it plain that the right to freedom of speech in public is not wholly dependent upon the discretion of the policeman on the spot — important though that will undoubtedly always be — but is guided by rules and principles that recognise, inter alia the importance of freedom of speech in public, and the fact that the person interfered with was going about his otherwise lawful business.
In so far as it remains possible to approach the problem as a matter of principle, the law should be that, if a person is acting in a way that is independently lawful, his conduct should not become unlawful merely because  he fails to obey the instructions of a policeman.
If the actor intends to provoke a breach of the peace (which will often be independently criminal, by virtue of sections 4 and 5 in any event), it should be open to the policeman in the last resort to require him to desist.
Even here, the test of imminence discussed in Moss v. McLachlan suggest that there must be a clear and present danger that the conduct in which he is engaging will give rise to a breach of the peace, and it is demonstrable that the constable has no reasonable alternative course of action open to him other than to ask the speaker to desist, as by, for example, calling for assistance.
As Professor E.C.S. Wade put it so powerfully several years ago:
‘a police officer should be grateful if he could point to a clear cut instruction that he was only to stop a meeting if some incident at the meeting itself, whether caused by the speaker and his supporters or by the opposition present at the meeting place, led him to suppose that disorder was inevitable and could not be averted by any other means.’
If this were not the case, it would be open to a constable to ask a member of parliament or other prominent person to stop speaking (or never even to begin his address), and a failure to do so would constitute an offence.
Disruptive persons would succeed in their objects, and that is not something that the law should permit.
Breach of the peace
Although ‘breach of the peace’ forms a cornerstone of public order law it is surprisingly difficult to say what the concept entails with any degree of precision.
Because of the association between ‘peace’ and ‘quiet,’there is a natural tendency to suppose that a breach of the peace is ‘any behaviour that disturbed or tended to disturb the tranquility of the  citizenry.’
But if any legal expression is a term of art, breach of the peace is one of them.
Recently, the courts have refined the concept, and established very clearly that it is allied to harm, actual or prospective, against persons or property.
The leading modern authority is undoubtedly the decision of the Court of Appeal in Howell.
The defendant had been told by the police to leave the scene outside a party where he had been swearing and shouting, which he grudgingly did, continuing to use foul language.
Watkins L.J.
said:
‘even in these days when affrays, riotous behaviour and other disturbances happen ill too frequently, we cannot accept that there can be a breach of the peace unless there has been an act done or threatened to be done which either actually harms a person, or in his presence his property, or is likely to cause such harm, or which puts someone in fear of such harm being done.’
By tethering the law to the notion of harm rather than peace and quiet, this definition places the law on a more stable footing in the world of facts, and reduces some of the areas of uncertainty that formerly surrounded it.
Thus, merely shouting and swearing is not itself a breach of the peace, although (as in this case) it was conduct likely to give rise to a breach of the peace on the part of another, and there could be an arrest for it on that footing.
Subsequently, it has been held that, even where such conduct causes alarm, it is not sufficient to amount in itself to a breach of the peace.
Threats to property in a person's presence are themselves a breach.
Unfortunately, later observations of the Civil Division of the Court of Appeal in R. v. Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall, ex p.
Central Electricity Generating Board throw a certain amount of doubt on aspects of this definition.
There, a group of protesters prevented the officers of the C.E.G.B.
from conducting surveys for the purposes of ascertaining the suitability of the site for the construction of a power plant.
In doing that, they were committing an offence, but not an arrestable one.
It is unclear whether or not the protestors were trespassers.
The Court held that the Chief Constable, who had been unwilling to lend the assistance of his men to help move the protesters, should not be compelled by mandamus to do  otherwise.
He had concluded that there was no likelihood of a breach of the peace, largely, it would seem, because the protesters had emphasised that theirs was to be a peaceful event.
But the Court took the view that, even if the police had made an error of judgment about that matter, the application for the mandamus was misconceived.
Neither the court nor a Chief Constable could compel an officer to do acts which can only lawfully be done if the officer himself with reasonable cause suspects that a breach of the peace has occurred or is imminently likely to occur.
It is the judgment of the officer about that matter that is crucial.
So far as the definition of what constitutes a breach of the peace is concerned, however, the decision is less satisfactory.
Although Howell was cited to the Court, none of the three judgments refers to that decision, and Templeman and Denning L.JJ. made remarks that were at variance with it.
Lord Denning said that:
‘the conduct of these people, their criminal obstruction, is itself a breach of the peace.
There is a breach of the peace whenever a person who is lawfully carrying out his work is unlawfully and physically prevented by another from doing it.’
There is no reference here to the likelihood of harm.
Lord Denning may have reasoned that a person who is obstructed is likely to use force on the obstructor and harm him.
But if force were used it would be lawful force and that could not itself be a breach of the peace, which implies illegality.
True, the lawful use of force might then be met with unlawful resistance which would in turn be likely to give rise to harm to the person whose use of force was justified in the first place.
It can hardly be said, even using this attenuated chain of reasoning, that the harm is ‘likely,’ more especially when the protesters had made plain their aversion to the use of force of any kind.
3.
ASSAULTING A CONSTABLE
‘Assaults or resists’
Technically, an assault is either the application of force to the person of another, or the threat to apply it in such a way as to cause the other to fear or apprehend that he is about to be subjected to force.
As a general principle, the status of a person made the subject of an assault is a matter to be considered by the tribunal as an aggravating factor in sentencing, rather than an ingredient in the substantive description of the offence.
An  exception is made in this instance because the policeman's task in maintaining law and order exposes him to a greater risk of attack than other members of the public.
He has a duty to involve himself in ‘trouble’ in order to prevent it.
The separate offence exists as a warning that ‘those who are minded to assault police officers should appreciate that they run a real risk of a sentence of immediate imprisonment.’
The existence of the offence is, therefore, of both practical and symbolic significance.
Resisting a constable is the least commonly encountered form of the three special police offences, resistance and obstruction being virtually synonymous for these purposes.
To resist an arrest might also involve an obstruction and an assault, although it has been held that merely pulling away from another is not an assault for the purposes of the offence of assault with intent to resist an arrest.
The mental element for assault on a constable
It has long been established that under section 51 (1), it is not  incumbent upon the prosecutor to establish that the defendant was aware that his victim was a policeman.
If a person assaults another who turns out to be a policeman, he can he convicted of assaulting a constable in the execution of his duty even though he had no knowledge that the other was a policeman, or even the means of such knowledge.
This seems a particularly harsh result where the person assaulted was in plain clothes, and it may be doubted whether it can be justified in principle.
Even if it is true that policemen require special protection in the course of their duties because of the proactive roles that we expect them to undertake, it does not follow that the person who assaults them without justification should be marked as having committed what is, in reality, an aggravated form of assault.
If the prosecutor were required to prove that the assailant knew or was reckless about the question whether his victim was a policeman, it might occasionally be that the assailant would escape conviction of the section 51 charge.
Even here, if the defendant has (for example) used more force than was reasonably necessary, he can (if appropriately charged) be convicted of the offence of simple assault.
To some extent, the potential harshness of the strict liability rule is mitigated by the fact that, if a person acts in what he takes to be self-defence when he is confronted by another whom  he does not realise to be a constable, he has a good defence to the charge, because he is not guilty of an assault.
This is a convoluted way of achieving a just result, and the law should be that the defendant should be proved to have realised that he was dealing with a policeman, or was reckless about the matter.
Where the defendant does realise that he is confronted by a policeman, it is not necessary for the prosecutor to show that he is aware that the latter is acting in the execution of his duty.
This means that it is no defence that the defendant believes that the policeman is acting outside the scope of his duty, even if he reasonably so thought.
This second feature of the rules relating to mens rea is more readily defensible in terms of social policy than is the rule just considered.
If a person knows that he is confronted by a policeman and comes to the conclusion, wrongly, that the policeman is acting outside the scope of his duty, he acts at his peril if he chooses to use force to escape from his predicament.
This can work hardship, since the scope of the constable's duty is often unclear, and the person charged may very reasonably believe that he is being falsely dealt with.
A person who is wrongly accused will know that he has not done that of which he is suspected, example, and may be indignant at being the object of suspicion.
But he can rarely know whether or not the policeman has good grounds for acting as he does, and in so far as there is a conflict between the citizen and the policeman, the reasonable suspicions of the policeman must take priority.
In Fennell a father sought to secure the release of his son who had been arrested for participating in an affray.
He hit one of the policemen on the jaw, and claimed in his defence that he had believed, on reasonable grounds, that his son was not guilty of the offence of which he was suspected, and had therefore been wrongfully arrested.
Had the detention of the son been unlawful, Fennell would have been justified in acting as he did.
His defence was, therefore, that on the facts as he reasonably believed them to be, his use of force would not have been unlawful, and he was entitled to be acquitted according to the ordinary principles governing criminal liability.
Holding that the defence was not available the court in effect classified the defendant's belief that the arrest was unlawful as a mistake of law, which could not avail him for these purposes.
As Scarman L.J.
expressed the point in a slightly different context:
‘if you choose at the street side to act the part of Hampden, you have got to be right.
There is a Latin maxim ignorantia juris non excusat, and, although these words are variously translated and variously applied in our law, they are remarkably applicable to someone who chooses to act in a challenging way towards a policeman on the street.’
Self defence against wrongful police conduct
Where a person is actually being made the subject of an unlawful attack by another, he is entitled to act in self-defence, and use force to do so.
His conduct does not amount to an assault, since his use of force is lawful.
These principles hold good even where one of the participants is a policeman; self-defence against unlawful interference by a policeman is not an assault.
English law does not recognise the continental doctrine of rebellion which requires a person to acquiesce in the unlawful use of official force against him, seeking such civil remedies as may be available subsequently.
In this country, a person may use preventive force where a policeman wrongfully insists upon attempting to do that which is unlawful.
The amount of force that a person is entitled to use depends in part on what the policeman is seeking to do.
Professor Williams criticises the attitude of some courts as being that a person may use ‘only force that is so mild as to be ineffective.’
The difficulty is that once violence is resorted to at all, it tends to become part of an escalating spiral; violence begets violence, and one object of the law is to prevent the resort to violence.
Where the wrongful conduct of the police is the initiating event, this would seem to justify the citizen in engaging in increasingly spirited acts of resistance.
Yet common sense dictates that there can be very few police actions which a person would be entitled to resist at all costs, including if ‘necessary’ the use of fatal force.
The law therefore sets a point (although an extremely unclear one) at which the citizen is not entitled to resist further, and must be expected to endure the indignity or invasion, seeking relief subsequently when he can substantiate that he has been the victim of a police mistake.
Suppose, for example, that the police seek to remove a person's clothing, or to take fingerprints when they are not authorised to do so, or persistently seek to question a person who makes it plain that he has no wish to answer, or seek to enter a house when they  have no search warrant or a defective one.
Concern for the physical welfare of the police and the person resisting (since the police are likely to be able to muster the greater force ultimately) both dictate that a point must arise at which further resistance is not only unwise but improper.
It is difficult to say how much force is permissible, and the universal but anodyne expression ‘as much as is reasonably necessary’ does not give sufficient guidance as to the true state of the law.
If the police were to use excessive force in exercising an admitted power, they would be acting unlawfully, and their victim would be entitled to use reasonable force preventively.
There are several reason why the courts insist that the police should observe the set limits to their powers.
The first is that since the person against whom the powers are being improperly exercised is entitled to resist such use, he is in principle entitled to know sufficient to enable him to make a judgment about whether it would be right to do so.
This is a consideration of principle rather than practical reality, since the relevant law is often obscure, and unlikely to be at the fingertips of the qualified lawyer let alone the layman.
Perhaps more important in practice, is the fact that police powers often involve invasions of the individual's privacy, dignity and integrity; their use can involve offence and humiliation, and the courts wish to insist that this should not be caused without legal justification.
Sometimes, the courts will push this rather far.
In Richards and Leeming, for example, the police were summoned to a house by an emergency call indicating that one of the occupants of a house was being badly assaulted.
When they arrived at the house, they saw a man whom they had good reason to suppose to be the assailant washing blood from himself.
The police sought to enter, giving as the reason a wish to make sure that the feared victim was safe and unhurt.
Surprisingly, no power is conferred for this purpose, either by statute or by the common law, although there was ample authority to enter to arrest if there were sufficient grounds to suspect that an offence had been committed.
It was held that the very considerable force — the defendants injured four policemen — used to try to prevent the police from entering was justified.
The notion that a person's home is his castle will not he eroded without explicit justification.
A further reason that may be advanced for insisting that police interference of whatever kind must be legally justified is that it is an understandable human reaction to respond with some indignation to an allegation or suspicion believed by its object to be unjustified.
The fact that the subject believes himself to be been falsely suspected will not necessarily protect  him from criminal liability if he should over-react.
In this sense.
the use of police powers may create provocative incidents, and even if the law cannot treat such conduct as being unlawful provocation, such incidents should be avoided wherever possible.
It is not entirely clear whether an onlooker or third person is entitled to use force to assist another to resist unlawful police conduct.
In principle, it would seem he should be able to do so; where the attacker is a citizen, the bystander may certainly intervene, both on grounds of private defence, and the prevention of crime.
In a New Zealand decision, it was held that the police are in a different position, so that the associate of the police ‘victim’ was guilty of assaulting the police in the execution of their duty, even though, viz-à-viz the victim they were acting outside the execution of their duty.
Mistaken self-defence
A problem arises when a person makes a mistake about the circumstances by which he is confronted and supposes himself to be under attack when in truth he is not.
There is then a question whether he is guilty of an offence if the mistake he makes is an unreasonable one, or whether any mistake will exculpate.
It has already been seen that, if the defendant knows that his assailant was a policeman, it will not avail him as a defence if he mistakenly thinks that the policeman was exceeding his powers.
Where, however, the defendant is unaware that he is confronted by a policeman and believes himself to be entitled to use force, the situation is different.
The effect of his mistake is that he is not guilty of assault.
If the facts actually were as he believed them to be, he would be entitled to act as he did.
This reasoning applies where a person goes to the aid of another whom he believes to be under attack.
In Gladstone Williams the defendant was on a bus when he witnessed what lie believed to be an attack by a large man on another, smaller youth.
He went to the youth's ‘assistance,’ only to find later that he had assaulted a policeman who had seen the youth committing an offence.
It was held that Williams was not guilty, since had the facts been as he believed them to be, he would have been acting in defence of the other.
Furthermore, the Court held that the direction that the mistake must, to exculpate, be based on reasonable grounds had been overtaken by later developments.
This was subsequently followed  in Ansell v. Swift where the defendant who had been lawfully protecting his brother in a fight hit a policeman who sought to restrain him.
The defendant thought that he was being attacked when he acted, and it was held that self-defence was available to him.
The prosecutor sought to rely on the words of Winn L.J.
in Kenlin v. Gardner that self defence was not available against an assault that was justifiable in law, as for instance a lawful arrest.
But the remarks were obiter in that case, since the interference was unlawful.
The report of Ansell does not disclose whether or not the defendant was aware that his assailant was a policeman, but it would seem that he did not.
Had the defendant been aware, it is submitted, he would have had no defence, since he would then have been making a mistake as to whether or not the policeman was justified in seeking to restrain him, and whether he was therefore acting in the execution of his duty.
If the policeman had approached him from behind, for example, and the defendant had acted without seeing who confronted him, he should have the defence, as Williams and Ansell hold.
This has the apparently anomalous result that both the policeman and the defendant are using force lawfully.
The difference is that whereas the policeman is  justified in acting as he does, the citizen is merely excused from criminal liability on the grounds that he lacks mens rea.
Section 51(1) and other assaults
Assault on a constable is one of a group of offences with a somewhat complicated family connection.
The offence of ‘common assault,’ as it is known, is triable either way, and punishable with six months when tried summarily, but with one year's imprisonment if tried on indictment.
Paradoxically, assaulting a constable contrary to section 54(1) of the Police Act 1964, which would appear to be an aggravated form of the offence is triable summarily only.
If the trial takes place before the magistrates and they come to the conclusion that the offence under section 54(1) is not made out, they are presently unable to convict of the offence of simple assault unless there is an additional information charging the common assault.
Prosecutors rarely adopt this course since the addition of the extra charge gives the defendant the choice of jury trial.
The offence of assault  with intent to resist arrest — whether by a policeman or a civilian — remains indictable, and punishable with two years-imprisonment.
Where the hearing is by way of complaint upon the complaint of the party aggrieved, contrary to section 42, the justices have the option whether or not they will accept jurisdiction.
The question of whether the offence under section 51 should be triable summarily only is controversial, for reasons examined by the C.L.K.C. Since magistrates often imprison persons convicted of assaulting policemen, but not of simple assault, the propriety of excluding jury trial seems questionable.
4.
OBSTRUCTING A CONSTABLE
The meaning of obstruction
When the offence of obstructing a constable was first enacted by Parliament, it seems reasonably clear that it was intended to refer to physical obstruction only.
The argument that it was confined to physical obstruction and threats was rejected in Bastable v. Little.
As a result, what amounts to obstruction may depend on what the policeman is seeking to do.
In Hinchcliffe v. Sheldon; Lord Goddard said:
‘obstructing, for the present purposes, means making it more difficult for the police to carry out their duties.’
As will he presently discussed, this enlarges the notion of obstruction further than is warranted.
The mere intention to obstruct is insufficient.
In Bennett v. Bale the defendant had invited a person to tell lies to disguise what he believed had been the commission of a licensing offence.
The person thus solicited happened to be an under-cover police officer.
In fact, no offence had been  committed, so that the assistance sought could not actually have impeded the police.
It was held that the conviction should be quashed.
One qualification that should be made to the general formula that Lord Goddard laid down in Hinchcliffe v. Sheldon is that it appears to make a person guilty of obstructing by omission, and the view may be expressed that this is not the law.
By being uncooperative, a person might very well make the task of the constable more difficult, but it may he doubted whether he commits obstruction.
If a constable were to ask for a ladder to rescue a cat from a tree, the person who declined to lend his assistance would commit no offence thereby.
There is no general legal duty to cooperate with the police to assist their investigations.
It may, however, be difficult to draw a line between acts and omissions for these purposes.
In Stunt v. Bolton a man refused to hand over to the police the keys of a car which was causing an obstruction of the highway.
He was adjudged guilty of the offence of obstruction.
A refusal to answer police questions is plainly not an offence under section 51(3).
In Rice v. Connolly, the landmark decision establishing that this is the law, it was said that this was so because a refusal to answer questions was not ‘wilful,’ an expression that their Lordships interpreted to mean ‘without lawful excuse.’
Wilfulness is more obviously part of the mens rea than of the actus reus.
A refusal to answer police questions undoubtedly makes the policeman's job more difficult when the person interrogated knows the correct answers, and the suspect intends to make the task of the police more difficult, in the sense that he is fully aware that he is doing so.
It has been held, however, that refusing to answer questions in abusive terms may amount to obstruction.
The correctness of this decision may be doubted.
Offensive lack of cooperation may make the task of the  constable more unpleasant, but it does not make it any more difficult than would a civilised refusal to help.
In such circumstances, the policeman could perhaps more appropriately proceed under sections 4 or 5 of the Act.
A policeman's job is made more difficult if a person physically obtrudes so as to prevent the policeman from arresting a third person, and it has been held that such conduct constitutes obstruction.
The logic of this has been held to extend to the situation where the person interposes by advising his friend of his legal rights; the courts have held that this too amounts to obstruction.
The mental element in obstruction: wilfully
Parliament has used the expression ‘wilfully’ to denote the mental element in the obstruction offence.
This is a word that changes its meaning according to context, and it is dangerous to generalise by reference to decisions on other statutes.
The courts decided readily enough that in this instance the offence is one requiring proof of mens rea; ‘the gist of the offence to my mind lies in the intention with which the thing is done,’ as Darling J. put it.
What is actually meant by intention is more problematic, and will be approached in stages.
By contrast with the offence of assaulting the police in the execution of their duty, it is clear that the prosecutor must show that the defendant was aware that the person obstructed was a constable.
So far as the attitude to his obstruction is concerned, the essence is that it must be shown that the defendant has deliberately brought about the state of affairs that makes it more difficult for the police to do their duties, and is aware that he has done so.
To what extent is it necessary for the prosecutor to show that it was the purpose of the defendant to make the task of the police the more difficult?
The authorities on the issue are discordant.
In Willmott v. Atack the defendant intervened as the police were in the course of effecting an arrest because he believed that he would be able to persuade the person being arrested to cooperate.
His actions in doing so in fact obstructed the police.
It was held by the Divisional Court that his appeal against conviction of the obstruction offence must be allowed.
According to the court, it was not enough that the defendant deliberately did some act that had the effect, objectively assessed, of obstructing the police.
Croom-Johnson J. said that
‘there must be something in the nature of a criminal intent of the kind  which means that it is done with the idea of some form of hostility to the police with the intention of seeing that what is done is to obstruct, and that it is not enough merely to show that he intended to do what he did and that it did in fact have the result of the police being obstructed.’
Leaving aside for the time being the question of ‘hostile intent,’ it is plain that it is not enough that the defendant deliberately does an act that has the incidental effect of obstructing the police; he must also have some notion that he is obstructing and causing the police difficulties.
The question is whether he is in addition permitted to say that, although he was aware that he was causing difficulties, he was doing so from the best of intentions.
Croom-Johnson J. plainly thought that he is; one of the reasons advanced for accepting the contentions of the appellant was that, if the law were otherwise, the ‘well meaning’ defendant who went to the aid of the police and accidentally obstructed them would be guilty of an offence.
By implication, the law should not seek to produce such an undesirable result.
A citizen is hardly encouraged to do his civic duty as he sees it if he is guilty of committing an offence should events backfire on him.
It is not clear from the report in Willmott v. Atack whether the police had made it plain that they did not want the defendant's ‘help,’ and, if so, what impact that has on the state of the law.
Hills v. Ellis the defendant was outside a football match where he witnessed a policeman arresting a person whom he believed to be faultless.
Thinking that the police were arresting the wrong man, he attempted to attract the arresting policeman's attention, and seized his arm for this purpose, since he could not make himself heard over the hubbub.
He was warned by another constable that he was liable to be arrested for obstruction if he persisted, which he did.
His motives, clearly, were of the best, but the court held that this was irrelevant.
His deliberate act was in fact obstructing the police who were making a lawful arrest, and that was sufficient mens rea.
The court might equally have said that the defendant also realised that what he was doing was obstruction, since the police had told him so.
In those circumstances, he could not argue that he did not mean to obstruct, or that he was unaware that his conduct was obstructing.
It may be, then, that there is a distinction between the two cases and that, notwithstanding the later doubts expressed in Hills v. Ellis, Willmott v. Atack should be taken to stand for the proposition that a person who interferes with the police intending to help them is not guilty of a wilful obstruction.
It is not clear what Croom-Johnson J. had in mind when he said that there was a requirement of ‘hostile intent,’ and the observation has been doubted and explained subsequently.
In Hills v. Ellis, this was interpreted to mean that the act of the defendant must in some way be ‘aimed at’ the police, even if there need be no hostility towards them.
This requirement  was satisfied in Hills v. Ellis itself.
But the element caused difficulties in Lewis v. Cox A friend of the defendant was arrested and placed in the back of a police van.
The defendant opened the door, to ask his friend where he was being taken.
Before he received any answer, the arresting policeman shut the door, warned him that he would be arrested for obstruction if he persisted and went back to the driver's seat.
The defendant was arrested when he again opened the door to find out from his friend where he was being taken.
His argument that his conduct was not in any sense ‘aimed at’ the policeman, as apparently required by the earlier decision, was accepted by the justices, who dismissed the prosecution.
The prosecutor's appeal was allowed.
The court said that, although in some circumstances the question whether the conduct was ‘aimed at’ the police may be ‘not unhelpful,’that was not an essential ingredient of the offence.
Rather:
‘the simple facts which the court has to find are whether the defendant's conduct in fact prevented the police from carrying out their duty, or made it more difficult for them to do so, and whether the defendant intended that conduct to prevent the police from carrying out their duty or to make it more difficult to do so.’
Here, because it could be inferred that the defendant knew that the police could not drive off while the van door was still open, he was aware that he was obstructing the police, and intended therefore to do so.
The court distinguished between the defendant's intention and his motive, treating the latter as being irrelevant, and cited McCullogh J. in Moore v. Green:
‘What is meant by ‘an intention to obstruct’?
I would construe ‘wilfully obstructs’ as doing deliberate actions with the intention of bringing about a state of affairs which, objectively regarded, amount to an obstruction as that phrase was explained by Lord Parker C.J. in Rice v. Connolly i.e. making it more difficult for the police to carry out their duty.
The fact that the defendant might not himself have called the state of affairs an obstruction is, to my mind, immaterial.
That is not to say that it is enough to do deliberate actions which, in fact, obstruct; there must be an intention that those actions should result in the further state of affairs to which I have been referring.’
In other words, what would appear to be required is some awareness on the part of the defendant that he was making the task of the police a more difficult one, and this element may have been lacking in  Willmott v. Atack, which would explain why the appeal was allowed.
It was present in abundance in Lewis v. Cox because of the police warnings.
If the police can show that they have issued a warning, it might seem the defence that the actor's conduct was not ‘wilful’ will hardly ever avail.
Intoxication and wilfulness
Although there appears to be no authority on the point, principle dictates that the offence of wilful obstruction is a specific intent offence.
If that is so, the defendant cannot be convicted if he raises doubts as to whether or not he realised that the person with whom he was dealing was a policeman, or that he did not realise that what he was doing would make the task of the policeman more difficult.
There appears to be little direct authority on the point, but in Lewis v. Cox Webster J. said that even taking into account the fact as found by the magistrates that the defendant was intoxicated and that his intoxication affected his actions, they must still inevitably have inferred that the defendant intended to obstruct.
This suggests that it is general practice for the courts to admit evidence of intoxication as a defence to the charge where this negatives the requisite mens rea .
Although it is dangerous to generalise about matters of fact, it may be asserted that it will require a considerable degree of intoxication before a defendant can plausibly make such claims.
If he is so intoxicated, he is almost certainly guilty of the offence of being either drunk and disorderly or drunk in a public place.
Arrest for Obstruction
Whenever the issue of whether or not there is a power of arrest for obstructing a constable in the execution of his duty has been explicitly considered by the courts, they have held that no such power exists.
The authorities appear to be ignored in practice with impunity, perhaps because there is frequently a power of arrest in situations in which the police at present exercise the ‘power.’
A policeman has a power of arrest for breach of the peace, and can issue instructions in order to prevent a breach of the peace.
If his instructions are disobeyed and he continues to fear a breach of the peace, he can therefore arrest, for a breach of the peace, the person who refuses to comply, and either seek to have the person bound over, or prosecuted for obstructing a constable in the execution of his duty.