

Financial accounting
Financial accounting theory
This chapter is concerned with the published accounts of public sector organizations from a theoretical point of view.
We examine different approaches to identifying users and their needs.
We also discuss different approaches to defining the reporting unit.
We end with a discussion of the accounting policy-making environment in the public sector.
Accounting Theory
Accounting theory is conventionally concerned with financial accounting, i.e. with accounting to external providers of finance.
It includes all aspects of published financial reports:
1
Their purpose
2
Their form
3
Their content
4
The laws, regulations, and guidelines governing them
5
The accounting policy makers who determine them
The literature on accounting theory is relatively new (the bulk of it has been generated over the last 50 years), and it has, until recently, been almost exclusively concerned with public limited companies (Whittington, 1986).
The 1970s saw the beginning of serious and substantial attempts to understand and improve the financial reporting practices of public sector organizations.
But in order to understand the problems faced in accounting theory students must often look to the literature on business organizations and apply it to the public sector context, albeit with great caution and common sense.
The conventional way of defining financial accounting (the convention was established in 1966 by the American Accounting Association's A Statement of Basic Accounting Theory) has it that accounting is a purposive activity, i.e. it is directed towards a specified end.
Previously, accounting was thought of in much the same way as mathematics, as though it was an abstract but systematic manipulation of numbers.
Now accounting must above all be useful.
In the UK the most authoritative statement of this position comes from the Corporate Report (ASC 1975, pp.9 and 15).
‘Our subject is, in essence, the fundamental aims of published financial reports and the means by which these aims can be achieved.
The form of report with which we are dealing we have termed the ‘corporate report’, by which we mean the comprehensive package of information of all kinds which most completely describes an organization's economic activity…
Our basic approach has been that corporate  reports should seek to satisfy, as far as possible, the information needs of users: they should be useful.’
If accounting reports are to be useful, therefore, we must define the users of those reports and the uses to which they put them.
If we assume that accountants play a passive role in this, namely that they provide only what is expressly requested, then we build our accounting theory on that.
However, if we assume that accountants also have an educational role, we might add to our definitions, to include potential users and potential users' needs.
Either way, this approach to accounting introduces a central difficulty: how do we find out who the users are and how do we find out their needs?
Some of the problems associated with answering these questions are as follows:
1
The number of users will be huge.
2
Their needs may/will conflict.
3
Users have been conditioned by accountants over many years, so that their expressed needs may simply reflect marginal improvements on what they have already been receiving.
4
Users are not necessarily rational and their needs are likely to change over time.
From the beginning, however, these difficulties have been recognized and although there have been attempts to overcome them — attempts which will no doubt continue — there had to be a way of progressing while these studies were being undertaken.
The approach adopted was to say that accounting can be based, not on users and their needs, but on hypothesized users and hypothesized needs.
A further refinement that has often been adopted is to rank the supposed users in order of importance and then to concentrate on the most important.
The many theories which concern themselves exclusively with needs of shareholders in public limited companies are typical of this approach.
In the business sector, the users' needs approach to accounting theory has been adopted in a number of authoritative statements.
In the UK, there is the Corporate Report, which has already been mentioned, and the Sandilands Report (Inflation Accounting Committee, 1975) on inflation accounting.
In the USA, there is the seminal A Statement of Basic Accounting Theory (American Accounting Association, 1966) and the Trueblood Report (AICPA, 1974), among others.
These statements influenced a number of academics concerned with accounting theory in non-business organizations, most notably those on committees of the American Accounting Association (1972 and 1975).
But it was not until the late 1970s that the accounting profession became involved.
Accounting theory and public sector organizations
Although there are difficulties involved in defining the business sector for accounting purposes, these difficulties have never been considered primary.
For example, the question of whether accounting is or should be the same for a public limited company as for a private company has never unduly concerned accounting theorists.
However, when you move away from the narrowly defined business sector there is a more significant problem: which organizations or groups of  organizations are you theorizing about?
If you discover the users (and their needs) of the accounting reports of a local government, does the resulting theory apply to a central government?
Does it indeed apply to a local government in a different country, where the body itself may be of a completely different kind?
Does it apply to a public utility which may or may not appear to be similar to a local government?
The main difficulty is that the non-business sector is not a homogeneous group of organizations.
It comprises:
(a)
Governments
(b)
Local governments
(c)
State governments
(d)
Nationalized industries
(e
) Non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs), also known as quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations (QUANGOs)
(f)
Charities
(g)
Cooperatives
(h)
Trade unions, etc.
Even when the discussion is limited to public sector organizations there are still difficulties.
Organizationally, British Rail is not the same as Cardiff City Council: they are responsible to different sets of elected members, they provide different services, and they are financed differently.
There is, therefore, no reason to assume that their accounting needs are the same.
One approach to the problem has been to list all the various kinds of non-business organizations, pointing out their political, economic, and social differences, and then build the accounting theories from there.
However, the number of organizations this produces is unmanageable, and it also tends to emphasize differences rather than similarities.
A more realistic alternative is to deduce which characteristics of organizations have the most impact on accounting.
This offers the best hope because in the end we are not interested in organizational differences per se, but in those differences which affect accounting.
The best example of this latter approach is to be found in Professor R. N. Anthony's Financial Accounting in Non-business Organizations (1988).
This now standard reference work was commissioned by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) in the USA.
At the time, the Board was primarily concerned with accounting standard-setting for business organizations, but it saw the need to involve itself with non-business organizations as well and this research study was its first move in that direction.
The study is not explicitly concerned with providing answers but with putting the relevant questions, along with the arguments pro and con for each.
Of primary interest to Anthony was whether, and if so how, a distinction ought to be drawn between accounting theories, standards and practices for business and non-business organizations.
He suggested that in order to take the decision, organizations could most usefully be categorized in one of three different ways:
1
Profit-oriented — organizations whose primary goal is the pursuit of profit.
2
Type A non-profit — non-profit organizations whose financial resources are obtained entirely, or almost entirely, from revenues from the sale of goods and services.
3
Type B non-profit — non-profit organizations which obtain a significant amount of financial resources from sources other than the sale of goods and services.
Categories 1 and 3 present relatively few difficulties.
An example of a profit-oriented organization is of course a public limited company, while an example of a Type B non-profit is a local government, because it receives the bulk of its finance from taxes, grants and borrowings.
Further, the broad experience of published accounting reports warrants the distinction being drawn.
For example, the profit-oriented organization would almost invariably produce a Profit and Loss Account, a Balance Sheet, and a Cash Flow Statement.
On the other hand, a Type B non-profit might produce a series of Revenue Accounts (which may or may not be on the ‘income and expenditure’ basis), a series of Balance Sheets, no overall Balance Sheet and no Cash Flow Statement.
At the same time, the two categories do cover a wide range of organizations.
The profit-oriented group would include the local butcher and BP plc; the Type B non-profits, a local charity and Her Majesty's Government.
The biggest difficulty, however, is with the Type A non-profit.
Experience tells us that there are organizations which fall between the profit-oriented and the Type B non-profit.
In the UK, these are most typically the nationalized industries.
They are not, by definition, strictly profit-oriented.
They also do receive a significant proportion of their income from the sale of goods and services rather than from taxes.
However, the definition of the Type A non-profit relates to a significant proportion of their ‘financial resources’, which of course includes capital finance.
Strictly, then, it is hard to imagine that such organizations exist.
One solution would be to redefine the Type A in terms of current financial resources and perhaps also to replace ‘entirely or almost entirely’ with ‘a significant proportion’, so that the Type A non-profit organizations become: non-profit organizations which obtain a significant amount of their current financial resources from the sale of goods and services.
The nationalized industries would clearly be Type A non-profit.
Further, British Rail, for example, would be distinguished from a Type B non-profit, even though it receives substantial capital and revenue grants from the Government.
Indeed, this might suggest that the Type A non-profit might usefully be dichotomized into those nationalized industries which have traditionally been ‘profitable’ and those which have not.
Such a distinction would require fine tuning but an a priori case might be made for the financial reports of the two groups being different.
Broadly speaking, the nationalized industries' accounts follow the business model of the Profit and Loss Account, Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Statement whilst including sector profit and loss accounts, echoing the Type B non-profit model.
Anthony's purpose in offering the above categories was to help answer the following question: how, if at all, should business organizations be distinguished from other organisations for the purpose of setting accounting standards?
He offered three alternatives:
1
Profit/non-profit distinction
2
‘Sources of finance’ distinction
3
No distinction
1 Profit/non-profit distinction
(a)
Profit is the most fundamental measure of performance in the business sector.
Accounting reports measure profit and therefore provide direct evidence as to the organization's performance in a year.
In contrast, where the profit motive is absent, services are provided for reasons other than the pursuit of profit; for example, they are provided for the welfare of individuals who cannot afford to pay the economic cost.
Profit is an inappropriate measure of performance for these organizations.
Accounting for them is therefore different.
(b
) Organizations where the profit motive is absent typically have not just one alternative goal but many.
A local government, for example, may provide health, education and highway services.
Each of these services has different specific goals, and therefore the accounting reports should show the extent to which these differing goals are achieved.
Consequently, in contrast to the single set of accounts for a profit-oriented organization, the non-profit organization needs a series of accounts for each service.
(c)
The profit-oriented organization is usually financed by shareholders' equity.
The accounts are largely designed to provide information about the returns achieved on that risk investment.
The non-profit organization typically has no risk capital invested in it, and therefore the returns on capital are of little importance.
2 ‘Sources of finance’ distinction
(a
) In profit-oriented and Type A non-profit organizations the primary source of current finance is revenues.
This usually means that the goods and services provided by these organizations have been tested in the market-place.
Therefore, whether the organization is pursuing profit or aiming to break even, the difference between costs and revenues is a measure of performance.
In both, the profit and loss account reflects its respective achievements.
On the other hand, for the Type B non-profit, the extent to which income from non-revenue sources such as taxation covers cost is only a very narrow measure of performance: it only measures the extent to which the organization spent what it said it would spend, saying nothing about how the market valued its goods and services.
(b)
In Type B non-profit, because their finance is not provided in direct exchange for goods and services, there are often restrictions placed on  what the organization can do with the finance.
For example, there may be a grant which is specifically for building a capital asset.
In this case it would be wrong to spend the money in any other way.
Accounting systems have been developed to handle these kinds of restrictions (fund accounting).
But these are irrelevant to an organization which charges for its goods and services because here the revenue gained can be used for any activity deemed appropriate: it can be reinvested, it can be distributed as dividends, it can be used to repay loans, etc.
(c)
Because of the importance of the profit and loss account in both the profit-oriented and the Type A non-profit organization, the final accounts are the primary instruments of financial accountability.
For the Type B non-profit the final accounts are also important in explaining how money was spent.
But of considerable, perhaps even equal importance, is the budget, because it is the budget which determines how much will be collected in taxation.
This means that the budget is in itself an important part of financial accountability and it also means that the final accounts often include, for comparative purposes, budgetary information.
Budgetary information is rarely included in the accounts of a profit-oriented or Type A non-profit organization.
3 No distinction
(a)
Double-entry bookkeeping, which is the foundation for financial reporting, is universal.
All organizations, of any size and in most countries of the world, use double entry.
This reflects the simple truth that whichever kind of organization is being considered, information is required about revenues, expenses, assets, liabilities and cash flows.
Different interpretations might be applied to different organizations, but the basic information needs are the same.
The Operating Statement, Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Statement provide this basic information.
(b)
Because so much more work has been done and so much more is known about the business way of accounting, having alternative methods leads to confusion.
The business model is generally understood and so should be applied to all organizations.
(c
) Because accounting reports are used to monitor the allocation of resources in the economy, they should all be on the same basis.
By making all financial reports directly comparable, better decisions can be taken about whether resources would not be better spent in different areas or in different amounts.
This argument is used particularly in discussions about the relative strengths of providing services through the public sector as against the private sector.
(d
) The unifying concepts such as‘capital’(all organizations have capital and all need to have a measure of the capital they own) outweigh the differentiating concepts such as ‘profit’.
There is no ‘correct’ answer to how the distinctions should be made.
For our immediate purposes, we need only keep in mind that particular public  sector organizations can fall in either of the categories of Type A non-profit and Type B non-profit.
We will also see cases where we do not categorize whole organizations in this way but we separate out those functions within the organization which could be classed as Type A and those which could be classed as Type B. This can also lead to parts of public sector organizations being classified as ‘profit-oriented’, a trend that has been particularly marked during the 1980s with the increasing use of Direct Service Organizations in local authorities, Hospital Trusts in the health service and Executive Agencies in the civil service.
Stewardship and accountability
There are two basic concepts of financial accounting which it will be useful to define before we discuss users and their needs, particularly because their use in ordinary language is often not helpful in understanding their technical meaning.
These are ‘stewardship’ and ‘accountability’, and they represent the two ends of a spectrum of reporting possibilities.
Stewardship refers to the holding of someone else's assets by a steward.
In its narrowly defined sense the responsibility of stewardship is to demonstrate that those assets have not been misappropriated.
Stewardship accounting is, therefore, typically limited to the balance sheet showing the money collected by the stewards, the form in which that money is held, and an audit certificate vouching for the truth and fairness of the statement.
The profit and loss account shows the increase or decrease in the money held over the year.
Accountability, in its widest sense refers to the responsibility for your actions to someone else.
It is therefore much more than just accounting, however widely accounting is defined.
There are many ways through which public sector organizations are held accountable (through elections, higher-level governments, the media, public inquiries, etc.) and for many different aspects of their performance (see Stewart, 1984).
Though not easy to define accounting is concerned with financial accountability plus some aspects of economic accountability.
This kind of accountability goes beyond the narrowly defined stewardship of assets to include responsibility for the performance of those assets.
The simplest example of this is the inclusion of an ‘earnings per share’ figure in the accounts of a business.
That ratio has little to do with stewardship, being concerned with indicating the success or failure of the business during the year.
Financial reports in all organizations have traditionally emphasized the stewardship function.
In profit-oriented organizations this emphasis has not been to the exclusion of performance measures for the simple reason that, because of the existence of the profit measure, the stewardship accounts can be analysed to yield pointers to performance.
Ratio analysis, which produces such measures as return on capital employed and liquidity measures, is the best example of this.
However, there are broader performance measures which could be included and which go beyond the traditional stewardship accounts.
The Corporate Report takes the view that published accounts should include additional  indicators of performance via additional statements, such as statements of value added, employment reports, statements of money exchanges with governments, etc.
In non-profit organizations, particularly in Type B, the stewardship accounts provide much more limited measures of performance.
The typical measure provided is the comparison of what the organizations said they would spend (articulated in their budget) with what they actually spent.
Although useful information, this demonstrates nothing about either the quality or quantity of the services they provide.
As a consequence, it is often argued that there is a greater need for additional performance measures, and that these measures should be more detailed in non-profit organizations; in other words, that the wider accountability questions are more immediate and important.
Objectives in public sector accounting theory
The overall objective of financial reports is to be relevant.
In order to define this further, we need to know who the users are and what are their needs.
Since we do not currently have this knowledge we hypothesize the user groups and their needs.
We could assume that everyone in the population is a user or a potential user of the accounts of public sector organizations.
This would accord with basic notions of democracy and indeed with much of the work that has been done in user analysis.
The problem is, however, that it is of little help in producing a list of user needs: the temptation would be to say either that everyone requires the same information or that everyone requires different information; the former would make the exercise redundant and the latter would make it impossible to handle.
The practical approach therefore is to group users and potential users so that firstly the members of each group require the same information and secondly the number of groups is manageable.
This is the approach that has been adopted in the past but, particularly in the non-business area, it has yielded markedly different conclusions.
On the one hand, there has been the approach which emphasizes the complexity of financial accounting and thus produces many user groups (which we might call the differential approach); alternatively, there has been the approach which emphasizes the commonalities and produces few user groups (which we might call the integral approach).
The differential approach to users and their needs
The best example of this approach comes from a research report entitled Objectives of Accounting and Financial Reporting for Governmental Units by Drebin et al.(1981).
This report was commissioned and published by the National Council on Government Accounting (NCGA) in the USA.
The NCGA was the main standard-setting body for the financial reports of US local and state governments, before the formation of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) in 1984.
The report offers a list of ten user groups:
1
Taxpayers
2
Grantors 
3
Investors
4
Fee-paying service recipients
5
Employees
6
Vendors
7
Legislative bodies
8
Management
9
Voters
10
Oversight bodies
The rationale for these groups is that taxpayers, grantors, investors, and fee-paying service recipients all provide financial resources; employees and vendors provide labour and material resources; the legislative bodies and management take the resource allocation decision; and they are all under the constraints imposed by voters and oversight bodies (which include higher-level governments).
The complexity of these groups and their interrelationships is shown by Fig. 7.1, taken from the report.
Taking this list of users and keeping in mind their relationships with the governmental organization, the report says that the overall goal of accounting and financial reporting for governmental units is:
To provide
(l)
financial information useful for making economic, political and social decisions, and demonstrating accountability and stewardship, and
(2)
information useful for evaluating managerial and organizational performance.
(p. 126.)
(Note that this definition separates accountability from performance measurement.
This means that the report is taking ‘accountability’ to be much narrower than our definition.)
The report then offers a series of basic objectives which support the overall goals and are themselves supported by the users' needs which stem from them.
Objective 1.
To provide financial information useful for determining and predicting the flows, balances, and requirements of short-term financial resources of the governmental unit.
Users' need:
(a
) For determining and predicting the balances and availability of short-term financial resources, including cash, for specific uses.
(b)
For predicting the need to obtain additional short-term finance resources.
(c
) For predicting the impact on short-term financial resources of specific revenue and other financial sources.
(d)
For predicting the impact on short-term financial resources of planned programmes and activities.
(e)
For predicting the ability of the governmental unit to meet its short-term obligations as they come due.
Objective 2.
To provide financial information useful for determining and predicting the economic condition of the governmental unit and changes therein.
Users' need:
(a)
For determining the value and predicting the service potential of resources held by the governmental unit.
(b)
For determining whether the value and service potential of physical resources have been maintained during a period.
For predicting the amounts and timing of future outflows resulting from existing commitments and the ability of the governmental unit to meet these when they come due.
(d)
For determining and predicting the cost of programmes or services provided by the governmental unit.
Objective 3.
To provide financial information useful for monitoring performance under terms of legal, contractual and fiduciary requirements.
Users' need:
(a)
For determining whether resources were utilized in accordance with legal and contractual requirements.
(b)
For determining whether resource contributions of taxpayers, grantors, and service recipients intended to support activities of a given time period were sufficient to recover the cost of those activities.
(c
) For determining whether fees or reimbursements are in accordance with legal, grant, or contractual requirements.
(d)
For accounting for the use and disposition of resources entrusted to public officials.
Objective 4.
To provide information useful for planning and budgeting, and for predicting the impact of the acquisition and allocation of resources on the achievement of operational objectives.
Users' need:
(a)
For predicting the impact of programme alternatives on short-term financial resources of the governmental unit.
(b)
For predicting the impact of programme alternatives on the economic condition of the governmental unit.
(c)
For predicting the amount of resource contributions of taxpayers, grantors, and service recipients needed to support activities of a given time period.
(d)
For predicting the effectiveness, including the distribution of benefits among groups, of proposed programmes and activities in achieving goals and objectives.
(e)
For predicting the incidence of the burden of providing resources for governmental operations.
Objective 5.
To provide information useful for evaluating managerial and organizational performance.
Users' need:
(a)
For determining the cost of programmes, functions and activities in a manner which facilitates analysis and valid comparisons with established criteria, among time periods, and with other governmental units.
(b)
For evaluating the efficiency and economy of operations of organizational units, programmes, activities and functions.
(c)
For evaluating the results of programmes, activities and functions, and their effectiveness in achieving their goals and objectives.
(d)
For evaluating the equity with which the burden of providing resources for governmental operations is imposed.
The effect of adopting the differential approach to establishing users' needs can now be seen.
For example, a clear distinction is drawn between revenue items (which are the concern of Objective 1) and capital items (which are the  concern of Objective 2).
Similarly, the distinction between historical financial accounting (Objective 3) and financial information for planning and budgeting (Objective 4) is clearly made.
Users' need (3b) implies that a distinction must be made, and must be accounted for, between the resources provided by taxpayers, grantors and service recipients, which shows whether their contributions were sufficient to cover the costs.
In fact, it is fair to say that these distinctions characterize the existing reporting models of governmental organizations, particularly in the USA.
And, although it must be said that if the needs suggested by the report were met there would be many changes to existing reporting practices, it is also true that many of the needs rationalize the existing complexities of governmental accounting reports.
The integral approach to users and their needs
Anthony's previously cited study for the FASB is a good example of the integral approach to users' needs.
His whole thrust is to produce an easily understood bedrock upon which the specific nuances of particular organizations can be built.
Thus, for example, at the outset he excludes consideration of budgetary information, because he feels that to have validity in financial reports it must be produced on the same basis as the financial accounts.
Since he cannot conceive of a situation where the financial accounts would be determined by the budgetary information, he suggests that users' needs can be developed in financial accounting terms and then, if budgetary information is required, it should be made consistent with the financial accounts.
His report produces a list of five user groups:
1
Governing bodies.
2
Investors and creditors.
3
Resource providers.
4
Oversight bodies.
5
Constituents.
Of course, we must remember that Anthony is considering all non-business organizations, not just governmental organizations as Drebin et al.were considering.
This is another reason for the tendency to take a much broader view.
A direct comparison with Drebin et al.shows that Anthony puts taxpayers, voters and employees in one group which he calls constituents; he calls grantors and fee-paying service recipients, resource providers; investors and vendors are also grouped together.
In the light of this list of users, Anthony offers the following four users' needs:
1 Financial viability.
This refers to the ability of the organization to continue in its present form or in its planned form.
Typical questions relating to this need would be: has the education authority enough funds to continue to provide a place for all school-age pupils?
Has the railway company enough funds to replace its obsolete assets?
Is the government's tax base strong enough to support a planned expansion of services?
Anthony  suggests this information need is satisfied by:
(i)
Tests of solvency and liquidity.
(ii)
The relationship between inflows and outflows.
(iii)
The degree of resource transferability — which refers to the extent to which resources might be restricted.
He emphasizes that the information which helps meet this need is useful to those in business organizations as well.
2 Fiscal compliance.
This refers to the extent to which the organization has complied with the conditions laid down in its authority to spend.
These conditions might be imposed internally, by a budget; in which case, fiscal compliance will be demonstrated by a comparison of actual spending with budgeted spending.
Or the conditions might be imposed by the law: for example, spending limits fixed as a percentage of last year's spending.
This could be demonstrated explicitly or via an audit report which was exception-based, i.e. it reported on any instances where the law was contravened.
3 Management performance.
This does not refer to measuring effectiveness as we have defined it.
We know this because Anthony explicitly excludes information about attainment of the organization's objectives; he believes that not enough is known about measuring effectiveness to include it as a user need.
Consequently, management performance is defined as a need to know whether money was spent wisely.
In terms of our definitions in Chapter 1, this refers to efficiency measured in terms of low-level outputs.
4 Cost of services provided.
This is self-explanatory and is needed for comparison purposes both between organizations and between the needs of present and future generations.
Since Anthony is above all concerned with highlighting the issues involved, rather than providing solutions, he then suggests the kind of specific accounting information which might satisfy the above four needs, and puts the arguments pro and con for each.
However, the integral approach does tend to lead to an emphasis on the similarities of business and non-business financial reporting; this is in contrast to the differential approach which tends to accept the dissimilarities as having equal importance.
For example, in terms of performance measurement, Anthony is explicitly concerned with economy, to the exclusion of efficiency and effectiveness.
His rationale is understandable: there is no generally accepted way of defining and reporting the measurement of high-level outputs in non-profit organizations.
Efficiency and effectiveness demand the measurement of outputs.
Anthony, therefore, chooses to ignore them.
Since the business model is a generally accepted way of reporting measurable outputs, the tendency is to conclude that the business model can serve as the basis for satisfying Anthony's users' needs.
Thus, financial viability and management performance are satisfied with the traditional business model, while fiscal compliance and cost of services demand an expansion of this basic information.
This line of argument is in stark contrast to Drebin et al.
They are explicit, in Objective 5, that users need information for evaluating efficiency and  effectiveness.
If they accept Anthony's assertion that not enough is known about output measurement in non-business organizations, the conclusion of Drebin et al.will tend to be,
first
, that we adopt what is known for the present; and
second
, for the future, we do more research to improve our knowledge.
This kind of contrast between different approaches to user needs is starker when other versions are considered.
Professor Holder (1980), in another study for the NCGA, considered all the user groups that had been offered by eight previous studies.
He then said that his study would be concerned primarily with those users who:
1
Had limited authority over the reporting entity.
2
Possessed a relatively intense need for financial information.
This is a well recognized solution to the problem of the manageability of many user groups.
Typically in the business sector, it is the information needs of shareholders which are considered paramount.
Holder concludes that the primary users of government financial statements, after applying the above two criteria, are present and prospective, short and long-term creditors.
The parallel is obvious; and of course the tendency to emphasize the similarities of business and non-business reporting is so much greater.
In fact, Holder concludes that governments should adopt the basic business model of financial reporting.
The GASB subsequently adopted an approach that is closer to the integral approach than the differential approach, though it is perhaps fair to say that the resulting list of user needs is closer to maintaining the status quo in governmental accounting while leaving the door open to the adoption of business accounting ideas in some areas.
A key paragraph from the GASB (1990, p. 4) is:
‘Financial reporting is not an end in itself but is intended to provide information useful for many purposes.
Financial reporting helps fulfil government's duty to be publicly accountable.
Financial reporting also helps to satisfy the needs of users who have limited authority, ability or resources to obtain information and who therefore rely on the reports as an important source of information.
For that purpose, financial reporting objectives should consider the needs of users and the decisions they make.’
By beginning with the ‘duty to be publicly accountable’ the GASB is allowing that financial reporting can be defined in part without explicitly referring to users' needs.
This is important in practice because there are elements of traditional financial reports of governments that are not easily rationalized in terms of explicit users and their needs.
For example, intergenerational equity between taxpayers (or interperiod equity) could be seen as a public policy, that is implemented in part by using financial statement numbers to influence the level of taxation.
In this case, the financial reports are imposing norms rather than passively providing information for users' benefit.
The GASB (op. cit., p. 13) identifies three groups of primary users:
(a)
Those to whom government is primarily accountable (the citizenry), which includes taxpayers, voters, service recipients, the media, advocate groups and public finance researchers.
(b)
Those who directly represent the citizens (legislative and oversight bodies), which includes members of state legislatures, county commissions, city councils, boards of trustees, school boards and those executive branch officials with oversight responsibility over other levels of government.
(c)
Those who lend or participate in the lending process (investors and creditors), which includes individual and institutional investors and creditors, municipal security underwriters, bond-rating agencies, bond insurers and financial institutions.
The needs identified are (op. cit. pp. 13–14):
(a)
Comparing actual financial results with the legally adopted budget.
(b)
Assessing financial condition and results of operations.
(c)
Assisting in determining compliance with finance-related laws, rules and regulations.
(d)
Assisting in evaluating efficiency and effectiveness.
These conclusions were partially based on an attempt to identify users and their needs empirically (Jones et al., 1985), though that exercise was somewhat disappointing because of the very low response rate (reportedly around 10 per cent ).
This is perhaps symptomatic of a continuing problem with the user/user needs approach to financial reporting theory: we are still not clear that substantial numbers of users exist.
Constraints
The search for more useful financial reports does not, however, necessarily mean a search for the most relevant information.
Constraints exist which prevent maximum relevance being attainable.
Instead, we aim for an optimal solution, achieving the most relevant reports possible in the light of the uncertainties involved in producing them, and the available resources.
Different views have been offered as to what these constraints might be, but the following list is representative of the main ones:
l
Objectivity
2
Consistency
3
Comparability
4
Timeliness
5
Ease and economy of account preparation
The extent to which accounting information enters into the consideration of relevance and how far it meets these constraints, is determined by an additional concept: materiality.
Objectivity
Perhaps the most fundamental characteristic of financial reports is that they are produced by management, they report on management but they are  addressed to owners and others external to the reporting organization.
Thus, in familiar terms, ownership is divorced from control.
It would therefore be unhelpful, not to say intolerable, if the controllers were able to report on their performance in any terms that they chose.
This means that the accounting principles adopted must have an acceptable degree of objectivity in the sense that any accountant would produce an acceptable set of accounts from the same data.
This statement is deliberately equivocal.
We might wish to say that any accountant would produce the same set of accounts from the same data.
This would accord with the general understanding of the word objective, i.e. independent of the observer.
However, the practice of accounting is not, and probably cannot be, objective in this sense.
Therefore, we content ourselves with a degree of objectivity which represents an acceptable narrowing of the areas of difference between financial reports.
In practice, objectivity is the main constraint on achieving more relevant financial statements.
For example, in this sense, a gross book value of an item of plant in historic cost terms is objective: in the plant accounts there is a debit which supports the balance sheet item and which is itself supported by an order and a paid invoice recording the historic cost.
If it is decided that more relevant information for the balance sheet would be the plant's replacement cost, then that entry becomes more subjective: different accountants might produce different replacement costs from different markets.
In fact, most of the proposals for ‘improving’ accounting practice have involved more current valuations in the balance sheet at the expense of more subjectivity (compared with historic cost) in generating them.
The problem is determining where the balance ought properly to be drawn.
A noteworthy exception to this trend can be found where some writers have proposed that financial reports move away from the relative subjectivity of all accruals accounting (subjective because of depreciation charges, stock valuations, etc.) to the relatively more objective cash flow accounting (which recognizes only cash inflows and outflows).
Consistency
This term is used to refer to the consistency over time of financial reports.
Its importance lies in the necessity of being able to compare the current year's report with previous years'.
This is fundamental because, while organizations tend to be long term, financial reports usually cover only one year.
Therefore, no matter how sensitive an annual report is, it cannot hope to capture even five years' economic activity.
The annual report artificially parcels up the underlying economic trends into years.
It would be very naive to suppose that one report taken on its own could tell you as much as you might want to know about the organization.
By comparing a series of annual reports the chances of seeing the underlying trends are so much greater.
But the reports must be consistent over time if this comparison is to be facilitated.
Take a simple example: you are interested in the trend of operating profits over ten years of a particular nationalized industry.
Capital receipts would  normally be credited to reserves and recorded in the balance sheet.
But in one year, a capital receipt was credited to the profit and loss account and included in turnover.
In another year, a capital receipt was credited to the profit and loss account but shown as an extraordinary item.
Each treatment might be acceptable but the treatment would be inconsistent and would render the analysis of the series of doubtful validity.
Comparability
Clearly concerned with comparing reports, this term is used to distinguish between comparing over time and comparing the report of one organization with another.
Thus comparability means the extent to which the performance of organization X can be compared with that of organization Y, using their financial reports.
This constraint relates to objectivity since the more objective financial reports are the more likely that different reports will be produced on the same basis.
However, particularly in the context of public sector accounting, it adds a necessary additional emphasis.
This is because objectivity is usually narrowed down to refer only to a homogeneous group of organizations.
So that what is acceptable practice for one group might not be acceptable practice for another.
Thus each group of accounts might be said to be objective but they are not comparable.
An ubiquitous example would be where the accounts of a government department were being compared with those of a business enterprise to judge whether privatization was worthwhile.
Each set might be independently verifiable.
However, where the government department does not depreciate plant and machinery but the enterprise does, then the resulting accounts are not strictly comparable.
Timeliness
This constraint refers to the amount of time the organization takes to produce its financial report.
The basic idea is that the quicker it produces its report the better.
In general, therefore, it constrains the increasing tendency for usefulness to mean more and more information.
The more that is desired, the more time it is likely to take to produce the annual report.
An example would be where two sets of final accounts were presented for the one organization, the first reporting historic costs and the second current valuations.
This might be seen to be more relevant to users but the trade-off would have to be made against the possible effects on the date of publication.
There are also examples of more timely reports being potentially less relevant.
For example, some local authorities produce their financial statements very quickly; on the other hand, they are able to do this by including more estimates of accrued expenditure rather than waiting for invoices to come in.
The question is whether the gain in timeliness is worth the additional subjectivity involved.
Ease and economy of account preparation
All information provision incurs cost.
The more information that is demanded the greater the cost.
This cost can be direct, for example in the form of additional accounting staff salaries, or it can be indirect, where other activities are neglected so as to put more effort into the final accounts.
As with any other economic decision, the aim is to achieve the right balance of benefit received from cost incurred, while recognizing that this is usually difficult to measure.
Materiality
Central though this concept is in accounting and auditing, professional guidance on its meaning is typically broad.
The essence of it is that information is material if it is likely to make a difference in user evaluations of financial statements.
There are examples in the private sector of quantification of what is material, but in most cases materiality is left to individual judgement.
As Tomkins and Barker (1985) point out, the concept has not been enunciated in the public sector context and it may be that, while it remains a matter of individual judgment, the specific applications may be significantly different.
However the concept of materiality is implemented, it provides the ‘threshold for recognition’ of accounting information.
Once information is judged material, we weigh its relevance against the constraints, and balance the costs of reporting it against the benefits.
The reporting unit
Until now, we have discussed financial reporting in terms of the organization, and it has been implicit that we have understood what the organization is and what its implications for accounting are.
This was only a matter of convenience, however, to keep the discussion as simple as possible.
Notwithstanding, the problem of what the reporting unit is, and how we define it, is a significant one for business accounting and is even more significant for public sector accounting.
A number of theories of the reporting unit have been put forward.
These are the main ones:
1
Proprietary theory
2
Entity theory
3
Fund theory
4
Commander theory
Proprietary theory
This theory sees the organization exclusively in terms of the owners (proprietors).
The reporting unit is therefore the organization as the owners see it.
This applies most readily to a partnership, for example, where the financial statements are concerned with showing wealth and the change in wealth over the period.
But it has also been argued that the proprietary view extends, in theory and in practice, to public limited companies.
In this case, the accounts are addressed to the shareholders and the balance sheet is a statement of shareholders' financial position while the income statement is the change in shareholders' financial position.
The accounting equation is: assets -liabilities = shareholders' equity
The practical effects of this view on the form and content of the accounts are many.
For example, interest on debentures is treated as a cost, so it is deducted from income (because from the shareholders' viewpoint it is a cost).
Similarly, salaries and wages paid to employees are seen as costs and deducted from income.
The practical effects on the reporting unit can be seen more readily when a proprietary view is taken of a group of companies.
Here, the subsidiaries would be shown in the group's accounts (which means the group shareholders' accounts) in terms of the net investment that the group's shareholders hold; consequently, the reporting unit would be the group (from the shareholders' viewpoint) rather than a consolidation of the reporting units of the subsidiaries.
A modification of the proprietary theory, known as the residual equity theory, defines the company in terms of the ordinary shareholders only; thus excluding the preference shareholders who would be considered owners under the proprietary theory.
Entity theory
The entity view of an organization is that it is distinct from any group of individuals associated with it.
The reporting unit is therefore the entity and the report is addressed to all those interested in it.
The Corporate Report represents a good example of the entity view.
Here, the corporate report is addressed to equity investors, loan creditors, employees, analyst-advisers, business contacts, the Government and the public, simultaneously.
Using the above example of a group of companies, the entity view would see the group as a whole, reporting in the balance sheet all the assets that the Group owns and all the claims on those assets.
The accounting equation under the entity view becomes: assets = liabilities
The value added statement is an entity view of the income statement.
Rather than concentrating on a bottom line which shows the profit attributable to shareholders, the value added statement is concerned with how much value the entity has added through its operations and how that added value has been distributed to the many resource providers.
Fund theory
The fund theory of accounting was developed by Vatter (1947) for the business context.
He felt that both the proprietary and the entity views had  unacceptable weaknesses: first that the proprietary view, being personal, was unsatisfactory for a public limited company where the owners change as shares are traded; secondly that the entity view begged the question of how you define the entity.
Consequently, he proposed that the reporting unit should be defined as the fund and that organizations should be seen as one fund or a series of funds.
This would mean that if an organization was seen as a series of funds, then the financial report for the organization would be an aggregation of the financial reports of the constituent funds.
Of course, the decision about where the funds are and what areas they cover is artificial.
The most commonly quoted definition of a fund is found in GASB (1990, Section 1100):
‘…a fiscal and accounting entity with self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and other financial resources together with all related liabilities and residual equities or balances and changes therein which are segregated for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions or limitations.’
A fund could therefore be a photocopying unit in County Hall, it could be County Hall itself (i.e. the administration of the County Council), or it could be the whole of the education service.
The fund theory offers the reporting accountant the flexibility to define the reporting unit where the definition is most useful.
Commander theory
This theory is a variant of the fund theory in that it sees the organization not in terms of a series of funds but a series of responsibility centres.
Each responsibility centre is controlled by a manager (‘commander’) and each manager is responsible for the performance of his unit.
Therefore, under the commander theory, the financial report of the organization is an aggregation of all the stewardship and performance reports for each responsibility centre.
It provides a specific focus and applies most readily to bureaucracies, where the tasks of the organizations are traceable to responsibility centres.
Of course, the fund view and the commander view will coincide where the funds are defined in terms of responsibility centres.
In practice, published financial reports tend to adopt more than one of these views simultaneously.
Also, different kinds of organizations lay the emphasis on different views.
The typical accounts of a business would largely be proprietary-based but might include entity influences.
Thus, although the income statement and balance sheet will be addressed to shareholders primarily, an employee report might be included which amplifies the accounts as they affect employees.
Similarly, including current cost accounts marks a shift towards an entity view because there the income statement shows the current cost profit after maintaining the operating capability of the business as a whole, as well as current cost profit attributable to shareholders.
The accounts of some nationalized industries have been more entity-based than those of public companies.
This probably reflects the fact that the equivalent of the owners and long-term creditors is the Government, on the public's behalf; and that, although return on capital is of interest, the necessarily wider view of the industry's role in the economy takes precedence.
Probably, the best example of the fund view is the US local government.
The GASB, which is the standard-setter for governmental bodies, recommends that the reporting model includes seven major types of funds: the General Fund, Special Revenue Funds, Capital Projects Funds, Debt Service Funds, Enterprise Funds, Internal Service Funds and Trust and Agency Funds.
The main issue involved with fund accounting is the extent to which the fund accounts should be aggregated to produce an overall view of the organization.
The idea of fund accounts is, of course, that the organization view is not the most relevant.
On the other hand, this is anathema to many accountants, particularly those involved in business, because they are used to seeing a single set of financial statements.
Specifically, the problems of unaggregated (or unconsolidated) fund accounts is that the cost of a particular service will not be shown as a single item.
For example, the bulk of the operating expenditure for the police department will be included in the general fund but the operating implications of capital expenditure (principal and interest repayments) will be included in the debt service fund.
On top of this, there may be areas of the police department which have been financed by special funds, perhaps in the form of trusts; the costs of these areas will appear in a different fund again.
The fund view is flexible enough to provide the opportunity for providing this kind of ‘additional’ information.
But its flexibility depends upon the levels of aggregation adopted and the willingness to provide different views of the same information.
Because of pressure from the business community in the US, many local governments are providing more of this kind of information; indeed there are examples of reports including a set of fund accounts and a set of accounts based on a proprietary view.
UK local authorities report under the fund view combined with the commander view.
Their fund is not the same as the US version because, although their reports do include the accounts of the general fund, housing revenue account, trust funds, etc. these are not funds in the strict sense of the GASB definition.
They are not self-contained sets of accounts.
Local authorities tend to have only one significant cash book.
Individual balance sheets are produced for the main funds but the cash figures are balancing entries which taken together will, when the accounts balance, produce the cash book balance.
Also, both operating expenditure and the operating consequences of capital expenditure appear together in the funds.
Balance sheets are usually produced for each account, but the operating accounts are in much more detail: the General Fund will be segregated into, for example, education, public health, roads.
These are the responsibility centres of local government, representing the functional areas of spending, each with a professional responsible for that activity to the council.
The  director of social services is the ‘commander’ of social services and is responsible not just to the council but to the community for social services.
The accounts, therefore, are structured to report the revenues and expenditures under his/her control.
Many UK local authorities produce a consolidated balance sheet.
On the face of it, this is offering a commander view because it is reporting on the command of the authority as a whole.
However, many consolidated balance sheets exclude some fund balance sheets.
The best example is where the superannuation fund is not consolidated.
The commander view would say that the superannuation fund balance sheet should be consolidated: the authority is responsible for managing the fund, although it is on the employees' behalf not the community's.
Indeed, this management does affect the community because of internal borrowing between the superannuation and general fund since the general fund provides employers' contributions and it charges for administration costs.
Where the superannuation fund remains unconsolidated, then a fund/proprietary view is being taken: the fund is not owned by the community, therefore it is not included with the community's accounts.
Few if any, local authorities produce a consolidated revenue account.
This seems inconsistent with the practice of producing a consolidated balance sheet.
It could be interpreted as a different commander view: there is no single commander responsible for this overall revenue account so it is not published.
On the other hand, a consolidated source and application of funds statement is produced.
The GASB (1990) has made a significant contribution to the problems of defining the reporting entity.
This has not been based on the theoretical approach adopted above; instead, it has been concerned with offering criteria to be used in practice in order to determine whether a unit should be included within the overall financial report of what they call the ‘oversight unit.
GASB suggests that the basic, but not the only, criterion to be used is the ability to exercise oversight responsibility of the unit by the elected officials of the oversight unit.
This oversight responsibility is derived from the power of the oversight unit and includes, but is not limited to, the following.
1 Financial interdependency.
This relates to the extent to which the unit produces a financial benefit or imposes a financial burden on the oversight unit.
Manifestations of this would include responsibility for financing deficits, entitlements to surpluses and guarantees of, or ‘moral responsibility’ for debt.
2 Selection of governing authority.
This relates to whether the oversight unit possesses final decision-making authority and is held primarily accountable for decisions.
3 Designation of management.
This relates to whether the management of the unit is appointed by, and held accountable to, the oversight unit.
4 Ability to significantly influence operations.
This relates to the ability of the oversight unit to influence the unit's operations, including reviewing budget  requests, signing contracts, approving the hiring of key personnel, exercising control over facilities and properties, etc.
5 Accountability for fiscal matters.
This relates to matters such as the extent of budgetary authority, the responsibility for funding deficits, the control of the collection and disbursement of funds, and whether revenues collected are determined by the oversight unit.
Accounting policy making
Traditionally, in the UK, the law has played a considerable part in regulating the form and content of published financial reports.
This applies as much to business organizations as it does to public sector organizations.
However, against this statutory backdrop, the professional bodies have developed a policy-making role and, following the example set in the USA, with the introduction of the Accounting Standards Board in 1990 we have seen the establishment of a standard-setting body which is neither government nor the accounting profession.
Accounting theory cannot realistically be discussed without considering the context of accounting policy-making.
Legal prescriptions
The prescriptions concerning the published accounts of nationalized industries are typically embodied in the Acts of nationalization.
The Acts include a general clause which says that the corporation should keep proper accounting records and should present its accounts in a form laid down by the relevant Secretary of State.
Subsequent Acts have tended to produce more detailed requirements, but the main thrust has always been for nationalized industries' accounts to produce, as a minimum, the amount and kind of information that a PLC has to produce.
On top of this minimum requirement, reflecting the fact that public corporations are not the same as private corporations, regulations typically provide that additional specific information be produced.
A good example of this is the requirement to produce disaggregated operating statements, in order to report on the performance of different sectors of a given industry.
Generally speaking, we can say that for nationalized industries the accounting standard-setting function of the law relates to the form of published accounts; while responsibility for the content is abrogated to the accounting profession (because ‘true and fair’ is defined by professional pronouncements).
This seemed particularly true during the 1970s.
However, there are two points to make about recent developments.
First the Companies Acts themselves have included more content.
Second the suspension of mandatory inflation accounting by the profession (in 1985) has not affected the nationalized industries, who continue to report current cost accounts, by government direction.
In local authorities, the law plays an equally important, probably more important, part in accounting standards.
The law relates to the form of published accounts.
But it also, to a greater extent, relates to content as well: for example , the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 effectively determines how local authorities account for capital expenditure.
In the NHS, the law gives the power to the Secretary of State, with the approval of the Treasury, to determine the accounts of health service bodies.
In practice, the broad form of these is determined by central direction, but the detailed content is left to the Management Executive of the NHS to determine.
Standard-setting for central government is almost entirely the responsibility of the Treasury, taking the Exchequer and Audit Department Act 1866 as the statutory basis.
There are minor exceptions where small units, which are said to compete with the private sector produce accounts showing a true and fair view.
And although these exceptions will grow with the introduction and development of Executive Agencies, the overwhelming majority of what are called the appropriation accounts are in a form prescribed by the Treasury.
This form is laid down in Government Accounting a Guide on Accounting and Financial Procedures for the Use of Government Departments issued by H.M.
Treasury.
The most important provision in this manual is that the system of cash accounting, rather than accruals accounting, is used in accounting for the money voted to government departments by Parliament.
Since standard-setting, as the private sector knows it, is primarily concerned with accruals adjustments and their effect, the Treasury manual is not strictly comparable.
Instead, it takes the form of a guide to bookkeeping; although the manual as a whole is more concerned with financial procedures for controlling departments' finances than with the accounts per se.
Professional standard-setting
Until the mid-1970s, what one might call public sector professional accounting practice had been promulgated by the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (which from 1901 — 1973 was known as the Institute of Municipal Treasurers and Accountants).
The majority of its work in standard-setting was primarily concerned with the form, particularly standardization of the form, of accounts; although practices that concern content have also been recommended.
However, the environment of professional standard-setting changed as a result of the inception of the Accounting Standards Committee (ASC).
Originally formed in January 1970 as a committee of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), it became in February 1976 a joint committee of the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies.
Its objective was
‘to propose for the approval of the Councils of governing bodies definitive standards of financial accounting and reporting.’
This encompassed:
(a)
fundamentals of financial accounting
(b)
definition of terms used
(c)
application of fundamentals to specific classes of business
(d)
the form and content of financial statements, including presentation and disclosure
Although the ASC was clearly under the control of the accounting profession, in 1982 its membership was broadened to include representatives from outside the profession.
Under the ASC, Statements of Standard Accounting Practice were not meant to be rigid specifications of acceptable practice but rather ‘to narrow the areas of difference’ between accounting practices.
The emphasis of the SSAPs was always on standards for accounts showing a true and fair view; indeed, very often the emphasis was on the accounts of PLCs.
The force of SSAPs resided primarily in the fact that under the ICAEW's auditing standards, a true and fair view was generally defined as one which did not contravene extant SSAPs; and that any noncompliance had to be stated and its effect quantified.
In 1990, standard-setting for companies was changed by the establishment of the Financial Reporting Council, the Accounting Standards Board and the Review Panel.
The last two are limited companies that are subsidiaries of the Financial Reporting Council.
The Council raises the money to finance all three (over 3 million a year) but is prohibited from involvement in the core activities of the Board and the Panel.
In the first year, over half of the finance came from the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies and the Government (mostly from fees charged on companies), while the remainder came from the Stock Exchange and the Bank of England.
The Accounting Standards Board is obviously responsible for setting accounting standards and took over all the extant SSAPs from the Accounting Standards Committee.
The Board issues standards (Financial Reporting Standards — FRSs) in its own right, without the approval of the accounting profession.
Modelled on the US experience, because accounting standards take time to go through ‘due process’, an Urgent Issues Task Force has also been established which can deal with problems in the interim.
The primary purpose of these new developments is to distance accounting standard setting from the accounting profession, in much the same way that the establishment of the Financial Accounting Standards Board did in the USA.
Because of the substantial sums of money being provided by the profession and the Government, if for no other reason, both can be assumed to continue to have an important say in policy making, but clearly the effect is in some sense to establish a middle ground.
The relevance of SSAPs to the public sector has never been entirely clear.
In 1986, a new Explanatory Foreword to SSAPs was issued which points out that they only apply to nationalized industries because the Government requires them to.
For other public sector bodies, the Foreword says that ‘it could be expected’ that ASC pronouncements will apply ‘except where they are clearly inappropriate’.
This is in effect saying that the policy makers for the public sector were indeterminate, at that time.
There were, however, other developments.
The ASC introduced the Statements of Recommended Practice (SORPs).
These were not binding on all members of the ASC in the way that SSAPs were, nor did they require the approval of the councils of the six professional bodies.
There were two ways of developing them: first, the ASC produced and issued  them; second, other bodies developed them and the ASC ‘franked’ the result.
The most relevant example of the latter is the SORP on the applicability of SSAPs to local government, issued in 1987.
The establishment of the Accounting Standards Board has not clarified the position.
It announced that it would not be concerned with the public sector and that it would not take over the extant SORPs from the Accounting Standards Committee.
This reinforces what has always been true: the SSAPs were not established with public sector organizations in mind.
The Board is simply saying that its own policies will also be explicitly only for companies.
One problem with professional standards, because they do not have the force of law, is ensuring compliance.
Under the new regime for companies this problem has been addressed to some extent.
There are two main elements to this.
First, the law (Companies Act 1985, Schedule 4, paragraph 36A, as amended) now requires companies to disclose whether the accounts are prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards, and to disclose particulars of any material departure from those standards and the reasons for it (the relevant standards are the SSAPs and FRSs of the Accounting Standards Board).
This is the first time that accounting standards have had even this amount of statutory backing.
Second (under s.245B of the 1985 Act, as amended), the Government has authorized the Financial Reporting Review Panel to apply to the courts in cases where it believes that a company has not complied with the law.
It is important to note that the Review Panel is only authorized to apply to the courts on the ground of legal non-compliance, not non-compliance with accounting standards.
However, these new powers do not apply to the public sector.
Compliance there depends on the preparers, perhaps the sponsoring Minister, or other regulating body and the auditor.
This is not unlike the former position for companies and this too produced many circumstances where organizations chose not to follow professional prescription and there did not appear to be the power or the will to enforce compliance.
For example, non-compliance by local authorities remains common.
What remains true is that the responsibility for accounting standard-setting for companies is clear, as it is for the Government.
In between, there is a host of organizations, including public sector organizations, for which there is no comprehensive set of accounting policies established exclusively for their cases.
The result has been that within the legal framework, policies have been chosen on an ad hoc basis.
This situation might have led to a drive for better theory for public sector accounting, to sustain these ad hoc policies — but it has not.
Policy makers have, in effect, left the difficult theoretical questions unaddressed about how, or to what extent, public sector accounting should be different.
The situation in the USA, at least for state and local governments, is different.
Traditionally, there were many standard-setting bodies for the public sector.
The NCGA, supported by the Government Finance Officers' Association, was concerned with state and local government; the Council of State Governments was concerned with state government; the General Accounting  Office of the Federal Government has set standards for federal departments and agencies.
In the 1970s, the Financial Accounting Standards Board declared its intention to become involved.
The result was a considerable power struggle, where huge sums of money were spent to protect the many and various positions: the money was used primarily to produce conceptual frameworks for aspects of governmental accounting which would then be generally accepted and would provide the base for future standard-setting.
As a result, an institutional compromise was found whereby the Governmental Accounting Standards Board was established, which, although associated with the FASB, is nevertheless separate.
The General Accounting Office continues to cover the Federal Government; the FASB sets standards for non-governmental, non-profit organizations; and the GASB deals with state and local government and governmental non-profit organizations.
Uniquely, then, the GASB is an accounting standard-setting body concerned only with governmental units at the state and local level.
The politics of the situation probably means that it has to be sensitive to the traditional concerns of the governments themselves but it also has to provide strong arguments for deviations from generally accepted accounting principles for business.
Whether the end result will lead to better governmental accounting is impossible to say, but it seems clear that major steps are being taken and will continue to be taken at least to understand the commonalities and differences between accounting for businesses and accounting for governmental units.
Financial accounting techniques
This chapter is concerned with the financial accounting techniques adopted in the operating statements and balance sheets of public sector organizations.
The accounting practices discussed do not exclusively relate to the public sector.
However, our discussion will concentrate on the contribution each can make to public sector accounting.
The major techniques
Different public sector organizations adopt different accounting practices.
The main ones are:
1
Budgetary accounting
2
Cash accounting
3
Accruals accounting
4
Commitment accounting
5
Fund accounting
These five are not mutually exclusive.
For example, one organization might adopt budgetary accounting, cash accounting and fund accounting simultaneously.
It is also possible that one organization adopts all five simultaneously!
Strictly speaking, the phrase ‘budgetary accounting’ refers to the practice (adopted particularly by some US local governments) of including budgeted amounts and actual amounts within the double-entry.
Very broadly, what happens is that the budgeted amounts of expenditure are credited to appropriation accounts and then as expenditure is incurred debits are set against these credits.
The balance on these accounts therefore continuously represents the amount of the budget still unspent.
Without understanding the intricacies of these book-entries we can see the philosophy of the system: namely, that the accounts should present in a systematic and continuous way the comparison of budgeted amounts and actual spending.
Since bookkeeping is systematic, then one way of achieving this objective is to include budgeted amounts within it.
The main disadvantage of this practice is its complexity; it is easier and more comprehensible if the accounts reflect actual revenues and expenses, and the budget reflects budgeted revenues and expenses.
The UK solution to the need for a continuous and systematic comparison of the two is to keep them separate as far as the double-entry is concerned but to report them side-by-side.
Hence, many public sector operating statements do not only show actuals but also budgets and comparisons of actuals with budgets.
This practice is in marked contrast to business organizations where, although the budget is of importance, it is never included in the published financial statements proper; indeed, it would be unusual for it to appear publicly at all.
The main reason for this difference, and it lies at the heart of the distinction between many public and private sector organizations, is the central role that the budget plays in fixing the level and distribution of taxation in governments.
It is no exaggeration to say that this function of the budget shifts the emphasis away from the ‘actual’ results as recorded in the financial accounts, towards the budget.
The actuals remain of importance but in these kinds of organizations they take an equal place alongside the budget.
It seems useful, therefore, to emphasize this difference by referring to the practice as budgetary accounting, while remembering that in the UK it does not have the same implications as in the USA.
Cash accounting, accruals accounting and commitment accounting are distinguished from each other by the point in time when expenses and revenues are recognized in the accounts, i.e. the point at which a given transaction generates a bookkeeping entry.
In the case of revenue recognition, there are basically two steps at which a bookkeeping entry might be generated: when the goods sold have been delivered and an invoice has been issued; and when the goods sold have been delivered and an invoice has been paid The complete cycle would be as follows:
Order received → goods despatched with invoice → cash received
Because of the accounting principle of conservatism, it is unlikely that an accounting system would recognize revenue merely on receipt of an order.
The most common system in business is to recognize revenue when the invoice has been issued.
However, there are systems, notably in the public sector and non-profit sector in general, where revenue is only recognized in the accounts when the cash is received.
The same thing can be said about expense recognition, although there is a system of accounting which recognizes a debit earlier than the receipt of an invoice.
The cycle for purchases might look like this:
Order issued → goods received with invoice → cash paid
The system of accounting which recognizes the transaction in the accounts at the time an order is issued is called ‘commitment accounting’.
Its name reflects the fact that the accounts are recognizing commitments said to have been entered into when orders are sent.
The system of accounting which recognizes the expense when the invoice is received (and the revenue, when the invoice is issued) is called ‘accruals accounting’.
‘Fund accounting’ refers to the practice of accounting, not in terms of an organization taken as whole, but in terms of its separate, independent, constituent parts (which are called ‘funds’).
This contrasts with the typical accounts of a business which present the business as a whole.
Strictly, therefore, an organization which adopted fund accounting, accruals accounting and had, say, six funds, would keep six complete and separate sets of accounts: six cash books, six sets of personal accounts, six  nominal ledgers, six operating statements, six balance sheets.
In practice, however, there are modified versions of fund accounting which achieve the same overall purpose, namely keeping the accounts of the funds separate.
Most typically, organizations have only one cash book (and bank account).
This is tenable because, with sophisticated and computerized accounting systems, control of the various funds can be exercised without separating out the cash transactions.
Although the concept of fund accounting is relatively simple, specific applications of it can be difficult to understand.
This applies, for example, to governmental accounting in the USA, where the adoption of fund accounting has introduced an accounting language of its own.
In fact, the ‘language’ is not of use per se to public sector accountants anywhere else in the world, excepting only as a necessary precondition to understanding the intricacies of US practice.
Consequently, we will be concerned with the concept as it applies generally to public sector organizations.
We can now see how one organization could adopt cash accounting, budgetary accounting and fund accounting simultaneously: only cash transactions are recognized, the cash flows are reported in the same format as the budget, and they are also recorded and reported in individual funds.
Similarly, it is possible for one organization to adopt all five simultaneously, by reporting in terms of funds, by comparing actuals with the budget and by adopting cash accounting in Fund 1, accruals accounting in Fund 2, and commitment accounting in Fund 3!
We can now look at each of these practices in more detail.
Budgetary accounting
Budgetary accounting refers to the practice of many public sector organizations, and particularly governments, in keeping and presenting their operating accounts in the same format and alongside their budgets.
The main purpose of this practice is to emphasize the budget's role in the cycle of planning-control-accountability.
As we have seen in detail in Chapters 2 and 3, the budget is the financial plan against which financial out-turns must be compared to effect control.
External accountability is enhanced by taking this essentially management control (i.e. control by management) and using it to demonstrate, particularly to taxpayers, the performance of management against the budget.
Budgets are important because they are used indirectly and directly to fix the levels and distribution of taxes.
For example, central government uses budgets rather more indirectly to fix taxes: they form the basic public expenditure requirements, but how taxes are fixed and whether a budget surplus or deficit is being planned are questions beyond the scope of the budgets themselves.
On the other hand, local governments use their budgets directly to fix tax levels, the essential point being that they cannot in law tax for a budget deficit.
In both cases, however, taxpayers are likely to be concerned with how actual spending turns out (hence the use of the word ‘out-turns’ to refer to actuals) against budgeted spending; not least because over-spendings are likely to mean higher taxes and under-spendings lower ones.
The idea behind budgetary accounting is, therefore, a simple one.
Complications do arise, however, because different kinds of organizations adopt  different formats.
This is necessarily caused by the fact that the intrinsic differences between the services provided in different organizations reflect themselves in the respective budgets.
In budgetary accounting these differences are perpetuated in the accounts.
For example, the main non-staff cost in a blood transfusion unit might be ‘drugs and dressings’; while the main non-staff cost in a school might be ‘books and materials’.
These two items could be classified in the same way as, say, ‘equipment and materials’ but this would merely hide the intrinsic difference between the items of account.
It may lead us to compare the relative increase in costs over a year, believing that we were comparing like with like.
We might think that any differences reflected poorer performance but it may just be that they merely reflect the different impact of specific price changes on drugs compared with books.
More meaningful results are obtained by producing budgetary accounts that are classified in a way which is specific to the particular service but this is at the expense of a uniform format for budgetary accounting.
Since it is unlikely that the accounts of the Blood Transfusion Services will be compared with those of schools on a regular basis, this problem is of less importance.
However, there are more significant problems in that the same kinds of organizations and the same kinds of services are often accounted for differently although they are all adopting budgetary accounting.
This arises mainly out of two issues:
(a)
level of aggregation, and
(b)
comparisons between budget and actuals.
A good example of where the level of aggregation adopted by the budgetary accounts affects their comparability occurs in local government.
One authority may publish its budgetary accounts for the Education Service as a whole.
Another authority may publish total amounts for primary schools, secondary schools, continuing education.
Another might publish the expenditure of employees, premises, etc. within primary, secondary, continuing education.
Obviously the problem with providing very detailed information is that financial reports become huge documents, which taken as a whole can be daunting for the reader.
On the other hand, by reducing the detail, the document may be much more easily handled but potentially important information may be lost.
Traditionally, local authorities have produced weighty financial reports but over recent years many have adopted much higher levels of aggregation with the consequent reduction in report size.
A major impetus has been that users found this detailed budgetary accounting confusing.
Of course, the reduction in reports also leads to a lower administrative and production cost.
The British Government's accounts adopt very high levels of aggregation.
Often a single line comparing budget with actual can represent millions or even billions of pounds.
This undoubtedly reflects the complexity and breadth of the Government's spending, but for the accounts to be of much use the disaggregated figures have to be used.
The other weakness in the practice of budgetary accounting lies in the extent to which financial reports compare budgets with actuals and explain the  differences.
Many organizations produce the budgetary accounts alongside the budget but only compare the two in global terms.
Thus, for example, the accounts and budget might be presented in detail but only total net expenditure of each division of service is compared with budget, showing the over-/under-spending and explaining broadly the reasons for any variance.
A more extreme version would be to compare and explain budget and actuals only for an organization as a whole.
Clearly, to compare and explain every line in the budgetary accounts would produce a vast amount of information and would probably benefit few.
A compromise might be to show the over- and under-spendings for all heads but only to explain any significant variances.
A significant variance could be defined as one amounting to more than a given percentage of the budget but which is not explained by the general level of prices, i.e. inflation or deflation.
However, whichever system is adopted, it is imperative that some comparison and explanation is included.
The rationale for budgetary accounting is that the budget and accounts should be continuously compared so that action can be taken to correct variances.
This applies as much to external users of the information as it does to internal users.
By reporting only two columns of figures (budget and actual), not only is the ultimate purpose of budgetary accounting not achieved but much time can be wasted in answering specific users' questions about variances which could have been avoided by the accounts themselves producing the relevant analysis.
In conclusion, budgetary accounting is primarily concerned with the form of the financial accounts rather than their content.
Cash accounting
This accounting system recognizes only cash inflows and cash outflows.
The resulting final accounts are nothing more than summarized cash books.
There are no balance sheets because there are no assets or liabilities in the books: sales are only recognized when cash is received (so there are no debtors); purchases are only recognized when cash is paid (so there are no creditors); there are no stock adjustments because the accounts are not concerned with recording usage, only with the fact that cash has been paid for purchases (so there is no closing stock figure); there are no fixed assets, for the same reason.
It is important to note that cash flow statements are not the same as the more common funds flow statements.
The latter are typically re-presentations of accruals accounting figures, albeit to include information that would not be readily apparent in the income statements and balance sheets.
Cash flow statements do not include accruals of any kind.
There is a very serious and respectable literature on cash flow accounting for the business sector which argues that the traditional accruals accounting statements are too subjective and hide crucial information about organizations' performance.
However, no accounting standard-setting body in the world has recognized them as serious propositions for replacing accruals accounting.
On the other hand, cash flow accounting is practised in many public sector and non-profit organizations.
The simple receipts and payments accounts of the small charity are probably the most common example; while perhaps the  most important (certainly in terms of the amounts of money accounted for) are the cash accounts of most sovereign governments.
Take for example, the accounts of defence spending by the British Government as shown in Fig. 8.1.
This is a summary of defence spending and is supported by statements which subdivide the five votes into smaller sections.
Nevertheless it can come as a shock to a trained accountant to discover that 21 billion of net expenditure is accounted for in this way: no assets; no liabilities, just an excess of payments over receipts of 20; 8 billion compared with a budgeted excess of 20.6 billion.
It would be wrong, however, to assume that these accounts are necessarily unsatisfactory and simplistic.
They are certainly simple and that is one of the chief advantages of cash accounting: it takes little more than common sense to understand and interpret.
Not only that, but because of its simplicity it also costs much less in terms of administration and accounting expertise.
This is not an inconsequential item, particularly when in practice many managers doubt the value of producing more elaborate accruals accounts.
The primary impetus, on the other hand, for cash accounting in the business sector comes from the undoubted subjectivity of accruals accounting.
Even when only historic costs are being recognized there are still subjective judgements which have to be made to produce balance sheets and income statements: how much depreciation to charge; how to calculate the closing stock figure; what provision to make for doubtful debts, etc.
Cash accounting does not include these adjustments and does not therefore involve their subjectivity.
When ownership is divorced from control, reducing the ability of managers to manipulate their reports to the owners is seen to be an important part of accounting policy-making.
This is no less important in government where the executive reports to the legislature.
Of course the essential point is not whether the accounts are subjective or objective; it is the extent to which they are useful.
The purpose of a set of accounts is to provide useful information; the level of subjectivity is just one constraint of many on fully achieving this.
The information which receipts   and payments accounts give relates to the amount of cash received and paid.
When these accounts are compared with amounts which should have been received and which should have been paid (as shown in the budget) much vital information for a public sector organization is shown.
Cash is clearly the lifeblood of any organization.
Budgets determine how much tax is collected.
If the Government spends less than the budget says it would spend during the year, then it is obviously better off at the end of the year and can then spend more or repay borrowings or reduce taxes.
If it spends more during the year than it said it would spend, it is worse off and must either borrow more or raise more taxes.
This information and the decisions which emanate from it are of great importance, politically, economically and socially.
We must remember also, however, that there is a vast amount of other information which has equal and greater importance.
This relates to questions of public finance and economics, such as: what will happen to interest rates if we increase the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement?
What will happen to unemployment if we spend more?
What will happen to inflation if we reduce taxes?
Accounting information does not attempt to answer such questions.
However, there are other less ambitious examples of the kind of information which the accounts could provide about inputs but which is not provided by cash flow accounting.
This relates to the two aggregates which are the primary concern of accruals accounting and about which cash accounting has nothing to say, namely, capital and income.
Because there are no assets or liabilities, there is no measure of what the organization is worth, no measure of capital.
Since income is the increase in capital, there is no measure of income either.
An excess of receipts over payments cannot be called income because receipts might include capital receipts.
Similarly, an excess of payments over receipts cannot be called a loss because apart from anything else the payments might include the acquisition of assets.
There is no opportunity to compare income with capital to yield a return on capital figure which is typically used as a measure of a business's performance.
Indeed there is no opportunity to use an income figure in any way as a comparative measure of performance.
Look again at Fig. 8.1 on defence spending.
That account tells us the amount of net payments over receipts compared with the budgeted figures.
There is no measure of what the defence services are ‘worth’ in terms of the assets and liabilities they have.
The only measure of performance which can be yielded is the comparison of budget with actual.
Strictly speaking, good performance is a matching of budget and actual; bad performance is either an over-spending (for obvious reasons) or an under-spending (because Parliament voted money to be spent, not saved).
But this measure of performance is a very narrow one and nothing more than an indication of stewardship.
The defence budget might have been spent, nothing more or less, but the money could have been spent more economically, more efficiently, or more effectively.
Of course, we know that an income figure for the defence budget could not yield the kind of information that it would yield in a profit-oriented organization, not least because it would simply yield a huge ‘loss’!
On the  other hand, parts of the budget could be set up as profit centres which charged other parts of the budget for using their services.
However, segregating income from capital is not only concerned with producing an income figure which might be used as a measure of performance.
It is also concerned with the converse, namely segregating capital from income.
The emphasis then is on defining that amount which can be consumed without impairing capital.
This is the more important part of the capital/income confusion in public sector organizations: agreement on the irrelevance of income as a performance measure can often be readily obtained because service provision may have nothing to do with the profit motive; on the other hand, all organizations have capital of some sort.
An obvious example of where the accounts could provide information about erosion of capital, but in the case of cash accounts do not, is for the sale of capital assets.
Selling off public sector land and buildings can be a highly lucrative activity (in the short term).
In receipts and payments accounts, the realized amounts will be shown as receipts and the accounts for the year will appear much healthier.
But of course what has happened is that the capital base has been eroded, and the future value of the sold asset will not accrue to the organization.
This is not to say that selling public sector assets is an unwise activity; only that cash accounts do not provide the complete picture of what happens when you do.
In fact, neither do accruals accounts necessarily, but at least they give some indication that capital has been affected.
Apart from this effect of including capital amounts in receipts and payments, there is also the effect of not recognizing invoices until they are paid.
In the following example, assume that an organization has a series of purchasing transactions each of which begins with an order and ends with payment of cash.
When the results for the financial year are being calculated two artificial lines are drawn, at the beginning of the year and at the end, namely:
In this case, the effect is that goods received in the old financial year (Invoice) are not recognized by the accounts until the new financial year (Cash paid).
Similarly, at the year end, goods are received (Invoice) but not recognized because the cash is not paid until the subsequent year.
This provides two main difficulties.
First, it is hard to accept that the subsequent payments figure reflects what the organization ‘cost’ to run during the year.
Invoice might be, for example, the cost of electricity used during the  final quarter of the year.
There is no question that the electricity was used during the financial year and yet the cost of the electricity is not shown until the next financial year.
Of course, it may be argued that the Cash paid at the beginning of the year relates to the last quarter's electricity for the old financial year and so this financial year includes four payments for electricity; thus, the year's payments do reflect the cost of electricity.
This argument assumes that the amount of electricity consumed in each final quarter is the same and that the price per unit of electricity is the same.
Take the following example.
Following the earlier example, assume the payment for each quarter's electricity is made in the next quarter.
But of course these are equal because the seasonal usage and cost per unit is assumed to be the same.
By making more realistic assumptions, the position changes.
Even if we assume that seasonal usage is constant but prices increase by 10 per cent p.a., we produce a difference:
However, the main point does not so much concern the question of whether seasonal usage would be constant or not, or whether costs are rising or falling or staying constant, but that the cash payments method does not record the cost of carrying out the activities for the year.
The second difficulty relates to the potential for deliberate manipulation of the accounts to produce preferred results.
For example, the real spending of a department or service might be the same under whatever system of accounting is adopted but in a given year, using cash accounting, the cash payments could be postponed by as little as 24 hours so that the accounts record a lower figure.
The likelihood of this occurring increases when budgets are used to control spending.
Imagine a department which can see that it is going to overspend its budget.
Rather than reduce its spending it maintains it, but postpones cash payments.
Of course, all this is doing is storing up trouble for the subsequent financial year; nevertheless, the financial control through the budget is effectively lost.
It could be argued that this is an organization matter not an accounting one; that a control needs to be introduced which prevents managers artificially postponing cash payments, e.g. a rule that all invoices must be paid within a specific time.
However, such a rule might mean that the organization is not taking full advantage of varying credit periods.
And anyway, it could also be argued that it is the accounting system which is allowing this manipulation (perhaps even inducing it) and therefore the accounting system should be modified to prevent it.
In summary, we have seen that cash accounting provides essential information, it is more objective than other alternatives and it costs less, in terms of administrative and accounting expertise, to implement.
On the other hand it provides no information about income and capital, nor about the cost of operating the organization during the financial year.
As with many accounting questions, the relative importance of the advantages compared with the disadvantages is a matter for judgement.
Some public sector organizations have been through the debate over an agonizing number of years: local authorities in the UK did so at the turn of the century and generally concluded that ‘receipts and payments’ was not sufficient.
On the other hand, most sovereign governments continue to adopt cash accounting though the pressure to adopt accruals accounting has increased and is beginning to have its effect.
Accruals accounting
The definition of the accruals concept as given by SSAP 2 is as follows:
‘Revenue and costs are accrued (that is, recognised as they are earned or incurred, not as money is received or paid), matched with one another so far as their relationship can be established or justifiably assumed, and dealt with in the profit and loss account of the period to which they relate; provided that where the accruals concept is inconsistent with the prudence concept, the latter prevails.’
The earning of revenues is generally taken to mean that invoices have been issued; costs are incurred when services are received.
Thus the recognition occurs one step earlier than under cash accounting.
There are many different forms which accruals accounting can take but the most common is historic cost accounting; another recognized form in the UK is current cost accounting.
The two broad differences between accruals and cash accounting are the calculation of income and capital and the accruing of receipts and payments.
In historic cost accounting, capital is measured as the initial capital invested.
Therefore land, which is not depreciated, will be shown at its historic cost in the balance sheet.
A depreciable asset would be shown at its cost less any depreciation; we say therefore that these written down amounts are ‘unallocated costs’, meaning they have yet to be matched with revenues because they have yet to yield revenues.
Monetary assets and liabilities are also shown at historic cost, though in many cases the historic cost of a monetary item is the same as its current cost.
In the current cost version, capital is measured in terms of its current value, which in many cases is its replacement cost.
Land is shown in the balance sheet at its current replacement cost while a depreciable asset is shown at its current replacement cost less any depreciation to date.
Stocks are also most often shown at their replacement cost.
Monetary assets and liabilities are shown at their historic cost.
The profit figure is the difference between realized revenues (‘realized' in the sense that invoices have been issued) and associated costs, measured either by historic costs or by current costs.
This involves accruing any receipts which have been earned in the financial year and accruing any payments which relate to purchases made in the financial year.
The corollary of this is that any receipts received or payments made in the current financial year which relate to accruals made in the last financial year, will not affect the current year's profit figures.
However, there are modified accruals accounting systems which are adopted by public sector organizations, most typically some UK local authorities.
One version is the ‘income and converted payments’ method.
Under this, all revenues are accrued when they are earned.
On the other hand, payments throughout the year are not continually accrued.
However, at the financial year end all the invoices that had been received but had not been paid would be collected together for each department say, and a total entry would be put through the books accruing all the payments due to be made.
Then the payments made in the new year in respect of these accrued amounts would be debited against the individual expense accounts making the net effect zero in the new year.
The advantage of this income and converted payments method over the full accruals method is that personal creditors accounts do not have to be maintained (why keep a record of the individuals to whom you owe money — they will tell you soon enough if you do not settle) and the bookkeeping effort is reduced.
The ‘converted receipts and payments’ method applies the same kind of thinking to receipts.
Although this method is used, it is less easy to rationalize it.
The rationale for not keeping creditors accounts is not only rather shortsighted (because you might lose the goodwill of your suppliers) but it does not apply to debtors accounts — it is for certain that you will want to know precisely who owes you money and how much they owe you.
Given then that all public sector organizations will keep meticulous records of debtors, it is hard to see that much effort is saved by not incorporating them in the double entry.
Final accounts under the accruals concept are not produced uniformly.
Different public sector organizations adopt different practices.
One reason for  this is, as we have already discussed, that some adopt budgetary accounting while others do not.
What they have in common, however, is that they produce a balance sheet and an operating statement, in marked contrast to the single ‘receipts and payments’ statement of cash accounting.
We can now examine an example of published accruals accounts.
Here is an extract from the accounts of the Post Office for the year ended 31 March 1991:
These final accounts, of course, look very different from the cash accounts of defence spending.
The basic difference is that the capital items have been stored separately in the balance sheet, leaving the operating items in the profit and loss account.
We do not know what was paid in cash and what was received in cash by the Post Office; all we know in this regard is the opening and closing cash figure.
Nor do we know, because the Post Office has not adopted budgetary accounting, how these ‘actual’ results compare with its budget.
On the other hand these accruals accounts have provided much more information than the cash accounts.
We can now have a measure of capital employed (net assets = 2,114m).
We can compare its performance, for example, by expressing profit as a percentage of capital employed, which for 1990/91 was 1.5 per cent .
This is a far from ideal measure but it can be used to compare performance over time and to establish target rates of return.
These accounts also give an indication that in producing 1.5 per cent return the capital base has been maintained so that today's postal services can be maintained in the future.
The accounts of defence spending give no indication at all of this: as a previous example explained, the ‘receipts’ may well include capital receipts which have eroded our ability to maintain defence facilities.
On the other hand, the extent to which the return on capital employed calculation can measure operating capability, given that the accounts are not current cost accounts, is debatable.
Although the above profit and loss account does not show the revenues and expenses separately, supporting statements do break the figures down into much more detail.
Because these are accruals accounts, the revenues and expenses shown, subject to measurement problems, ‘relate to’ this financial year.
In other words, there are no revenues included against which we must charge future expenses and there are no expenses against which we must match future revenues: there are no hidden liabilities but at the same time there are no hidden windfalls.
A major concern of any user of these accounts must be the extent to which the turnover was earned in a competitive market.
In a highly competitive market the returns would be a satisfactory performance measure; for a monopolist it might merely reflect that any inefficiencies in service have been passed on to the customers who have no choice but to pay the higher prices.
In practice, the user relies on overall policy control of the Government (particularly through the Monopolies and Mergers Commission), as well as consumer controls (e.g. through consultative councils), to help validate ‘return on capital’.
Having said that, a major recent trend has been to introduce more competition and the Post Office, for example, increasingly competes in all its operating businesses.
A major distinction between accruals accounting in PLCs and accruals in public sector organizations relates to long-term debt.
One use of a balance sheet in a PLC may be to help assess the level of gearing (i.e. the ratio of debt to equity) as a measure of the riskiness of future profits.
A high level of gearing (relative to others in the same industry) means more risk for shareholders because the possibility of their receiving dividends depends, first of all, upon  earning operating profits which will more than cover the interest payments on the debt.
Another use, from the lenders' point of view, is in assessing the ability of the PLC to repay its debts with interest.
This involves, among other things, comparing the level of debt with operating profits as well as with the value of the assets.
The latter is relevant in assessing whether, if the PLC was liquidated, there would be enough funds released to honour the debts.
These uses of accruals accounts have little meaning in public sector organizations.
In most nationalized industries long-term debt is provided by the Government anyway.
This is not to say that nationalized industries might not be capable of earning enough revenues to pay that debt (far from it) but that the Government will not need a published balance sheet to assess financial viability.
Instead, data are provided directly and more timely to obviate this need.
The other main group in the public sector which adopts accruals accounting in some form is local authorities.
Their accounts look very different from the nationalized industries because they adopt budgetary accounting and also because they adopt fund accounting.
Therefore, we will postpone discussion of them until the section on fund accounting.
A final point to make about the adoption of accruals accounting is that in the USA the Governmental Accounting Standards Board has further developed the idea of a set of accounts which are not purely cash-based but are also not full accruals accounting as best commercial practice would envisage it.
A fundamental distinction has been drawn that appears to be useful: between the measurement focus of accounting and the basis of accounting.
The definitions are as follows (GASB, 1990, p. 552).
‘Measurement focus: The objective of a measurement, that is, what is being expressed in reporting an entity's financial performance and position.
A particular measurement focus is accomplished by considering not only which resources are measured (for example, financial or economic resources), but also when the effects of transactions or events involving those resources are recognized (the basis of accounting).’
‘Basis of accounting: The timing of recognition, that is, when the effects of transactions or events should be recognized for financial reporting purposes.
For example, the effects of transactions or events can be recognized on an accrual basis (that is , when the transactions or events take place), or on a cash basis (that is , when cash is received or paid).
Basis of accounting is an essential part of measurement focus because a particular timing of recognition is necessary to accomplish a particular measurement focus.’
Crucial to the above is the definition of financial resources (op. cit., ib.):
‘Cash, claims to cash (for example, debt securities of another entity and accounts and taxes receivable), claims to goods or services (for example , prepaid items), consumable goods (for example , supplies inventories), and equity securities of another entity obtained or controlled as a result of past transactions or events.’
The chosen policy for governmental fund operating statements happens to be the flow of financial resources measurement focus defined as (GASB, 1990, p. 559):
‘A measure of the extent to which financial resources obtained during a period are sufficient to cover claims incurred during that period against financial resources.
This  measurement focus considers financial resources only and uses an accrual basis of accounting.’
It is important to note that the definition of ‘financial resources’ has changed since 1988.
In the Exposure Draft Measurement Focus and Basis of Accounting — Governmental Funds (p. 82), the definition was:
‘Cash, claims to cash (for example, accounts and taxes receivable), and claims to goods or services (for example , prepaid items) obtained or controlled as a result of past transactions or events.’
The point is, of course, that inventory has now been included in financial resources and therefore, under the flow of financial resources measurement focus, the operating statement includes changes in inventory.
This change in definition helps to pinpoint the essence of the idea of ‘measurement focus’ as well as the main problem with the idea.
Using the measurement focus, we can move up the balance sheet (in the UK) and decide whether changes in each line-item within assets affect the operating statement.
Under the original proposal for the flow of financial resources measurement focus, the line was drawn between monetary assets and non-monetary assets, where only changes in monetary assets affected the operating statement.
Now the line has moved up to include inventories.
The essence of the idea of ‘measurement focus’ is, to put it straightforwardly, that by adopting the ‘flow of financial resources’a governmental organization can adopt ‘accrual accounting’in its operating statement (that is, it can ‘recognize the effects of transactions or events on the resources of an entity when they take place, regardless of when cash is received or paid’) but does not have to charge depreciation.
Depreciation is not relevant because it relates to a non-monetary asset outside the flow of financial resources measurement focus.
The main problem with the idea of ‘measurement focus’ is that its definition is arbitrary.
The original definition of financial resources had the virtue of approximating to be a generally-understood distinction between monetary and non-monetary assets, though even that distinction can be difficult.
But by including inventory in ‘financial resources’ it is hard to see any rationale for the definition: in what sense is inventory different from equipment, as a ‘financial resource’?
Nevertheless, though difficulties remain in locating each possible measurement focus, the idea is one that provides an escape from the dominant (if woolly) notion of accruals accounting as an all-or-nothing alternative to cash accounting.
A critique of accruals accounting
The broad benefits of accruals accounting can be summarized as follows.
First, the fact that revenues and expenses in the Operating Statement relate to those earned and those incurred respectively, means that accruals accounting provides measures of the economic goods and services consumed, transformed and earned; cash accounting provides measures of cash inflows and cash outflows.
The second benefit is that accruals accounting yields an income figure.
When there are no price changes the income yielded in historic cost accruals accounting is an acceptable measure of performance: more profit implies more success.
This does not mean that the measure of profit is absolute or objective.
Accruing depreciation, stock valuations, provisions for doubtful debts, etc., are subjective judgements which make historic cost profit subjective.
Nevertheless, this subjectivity is controlled by independent opinions of auditors and by enforcement of accounting standards and the results are evidently acceptable.
When prices do change, however, the income statement becomes less acceptable as a measure of performance.
Inflation, for example, means that the value of fixed assets tends to be understated (historic cost compared with current value) while income tends to be overstated (because depreciation is related to historic cost and not to higher current cost).
One of the objectives of current cost accounting is to produce a more acceptable income figure under conditions of rising prices.
Having said that, in a public sector context the income figure as a measure of performance can only be as good as the competitiveness of the markets in which it is earned allows.
The ability of a monopolist to earn profit, or an organization with social responsibilities to make losses, is hardly to be taken as a signal of economic efficiency.
The Byatt Report, Accounting for Economic Costs and Changing Prices (1986), has added an interesting twist to this argument.
Following the demise of current cost accounting in the private sector and the apparent determination of the Treasury to retain it for nationalized industries, the fact that Byatt strongly endorsed its retention in the public sector is important, particularly from the policy-making perspective.
Essentially, the argument used is that because there is no competitive market in the capital of nationalized industries and no competitive market in their products, the published accounts have a greater significance in assessing economic performance than in the private sector.
Since current cost accounting measures economic performance best, the Report argues, it should be retained in nationalized industries.
Put another way, given the Government's unequivocal control of nationalized industries in the 1980s, being able to control the industries' current cost profit provides the best financial control of their behaviour.
For similar reasons, forms of current cost accounting are being applied to some of the newly-privatized (regulated) industries, such as the water industry.
The third benefit is that it yields a measure of capital.
Historically, the emphasis on maintaining the initial capital invested in a public limited company derives from the causes célèbres of the nineteenth century, when creditors were swindled out of their debts by PLCs which distributed capital as income thus leaving insufficient assets to repay creditors.
Because of the limited liability of shareholders, creditors had no redress.
Consequently, case and statute law was made which prevented distribution of capital invested.
However, the idea of capital maintenance also has economic significance: income is only recognized after capital has been maintained intact.
If the main asset in a business is a factory then merely selling the factory does not yield income, only  capital in a liquid form.
If the receipt is distributed to shareholders as dividends then the capital base of the business has been eroded.
However, under historic cost accruals accounting, for an asset which was sold for more than was paid for it, then the net gain would be income: only the initial cost would be called capital.
In fact, this is the weakness of historic cost accruals accounting.
Just as with profit measures, capital measures are affected by changing prices.
If the factory was sold for more than it cost, if the net gain was treated as income and if a new factory had to be built at the new (higher) prices, then the capital would have been eroded.
Maintaining initial capital intact would be useless if you wanted to remain in the same business.
Instead, the accruals accounts would have to be modified to maintain the current cost of assets.
However, we can say that even historic cost accounting, in times of rising prices, does provide some indication of the extent to which capital might have been eroded or maintained, which as we have suggested earlier is potentially useful information.
The economic significance of capital maintenance in the balance sheets of public sector organizations has not been a major concern of accountants in the past.
Those balance sheets very often do not record the existence of any capital at all, as in the case of local authorities.
Typically too, nationalized industry balance sheets show capital as amounts owed to the central government.
Because those debts are not shown in any balance sheet of central government (there is not one) and also because the balance sheets have a history of restructuring and debt write-off, maintaining capital in accounting terms has become progressively less realistic.
The emergence of current cost accounting and of efforts to apply it to public sector organizations has necessitated taking an explicit view of capital maintenance in their accounts.
However, there are many public sector organizations which are unlikely to adopt current cost accounting.
The question for these organizations is not whether capital is of any relevance to them, for it undoubtedly is.
What their assets are worth is relevant for decisions about making the best use of them.
Should they be sold and new, more efficient assets substituted?
Should anything be set aside?
Is there enough security to support an increased level of borrowing?
The definition of capital expenditure and operating expenditure is relevant for deciding how to finance.
Capital expenditure can be financed by borrowing; if it is not, does this not mean that revenue finance (taxation) is unnecessarily high?
Operating expenditure should not be financed by borrowing; if it is then future taxpayers are paying for services they will not benefit from.
There is indeed no doubt that capital is relevant for taking decisions.
The question is rather whether the accounts ought to record it in a meaningful way.
The main difficulty is that in order to record capital the organization not only has to know what assets it owns but it also has to put a value on them, even if the ‘value’ is their historic cost.
This is the same problem that many businesses faced in the last century when they had to produce balance sheets.
If no assets registers exist which record values, then the task of taking an inventory of fixed assets and valuing them might be a huge and  expensive one.
Further, particularly under a current cost system, these values have to be kept up to date.
Another argument used against the need to record assets values is that many public sector assets are not realizable.
It used to be argued that, for example, a motorway could not be sold or that no one would buy a sewer.
Some of the more creative forms of privatization adopted in the late 1980s have opened up the possibility that any asset could be sold but, regardless of that, the argument is fallacious because the net realizable value of an asset is not the only value which can be placed on it.
Those assets certainly would cost money to replace and to that extent their existence means they are worth their replacement cost: without them we would have to incur the replacement cost to retain their services.
In the end, the argument is about whether it is worth the cost of reflecting capital values in the accounts.
If it is worth the cost then the accruals system will provide the vehicle for this information.
There are, however, problems associated with accruals accounting.
The first is that it introduces more subjectivity into the accounts.
Although this subjectivity is not boundless, because of the audit function and accounting standards, nevertheless it can be used to distort accounting information rather than provide a ‘truer’ picture.
Secondly, the relevance of accruals accounting, when it is linked with historic costs and during periods of rising prices, is limited.
Profit figures become merely amounts which can be spent without impairing initial capital invested.
Thirdly, in comparison with cash flow accounting, accruals adjustments demand a higher administrative and accounting cost.
Either keeping personal creditors accounts or making sundry creditors adjustments can consume inordinate amounts of administrative and accounting time.
Finally, there is a problem associated with financial control.
With cash accounting we suggested that manipulation of accounting results could be effected by postponing cash payments and that this applied particularly when budgets were used in financial control.
With accruals accounting, of course, postponing or bringing forward cash payments or receipts has no effect.
However, it does provide the opportunity for another kind of manipulation.
Imagine a manager with a budget which is underspent one month from the year end.
The manager can see one month ahead and knows that normal spending would still leave the budget underspent.
If it is underspent then either the amount will be lost or next year's budget will be reduced to the lower amount, or both.
One ploy would be quickly to issue orders and have goods delivered merely to fulfil the budget.
Under a cash accounting system the manager would need also to make sure the invoice was paid before the end of the year.
Under accruals, an invoice need only be received.
Not only does this give the manager more opportunity to spend the amount much more quickly, but it also takes it out of the accountant's hands: accountants decide when cash is paid but managers and suppliers decide when invoices are issued.
Commitment accounting
Commitment accounting is much less widely adopted in practice than either cash accounting or accruals accounting.
Indeed, often when it is adopted the  final accounts are adjusted to appear as accruals accounts.
However, it is worth considering because it does offer, at least in theory, an alternative.
This system recognizes transactions when the organization is committed to them.
This means that the transaction is not recognized when cash is paid or received, nor when an invoice is received or issued but at the earlier point, when orders are issued or received.
To see broadly how commitment accounting works, take an example of a manager ordering 100 boxes of chalk.
The manager knows the supplier to be used, and the current price per box is 5.
When the order is issued to the supplier for 100 boxes at 5, a debit is recorded as an expense to the account for chalk.
Of course, there is a variety of factors which might affect the amount of the subsequent invoice: the supplier might not have 100 boxes, the price may have changed, the manager may have used the wrong price, etc.
Therefore, the corresponding credit would not go to the supplier but to, say, an orders issued account:
When the chalk is delivered with an invoice, the entry in the accounts would be:
If the goods delivered and accompanying invoice were for more or less than the amount recorded on the order, a correcting entry would also have to be made.
Assume that 100 boxes were delivered at 5.50.
This would generate the following entry:
Under this system, the organization is recognizing the issue of an order as a commitment to incur the expenditure and the accounts continuously record commitments.
A critique of commitment accounting
The primary function of commitment accounting is in fact in budgetary control.
The idea is that there is little value to a manager of a set of monthly accounts which record only the invoices received or invoices paid.
In order that managers are in control of their budgets they need to know how much of that budget has already been committed in terms of the orders issued.
By receiving accounts of invoices received or paid, they could easily overcommit their budgets.
Of course, sensible managers would know that the accounts did  not include any orders issued against which invoices had not been received and would, therefore, keep their own record of these so that they did not overcommit the budget.
The response to that is, if this accounting information is so relevant to a manager why is it not included in the accounts?
Because this is its primary function, commitment accounting concentrates on orders issued.
Orders received, which relate to revenues, would not be accounted for until invoices had been sent out.
The problem of budgetary control does not affect revenues in the same way as expenses.
Although the case for commitment accounting improving budgetary control is a good one, there is a real problem involved in adopting it in the financial accounts.
This is simply that the accounts would record, as an expense, an item which is only supported by the issue of an order.
There is generally no legal liability incurred and the order could easily be cancelled.
It is difficult to accept that this is an expense of the accounting period in which only an order was issued.
On top of this, the kind of problem which has been discussed earlier under accruals accounting becomes more important and potentially more damaging under commitment accounting.
Let us return to the example of the manager whose budget is underspent one month away from the financial year-end.
The manager knows that the normal level of spending would leave the budget underspent and that this underspending will have to be forfeited with a possible consequent reduction in next year's budget.
Under accruals accounting, in order to make sure the whole budget was spent, additional orders would have to be issued and invoices received before debits would be recognized.
We have already identified this as a problem but at least the opportunity for manipulation was constrained by the time it would take to receive the invoice.
Under commitment accounting, the manager could simply issue orders a few days before the year-end to ‘fill up’ the budget.
Indeed, there might be little to prevent some of the orders being cancelled when the new year commences.
In effect, commitment accounting provides the opportunity for managers and for organizations as a whole to contribute to general reserves at the year-end and to treat the contributions as expenses.
In fact, professional practice in this area is to exclude from the final accounts all orders issued where invoices have not been received.
This means that, although commitment accounting can improve budgetary control and as such may be used for periodic reports to managers, professional practice in the UK precludes its use in the final accounts.
If commitment accounting is adopted during the financial year, the conversion to ordinary accruals at the year-end involves the following book entry: in respect of all the orders issued for which invoices have not been received at the year-end.
The entry would be reversed in the new financial year so that the accounts would once again be recording commitments.
Fund accounting
Fund accounting is a practice we were introduced to in Chapter 7.
It refers to the method of accounting which reports in terms of funds rather than in terms of organizations.
The practical effects of adopting fund accounting depend upon the extent to which different funds are utilized and the form and extent to which the individual fund accounts are consolidated in the final accounts.
If ten funds are used but they are all consolidated into one operating statement and one balance sheet, then the results might well be the same as the accounts for a business.
Indeed, the parallel is very close to the consolidation of the accounts of a group of companies, although this will depend upon the manner in which the consolidation is effected.
On the other hand, if there is a profusion of funds which are not consolidated, then the fund accounts will be very different from the accounts of a business.
The reason for this difference is that businesses see themselves as having a pool of resources which can be used in any aspect of their business to achieve their overall objective, e.g. to achieve a satisfactory return on capital.
Thus this pool of resources could be invested in working capital, in fixed assets, or in financial assets; or it could be spent on wages, supplies, or overheads; or it could be distributed as dividends or used to repay debt.
In other words, there is one fund and the accounts do not divulge the whereabouts of specific monies paid into it, only the whereabouts of the monies in the fund as a whole.
The problem with applying this practice to local government, for example, is that the monies which are paid in cannot be used indiscriminately.
If central government is to finance 100 per cent of a local authority's programme for maintenance of motorways, the authority cannot charge other, unrelated expenditure to that programme.
If an ex-pupil of an education authority  bequeaths £10,000 on the condition that the money is invested and the interest earned is awarded as a prize to the best academic performance each year, the money cannot in law be used to keep local taxes down.
Similarly, if an authority sells a piece of land, the capital receipt also cannot be used to keep local taxes down.
There are many other examples of these kinds of restrictions on how specific monies paid into a local authority can be spent.
The American expression for this position is to say that the resources of a local authority are not ‘fungible’, meaning that we cannot treat them as one mass.
There are different extents of this fungibility.
A useful two-way distinction can be drawn between those monies which are unrestricted and those which are restricted.
These categories would correspond to those which are fungible and those which are not.
Then the restricted monies can be further categorized into broad areas of restrictions, so that one area represents specific grants while another represents bequests, for example.
The point being that the more detailed the categorization of the restrictions becomes, the more likely it is that qualitatively different kinds of restrictions will emerge.
For example, monies could be restricted because the governing body has put them aside for a specific purpose, such as for renewal of a fleet of cars.
This does not mean, however, that they could not easily become unrestricted by a future change in policy: if the fleet of cars subsequently becomes superfluous then  it would be nonsensical not to put the fund back to where it originated.
Another degree of restriction might take the form of a bequest.
The bequest must be adhered to, but adherence depends upon interpretation of the bequeather's wishes.
If a bequest to a school was specified in terms of‘the best performance in the School Certificate’ it would be unreasonable not to release that restriction when the School Certificate was abolished.
It would be a matter of judgement as to how broadly any new restriction was imposed.
An extreme form of restriction would relate to a specific government grant.
The terms of the grant would most typically specify precisely which expenditure qualified for grant and that any underspending had to be relinquished to the Government.
The restriction in this case would be in law and would be an absolute one.
Let us now examine the published accounts of a simplified local authority to see the effects of adopting fund accounting.
This authority accounts using the following funds:
1
General Fund
2
Housing Accounts
3
Trust Funds
Each fund accounts for specified items of income and expenditure.
Each produces an operating account and a balance sheet.
We will concentrate on the General Fund and the Housing Accounts.
Here are the summarized final accounts of the General Fund which is the fund for all expenditure that is properly chargeable to local taxes:
Let us now introduce the Housing Accounts.
This fund is concerned with the provision and maintenance of the stock of houses owned by the authority and rented out to tenants.
It is maintained separately from the General Fund because the policy has been, and particularly in recent years, to try to cover operating expenses by rents charged and housing grants.
In other words, if there is to be a contribution from taxes to balance the operating account, then it should be explicit and calculation of it should also be explicit as should a contribution from Housing to the General Fund.
These are the summarized final accounts for housing:
The link between these accounts and the General Fund is the contribution of 900,000.
The bookkeeping for this inter-fund transfer is a potential source of difficulty because strictly the transaction generates two double-entries.
The first would be in the General Fund:
The second would be recorded in the Housing Accounts:
However, as we noted earlier, most organizations which adopt fund accounting do not keep all their funds completely separate.
Instead they keep a common cash book and bank account which serve all funds.
Consequently, the above two journal entries could be condensed into one:
Since there is only one cash book for the organization, cash does not pass from fund to fund and so is excluded from the journal entry.
This practice does beg the question of how different cash figures are found for the different fund balance sheets when a single cash book is kept for the authority.
The answer is that, in the process of producing final accounts, the cash amounts for each fund balance sheet are balancing figures.
As long as the total of the balancing figures for each fund equals the balance on the cash book, then the accounts as a whole are in balance.
We now have two fund balance sheets in this authority's accounts.
Each one provides the balance at the year end for the defined area.
But what of the organization as a whole?
In order to provide some sort of overall picture this authority, in common with most others, produces a consolidated balance sheet.
As with the consolidation of the accounts of a group of companies, this does not only involve aggregation: there is also the elimination of any inter-fund balances to preclude double-counting.
This is the consolidated balance sheet for our authority:
This balance sheet does not consolidate all the funds.
The trust funds are reported only in the fund accounts.
The reason for this is that the trust funds are not owned by the authority, they are being administered on behalf of the bequeathers.
Consequently, the authority has decided that it would be misleading to include these amounts in a balance sheet which provides some measure of what the authority is ‘worth’.
Some authorities operate superannuation funds on behalf of their past and present employees and these fund accounts are often not consolidated for the same reason.
A critique of fund accounting
Fund accounting explicitly recognizes the political, economic and legal differences that exist between the services provided, and the activities carried on, within public sector organizations.
In the above example, the political differences between the General Fund of a local authority and the Housing Accounts relate to the fact that the former is financed by taxes and the latter is financed by housing rents.
Taxes are paid by all owner occupiers (among others), including substantial contribution from commercial property owners; while rents are paid by council house tenants.
Therefore, for example the pressure groups relating to each fund are different and their demands are also different.
The economic differences are that taxes are not related to the services which taxpayers might receive from the authority; whereas rents paid by individuals are directly related to their occupancy of council houses.
The legal differences reflect the political and economic differences in that different services are provided under the authority of different statutes.
These laws require different (specific) standards, different methods of finance and cite different government departments as having overall responsibility for parts of the services.
The laws often also mean that specific committees and specific departments are set up within local authorities to administer the services.
These political, economic and legal differences between services define the extent to which a local government's resources are fungible.
The objective of fund accounting is to reflect this lack of fungibility in two ways:
1
By ensuring that all debits and credits are maintained separately for funds which are not fungible.
2
By producing a separate operating statement and balance sheet for each non-fungible fund.
In practice, many local authorities do not fully achieve these, for a variety of reasons.
For example many do not publish separate fund balance sheets, only separate operating statements.
We have also noted that all debits and credits are not maintained separately because authorities tend to keep only one cash book.
In fact, with sophisticated computer programs available, there is no reason why any organization of any size need maintain separate cash books and bank accounts for separate funds.
Indeed, it can be argued that a profusion of cash books and bank accounts would provide more problems than it would solve, particularly to financial managers concerned with managing the organization's cash resources as a whole.
On the other hand, if the arguments for accruals accounting are accepted, then fund accounting requires an operating statement and a balance sheet for each fund.
The most pervasive (and persuasive) argument against fund accounting is the increased costs involved in producing published accounts compared with the business method.
These additional costs are of two kinds.
First, there are the physical costs of production.
The second cost associated with producing fund accounts relates to the investment of time and skill needed to understand them.
Most professional accountants have been trained to expect only one set of financial accounts for each organization.
They are trained to search for the overall picture so that they can advise on overall financial policy or make an overall judgement on the truth and fairness of the accounts.
Judgements about profitability, net worth, and creditworthiness are judgements about the PLC taken as a whole.
The idea that an accountant is examining only one set of accounts, of many, is anathema because it carries the implication that unwanted debits and credits might have been secreted away in these other accounts.
This is the other side of fungibility.
If resources are fungible then judgements must be made in the light of all debits and credits.
Some critics have taken the argument against this second cost to the extreme and suggested that the mere fact, of fund accounting not being the norm within the accounting profession as a whole, should prohibit its use.
The criticism that fund accounting does not provide an overall view of the organization is partly countered in local authorities in the UK by producing a consolidated balance sheet.
We have seen that this does not tend to include funds such as the superannuation fund and trust funds.
Nevertheless, it does provide a view of the bulk of the authority.
When this is not as a substitute for the individual fund balance sheets, the argument about incomprehensibility still applies.
However, producing a consolidated balance sheet without the fund balance sheets is hardly a satisfactory solution.
Potentially important information can be lost in consolidating the balance sheets of just two funds.
If eight were consolidated and the individual ones were not published, then the loss of information would be that much greater.
Not only that but it is difficult to see how useful a consolidated balance sheet really is when funds are not fungible.
The balance sheets of public sector organizations are not relevant for making judgements about creditworthiness anyway, so the consolidation adds nothing in this respect.
The net assets of the organization are shown but it is hard to imagine what use can be made of this figure.
Who owns the asset?
What could be done with any realizations?
What does the debtor figure relate to?
Rent, taxes, government grants, other local authorities, miscellaneous charges?
The accumulated surplus on operating account is shown; but what could this be used for?
Reducing taxes, reducing rents, awarding more prizes on the trust fund, reducing administrative charges, reducing insurance fund contributions?
In fact, the consolidated balance sheet is published for little more than completeness: it gives the net debit balances and net credit balances for the organization to be carried forward to the new financial year.
This helps to explain why they do not publish consolidated opening statements: ‘cost of the services of the organization’ adds nothing to the fund operating statements; the measure of performance has no meaning; and, of course, there are no balances included to be carried forward to the new year which are not included in the balance sheet.
In the light of the above, it is not easy to explain the usefulness of publishing a source and application of funds statement for the organization as a whole.
We conclude that the political, economic and legal reality demands fund accounts but many users (particularly business accountants) do not understand them.
There are many analogies in accounting as a whole for this paradox.
The published accounts of PLCs are becoming more and more complicated because of the increased number and complexity of footnotes; yet those footnotes reflect the increased awareness of the need to provide more relevant information.
Fund accounting is merely one more attempt by accountants to report on a complex reality more sensitively; although this seems inevitably to be at the expense of general understandability.
Capital accounting in local government
This chapter is primarily concerned with capital accounting in UK local authorities.
The reason for this specialization is our need to understand this specific and unique method of accounting which cannot easily be understood from a commercial accounting perspective.
The forms of capital accounting
In business balance sheets, the distinction between capital accounts and operating accounts is mostly unclear.
This is because the funds in a business are fungible.
The cash figure in the balance sheet might include both capital and operating cash: if a debenture is issued but the resulting cash has not yet been invested in fixed assets, then the cash will perhaps be shown in the cash book — this is capital cash; if profits were made in the current year, some of these profits might take the form of cash — this is operating cash.
But in the accounts of the business the distinction is not made.
Nevertheless, it is important as a matter of law and could be important as a matter of economics, that a limited company can distinguish between the original capital invested and the rest.
The law attempts to ensure that the original capital invested is maintained within the limited company, particularly so that the rights of unsecured creditors are protected: the original capital, if maintained, is assumed to provide their security.
As a matter of business economics, if the capital originally invested is eroded, for example by distributing capital amounts in the form of dividends, then the business's ability to carry on will be diminished.
In general terms, inflation accounting methods have been concerned with ensuring that capital is being maintained in economic terms.
Consequently, business balance sheets do distinguish between revenue reserves and capital reserves, the former being distributable while the latter are not.
Moreover, current cost accounting strictly demands that a business's cash book be segregated into capital and revenue cash.
The capital/revenue distinction is therefore important in business accounts even though the published balance sheets tend to understate it — a fact now emphasized in the Cash Flow Statement.
In public sector organizations, the distinction sometimes takes on a lesser and sometimes a greater importance.
In the appropriation accounts of the Government, the distinction is almost non-existent.
Some votes are for capital items, such as expenditure on new buildings, while others are for revenue items, such as staff salaries.
Each are accounted for in the same way: budgeted expenditure is compared with actual spending, budgeted income with actual income, and any net under- or over-spending on the vote as a whole is paid  over to, or collected from, the Consolidated Fund.
This latter fund simply collects together all the appropriations of expenditure made by Parliament and is financed broadly by taxation and borrowing in proportions which bear little or no relationship to the underlying ‘capital’ and ‘revenue’spending.
Simply, as far as the accounts are concerned, spending is spending.
In other public sector organizations which adopt the cash basis of accounting, the capital accounts are essentially the same as the revenue accounts although the two are kept separately.
The accounts of the National Health Service as a whole offer a good example.
These authorities are ultimately financed by a grant from the Government.
However, there are current grants (for operating expenditure) and capital grants (for capital expenditure).
Although there is some latitude between these grants, in that part of the capital grant can be transferred to be used on the current grant, the distinction between them is maintained and is important.
However, the accounts do only compare actual expenditure against grant for both categories.
Although this is true of the appropriation accounts presented to Parliament in respect of the NHS as a whole, the way that the constituent health service bodies account for capital has been the subject of substantial change.
Commercial accounting has been introduced for the new Trusts.
For the NHS managed hospitals, a form of accruals accounting has been introduced, including depreciation charges and an opportunity cost of capital charge.
In principle, this accounting is no different from commercial accounting except that the depreciation charges are being made into cash flows from each hospital to the Regional Health Authorities, who then reallocate the cash flows back to the District Health Authorities and the GPs, who in turn buy services from the hospitals.
This radical treatment (radical at least in the UK — it has distinct echoes of the accounting used in the old centrally-planned economies of Eastern Europe) is a result of grafting on depreciation accounting (and including the depreciation in prices) to a cash accounting system.
Capital accounting in a nationalized industry is in essence no different from that in a limited company.
Capital finance takes a different form and the Government has overall control of it (in the form of upper limits to the amount the organization can borrow — known as ‘external financing limits’).
But once the finance has been raised, it is fungible.
It has always been the policy of the Government for nationalized industries to adopt best commercial practice at least.
Capital accounting in UK local authorities
Local authorities account for capital expenditure in a unique way.
(For a discussion of local authority capital expenditure, see Chapter 3.)
There is no counterpart in any other kind of organization, business or non-business.
In fact, new accounting arrangements were introduced with the implementation of the poll tax legislation in 1988 and subsequently.
The overall effect of these new arrangements is the same as it was under traditional accounting but there are important differences also.
It will be instructive, therefore, to describe the traditional method and then to explain the new system.
Before 1988, there were two legal requirements that effectively determined the form of capital accounting:
1
Schedule 13, para 7(i), Local Government Act 1972 required that where expenditure was defrayed by borrowing, a sum equivalent to an instalment of principal and interest was debited to the relevant operating statement so that the loan was repaid over a specified period of years.
2
Local authorities were not allowed, in law, to budget for an operating deficit.
In other words, having debited principal and interest for loans raised to operating statements, rates had to be collected at least to cover those repayments (S. 2, General Rate Act 1967).
The effect of these two prescriptions was that the principal repayments of loans raised were taken off the balance sheet and put through the revenue account.
In a business, for example, only interest on loans is put through the profit and loss account as an operating expense; principal repayments involve taking one balance sheet item, i.e. cash, and using it to reduce another, i.e. long-term liability.
Thus, in a business which finances the purchase of a depreciable asset by issuing a debenture, the operating expense of that machine is:
1
Depreciation — the allocation of a proportion of the total cost to the year
2
Interest on the loan
The redemption of the debenture is either refinanced by another debenture issue or it is repaid from any surplus cash.
In local authorities, the principal repayments were forced through the revenue account: the law was in effect saying that provision must be made annually for repayment of debt.
In practice, therefore, these principal repayments took the place of depreciation.
The effect was inextricably to combine matters of capital cost with capital finance — since the annual ‘cost’ of the asset was defined by the annual cost of finance, the principal repayments.
An example might highlight the essential features of the system.
A local education authority is to build a new school gymnasium.
Approval has been received to spend 250,000 and the building cost turned out to be 250,000.
In order to keep the example simple, assume that the gymnasium was built and paid for in cash within a year.
Assume also that a specific loan was raised to finance the building cost.
The journal entries would be:
During the subsequent year, as the law requires, provision would have to be made for the principal and interest repayments on the loan in the revenue account.
The repayments in this first year are:
Together these amounts are called ‘debt charges’.
The figures assume that the loan is to be repaid using equal annual instalments over 20 years and interest is charged at 10 per cent of the reducing balance.
The number of years over which loans could be repaid was a matter for each individual authority, subject to maxima laid down by the Government for given categories of assets.
The only other two entries in the accounts relate to the collection of taxes and tax-related grants of 50m and net expenditure (before repayments of principal and interest) of 52m.
The accounts for the year would be as follows:
Now the debt charges would have to be paid to the long-term creditor.
The journal entries would be:
Note that as the principal repayment reduces the loan outstanding so it is debited to that account.
A credit for interest owed would not normally have been set up so the interest would be debited to the nominal account shown, which will then merely be transferred into the revenue account:
There is one more entry required.
Although we have made a repayment of principal, we have not yet financed that repayment.
In the accounts of a business the principal repayment would merely be a transfer of funds within the balance sheet from the owners to the creditors.
In local authorities we know that the principal repayment must be financed through the revenue account, namely:
The credit, in this journal entry is to an account known as ‘capital discharged’.
The name is unfamiliar but it is only what its name implies: the capital liabilities that have been discharged, in this case, by repayment of loans.
The accounts can now be posted with these journal entries and the balance sheet drawn up:
The most important thing to note about the presentation of this balance sheet is that the fixed assets continue to be shown at their historic cost.
As principal on the loan is repaid, the loan outstanding reduces and capital discharged increases.
If the asset was not depreciating, such as a piece of land, then this capital discharged would reflect an historic cost measure of the capital that the authority held in the land.
In the case of the gymnasium, which would depreciate, an assumption can be made that this capital discharged represents depreciation.
Since the net book figure is precisely matched by loans outstanding, this presentation implies that the authority has no capital invested in the asset: the amount by which the asset depreciated to date was repaid to the loan creditor.
Another point about the balance sheet relates to the treatment of the deficit on the revenue account.
In a business any operating loss would be deducted from capital and accumulated reserves on the liabilities side.
Had there been any accumulated revenue account surpluses, then the deficit of 2,037,500 would have been netted off them.
Since in our simplified example there were none, then the deficit has to be shown as a fictitious asset under other balances.
This simple example implies that specific loans are raised to finance specific assets.
In most, if not all, local authorities this ‘earmarking’ of loans is no longer practised.
Instead, the authority as a whole manages loans in a fund known as the ‘Loans Fund’.
The individual fund accounts then borrow any required capital finance from the Loans Fund.
Thus, it is nothing more than a clearing house which does nothing in its own right.
It simply services all the other spending funds, by borrowing from external sources and lending internally.
The advantage of a Loans Fund is that it facilitates the authority's management of debt.
All the individual fund borrowing requirements are collected and then are matched with the optimal portfolio (mixing long- and short-term debt, as well as mixing debt and equity holdings).
This prevents individual funds adopting financing policies which may be inconsistent or dysfunctional for the authority as a whole.
Thus if one fund was a net lender (of 1m) and another was a net borrower (of 2m) it would normally be inefficient  for the 1m to be lent externally and the 2m to be borrowed externally: borrowing rates of interest would normally be higher than lending rates.
If the requirements are put through a Loans Fund, then the net requirement of the authority is to borrow 1m;
Of course, the same result could be achieved without putting the bookkeeping through a Loans Fund.
It is only that by doing so, the accounts are reflecting the economic reality more closely.
An important effect of adopting a Loans Fund (or any other ‘loans pool’) is that a distinction has to be made between loan repayment and loan redemption:
Loan repayment
is the straightforward transaction reflecting cash flowing out of the authority (assuming it is external loan repayment) to repay loans.
Loan redemption
is the amount of principal charged in the fund revenue accounts to the Loans Fund to provide for the ultimate repayment of loans.
This distinction has to be made because, although loans may be redeemed over 60 years, it is extremely unlikely that a financing instrument could be found which would mature in 60 years' time.
Stock, for example, is issued for 25 years at the most, for the obvious reason that the market will charge a high premium for lending over a longer period than that.
In fact, maturity dates are currently much earlier than 25 years.
Consequently, a nominal 60-year loan would in practice be made up of many short-, medium-, and long-term loans.
The loan redemption relates to the pattern of principal amounts chosen to contribute to the Loans Fund, say 1/60th each year.
The external loan repayments relate to the cash flows out of the authority enforced by maturity dates earlier than 60 years.
This distinction has importance not least because it is often (mistakenly) said of local authority accounts that they are essentially cash accounts.
This is mistaken because the charge to revenue accounts does not reflect cash flows, only loan redemptions.
In summary, it is when capital expenditure is financed from borrowing that we see the most fundamental difference between local government accounting and commercial accounting.
The effect of forcing loan redemptions through revenue accounts was to link financing of the assets with accounting for them.
This link also influences accounting for capital expenditure that is financed other than by borrowing.
Whether assets are financed from reserves, from grants or from revenue, they are not depreciated.
If there are effects on the revenue account, these will be accounted for when the revenue finance is required.
Therefore, in the case of capital expenditure out of reserves, the revenue effect is recorded only when the contributions were made from revenue into the reserve accounts.
Where capital is financed from grants, there will be  no direct revenue effect.
Obviously, when capital is financed from revenue, the accounting takes place at the same time as the financing.
This accounting method has been used in local government throughout its modern context in the UK, i.e. since 1835; indeed, it was used before that as well.
But since the early 1970s, there has been a great deal of controversy about it and the prevailing mood in the accounting profession appears to be that the system is archaic and needs replacing.
In fact, accompanying the introduction of the poll tax in 1988 (and surviving it with the move to the ‘council tax’) traditional accounting was changed.
The balanced budget requirement is now enforced under Part VI of the Local Government Finance Act 1988.
Debt charges (principal and interest) still have to be included in budget revenue expenses and therefore, in the end, local taxes have to be raised to finance these debt charges.
However, there are important changes in how this is achieved.
In place of the requirement to debit debt charges to individual operating statements, the law now requires that the local authority makes a ‘minimum revenue provision’ for the accounts as a whole.
This provision is a percentage of the authority's overall outstanding debt and is prescribed by the Government (Part IV of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989).
As a consequence, whereas before the government used to control the amount of loan redemption by setting a maximum redemption period for each category of asset, now it has a global control.
By setting the percentage at 4 per cent(as it did), it is requiring local authorities to spread loan redemption for its aggregate borrowing over approximately 50 years at maximum (which equates to 4 per cent on a reducing balance basis).
Among other things, this means that the traditional connection between loan redemptions and the lives of associated assets has been broken.
Now loan redemption is a matter for the Government to decide (at least as to minima), and presumably comes down to a judgement about how much the Government thinks that local authorities as a whole can afford to redeem in any year.
There is another possible consequence of this change, which may or may not have been intended.
The minimum revenue provision is defined in terms of the authority as a whole.
This raises the question about whether we still need to allocate debt charges to individual operating statements.
In fact, the arguments in response to this question are no different from the pervasive arguments in the whole of accounting about spatial allocations, from a central pool to smaller units.
It is just that, since the law has shifted the focus from a disaggregate control to a central control, the question naturally raises itself.
The additional attraction of moving to a central control, for some, is that it has often been argued, and increasingly so over the past 20 years, that debt charges do not measure ‘cost of service’ and should not be charged to detailed revenue accounts anyway.
We will return to this point later in the chapter.
A critique of local authority capital accounting
Let us begin by trying to understand the rationale for the system; after all, it has been used for many years and must presumably have had some point  to it.
We can see it in its most elemental form in its historical context where, for example, an influential group in a community on the Thames decided, in the 1830s, to build a new bridge over the river.
The capital cost is to be financed from a local property tax.
The community cannot afford to pay the required tax in one year so the immediate finance is by borrowing.
The financial decision is taken, in the light of current market conditions, to issue stock redeemable in equal annual instalments of principal and interest over the ten years following completion of the bridge.
The property tax will be levied, on the predictable base of immovable property, to yield the required annual debt repayments.
In this case, it would seem natural to establish an accounting system that records the annual debts (principal and interest), in which each year's debt charges signal the property tax rate (having taken account of rateable value) and which subsequently accounts for the actual expenditure and actual revenues (to determine whether next year's taxes need adjusting).
If we now introduce the idea that the control and management of this bridge, including its finances, were in the hands of periodically-elected local politicians, the system appears in sharper relief.
For the community, the bridge is a good thing but the taxes are bad.
The borrowing facility severs the relationship between the two things: it allows the community to have all the good things but in the short run to suffer a much smaller amount of the bad.
In extremis, if the community defaulted on the debt, the relationship would be completely severed.
But as long as the politicians are forced to levy annual taxes to make annual debt repayments, there is some control over their fiscal integrity.
This is the essence of local authority capital accounting.
By retaining the link between finance and accounting, local politicians are forced to bear some of the cost of their programmes in the annual taxes that they have to levy in the short run.
Politicians are endowed by law with finite, and short, time horizons.
The capital accounting system is a method of forcing some of the financial consequences of their actions into those time horizons.
We might argue, albeit anachronistically, that best commercial practice could also have been adopted in accounting for the bridge.
The asset is capitalized, interest is expensed and principal repayments do not pass through the revenue account.
Depreciation may be charged, if the bridge was judged to be depreciable.
The tax-financing decision would be severed from accounting.
The tax might still be based on debt charges, or might not.
The revenue account would match the taxes due with depreciation and interest charged.
This would yield a measure of the annual cost of the bridge.
But would it provide the same control over the politicians' fiscal integrity?
The answer must be that it could not since the fact of adopting depreciation accounting severs the link with finance.
This is not to suggest that the existing system does not have its problems.
Because the revenue account is determined by matters of finance, it does not account for the annual cost of running the authority.
This is particularly poignant in cost comparisons between local authorities.
Differences can be affected as much by different financing requirements as by differences in resources consumed.
Traditionally, controversy has centred around the question of whether local authorities should adopt best commercial practice, i.e. depreciation accounting, instead of the existing system.
The first major privatization debate (as we would now call it) in this country took place in the first decade of this century.
Because the major public sector bodies (outside the Government) were local authorities, the debate involved local government accounting (see Jones, 1985).
Indeed, a significant part of it concerned the relevance of depreciation accounting.
More recently, Sidebotham (1966 and 1970) concluded many years of his own research by proposing, among other things, a Consolidated Capital Fund that would include all capital assets of an authority and would charge fund revenue accounts for the use of those assets.
The Consolidated Capital Fund would sever the link between finance and accounting.
We can be sure that the debate is, therefore, a long one.
In its modern context, we can now examine the issues involved.
Non-monetary economic goods can usefully be divided into three categories:
1
Unlimited life goods — the best example of which is building land
2
Single-year goods — which include raw materials, electricity, fuel, etc.
3
Multi-year goods — which include plant and machinery, vehicles, buildings, etc
Under the system of cash accounting, all three categories are dealt with in the same way: cash payments relating to each one are recorded as cash flows in the year in which they occur.
Consequently, there is no capitalization, no unallocated costs and no depreciation.
In accruals accounting, however, the three categories are dealt with differently.
Unlimited life goods are typically stored at historic cost in the balance sheet and there is no depreciation.
Single-year goods are matched with the revenues that they generate.
Therefore, in any year, they may be expensed (when they have generated revenues) or they may be stored in the balance sheet (for example, as closing stock, when they have yet to generate revenues).
Multi-year goods are stored in the balance sheet as unallocated costs and proportions of cost are allocated to the operating statement to match revenues generated.
This allocation of cost is called ‘depreciation’.
SSAP 12, Accounting for Depreciation, says:
‘…provision for depreciation of fixed assets having a finite useful life should be made by allocating the cost (or revalued amount) less estimated residual values of the assets as fairly as possible to the periods expected to benefit from their use.’
This standard was developed with commercial accounts in mind and it confirms the view that depreciation is a matter of allocation, not of valuation; though in recent years it has become acceptable to allocate revalued amounts.
Charging depreciation in the accounts of businesses receives its support from the matching concept.
Realized revenues have to be matched with the costs which yielded those revenues.
Since the use of depreciable assets yields revenues, some proportion of the cost of those assets must be allocated to the operating statement.
This produces a more correct operating cost than would  be shown without including depreciation and consequently produces a more correct measure of profit.
This is perhaps particularly true when depreciation charges are based on current values.
An additional potential benefit is that charging depreciation means that funds are set aside (though these funds need not be and probably will not be liquid) to maintain the capital of the organization.
It must be said that the relevance of the depreciation charge in this context depends also on which of the asset's many possible values is depreciated.
Thus, for example, when specific prices are rising, depreciating the historic cost of the asset will not provide for replacement.
Nevertheless, depreciation has a place in capital maintenance.
We know that local authorities are forced by the law to charge loan redemptions (principal repayments) to revenue.
These redemptions are, therefore, in lieu of depreciation in the case of depreciable assets.
Indeed, with two assumptions, they will be equal to depreciation charges.
Assumption 1:
that the whole of the capital cost is financed from loan.
Assumption 2:
that the loan redemption period is the same as the estimated useful life of the asset.
If these apply and if, for example, the loans are redeemed using equal annual instalments of principal, then the revenue charge will be exactly the same as if an asset was depreciated using straight-line depreciation and any loan repayments were merely balance sheet transfers.
Consequently, the argument about depreciation producing more correct costs in the revenue account applies equally to principal repayments in lieu of depreciation.
The debate about whether local authorities should adopt depreciation accounting is concerned with the following issues:
1
The reasonableness and generality of the above Assumptions 1 and 2
2
The relevant concept of capital maintenance
On the first issue, the problem with Assumption 1 is that a significant proportion of capital expenditure is not financed from loan.
Particularly, we have seen that it is often financed by revenue, either explicitly (by recording it as an asset with an equal figure of capital discharged) or implicitly (by expensing it).
This means that in future years the revenue accounts effectively treat the use of these assets as being free.
Whereas, if depreciation was charged on all depreciable capital assets, then a more correct cost would be recorded.
Assumption 2 could be equally unrealistic.
One reason is that the Government has always set upper limits to loan redemption periods.
With a minimum revenue provision based on, say, 4 per cent of outstanding debt, this means that assets as a whole cannot be financed over more than 50 years, assuming that 4 per cent is constant.
Since, demonstrably, local government assets have in the past lasted, and continue to last, more than 50 years, for those assets the assumption is mistaken.
Another reason is that many local authorities, as a matter of policy, accelerate their loan redemptions so that loans are repaid long before the end of the assets' useful lives.
This decision is taken primarily as a matter of finance.
Increasing loan redemption periods cannot be done without incurring costs in the form of interest charges.
In  money terms, therefore, it is cheaper to repay loans quickly because interest will be saved.
Of course in real terms, this ‘saving’ depends upon the relationship between nominal rates of interest and rates of inflation — not to mention the community's rate of time preference.
But in practice some authorities judge that this relationship has meant that loans should be repaid quickly.
Again, this means that revenue accounts are not recording the more correct cost of the capital assets once the loans have been repaid.
The second issue involves the concept of capital maintenance adopted.
We have said that depreciation in business can perform the function of maintaining capital.
If depreciation is provided for in terms of replacement costs, this means that the business will set aside out of profits enough funds to replace its expired assets.
(This does not mean that the replacement funds will be available in liquid form on expiry since they could be locked up in other fixed asset purchases.)
Charging principal repayments in lieu of depreciation does not perform the same function in a local authority.
If we think of an individual asset to be purchased and financed from loan, then the authority begins with no capital.
It then borrows the capital required and invests it in the asset.
As the loan is repaid the asset depreciates until, when the asset expires, the loan has been repaid (if Assumption 2 is correct).
Consequently, the authority is still left with no capital.
If it decides to replace the asset, it has to borrow again.
 And.
so the cycle goes on.
The underlying concept is what has been called ‘zero capital maintenance’(Jones, 1982).
The rationale for this is that the generation which uses the asset should pay for it.
The extent to which this inter-generational equity is achieved in practice depends upon Assumptions 1 and 2 as well as upon the extent to which any pattern of principal repayments is capable of reflecting assets usage.
If depreciation is to be substituted for loan redemptions, then first of all the law must be changed, to take the principal repayments out of the revenue account so that they become balance sheet transfers as in business.
If the depreciation charges were not controlled in any way, then this would mean that local authorities could do one of three things:
l
They could hold permanent debt.
This would arise where depreciation charges were less than principal repayments would have been.
The difference between these would be unredeemed debt.
In effect, this would mean that capital could be reduced, perhaps from zero to being negative.
The starkest example would be unlimited life goods, where depreciation presumably would not be charged at all.
2
They could maintain the status quo, by charging the same in depreciation as would have been charged in principal repayments.
3
They could increase their holdings of capital, by charging more in depreciation than they would have charged in principal repayments.
After the principal had been repaid, through the balance sheet, surplus funds would be recorded as increases in capital.
Options l and 2 would affect the concept of capital maintenance, and the argument would then include opinions on the relative merits of each.
If  agreement was reached that inter-generational equity existed under the present system, then option l would mean that current taxpayers were benefiting in relation to future taxpayers, on the other hand, option 3 would mean that future taxpayers were benefiting in relation to current taxpayers.
But these conclusions depend upon depreciation being a substitute.
If it was to be provided in addition to principal repayments in the revenue account, then local authorities' capital would increase.
If agreement was reached that inter-generational equity existed under the present system, then this would mean that the change in accounting policy would lead to future taxpayers benefiting relative to current taxpayers.
The judgements that have to be made are complex, not least because local government has existed for a long time and the opportunities for building up capital or depleting it have been great.
The judgment we make today must make allowance for this.
In fact, there is a real example of depreciation accounting being practised alongside payments in lieu of depreciation.
This occurred in the old water authorities.
When the water industry was reorganized, following the Water Act 1973, the local authority system of capital accounting was adopted throughout.
Perpetuation of this system would have meant, as we can predict from the above reasoning, that when the nation's sewers finally collapsed, having been built in the last century, a huge financing requirement would have been forced upon the industry.
The local authority system provides no capital for replacing assets; the capital must be reborrowed.
Now, on the face of it, the problem of obtaining the finance is no different from that faced by local authorities every day.
However, if we look more deeply, we can see that this massive refinancing would be very inequitable.
The reason being that probably for the last 50 years the sewers have been provided free: they have outlived any associated loans and so no charge has been made to the revenue accounts.
On top of this, the replacement costs of sewers (indeed any buildings and plant) have increased enormously.
In other words, in this case, we cannot assume that the position in 1974 represented inter-generational equity.
The then current ratepayers had received substantial bequests from the ratepayers of 50 and 100 years previous.
In the light of this, the addition of depreciation charges to water revenue accounts is justified.
It could be argued that it came too late to correct the inequity completely, but at least it was a partial correction.
The current situation could be interpreted this way: the additional depreciation is building up capital but not so that the sewers can be replaced without the need to borrow; rather, that the smaller future borrowing requirement will recompense future generations for the unwillingness of pre-1974 ratepayers to share the burden of the capital cost of sewers.
Whether local government would be allowed to go through the same process is difficult to say.
It is likely that there would be significant opposition to the idea that local taxes should bear the burden of redeeming the old debt as well as building up new capital.
There is no doubt that in the past this is where depreciation accounting has floundered, as an addition to the existing system: local taxes were judged to be incapable of bearing the additional burden.
In summary, substituting depreciation accounting for the existing method would make revenue accounts more relevant for cost comparisons but less reliable for financial control.
Adding depreciation accounting to the existing system has, in the past, not been affordable.
Perhaps the future lies in the compromise of adopting the old management accounting adage: different costs for different purposes.
In this, we might keep the existing loan redemptions for the tax calculations but substitute depreciation charges for cost comparisons and management information generally.
As a matter of accounting technique, it is easy to see how this would work, though in practice the extra administrative work would not be insubstantial.
The most important problem for theorists is whether politicians, officers, the Government and others will accept two information systems.
For while it is true that ‘different costs for different purposes’ is an accepted part of textbooks, it is not clear that the idea has been successfully communicated to non-accountants.
Appendix to Chapters 8 and 9
The purpose of this Appendix is to discuss an example that compares the important elements of the cash basis and forms of the accrual basis of accounting; and to compare the local authority model.
Assume that a unit buys a minibus for 10,000 that lasts for four years and at the end of Year 4 is worthless.
The financial objective is to break even, either by charging for use of the minibus or by taxing: in a private sector context, we assume charging; in a governmental context, taxing.
We abstract from real-world problems of uncertainty (so that the above data are all known) and from changing prices.
Running costs (e.g. fuel, insurance, tax, driver's wages, etc.) are 5,000 p.a., on both the cash basis and the accrual basis.
In other words, there is either no opening and closing working capital for each year or the two balances for each year are the same.
Assume also that running costs are financed with credit until receipts are received.
The financial accounting question comes down to this: which year(s) bears the 10,000?
There are an infinite number of ways of dividing it up; indeed, there are an infinite number of ways of dividing it up systematically.
Commonly-used methods of calculating this depreciation include the following:
In the context of companies, there is nothing in law or in accounting standards that requires or forbids one or other of these methods be used.
Disclosure of the method adopted is required by SSAP 12; the same standard requires disclosure of the reason for any change in method and the effect of the change.
In the following, we will choose the straight-line pattern.
Now we can introduce one more element.
The unit may not have the capital in the beginning and has therefore to borrow 10,000 at an annual percentage rate (APR) of 12 per cent(otherwise known as the ‘internal rate of return’).
There are many possible schedules of repayment of this loan but the following two will be used here (both assume cash flows at the end of each year):
We can see, therefore, that using the business accounting model (No. 1 and No. 2), the opening capital position was maintained.
Had charges been made in excess of the ones recorded here, these excesses would have been called ‘profits’ or ‘surpluses’, after maintaining initial capital intact.
This is particularly important because in practice we assume that ‘accounting’ for the business and ‘financing’it are distinctly different issues.
It follows from the above that the principal repayments of loans are not costs of running the minibus that have to be passed on in charges to the users.
Put another way, the financing and refinancing of the business is accounted for as balance sheet movements.
For example, in No. 2, capital would still be zero even if the surplus cash was not used to repay the loan: when the loan is repaid the two balance sheet items of ‘long-term creditor’ and ‘cash’are written out.
Now we can examine how a cash basis might account for the minibus, more specifically how a government's cash basis might.
In thinking about this model in practice, there are a number of issues to remember.
Governments are not required to balance their budgets.
As a consequence, the direct relationship between the cost calculation and the fixing of taxes that we have set up here is inapplicable.
Governments run deficits   (usually) and sometimes run surpluses.
Particularly since the impact of Keynesian economics on government policy, decisions about these matters are made in macroeconomic terms: the effect on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, etc.
Nevertheless, it remains true that, as under the business model, financing and refinancing of debt takes place outside the appropriation accounts (which are the operating statements).
Having said that, there are units within the Government that are set up as ‘trading funds’.
These are becoming increasingly important and since 1990 the law is much more flexible in terms of the criteria to be satisfied before a unit can become a trading fund.
(Note: the Next Steps Initiative, which is primarily concerned with the establishment of Executive Agencies, is not the same thing as the establishment of trading funds.
However, Executive Agencies are in some cases becoming trading funds and it appears that many more will become so in the future).
By establishing a trading fund, the Government applies the business model of accounting.
It could do this by giving the fund a loan, in which case our No. 2 calculation would apply: obviously, the payment of interest on the debt would be to the Government's central funds.
But the Government could also inject equity, in the form of public dividend capital.
With one modification, our No. 1 calculation would apply and, because of the policy of break-even, no amounts would be available to pay dividends to the Government's central funds.
The modification is that the Government would also make a charge to the trading fund, representing an opportunity cost of capital charge.
It has long been argued by some accounting theorists that business accounts should also include an opportunity cost of capital in the income statement.
In practice, this does not happen but the rationale for this policy in the context of trading funds is that, in competing with the private sector, the Treasury argues that the fund should be required to make charges that at least cover a normal commercial return on capital.
Turning to the local authority case, this is how the existing method of  
The effect here is, by requiring taxes to equal spending (as defined) the accounting model inextricably binds the accounting to the financing.
If we extend the method to include depreciation as well as principal repayments, this is the effect:
Now it is obviously possible, because of the way we have constructed this example, to use depreciation to replace the charge made for the principal repayments of the loan and to show that the result will be the same as in Local Authority Accounting No. 1:
As long as the balanced budget requirement remains, the accounting remains bound up with the financing.
In this example, No. 3 is the same as No. 1, but it is easy to imagine many circumstances in which they would be different in practice.
For example, an asset such as land would not normally attract a depreciation charge but it would result in principal charges to revenue if it was financed by loan.
All depreciable assets would attract depreciation but only those assets with debt outstanding would produce, in effect, a charge to revenue for principal repayments.
Moreover, in all these examples we have assumed historic cost accounting.
Local Authority No. 1 method always uses historic cost accounting.
If depreciation was based on current values and these values were different from historic costs that would of itself produce differences.
For example, replacement costs of economically useful assets (e.g., Case 3 assets under deprival value accounting) could be significantly higher than the book values of assets with related outstanding debt.
This would produce significantly increased charges for depreciation, which in Local Authority No. 3 would simply lead to significant cash surpluses.
As was pointed out earlier in this chapter, this is not necessarily bad, particularly when extra resources are needed for capital investment programmes.
The point is only that this is as a direct result of the accounting method adopted rather than any policy decision.
There are other issues involved in comparing No. 3 and No. 1.
An important question relates to the potential to manipulate the charges for the minibus.
As the law and accounting standards currently require for  companies, any systematic charge can be made to the income statement.
In our example, Year 1 could have been charged with 5,000, 4,000 or 2,500.
Under local authority accounting practice, the minimum revenue provision for the local authority as a whole is a fixed percentage, determined by the Government.
Why these two methods of accounting are controlled so differently is a complex matter, but a factual difference is that in the context of companies depreciation is purely a matter of accounting, whereas for local authorities it is a matter of accounting and finance.
Perhaps this opens up the idea of the Government substituting depreciation accounting in place of principal repayments of loans but imposing the same control over the depreciation charge that it imposes on the minimum revenue provision.
This would be anathema to the Anglo-American tradition of business accounting, but would fit with the Continental European tradition.
Depreciation accounting, in that way, could be used to raise additional taxes, perhaps for the explicit purpose of providing further investment.
We might be tempted also to say that other benefits of depreciation accounting would ensue, such as producing a charge in revenue accounts for the use of assets, rather than as at present for the financing of assets.
This raises many questions about the extent to which any depreciation charge could yield a useful measure of this use but, given the policy of fixed depreciation charges imposed by Government, it would be hard to see how these charges would be capable of measuring actual usage of assets (a point which is at the heart of the difference between the two accounting traditions).
This might lead us to conclude that in the case where taxes cannot bear the additional charges resulting from depreciation accounting (which is another way of saying that there is not the political will to impose them), in order to retain control of the charge to revenue accounts, the existing system will remain.
It is theoretically possible to divorce the balanced budget requirement from the accounting for the cost of individual funds or individual units within funds, by having two sets of accounting numbers.
So, for example, the cost of the minibus to the budget-holder is based on a depreciation charge whereas the cost of the minibus to the taxpayer is based on a minimum revenue provision.
This solution is familiar to accounting textbooks but the political and other behavioural consequences have hardly been addressed.
Financial reporting and accountability
In the two previous chapters, we have discussed the financial accounting techniques available to, and used by, public sector organizations.
This chapter is concerned with the ways in which the results of these techniques are reported and more particularly with the legal and professional attempts made to standardize them.
We then discuss how financial reports can be used, and how they might be improved, to satisfy the demand for information about wider accountability issues.
Accounting standards
In the developed countries of the world, the UK and the USA represent the ‘flexible’ view of financial reporting: accounting standards exist to narrow the areas of difference; they do not exist to eliminate them.
This is in marked contrast to Continental European countries and the old Eastern bloc.
Those countries adopt ‘uniform’ accounting, the explicit goal of which is to eliminate differences in accounting practice.
We can characterize this polarization of views in the following way: flexible accounting is concerned with accounting in accordance with the facts; uniform accounting is concerned with accounting in accordance with the rules.
On the face of it, it may seem that these two approaches can be made to coincide as long as the rules are drawn up to reflect the facts.
In practice, however, they are contradictory, because the purpose of the rules is to produce a single solution to any accounting problem while economic reality, with which accounting purports to be concerned, is far too complex for unique solutions.
Take the example of calculating an annual depreciation charge for a vehicle.
Under uniform accounting, the rules will specify, for example, that a given vehicle will be depreciated on a straight-line basis over seven years throughout a particular industry.
This produces a uniform depreciation charge (or a standard depreciation charge) and is calculated according to the rules.
The problem is that plainly this depreciation charge cannot reflect the periodic benefits expected to accrue from using the vehicle.
Different industries will use vehicles more or less efficiently.
An industry which uses the vehicle on long haul will derive different periodic benefits from an industry which uses it over many, short journeys.
Different loads will produce different vehicle lives and different repair bills.
Different repair schedules will produce different repair costs and different vehicle lives.
The economic reality of each organization is likely to be different.
The flexible approach is therefore to allow organizations to account for their own economic reality.
Asset lives are not specified, they must only be fair.
The depreciation method can be straight-line, reducing balance, sum of the digits, economic, or indeed any other, so long as the periodic charge is fair.
But the more immediate problem in this context is that a totally flexible approach would prevent comparison of the reports of different organizations and the reports of the same organization over time.
Since little in accounting is absolute, some comparability is a necessary (though not sufficient) condition for financial reports.
Hence, we have the attempts by both the law and professional pronouncement to standardize, but to standardize whilst retaining some flexibility.
Legal prescriptions
As an example of how the law is concerned with accounting standards in nationalized industries, we can examine the case of British Rail (BR).
The main Act relating to BR's accounts is the Transport Act 1962.
The original nationalizing Act (Transport Act 1947) had in fact set up the British Transport Commission, of which BR was only one part.
The Transport Act 1962 abolished this Commission and put the railways under the control of the British Railways Board.
Section 24(1) of that Act says that the BR Board, among other things,
’
(a)
shall cause proper accounts and other records in relation thereto to be kept, and
(b)
shall prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and containing such particulars, compiled in such a manner, as the Minister may from time to time direct with the approval of the Treasury.
‘
In May 1991, the Secretary of State for Transport issued a revised direction to the BR Board which included the following provisions.
1
The statement of accounts, made up to 31 March, will include a Group Profit and Loss Account, a Group Balance Sheet and a Group Cash Flow Statement, for the Board and its subsidiaries.
In addition, the Board will produce a balance sheet.
2
The accounts will give a true and fair view.
In addition, the Companies Acts, the Stock Exchange document on Admission of Securities to Listing, and best commercial practice including accounting standards will apply, subject to modifications.
3
Historical cost accounts are the main accounts, with the effect of changing prices being shown in supplementary accounts.
4
Infrastructure expenditure on new routes and new electrification is capital; other infrastructure is revenue.
An additional provision should be made in the profit and loss account for replacement of rail passenger assets.
5
Separate disclosures are required, for example: Profit and Loss Accounts (or footnotes)
(a)
the amount of turnover to third parties other than Government and the amount of central and local government payments shown as revenue;
(b)
gross income and expenditure and operating results for
— Rail
— Railfreight Distribution
— Letting of Operational Property
— Letting of Non-operational Property
— Corporate
— British Rail Maintenance Ltd
;
(c)
transport grants received.
Balance Sheets
(a)
indebtedness to Government;
(b)
analysis of the Group Balance Sheet by main categories, as under (b) in the Profit and Loss Accounts.
Clearly the main emphasis is on BR's accounts providing the same information as must be provided by a PLC.
But in addition, there is recognition that nationalized industries are different: capital indebtedness to the Secretary of State, interest and financing charges due to Government, payments received from central and local government, all must be shown separately.
And equally significantly, we can see the influence of the fund/commander views in that the operating results have to be disaggregated into component parts of Rail, Railfreight Distribution, etc.
The major statute for local authorities is the Local Government Finance Act 1982.
Section 23 gives the Secretary of State power to make regulations with respect to the
‘publication of information relating to and the form, preparation keeping and certification of accounts'
.
This power was exercised in the Accounts and Audit Regulations 1983, which require that:
1
A statement of accounts is to be prepared, including:
(a)
summarized statements of income and expenditure of each fund or undertaking required by law to be accounted for separately;
(b)
summarized statement of capital expenditure for each service and showing capital finance;
(c)
a consolidated balance sheet;
(d)
a balance sheet for all funds not included in consolidated balance sheet;
(e)
a statement of source and application of funds.
Preceding year's amounts should also be shown.
2
The statement of accounts must be prefaced by a statement of the main principles adopted in compiling the accounts and that statement must draw attention to any significant changes in practice.
3
The main principles referred to above include the following:
(a)
the basis on which debtors and creditors are included in the accounts;
(b)
the nature of substantial reserves;
(c)
the basis on which provision is made for the redemption of debt;
(d)
the basis on which capital works or expenses are recorded;
(e)
the basis of valuation of real property and investment;
(f)
the basis of depreciation provisions;
(g)
the extent to which central administration expenses are allocated over services.
4
The regulations also give details of how the historic rights of inspection of accounts by the public, should be administered.
In response to demands for even more information from the accounts of local authorities, the Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980 included giving further power to the Secretary of State to issue ‘a code of recommended practice as to the publication of information’(s. 2).
A code of practice was issued in 1981 called Local Authority Annual Reports.
This recommends the publication of such details as:
1
Revenue and expenditure for year showing:
(a)
how, in overall terms, the financial out-turn compared with the budget and an explanation of major variances;
(b)
a service analysis of gross revenue expenditure and income;
(c)
net expenditure by service compared with:
(i)
original estimates plus inflation,
(ii)
actual for previous year.
2
A summary of capital expenditure by service and a statement showing the sources of finance.
3
A summary subjective analysis of gross revenue expenditure and income.
A set of key service indicators to measure performance.
5
A year-end manpower statement.
This information is supplementary to the abstract of accounts, although the two documents may be published as one.
As we can see, these prescriptions relate to the form of local authorities' accounts.
There is no pressure to adopt the business model of reporting.
The profit and loss account is here called a ‘revenue’ account; and rather than a cash flow statement we have a set of capital accounts.
There is also emphasis on the Budget, in that variances have to be explained, which is more typical of the Government.
There is, however, an important exception to the rule that ‘form equals statute; content equals professional guidelines’ in local authorities.
This relates to depreciation of capital assets and payments in lieu of depreciation.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 requires that a minimum revenue provision be made in the revenue accounts, in respect of outstanding debt.
Without the explicit power to charge depreciation, this effectively means that local authorities have to adopt the ‘charge in lieu of depreciation’ method of accounting and as such has a significant effect on their accounts (see Chapter 9).
A further point worth noting is that the business model was supposedly adopted in some parts of local authorities.
The Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980 required that the accounts of direct labour organizations should be made up of a balance sheet, a revenue account, and a statement of rate of return; and that these accounts show a ‘true and fair view’.
These requirements were never fully implemented.
The Local Government Act 1988 repealed the requirement to prepare a balance sheet and the requirement to show a ‘true and fair view’.
Now the requirement is the same as for the rest of the accounts: that they ‘present fairly’.
Professional standards
In nationalized industries, the professional standards are those which are applied to the accounts of PLCs.
Professional standards have traditionally played little part in the accounts of central government.
It is in local government that different accounting standards have been promulgated by the CIPFA to reflect the different context.
The main publication is the 1985 Standard Classification (revised in 1988), which is concerned primarily with the form of accounts rather than their content.
Its major purpose is:
‘to promote a common and therefore consistent basis for producing published and statistical financial information of a stewardship or control nature’.
(CIPFA, 1986, p. 47)
CIPFA also encourages an (unspecified) alternative classification for management information purposes.
In order to understand the standard classification, we must understand the terminology used.
The whole of the revenue accounts of a local authority are divided into the following constituent parts:
1
Services — these are the main services, such as education, health, highways, etc.
2
Divisions of service — For example, education will be divided into primary, secondary, continuing education, etc.
3
Subdivisions of service — which provides a further breakdown of the division.
Standard groupings — for each division of service, these groupings represent the main areas of expenditure and income, e.g. employees, premises, transport, etc.
5
Sub-groupings — a sub-division of the above standard groupings.
6
Detail heads — a detailed analysis of the sub-groupings.
The document produces a revenue account with standard headings which it expects will be adopted by most divisions of service, although it recognizes that the detail heads adopted by a particular division will be different.
(Note: this has been slightly modified.
For the exact classification, refer to the original).
Earlier versions included standard classifications of balance sheets.
However, these have been excluded, pending the results of a fundamental review of capital accounting.
The above form is essentially objective, in that it relates to the objects of local government, e.g. education, health, highways, etc.
These objects are then disaggregated to produce an analysis over divisions of service.
But then, for each division of service, a subjective analysis is provided, e.g. salaries, premises, etc.
This analysis relates to the kind of expenditure incurred rather than the purpose for which it was incurred.
Given the standard revenue account above there are two further issues which this objective versus subjective classification introduces.
First, it is useful to provide a subjective analysis of expenditure for the whole of the local authority.
This ignores the objects and would appear as:
This could be analysed in more detail to include, for example, sub-groupings.
It would be in addition to the objective classification and provides a broad analysis of expenditure which can be useful in making broad judgements, for example, about the percentage of total costs paid as salaries and wages.
Similarly, it also explains how much is paid in principal and interest repayments by the authority as a whole.
The other aspect of the objective/subjective classification is the extent to which the given objective analysis can be improved upon.
At present the objects are defined in terms of the departments of local government: education, health, highways.
Yet these departments are not independent units.
They work together to achieve the overall objectives of the organization.
Consequently, the ultimate objectives tend to cut across departmental boundaries, and net expenditure on these objectives is concealed by the existing objective classification.
Thus, if an objective is to provide 250 new council houses, this is not a matter for the housing department alone.
Roads, schools, refuse collection, etc. will provide inputs to the scheme but the cost of these inputs will be reported within the departments' accounts.
The extent to which these kinds of considerations can be included in the accounts depend upon the extent to which they were included in the budget.
PPBS and zero-base budgeting would demand a different objective classification of expenditure and income from what is currently provided.
Since 1976, CIPFA has encouraged the application of SSAPs to local government.
In 1987, a Statement of Recommended Practice (SORP) was issued by CIPFA, having been ‘franked’ by the ASC, on the extent of this application; a revised version was published in 1990.
The impact on financial reporting is not easy to assess because the exercise is more concerned with rationalizing the SSAPs to fit current reporting practice (as determined primarily by the law) than it is concerned with changing current reporting practice by implementation of SSAPs.
The fundamental point to make is that the standards were developed for the private sector, without local government in mind.
For some standards (e.g. on earnings per share and deferred tax), this fact makes it easy to comment on their applicability: they are obviously not applicable.
For the remainder, the position is more difficult.
Standards such as those on depreciation and current cost accounting are so different from current practice that it is impossible to rationalize them.
The problem with the former, i.e. the standard on depreciation, is that it requires organizations to provide for depreciation of fixed assets having a finite useful life.
The law requires a charge to be made in lieu of depreciation for all assets financed from loans.
For other assets there is no provision, statutory or professional, to depreciate them.
Without amendments to the law, depreciation charges would mean existing taxpayers effectively paying twice for the same assets, for no other reason than the application of SSAP 12.
This follows because, as we have also seen, local authorities are prohibited from budgeting for revenue deficits.
In addition, the whole question of depreciation accounting is tied up with matters of capital maintenance and broader questions of what local authority accounts are attempting to do.
In other words it is a part of the larger and even more complex issue of the relevance of current cost accounting.
For the majority of the SSAPs, however, it is possible to identify elements that could be said to be relevant.
Take for example the most basic standard, SSAP 2 on the disclosure of accounting policies.
This defines four concepts: going concern, accruals, consistency and prudence.
The relevance of these to local authorities is partial.
The going concern concept does not apply since it can be assumed that, absent law to the contrary, all authorities will exist into the foreseeable future.
For the accruals concept, local authorities ‘should accrue for all significant items of revenue expense’.
The 1987 SORP points out that local authorities do not generally accrue for capital expenditure and sales and disposals of capital assets.
On that basis, the SORP must be requiring depreciation to be charged since it would be a necessary part of all significant items of revenue expense.
On the other hand, SSAP 12 (which is directly concerned with depreciation) is said not to be relevant to local authorities.
It is hard to reconcile these two statements.
The consistency concept is applicable.
The 1987 SORP stated that the prudence concept has to be modified because ‘proper accounting practice within the legal framework’ includes accounting that ‘best commercial practice’would find imprudent.
The instance cited was where debt charges continue to be included in revenue accounts for financing assets whose useful life is over.
The 1987 SORP did not elaborate but notable examples have occurred in the past when high-rise council flats have been demolished relatively soon after construction: local authorities have decided that housing revenue accounts could not and should not bear the burden of extinguishing the associated debt in the year of demolition.
The 1990 SORP has a different version: it simply states that the prudence concept should be applied.
SSAP 2 requires disclosure of deviations from the four concepts and from generally accepted accounting policies.
The SORP recommends the same for local authorities and gives examples of accounting policies to be commented on.
But even here it is difficult to assess the impact of this recommendation on financial reporting since the law already requires the substance of this anyway.
Professional prescriptions take one other form: the Code of Practice on Local Authority Accounting, issued in 1987.
The status of the Code derived originally from having been issued by CIPFA with the support of the local authority associations and the Audit Commission; in addition, the ASC franked the Code as an SORP.
However, this position changed with the passing of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989.
This Act requires local authorities to adopt ‘proper practices’ in their accounts.
Section 66(4) defines these as accounting practices that are otherwise required by law; in addition, ‘proper practices’ include those regarded as such by ‘any generally recognised published code or otherwise’(except that where a given practice conflicts with the law, it is of course the law that takes precedence).
The Code recognizes itself as having the support of s. 66 and it would be expected that it is indeed ‘generally recognized’.
In essence, the Code is a broadly-based rationalization of statutory requirements, CIPFA's Standard Classification, the SORP and CIPFA's ad hoc recommendations.
It says that the statement of accounts will be made up of:
1
an explanatory foreword
2
a statement of accounting policies
3
the accounting statements
4
notes to the accounts
Compliance with ‘proper local authority accounting practices’ and with this Code will normally mean that the accounts ‘present fairly’the financial position and transactions.
It is difficult to judge, even to describe, the contribution that the Code makes.
As the foreword says, the Code is most importantly addressed to each local authority.
It takes the form of a guide to proper reporting practice, although it does not cross-reference its prescriptions to their sources of authority nor indeed does it explain what hierarchy of authority those sources represent.
Since each local authority knows the law and CIPFA's recommendations, it is hard to see the Code's purpose.
In the light of this difficulty, perhaps we need to speculate on the Code's purpose in a wider, policy-making context.
In recent years, in the context of  ever-tightening controls on local authorities by Government (culminating in the radical imposition of rate-capping, i.e. putting an absolute limit on rate levels), many authorities adopted what was dubbed ‘creative accountancy’.
Slogans such as this are, by their nature, difficult to explain.
In the private sector context, the phrase tends to be used pejoratively.
But many responsible local finance officers accepted the phrase as an accurate description of, indeed as a compliment to, their legal and professional attempts to protect their localities against Government interference.
It is important to emphasize that ‘creative accounting’ does not properly refer to ‘illegal accounting’: there is or was no support for illegal accounting.
Whether one sees creativity in accounting as a virtue or not, it is a natural part of the tradition of flexibility in rule making (a tradition that includes an unwritten constitution and common law, among other things): detailed and specific rights and obligations are anathema.
Instead, those rights and obligations, in accounting practice no less than in other areas, are based on an unstated consensus.
When the consensus breaks down, particularly as a result of a shock to the system (such as rate-capping), the flexibility can be exploited.
In 1985, the Government responded to, among other things, this creative accounting by proposals to reduce the flexibility in accounting regulations.
They were radical proposals that specified in considerable detail the form and content of accounts.
Opposition to them resulted in the proposals being withdrawn.
The local authority associations were subsequently asked to provide an alternative set of proposals.
The Code is the response.
It seems unlikely that the Code will, as a result of what it explicitly says, substantively change financial reporting practice.
On the other hand, it may change financial reporting practice because of what it represents in the continuing controversies about professional self-regulation.
Professional standards have had an increasing influence on the National Health Service.
The Government has the power and the responsibility to set accounting standards, and financial accounting is dominated by the appropriation accounts, which provide the central account to the legislative of spending by the executive.
Since these appropriation accounts are on the cash basis, accounting standards would hardly seem relevant.
Indeed, the NHS Manual for Accounts (1977) reflected this position.
The Manual was essentially concerned with prescribing the classification of revenue spending and capital spending, implicitly on the cash basis.
Thus, for example, the accounts of a Health Authority would disclose the salaries and wages cost for medical staff in the hospitals of the authority; a secondary analysis would also provide costs per in-patient day.
No explicit mention of SSAPs was made.
This situation changed with effect from 1983/84 and was embodied in the reissue of the Manual for Accounts (1986).
Here it states that because of Government's responsibility for accounting and the  nature of that accounting ‘it is not valid to seek to apply the SSAPs verbatim to the accounts and statements of the NHS’(para 1.3, Annexe A, Ch 3).
And in fact, the majority of the then extant SSAPs were judged either to be inapplicable or to have limited applicability; five said to be applicable were: SSAP 2 (Disclosure of Accounting Policies), SSAP 5 (Value Added Tax), SSAP 9 (Stocks), SSAP  10 (Source and Application of Funds) and SSAP 18 (Contingencies).
The 1986 Manual also reported that ‘The Treasury have directed that the format (rather than the content) of the annual accounts of all public sector bodies (i.e. including Health Authorities) should so far as possible follow that of the private sector’(para 3, Ch 1).
The result was that the Statement of Accounts for a Health Authority became a Foreword, Statement of Income and Expenditure, Statement of Working Balances, Source and Application of Funds and the Notes.
The detailed analysis of revenue expenditure, for example, became a note to the statement.
In passing, it is also important to note that the practice in some Health Authorities of issuing annual financial reports in addition to these statutory accounts was recognized by the Manual as voluntary reports, complementing the Statement of Accounts and outside the formal external audit.
Although SSAP 2 was said to have been applicable, the important caveat was added that in accounting to the Government for the purpose of producing the appropriation accounts, the accounting was on the cash basis.
In other parts of the Statement of Accounts, changes in working capital were recognized.
However, there was no recognition of capital assets, either their capital values or depreciation.
With effect from the financial year 1991/92, SSAPs will have an even greater role when, for example, depreciation accounting is introduced into the Health Authority hospitals and the Trust hospitals.
As with local government, the essential problem for the NHS in this exercise is that the SSAPs were set with businesses in mind.
Most fundamentally, it was not then a concern for standard-setters about how the resulting accounts would fit into a cash-based appropriation accounting system.
It could be argued, on a theoretical level, that that should have been a concern since the use of SSAPs by businesses means that the compilers of the national income accounts are presented with the same problem — but that is left to the statisticians to resolve.
For the NHS accounts, a practical solution has to be found, and it no doubt will be, but how the resulting accounting numbers can be interpreted will remain problematic.
Performance measurement
Financial accounting techniques have traditionally been concerned with the stewardship function, narrowly defined.
The financial reports provide a picture of the resources entrusted, how the resources were employed during the year, and in what form the resources are now held.
The emphasis has always been on producing verifiable statements of income and expenditure, balance sheets and, latterly, cash flows.
The position taken by the accounting profession is that the function of the accounts is to provide verifiable information: what users of that information choose to do with it is a matter for them.
In business organizations the increasing tendency has been to use the basic financial statements as a measure of performance.
The income figure, particularly expressed as a ratio of net investment, has come to be the ultimate test of a company's success or failure.
Indeed, the pervasive appeal of the term ‘bottom line’(profit after all deductions) is such that it is often used as the ultimate test of success in any aspect of society; in sport, how well the game is played is irrelevant, what matters is the final score — the bottom line is winning or losing.
It is not difficult to pinpoint this appeal.
If a firm is operating in a good, competitive market then, notwithstanding the problems associated with accounting measurements, profit does give an indication of how well it produced goods: the market was willing to pay more for the finished goods than it cost the firm to produce them, if the firm made a profit.
In practice, however, many organizations produce and sell goods in markets which are not competitive.
Even in the private sector there are many and various impediments to the free flow of goods and services: government subsidies, import controls, export incentives, tax inefficiencies, transaction costs, cartels, etc.
In the pluralist economies of the UK and the USA unregulated markets are in the minority.
Taking account of this, and remembering that profit figures are produced by accountants who have an array of alternative treatments of the basic debits and credits, it is not surprising that expert financial analysts are not satisfied with a profit figure alone.
Indeed, the profit figure that is required is not likely to be the one in the financial statements: that is forever a bygone.
It is the profit in the next financial statement, and the one after that, that matters.
The past figure is useful as a predictor of the future ones.
But in order to predict the future, one past figure is not enough.
A series is required.
To make sense of the series, trends have to be identified.
In complex businesses, these trends are not stable because they are made up of complex interactions of diverse circumstances.
Firms do not produce one kind of product, they produce many kinds.
A single profit figure is an aggregation of many, earned from completely different markets.
The aggregation cannot be used sensibly as a predictor.
Disaggregated data will not merely be by product but also by geographical area.
They will also include vast quantities of physical as well as financial data about every aspect of the different markets.
Stock market prices do not simply move every half-year when interim profit figures are announced.
Profit figures may be used in banner headlines; but for anyone with any expertise and any money to lose, it is the beginning of an analysis of performance, not an end.
As well as this, the trend over the past few years has been towards greater accountability from business in the form of information about matters other than profit and loss.
Representative of this is the Corporate Report's statement (p. 38):
‘Business enterprises can survive only with the approval of the community in which they operate and they have an interest in revealing information which displays how differing interests are being balanced for the benefit of the whole community.
Because neither business organizations nor the public regard the maximization of owners’ profit as the only legitimate aim of business, distributable profit can no longer be regarded as the sole or premier indicator of performance.
This would be so even if accountants were able to agree that ‘profit’ is one certain figure which can be measured with precision.’
The report concludes that there is a need for the following additional  statements to be published (p. 79):
1
A statement of value added
2
An employment report
3
A statement of money exchanges with Government
4
A statement of transactions in foreign currency
5
A statement of future prospects
6
A statement of corporate objectives
However, these recommendations have yet to be taken up by the profession and corporate reports in the business sector have largely remained concerned with fulfilling the statutory duties relating to reporting profit and loss.
This is true of nationalized industries too, although there have been exceptions.
The statement on value added has been reported in some cases.
Take, for example, the Post Office's 1986/87 Financial Report.
Although produced outside of the audited financial statements, and therefore not audited, a value added statement was produced:
As The Corporate Report (1975, p. 49) says, value-added statements of this kind offer an alternative view to the profit and loss account, showing the Post Office as ‘a collective effort by capital, management and employees’; it also identifies the financial flows into Government.
The value added statement is now not published.
One interpretation of this is that as the nationalized industries move closer to some form of privatization so their published financial information appears to become closer and closer to the commercial practice of publishing only that which is required, and no more.
Performance measurement in the private sector is almost wholly limited to financial measures, under the tacit assumption that competitive markets are the best judge of the relative value of the goods and services provided.
How well a company performs is judged by customers at the point of sale, not by reading financial reports.
This is not to say that financial reports should be restricted to financial measures, of course, only that in practice they are.
Performance measurement in governments is different.
Governments do not sell the bulk of their goods and services.
Income for them includes taxation, which provides no measure of the willingness of the community to pay.
The balances on their operating statements cannot be called profits or losses, rather they are called surpluses or deficits.
Financial accounting reverts to what it traditionally was for businesses: producing verifiable statements of the organization's stewardship.
There is one significant exception to this and that is the use of budgetary accounting.
This practice continuously compares budgeted amounts with actuals and as such is providing some measure of performance against a predetermined standard.
When employed in the financial reports it provides external users with some measure of performance.
This will only be as good as the standards employed and the quality of the audit in detecting whether wasteful expenditure was incurred simply in order to meet budgets.
Nonetheless, it does provide some measure.
The basic problem for governments, even with budgetary accounting, is that there is no measure of output in the stewardship accounts: there is no sense in which taxation measures the organization's output.
Broadly then, we will examine two aspects of performance measurement in the public sector: first, the question of how we measure the output of governments and second, the broader question of how public sector organizations as a whole might publish more information about wider accountability issues.
Measuring output in governments
In our discussion in Chapter 1 about economy, efficiency and effectiveness, the technical problem was how we can meaningfully compare inputs and outputs to produce a measure of efficiency when outputs are not automatically valued by the market price.
A practical solution to this problem has been to compare the monetary inputs (costs) with non-monetary outputs.
These can be unit-cost statistics which provide some, albeit limited, information about performance.
They provide broad indicators of deviant performance which  pinpoint areas for more detailed research.
This is the sense in which they do little more than ‘raise red flags’.
Unfortunately, this also means that they are of value only to those users who have the expertise and the authority to make more detailed investigations.
In the case of the performance of local authorities, the Government fulfils both these requirements.
It is perhaps for this reason that a Code of Practice was issued by the Secretary of State for the Environment in 1981 which requires that authorities produce a minimum number of specified unit cost statistics.
Examples are:
These statistics can be used by non-expert readers of accounts as a basis for asking questions of councils, but in themselves provide little clue as to performance.
Because of the fact that unit costs only raise red flags, the onus is on any analyst who is comparing statistics between authorities to explore all the possible explanations for differences before coming to conclusions.
Finding unit costs which support preconceived notions is easy but ultimately useless.
Hansen (1977) is an example of a sensitive analysis of unit cost statistics.
The paper is an analysis of refuse collection statistics, comparing the local governments of Rochester, Buffalo, and Syracuse in New York State.
The basic unit costs were as follows:
For local governments which were judged broadly comparable, these statistics show considerable variation and suggest that Rochester was performing badly.
The analyst was prompted to try to explain why these differences  occurred.
She discovered:
1
In Rochester and Buffalo, although the loads per vehicle were approximately the same, productivity in Buffalo was higher than in Rochester.
This was measured as tons collected per man-day (Buffalo 2.55; Rochester 1.88).
2
In Syracuse, tons collected per man-day were 3.07.
There were two reasons offered for this.
First larger vehicles were used so the tons per load figure was higher.
Second, Syracuse operated an incentive system whereby crews which finished early could not go home until all the crews had finished; consequently, those which finished early had an incentive to help the others.
3
Crews in Buffalo and Syracuse were made up of one driver and two labourers.
In Rochester, it was one driver and three labourers.
The differences were beginning to be explained, although these statistics still do not say why Rochester was so out of line.
Much of the answer lies in the fact that, while Buffalo and Syracuse have curbside pick-up of refuse, in Rochester they pick up from backyards.
And although the analyst questioned whether the additional labour in Rochester was completely justified by this, there is no doubt that this fact is at the heart of the differences in unit costs.
What this example shows is that any stark conclusion on the basis of one unit cost statistic that a given local authority is inefficient is not a rational conclusion.
The statistic does indeed ‘raise a red flag’ but detailed investigation reveals that there are good explanations.
Moreover, the detailed unit cost and physical statistics do not in themselves measure whether the curbside pick-up is more efficient; only that it costs less.
The output comparisons have to take into account social, economic and political considerations: it may just be that in Rochester the residents prefer not to have to drag their refuse up the garden path, at any price.
In accounting, we simply do not know enough to be able to measure this.
Now we can return to the unit cost statistics provided by local authorities under the Code of Practice mentioned earlier.
Birmingham City Council reported the following in its accounts for 1989/90:
The actual published version is considerably easier to understand because of the use of ‘bar charts’, which cannot be reproduced here.
As the report itself makes clear, ‘statistical comparisons serve as a pointer only to possible differences in service efficiency which may or may not be borne out by further investigations’.
What might further investigations yield?
It may be that different accounting treatments lead to different ways of  calculating cost; this is to a considerable extent mitigated by accounting standards but cannot be totally ruled out.
Even if the costs were entirely comparable, what kinds of things would we want to know before we could judge the performance of secondary education?
Cost per pupil may be low because class sizes are high.
Cost per pupil may be the same, although one authority spends much more on teachers and less on books and equipment.
The necessary next step in assessing performance on the basis of unit cost statistics such as these is to ask the relevant organization why.
Wider accountability issues
Once we move away from the traditional accounting statements and unit cost statistics, the possibilities are unbounded.
There is no ‘best professional practice’.
Guidance has been provided by The Corporate Report, as we noted earlier, on the kind of additional statements that might be produced.
But since the decision on which to publish, and in what form, is the responsibility of the management, there is a danger that only that which shows the organization in the best light will be published.
Since the management is accountable and is producing the information, it would be rather surprising if it were otherwise.
Of course, the same applies with traditional financial reporting.
But in this case, there is a body of professional practice which aims to reduce the subjectivity involved and the basic information used is systematically produced, with a minimum possibility for editing: come what may an operating statement, a balance sheet and a cash flow statement will be published.
Moreover, the financial accounts are audited.
It is the greatest weakness of this wider view of accounting that there is no system for producing the data, which is verifiable in the way that double-entry bookkeeping is.
Probably because of this, there are no professional guidelines and there is no requirement for audit.
Nevertheless, the 1980s have witnessed ever-increasing use of performance indicators, some of which are unit cost statistics but many of which are output measures, albeit usually low-level output measures.
Batteries of these indicators are being produced for the NHS, government departments, universities, nationalized industries and local authorities, among others.
British Rail is a notable example for having taken an early lead in publishing performance indicators.
In the 1990/91 accounts, the indicators are clearly not part of the audited financial statements and have not been audited.
Because BR has no direct competitor in the UK, some performance indicators are compared with the average of 14 European railways:
Many more indicators are provided for BR alone.
Perhaps two of the most important statistics for railway passengers relate to the lateness and cancellation of trains.
These are reported in a number of ways:
In addition, within the Annual Report section, some actual performance indicators are compared with quantified objectives.
In the 1986/87 accounts:
In the 1990/91 accounts, there is a change:
Setting aside the important caveat about the reliability of these numbers in the absence of an audit, what conclusions can we draw about performance indicators such as these?
The issues being reported we can fairly assume are relevant, to the customers and to taxpayers.
Whether the performance indicators relating to these issues are relevant is more difficult.
At such a high level of aggregation, for an annual period, and reported some months after the financial year, it is not easy to see how most customers would change their behaviour because of them.
Taxpayers, at least through the political process, might find such hard data useful, as broad rules of thumb to confirm subjective perceptions about performance.
If this were true then the fact of having to report the indicators may encourage managers to achieve their targets.
In the context of punctuality of trains, it may also encourage the targets to be adjusted.
In late 1987 in the USA it was reported that because of increasing criticism about lateness in domestic airline flights, one action taken was to increase the scheduled flight times for journeys, an action judged by the media  to be more honest.
On the other hand, the criticism of airlines did not emanate from statistics but from personal experience.
The distinction is important because performance indicators may support personal experience but they may also pre-empt criticisms based on personal experience: the aggregate statistics may look reasonable enough but these might hide specific areas of ineffectiveness.
Returning to the question of reliability of numbers such as these in the absence of audit, the Post Office has addressed this question and in its 1990/91 Report and Accounts, alongside its performance measures (‘quality of service' of the Royal Mail letter service) is the following:
Report of the Post Office Auditors on Quality of Service
We have reviewed the information set out on pages…detailing the quality of the first and second class letter service for 1990/91.
The scope of our work was designed to ensure that the information on deliveries was obtained in accordance with the stated methodology and sampling programme set out on page…and that the results were correctly calculated and presented.
In our opinion, the quality of service measurements of the first and second class letter service for 1990/1991 have been correctly calculated and presented and have been derived from information obtained in accordance with the stated methodology and sampling programme.
Ernst & young 
This obviously makes explicit what is generally true of performance indicators: that they are not usually generated from a systematic record (and when they are, the system is not as reliable as a bookkeeping system can be).
Consequently, this is not an ‘audit report’ as Auditing Standards and Guidelines define one, but is instead an ‘accountant's report’.
What the report does not do is to comment on the appropriateness of the sampling methodology for producing these kinds of performance measures.
But it does add some reliability to them.
For all that we might say about the relevance of performance indicators in financial reporting, a fundamental and seemingly intractable problem remains: performance cannot be judged in terms of output alone, economy, efficiency and effectiveness must be judged together.
No doubt British Rail and Royal Mail could improve their performance indicators given unlimited inputs.
What is important is the relationship between inputs and outputs.
On this, financial reporting practices are silent.
This is not a criticism of the reporting organizations because it simply reflects our ignorance of how to measure the relationships.
Performance measures were not invented in the 1980s.
We have always measured output.
Intermediate measures of output have often been used as surrogates for ultimate output: the use of marking in examinations has dominated education for over 150 years.
What happened during the 1980s was that we measured more things, more systematically, and published the measurements to an extent not seen before.
It could also be argued that we did so despite any better understanding of the essential problem: how do we establish causal relationships between inputs, low-level outputs and ultimate outputs, reliably?
The final point to make is that having weighed the relevance and reliability of information, we then judge whether the benefits of accounting and reporting outweigh the costs.
The information system used to collate these statistics is presumably extensive and costly.
Whether these costs are worth bearing is another question that must be asked — though, in truth, it is probably unanswerable.
Auditing
Institutional and legal environment of auditing
Many auditing techniques are common to the public and private sectors.
However, the institutions which administer and execute public sector audits are different; this is mainly because of the effect of specific statutes.
This different institutional and legal background has contributed to public sector auditing having different procedures, different responsibilities and a wider role.
The nature of the external audit
The Auditing Practices Committee (from 1991, known as the ‘Auditing Practices Board’) of CCAB Ltd (which is made up of the councils of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ireland, the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants, the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, and the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants) issued an Explanatory Foreword which explains the scope and authority of Auditing Standards and Guidelines.
This defines auditing as follows:
‘an audit is the independent examination of, and expression of an opinion on, the financial statements of an enterprise.’
In this definition, ‘enterprise’ means any entity, whether profit-oriented or not, and ‘audit’is not limited to circumstances requiring a ‘true and fair view’opinion.
The statutory auditor of a PLC reports on financial statements produced by management for shareholders.
The auditor is appointed at the Annual General Meeting of the PLC (not by the shareholders or the directors or the officers).
The purpose of the audit is to add credibility to financial statements for the immediate benefit of the shareholders.
This view of the statutory audit has other important consequences.
First, the most important characteristic of any audit, namely its independence, is defined according to the specific relationship involved.
It tends to be defined, for example, in terms of auditors not being officers of the PLC or not being involved with the officers otherwise than in the capacity of auditor.
Second, there is no recognition of the existence of internal audit.
Large PLCs do have internal audit departments.
And, in practice, the external auditor will take account of this in carrying out the statutory audit.
However, because the ultimate responsibility is given to the external auditor, the role of the internal auditor is not emphasized.
In so far as the auditor in the public sector is expressing an opinion on financial statements, then the Auditing Standards and Guidelines that apply in the private sector also apply in the public sector, absent specific statements to the contrary (Auditing Guideline 416, 1987).
But the most important point is that very often auditors are required to do much more than express opinions on financial statements, in the public sector in general and in government particularly.
We need to look elsewhere, therefore, to understand how public sector auditing differs from private sector auditing.
A general definition of the function of governmental audit is found in a Green Paper on The Role of the Comptroller and Auditor General (Cmnd 7845).
This says that the C. and A.G.'s work covers:
Financial and Regularity Audit
(a)
A financial audit to ensure that systems of accounting and financial control are efficient and operating properly and that financial transactions have been correctly authorized and accounted for.
(b
) A regularity audit which verifies that expenditure has been incurred on approved services and in accordance with statutory and other regulations and authorities governing them (sometimes called the ‘Compliance Audit’).
(c)
An examination of economy and efficiency, to bring to light examples of wasteful, extravagant or unrewarding expenditure, failure to maximize receipts or financial arrangements detrimental to the Exchequer, and weaknesses leading to them.
(d)
An examination to assess whether programmes or projects undertaken to meet established policy goals or objectives have met these aims.
Economy and Efficiency Audit
Effectiveness Audit
It also says that the C. and A.G. takes into account the arrangements made for internal audit.
Although this summary was only offered in the context of the C. and A.G., it is a good general summary of the audit of government and local government in the UK as well as the USA.2 In the USA, this audit is often called the ‘expanded scope audit’, to emphasize the nature of the difference between it and the statutory commercial audit; in Canada, the term is ‘comprehensive auditing’.
Comparing the commercial audit definition with this one, we can see that the Regularity Audit, the Economy and Efficiency Audit, and the Effectiveness Audit are clearly requirements over and above the attestation of financial statements by commercial auditors.
Indeed, the definition of a financial audit explicitly includes examination of systems of internal control whereas the commercial audit does not.
It is important not to conclude from this analysis that the statutory audit of a PLC is only concerned with financial statements.
Many of the methods adopted will include testing, and relying on systems of internal control.
Many will include consideration of economy and efficiency.
This is so, not least because the efficiency of a PLC's operation can affect its financial statements: stores which allow inventory to deteriorate unnoticed will not only lose the company money, they will overstate the stock valuation in the balance sheet.
Equally importantly, it would be wasteful to industry as a whole if questions of economy and efficiency were not identified in the course of audit work.
In general, it is fair to say that the legally-sensitive nature of the statutory audit has tended to encourage the auditing profession to deflate shareholders' expectations of audit.
In practice, the audit is far more comprehensive than the official definition suggests.
Nevertheless, quite apart from making the wider role more explicit, the expanded scope audit has different implications.
For example, the effectiveness audit by its nature introduces political issues.
Policy goals and objectives are set by legislative bodies, made up of politicians.
These goals never are (never can be) so explicit as to exclude all subjectivity in interpreting performance against them.
The more measurable and specific they become, the less realistic they become in terms of the legislative's intentions.
An analogy can be drawn with the judiciary, which is often involved in ‘interpreting’ Acts of Parliament in terms of Parliament's intention.
Sometimes these interpretations are controversial, so much so that laws have to be passed ‘to clarify’ the original intention.
Interpretations of statute are not unfamiliar to commercial auditors; but they are unfamiliar when they involve overtly political questions.
The necessary condition of audit independence has a different flavour in government.
It is more concerned with independence from the executive and, in the case of central government, this introduces significant and quite distinct problems.
The most significant one is, how anyone in society today can be independent of the executive, given the power that it wields.
The expanded scope audit has been recognized relatively recently.
Traditionally, governmental audit has been concerned with the financial and regularity audit.
The demand for more public accountability in the 1970s, along with the demand for real reductions in public sector spending in the UK and the USA, has included demands for greater ‘value for money’ from government.
The supreme audit institutions of both countries, as well as of the profession, have responded with a greater application of and greater publicity about economy, efficiency and effectiveness auditing.
The nature of internal audit
Internal audit is a large and significant part of the financial control of many organizations.
In central government as well as in the National Health Service there are many internal audit sections; in local government all authorities are required by the Accounts and Audit Regulations 1983 to have internal audit departments.
The Auditing Practices Committee (Guidance for Internal Auditors, 1990) defines internal audit as follows.
‘An independent appraisal function established by the management of an organization for the review of the internal control system as a service to the organization.
It objectively examines, evaluates and reports on the adequacy of internal control as a contribution to the proper, economic, efficient and effective use of resources.’
There are two important aspects of this definition, in contrast to external audit.
First, as essential as independence is to both, in the context of internal audit it is bound to have a different emphasis because internal auditors are officials of the audited organization.
The Guidance concentrates on the organizational status of internal audit and the objectivity of internal auditors in achieving the requisite independence.
On the former, it states that internal audit should be involved in the determination of its own priorities, in consultation with management, and the head of internal audit should accordingly have direct access, and freedom to report to all senior management.
The objectivity of the internal auditor is seen in terms of each auditor having an objective attitude of mind and being able to exercise judgement, express opinions and present recommendations with impartiality.
The second important difference between this definition of internal audit and that of external audit is the concentration on reviewing the internal control system.
The main objectives of the internal control system are given as:
(a)
to ensure adherence to management policies and directives in order to achieve the organization's objectives;
(b)
to safeguard assets;
(c)
to secure the relevance, reliability and integrity of information, so ensuring as far as possible the completeness and accuracy of records;
(d)
to ensure compliance with statutory requirements.
As far as the main professional accounting bodies are concerned, this Guidance is definitive but, as is always the case in the public sector, the Government also has a say.
For example, government departments must look to the Government Internal Audit Manual (HM Treasury, 1988).
In fact, the manual's version is essentially the same.
Internal audit is defined as an ‘independent appraisal within a department which operates as a service to management by measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of the internal control system’(para.
A.l).
In this context, ‘management’ means the Accounting Officer.
Similarly, the notion of independence is stressed and is seen as ‘essentially an attitude of mind characterized by integrity and an objective approach to work’(para.
B.2.1).
All of the above gives an impression of being uncontroversial, as official standards tend to do, but the practice of internal audit is fraught with difficulties.
Historically, the notion of a ‘professional’ was one of a person who was not an employee of the organization but in ‘public practice’and in some sense, therefore, perceived to be able to offer impartial advice.
The ‘accounting profession’ has over the years widened to the point where it is not only commonplace but is expected that ‘professional accountants’will be employed by industry, government, local government, health authorities etc.
The dual responsibilities, to the employer and to the profession, remain problematic: the professional response has been to offer on-line access to ethical guidance.
Just because of the nature of the work that internal auditors do on a day-to-day basis, their dual responsibilities provide more difficulty than most.
No doubt this is partly why the official definitions of internal audit stress that, while having an independence of mind, internal auditors report to  management: ‘whistle-blowing’ must be internal ‘whistle-blowing’.
But particularly in a public sector context, where appeals to the public interest could be assumed to be more common, profound questions remain which cannot be resolved by terse definitions.
We can now turn to the specific institutional and legal environment of external auditing in nationalized industries, central government, local government and the National Health Service.
Nationalized Industries
The requirements for audit of the accounts of nationalized industries are typically found in the Act of nationalization or, if there has been significant reorganization of the industry since then, in the reorganizing Act.
In addition, more detailed directions are issued by the relevant Secretary of State.
Generally, the accounts are required to be audited by an auditor appointed by the same Secretary of State.
This has meant that one of the major firms of chartered accountants has been employed.
For example, take British Coal.
Under the Coal Industry Nationalization Act 1946 and the Coal Industry Act 1971, a direction was issued in July 1991 by the Secretary of State for Energy requiring the statement of accounts to give a true and fair view of the profit or loss, state of affairs and cash flow of the corporation and its subsidiaries.
For 1990/91 the accounts were audited by Ernst & young and this is the essence of their report:
We have audited the accounts of British Coal Corporation…in accordance with auditing standards.
In our opinion:
(a)
the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Corporation at March 30, 1991 and, in respect of the Corporation and their subsidiary undertakings regarded as a single entity, of the state of affairs at March 30, 1991, and the results and statement of cash flows for the year then ended, and have been properly prepared in accordance with the direction of the Secretary of State for Energy…, and
(b)
the supplementary current cost information on page…has been properly prepared in accordance with the bases and methods described in note 2.
We can see, therefore, that auditing British Coal is stated in terms of the definition of audit given in the Explanatory Foreword to Auditing Standards and Guidelines.
We can conclude that the audit has said nothing about economy, efficiency or effectiveness.
This is not to say that a three E's audit is never undertaken in nationalized industries.
Recently, they have been subject to many what one might call ‘extraordinary audits’, which have been concerned with these matters.
Sometimes carried out by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, sometimes by chartered accountants, they were ad hoc studies commissioned by the Secretary of State.
These must not be forgotten but, on the other hand, they are not systematically carried out and, aside from its independence, the systematic nature of audit is its most significant characteristic.
The other major point is that although the audit of a nationalized industry is set up, and therefore presumably carried out as if it were an audit of a PLC, this does not mean that it will always be so.
It is at least conceivable that  political interference has taken place or could take place in the audit, if only because the auditor is appointed by the Secretary of State; although there are no obvious examples of this having happened.
More demonstrably, however, there has in the past been evidence of some feeling in Parliament that the Comptroller and Auditor General should be given the power to audit all public money voted by Parliament, including that voted to nationalized industries.
However, the 1980 Green Paper on the role of the C. and A.G. rejected the call for involvement with nationalized industries (para. 50, p. 17) and the National Audit Act 1983 explicitly excludes them from the C. and A.G.'s scope.
The Government
The auditor of government is a unique institution.
It is the oldest aspect of the auditing profession.
The office has substantial authority with a tradition quite apart from the statutory audit of a PLC.
If there is one factor which has determined the nature of the office it is that, in theory, it is auditing the executive on behalf of the legislature.
He must therefore be independent of the executive and as an officer of the House of Commons is strictly only answerable to the House.
The principal Acts of Parliament which set down the audit requirements of central government are the Exchequer and Audit Departments Acts 1866 and 1921 and the National Audit Act 1983.
Section 1(1) of the 1921 Act requires that:
‘Every appropriation account (of government) shall be examined by the Comptroller and Auditor General on behalf of the House of Commons.’
The Appropriation Accounts are concerned with monies voted by Parliament; but although they cover a vast area they do not contain all public monies.
For example, although the central government proportion of the finance of local government is within the appropriation accounts, the locally-financed proportion is outside.
Under Section 3 of the 1921 Act (amended by the 1983 Act), the C. and A.G. can also be required to audit certain accounts by direction from the Treasury; but these are relatively few and any direction must be approved by the House of Commons.
There are also a large number of bodies' accounts which C. and A.G. audits by agreement with the body and the government department concerned.
The C. and A.G.'s salary is a charge on the Consolidated Fund (which means it does not have to be voted annually by Parliament) and the holder of the office is, ex officio, an officer of the House of Commons.
Before the 1983 Act, the C. and A.G. was head of the Exchequer and Audit Department which was made up of around 600 civil servants.
This department has now been superseded by the National Audit Office and the new staff are not civil servants.
There is no statutory prescription about the qualifications of the C. and A.G. and his staff.
For example, they do not have to be qualified accountants; indeed, the majority are not, although the proportion that are is increasing.
Statutorily, the power of the C. and A.G. resides in his responsibility to audit public accounts on behalf of the House of Commons.
In practice, it has been suggested that the C. and A.G. also has a close and effective working  relationship with the Public Accounts Committee; this is the committee of the House of Commons responsible for examining the public accounts it sees fit to examine and has the power to send for persons, papers and records.
This relationship takes the form of the Public Account Committee basing its investigations on the reports submitted by the C. and A.G.
The 1983 Act established a Public Accounts Commission.
Made up of the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, the Leader of the House of Commons and seven other members of the House (who must not be ministers), its purpose is to oversee the National Audit Office, in approving the annual budget and appointing the auditor for the Office's own accounts.
Section 1(1) of the 1921 Act defines the role of the C. and A.G. as follows:
‘The C. and A.G. shall satisfy himself that the money expended has been applied to the purpose or purposes for which the grants made by Parliament were intended to provide and that the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it.’
And s. 1(2) says:
The C. and A.G., after satisfying himself that the vouchers have been examined and certified as correct by the accounting department, may, in his discretion and having regard to the character of the departmental examination, in any particular case admit the sum so certified without further evidence of payment in support of the charges to which they relate…‘
These subsections have been interpreted by the Public Accounts Committee (1980, vol.1, pp. x-xi) to mean that the statutory audit consists of:
(a) Financial audit
— the C. and A.G. satisfying himself as to the accuracy of the appropriation accounts (s. 1(2));
(b) Regularity audit
— the C. and A.G. satisfying himself that money spent has the proper authority (s.1(1)).
Before the 1983 Act, it had been suggested that these statutory audits were supplemented by economy, efficiency and effectiveness audits.
Part II of the 1983 Act has now included specific provision for these audits, calling them economy, efficiency and effectiveness examinations.
They are not mandatory (s. 6(1)) and the Act stresses that they do not give any entitlement ‘to question the merits of the policy objectives of any department’(s. 6(2)).
The audit certificate which is attached to the majority of the Appropriation Accounts says:
‘I certify that I have examined the above account in accordance with the Exchequer and Audit Departments Acts 1866 and 1921 and the National Audit Office auditing standards.
‘In my opinion the sums expended have been applied for the purposes authorized by Parliament and the account properly presents the expenditure and receipts…for the year ended…‘
There is no audit certificate relating to the economy, efficiency and effectiveness examinations; s.9 says that the C. and A.G. may report to the House of Commons on the results of any examination.
In addition to the Appropriation Accounts, there are many statutory bodies that have responsibilities to produce accounts, to have them audited by the C. and A.G. and to present the result to Parliament.
In some cases, the audit certificate will certify that the accounts ‘properly present’.
But in others, the accounts adopt, at a minimum, best commercial practice, that is, they show a true and fair view.
Take, for example, the Welsh Development Agency's accounts for 1989/90.
The audit certificate says:
I certify that I have examined the financial statements on pages 3 to 18 in accordance with the Welsh Development Agency Act 1975 and the National Audit Office auditing standards.
In my opinion these financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Welsh Development Agency and the Group at 31 March 1990 and of the results and the source and application of funds of the Group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Welsh Development Agency Act 1975 and determinations made thereunder by the Secretary of State with the approval of the Treasury.
I have no observations to make on these financial statements.
In 1987, the National Audit Office introduced its own auditing standards.
There are two.
The first is called an Operational Standard and has five requirements:
1
The auditor should adequately plan, control and record his work.
2
The auditor should obtain relevant and reliable audit evidence sufficient to enable him to draw reasonable conclusions therefrom.
3
The auditor should ascertain the audited body's system of recording and processing transactions and assess its adequacy as a basis for the preparation of financial statements.
4
If the auditor wishes to place reliance on any internal controls, he should ascertain and evaluate those controls and perform compliance tests on their operation.
5
The auditor should carry out such a review of the financial statements as is sufficient, in conjunction with the conclusions drawn from the other audit evidence obtained, to give him a reasonable basis for his opinion on the financial statements.
Only the first two relate to economy, efficiency and effectiveness audits.
The Reporting Standard gives details of the audit certificate, including situations requiring qualifications.
We have seen that independence is defined, for the audit of the UK government, in terms of the C. and A.G.'s independence from the executive.
This is primarily achieved by taking his appointment out of the control of the executive and making his statutory responsibility that of reporting to the House of Commons.
There are a number of ways that this theoretical independence was compromised before the passing of the 1983 Act:
(a)
the Treasury had significant powers to direct the areas and nature of the C. and A.G.'s audit;
(b)
the appointment of the C. and A.G. has historically tended to come from the Treasury;
(c)
the Treasury audited the accounts of the Exchequer and Audit Department;
(d)
the Executive controlled the staff of the Exchequer and Audit below the C. and A.G.
Indeed, Normanton (1966, p. 372) says that:
‘To suggest that this Act [the 1866 Act]established a legislative type of audit would be a gross  over-simplification .
What it actually did set up was an audit on behalf of both the legislative and the executive, under the detailed direction of the latter.’
[Normanton's italics]
One effect of this Treasury influence which has been suggested is that organizations which are not under direct Treasury control have avoided being audited by the C. and A. G. Hence, some big spenders of government money have adopted other forms of audit.
In the National Health Service, for example, all the public money involved is included in the Appropriation Accounts.
The expenditure, however, is not under direct Treasury control; the Health Service is administered by Health Authorities which have executives of their own and which receive block allocations of finance from the Appropriation Accounts of the Department of Health and Social Security.
The C. and A. G. is given the responsibility for auditing all appropriation accounts by the 1921 Act.
But in practice this has come to mean that the C. and A. G. examines, certifies and reports on the annual summarized accounts of the National Health Service taken as a whole, i.e. as the appropriation account presents them.
One might assume that this would mean necessarily that the C. and A.G. audited all the Health Authorities.
But this would be wrong.
The statutory audit of the Health Authorities is now under the Audit Commission's responsibilities.
The 1983 Act reduced Treasury influence.
Section 1(2) of the 1921 Act gave the Treasury power to direct the C. and A.G. to examine vouchers in more detail — the new Act has withdrawn this power.
Similarly, s.3(3), which gave the Treasury overriding authority to arbitrate in any dispute between the C. and A.G. and an auditee, has also been withdrawn.
The Treasury still has the power to make directions about which accounts shall be audited by the C. and A.G.; but that power is now exercised through a statutory instrument which must be placed before the House of Commons.
Also, as we have seen, the National Audit Office's accounts are not now audited by the Treasury and its staff are not now civil servants.
This reduction in the Treasury's influence has not, however, affected the coverage of the C. and A.G.'s audit.
The National Health Service is still excluded (although not from the three E's examinations), as are the nationalized industries.
The original proposals, which in a modified form became the 1983 Act, brought these in.
However, there was successful opposition from the industries themselves.
The three E's audit in the public sector receives most attention in the literature.
Previously absent from statutes, economy, efficiency and effectiveness are now included in the 1983 Act.
Whether they have appeared as part of the  C. and A.G.'s audit is a moot point.
The Act takes pains to refer to them as ‘examinations’ and they are not mandatory in the way that the certification of the appropriation accounts is.
On the other hand, the 1866 and 1921 Acts also avoid specific reference to ‘audit’.
In recent years, there has been much debate about the role of the C. and A.G. The office is an old and distinguished one.
The 1983 Act has invalidated many of the previous criticisms about the lack of complete independence from the executive.
It remains to be seen whether the other main criticism will re-emerge and whether the House of Commons will demand a legislative audit of all the monies it votes.