

DEFINING AND REDEFINING RAPE
In Chapter 1, the difficulties associated with processing rape were described.
But the law itself constitutes a further problem for the criminal justice system.
This chapter will focus on the English law of rape, its relationship with other sexual offences and the options for reform within the present framework of the law.
The definition of rape is contained in the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1976, s. 1(1).
It has five  constituent elements.
There must be (1) sexual intercourse (2) with a woman which is (3) unlawful and which takes place (4) without her consent,(5) knowingly or recklessly.
These elements will now be discussed in turn.
Sexual Intercourse
(a) The Legal Definition of Sexual Intercourse
Vaginal penetration by the penis which, for the victim, may be less offensive than certain other forms of attack, alone constitutes sexual intercourse which is required to be proved for the crime of rape.
Like buggery, which generally involves penile penetration of the anus, rape is regarded with extreme gravity and carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
Forced acts of oral sex and penetration by objects or  other parts of the body are collectively subsumed under the heading of indecent assault, a crime which covers a  multitude of activities, some of which are less than grave.
The maximum penalty for this offence when perpetrated against a woman was formerly two years' imprisonment, rising to five where she was under 13.6 In 1985, it was raised to ten years' imprisonment regardless of the victim's age.
In their study of 115 rape victims, Burgess and Holmstrom found that vaginal penetration by the penis had been accompanied by forced fellatio in 22 per cent.
of cases, cunnilingus in 5 per cent., anal intercourse in 5 per cent. , digital insertion or manual touching of the victim's genitals in 5 per cent. , urination on the victim or her clothes in 4 per cent .
and insertion into the vagina of an object in 1 per cent.
of cases respectively.
Wright and West, in a study of all incidents recorded by the police as genuine rapes or attempted rapes in six English counties over a five-year period from 1972 to 1976, found that of a total of 297 cases, fellatio was attempted or demanded in 30 incidents, cunnilingus in 13, buggery in 12 and other sexual acts usually involving masturbation in 35.
Fellatio was particularly common where the assailant had been drinking and was unable to sustain an erection or reach orgasm.
Burgess and Holmstrom found that forced fellatio was twice as common in multiple assailant rape whereas cunnilingus only featured in single-assailant rape, but these differences do not appear in Wright and West's larger sample.
An incident of sexual assault thus frequently involves a number of different sexual acts.
English law differentiates sharply between them.
The narrow definition of rape and its failure to encompass other forms of sexual assault may be attributed to the early origins of the offence.
Historically, the law of rape was concerned particularly with theft of virginity, reflecting a preoccupation with the protection of virgins from rape, abduction and forced marriage.
In the twelfth century, the author of Glanvill, describing the manner in which a complaint of rape was to be made, had the rape of virgins in mind when he wrote: ‘A woman who suffers in this way must go, soon after the deed is done, to  the nearest vill and there show to trustworthy men the injury done to her, and any effusion of blood there may be…’
Later, in the thirteenth century, Bracton described the special appeal which could be brought where a virgin was raped and the severe penalty which would ensue upon conviction:
‘Among other appeals there is an appeal called the rape of virgins.
The rape of virgins is a crime imputed by a woman to the man by whom she says she has been forcibly ravished against the king's peace.
If he is convicted of this crime [this]punishment follows: the loss of members, that there be member for member for when a virgin is defiled she loses her member and therefore let her defiler be punished in the parts in which he offended.
Let him thus lose his eyes which gave him sight of the maiden's beauty for which he coveted her.
And let him lose as well the testicles which excited his hot lust.
Punishment of this kind does not follow in the case of every woman , though she is forcible ravished, but some other severe punishment does follow…
In times past, the defilers of virginity and chastity [suffered capital punishment]as did their abettors since such men were not free of the crime of killing especially since virginity and chastity cannot be restored.’
Although Bracton alleged that the rape of non-virgins was also punishable, this does not appear to have been the practice of the courts.
Indeed in 1244, Thurkleby J. disallowed a widow's appeal of rape ‘because a woman can only appeal concerning rape of her virginity.’
Eventually in 1275 the first Statute of Westminster appears to have provided that the ravishment of any woman was an offence punishable with a penalty of two years' imprisonment and ransom and in 1285 the second Statute of Westminster turned this into a capital offence.
However, it is noteworthy that even as late as the nineteenth century, the courts were still discussing whether, in the case of a young girl, there was penetration sufficient to constitute rape where the hymen remained intact.
Sexual offences introduced into the law at a much later stage continued to reflect this preoccupation with penile penetration of the vagina.
In a series of crimes, the words ‘sexual intercourse’ are used exclusively in this sense.
Thus, it is an offence to procure a woman to have sexual intercourse by threats or false pretences in any part of the world.
These offences were apparently introduced to combat the white slave traffic.
It is equally an offence to administer drugs to a  woman for a similar purpose or to procure a girl under 21 or a defective to have sexual intercourse with a third party in any part of the world.
Equivalent statutory offences to deal with men who procure women by threat to perform any other sexual acts or who administer drugs or procure for third parties for such purposes do not exist.
Similarly, it is an offence for a man who is a member of staff or a manager of a hospital to have sexual intercourse with a mentally disordered female patient.
It is no offence for him to engage in other sexual acts with her, unless these are otherwise unlawful, although it is an offence for him to commit an act of buggery or gross indecency with a male patient who is mentally disordered.
Since a variety of conduct is included within the term gross indecency, the protection afforded to male patients from sexual exploitation is greater than it is for female patients.
The crimes of detaining a woman against her will with the intention that she shall marry or have unlawful sexual intercourse, and taking an unmarried girl under the age of 18 out of the possession of her parent or guardian with intent that she shall have sexual intercourse, are restricted in the same fashion.
It seems likely that the two latter offences were conceived to protect the interests of wealthy fathers by seeking to ensure that their daughters did not contract unsuitable marriages or forfeit their virginity and become less eligible.
Today the only justification for retaining any of the offences described in this paragraph must be the protection of women from sexual exploitation.
If this is the case, the argument for so narrow a definition of sexual intercourse would seem hard to sustain.
The crime of incest is a further case in point.
It may be committed where sexual intercourse takes place between a man and his daughter, sister, or half-sister, mother or grand-daughter irrespective of whether the relationship is traced through ‘lawful wedlock,’ and irrespective of whether consent is present.
It therefore covers conduct which is already penalised by the crimes of rape and unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 16.
However, since it applies whatever the age of the woman, it also extends to behaviour which is not otherwise dealt with by the criminal law.
But the offence is confined to sexual intercourse.
Thus, a man may have sexual relations other than vaginal or anal intercourse with his mother, daughter, grand-daughter or sister  provided that she is over 16 and provided she gives her consent in the legal sense of the term.
Eugenic considerations may be regarded as a justification for confining incest to sexual intercourse.
Certainly there appears to be a high risk that the child of an incestuous union between father and daughter or brother and sister will have serious congenital defects.
The risk remains, although it decreases where the relationship is further removed.
The British Medical Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists believe that eugenic grounds provide the main justification for a separate offence of incest.
However, ‘eugenic considerations were by no means crucial to the passage of the Incest Act’ in 1908 and the protection of children from sexual exploitation by parents was regarded as far more significant.
But the sexual exploitation of a child does not only take the form of vaginal penetration by the penis.
Other sexual acts may well be involved.
Sometimes indecent assault of a small child is a preliminary to sexual intercourse when the child reaches puberty.
Thus, Sandra Butler writes:
‘In many situations in which the father is the aggressor, the eldest daughter is the first to be victimized, and earliest sexual contact can begin when the child is as young as 5 or 6, with genital fondling, mutual masturbation and oral-genital contact…
Explicit genital intercourse frequently does not begin until the girl reaches puberty….
When sexual activity continues for years, the child feels a deepening responsibility to keep the relationship hidden from everyone, and her father is free to escalate the level of sexuality between them’
The responsibility which parents have to ensure that sexual acts do not take place between themselves and their children is surely not confined to sexual intercourse.
The breach of the special trust that exists between a child and a parent is no less violated where sexual acts other than vaginal penetration are induced or performed.
The view of most experts is that ‘whatever form the assault takes, the scarring of the child can be deep and lasting.’
Once it is conceded that there are grounds other than eugenic ones for a separate offence of incest, then the question which inevitably arises is why the crime should be confined to sexual intercourse.
(b) Reform.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee's Proposals
(i) Rape, Indecent Assault, Buggery
In Australia, the states of South Australia and Victoria have redefined rape so that it covers the introduction of the penis of a person into the anus or mouth of another person as well as penile penetration of the vagina.
In Victoria, the insertion of objects into vagina and anus is also included.
In England, the Criminal Law Revision Committee is unanimously of the view, however, that the present definition of sexual intercourse for the purposes of the law of rape should be retained.
In its Working Paper, it argues in favour of the present law on two grounds.
First of all it states:
1.
‘The concept of rape, as a distinct form of criminal misconduct, is well established in popular thought and corresponds to a distinctive form of wrongdoing.’
The Committee is quoting the Heilbron Report, and appears to be saying that if the public thinks that a particular law covers certain activities and in fact it does cover these activities, then it should for that reason continue to cover only these activities.
Quite apart from the limitations on law reform in general which such an argument would appear to justify, if the views of the public are of any significance at all in this context, then it must be its view of what the law ought to be rather than what it is.
Furthermore, the Committee does not in fact know how the public perceives the ambit of the law of rape, nor did it attempt to find out.
If nomenclature is a problem here, then the desirability of abandoning the term rape and substituting another merits consideration.
The Committee goes on to state:
2.
‘The risk of pregnancy is a further and important distinguishing characteristic of rape.’
Undoubtedly, vaginal penetration with a penis may lead to pregnancy which cannot be said of the other forms of sexual assault at issue.
However, the fact that pre-pubertal, menopausal, sterilised and infertile women as well as those who  practise contraception are all covered by the law of rape suggests that this distinction is not of overriding significance.
Moreover, historically, the possibility of pregnancy does not emerge as a central consideration in the offence of rape.
Hale declared that proof of the emission of seed was unnecessary and, in the nineteenth century, although there was some doubt about this, East expressed himself to be firmly against such a requirement.
He stated  that upon penetration ‘The quick sense of honour, the pride of virtue which nature hath implanted in the female heart…is already violated past redemption and the injurious consequences to society are in every respect complete.’
Today, the Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.44 makes it clear that sexual intercourse is established upon proof of penetration alone.
Just as it favours conserving the existing definition of sexual intercourse for rape, the Committee seeks to retain the crime of buggery to deal exclusively with anal intercourse.
However, it suggests certain alterations to the present scope of the offence.
Buggery as presently defined covers non-consensual acts between males and between men and women and consensual acts between men and women and between males unless the latter are aged 21 and the acts take place in private.
A man and woman who freely and willingly engage in anal intercourse are thus as guilty of buggery as a man who perpetrates a violent anal attack.
In recognition of this anomaly, the Committee recommends that consensual buggery between a man and a woman who is over the age of 16 should no longer be criminal.
The Committee is thus opposed to any form of integration between the three offences of rape, indecent assault and buggery.
It also proposes that there should be three distinct offences, namely, unlawful sexual intercourse, gross indecency and buggery, to deal with consensual sexual activity involving a person under the age of consent.
Its reason for treating consensual anal intercourse separately is stated thus: ‘This distinctive conduct has such potentialities of physical and psychological damage that it ought to be distinguished from lesser forms of sexual conduct.’
Of course, the distinctive nature of the conduct cannot in itself be a sufficient reason for a separate offence, since, for example , the introduction of the penis into the mouth, cunnilingus and object penetration are each equally distinctive, but they will, it is proposed, collectively be classified as acts of gross indecency.
So far as the gravity of anal intercourse in relation to other sexual conduct is concerned, the Committee's view is not altogether clear.
Thus, in the context of consensual sexual activity with a girl under the age of 16, it states: ‘Most of us think that acts such as oral sex are extremely serious (perhaps more likely to disturb a young girl meeting them for the first  time than sexual intercourse).’
Yet it recommends that the maximum penalty for such conduct should be two years where the girl is over 13 and under 16, the same penalty as for sexual intercourse, whereas for consensual buggery the maximum recommended is five years.
Where the girl is under 13, the penalty would rise to five years for gross indecency as compared with life imprisonment for sexual intercourse and buggery.
The Committee's reason for retaining buggery as a separate offence to deal with non-consensual anal intercourse is once again because of the distinctive nature of the conduct and because it considered that it was ‘an especially humiliating and distressing experience.’
However, it is not clear that it is substantially more humiliating and distressing than forced acts of oral sex or object penetration.
Moreover, in the light of the Committee's comment that consensual oral sex is extremely serious and more likely to be disturbing to a young girl than sexual intercourse, it would seem to follow that non-consensual oral sex is extremely serious and more likely to be disturbing than rape.
Yet, in its Working Paper the Committee recommended a dramatic difference m penalty between rape and non-consensual buggery on the one hand, and forced acts of oral sex on the other.
It proposed that the maximum for rape should continue to be life imprisonment and the maximum for non-consensual buggery where the victim was over 16 should be raised from ten years to life imprisonment.
The proposed maximum penalty for indecent assault, however, was five years.
In its final Report, the Committee conceded the force of the argument in favour of a higher penalty for indecent assault.
It proposed a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment instead of five.
This in turn prompted a reconsideration of the proposal, rejected in its Working Paper, that there should be two degrees of indecent assault.
This would ensure,inter alia , that defendants charged with relatively trivial acts would neither suffer the stigma of conviction for a serious offence with a high penalty nor would run the risk of a more severe sentence than would have been dispensed under the old law.
The stumbling block proved to be the issue of how and where the line should be drawn between the two degrees.
The Committee discussed three alternatives.
First it considered whether the aggravating factor should be penetration.
However, it was not at all convinced that a slight penetration  with one finger could be regarded as an aggravated assault and yet considered it impractical to distinguish between different forms of digital penetration.
Moreover, it was felt that acts other than penetration could be equally traumatic.
The Committee then looked at the approach taken in Victoria, Australia, where the relevant statute lists special factors which will convert an indecent assault into an aggravated one.
A defendant who, for example, is armed with a weapon or performs the assault in the presence of a third party is guilty of an aggravated offence.
The Committee concluded, however, that whilst these factors were of relevance to sentencing, it was less clear that they could form an appropriate basis for distinguishing one offence from another.
Finally, the Committee considered whether the aggravated offence could be defined to include acts of penetration as well as indecent assaults accompanied by conduct involving serious degradation and humiliation to the victim.
Once again, however, it was felt that this solution was not entirely acceptable since the words degradation and humiliation were lacking in the certainty desirable for criminal legislation.
The Committee finally conceded defeat and left the matter open.
It suggested that, if an aggravated offence were introduced on the basis of any of the three alternatives discussed, the Director of Public Prosecution's consent should be required before a prosecution was brought because of the difficulties associated with each.
In the light of the Committee's hesitancy, it is not surprising that the Sexual Offences Act 1985, which raised the penalty for indecent assault to ten years' imprisonment, did not also divide the offence into two degrees.
Yet the task of distinguishing sexual assaults in terms of gravity is perhaps less awesome than the Committee alleged.
Penetration of the body by whatever means is generally more traumatic than other forms of sexual contact — intruders and invaders are more threatening to the human animal than those who remain outside.
Penetration involving the penis, vagina or anus is perceived differently and regarded more seriously than other forms of penetration.
A satisfactory dividing line could have been drawn in these terms.
Cunnilingus is a marginal case but since it involves genital contact and may involve a form of penetration, there is a case for placing it within the more serious category.
So far as digital penetration with one finger is concerned, if this is less serious than other types of penetration, this could be reflected in sentencing.
To require the D.P.P. 's consent before any prosecution for aggravated assault is brought merely on account of this matter, would appear to be a response which is both exaggerated and unwarranted.
Moreover, such a requirement would discourage prosecutions for the aggravated offence and would exclude private prosecutions.
Although the case for dividing indecent assault into two degrees is  not overwhelming — it would be stronger if the maximum penalty were higher than ten years — there would undoubtedly be certain advantages to be derived from so doing.
Such an arrangement would encourage defendants to plead guilty to the lesser offence and thus spare the complainant the trauma of giving evidence in court.
Defendants were frequently prepared to plead guilty under the old law with its maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment.
They may be less inclined henceforth to do so.
This could result in fewer prosecutions and convictions for indecent assault.
If the offence were divided into two degrees, such an outcome might possibly be avoided.
(ii) Other Offences
In its Working Paper, the Criminal Law Revision Committee discussed several offences apart from rape which require proof of sexual intercourse.
It considered whether the definition of sexual intercourse should be expanded in the case of the relatively insignificant offence of taking an unmarried girl of 18 out of the possession of her parent with intent to have sexual intercourse, and concluded that little would be achieved by doing so.
It came to the reverse conclusion so far as the crime of administering a drug for the purpose of obtaining sexual intercourse was concerned and recommended that all sexual acts should be covered.
However, it entirely failed to consider the far more important question of whether the definition should be extended for the crimes of obtaining sexual intercourse by threats or false pretences.
Given the Committee's proposals on buggery, this would have meant that a man who procured a woman's submission to anal intercourse by threats other than of violence would not necessarily have been guilty of any offence.
Similarly, regarding incest, the Committee merely stated that it proposed no alteration in the definition of sexual intercourse for the purpose of this offence.
The matter was not discussed and no reason for this view was provided.
Under the Working Paper's proposals, therefore, vaginal penetration by the penis would have remained the focus of sexual offences legislation.
In its final report, however, the Criminal Law Revision Committee has reconsidered this approach.
It now proposes that the offence of taking an unmarried girl out of the possession of her parents with intent to have sexual intercourse should include both boys and girls provided that they are under 16.
It should also encompass an intent to have anal intercourse or commit an act of gross indecency since such  conduct ‘would be regarded by many as more serious than abduction for the purposes of sexual intercourse.’
The Committee further recommends that the crime of administering a drug to enable a man to have sexual intercourse with a woman should be extended to protect males and to cover acts of gross indecency.
A new offence is also proposed to penalise the procuring of acts of gross indecency by threats or intimidation.
The Committee has not, however, shifted its position so far as the crime of incest is concerned.
It shared the view of the Policy Advisory Committee that ‘the primary aim of the law against incest is the protection of the young and vulnerable against sexual exploitation within the family and rejected the idea that eugenics was the law's principal justification.
It commented further:
‘It is not merely a question of unlawful sexual intercourse with a person who may not be in a position to give true consent.
There is also a special dimension, the violation of the role of the family, which adds to the harmful consequences of incest.
A child who suffers abuse at the hand of a stranger can expect comfort and protection from his or her family; incest victims often have no-one to whom to turn — those who should support have been the cause of suffering.’
These considerations clearly apply with equal force to other sexual acts such as buggery and oral sex.
Indeed, the Criminal Law Revision Committee consistently treats buggery as a particularly grave form of abuse.
The Policy Advisory Committee expressed the view that ‘some indecent acts other than sexual intercourse, especially if repeated over any length of time, can perhaps be as harmful as sexual intercourse, and that they represent just as much an abuse of the familial relationship as acts of sexual intercourse.’
Despite all this, however, both committees took the view that incest should be confined to sexual intercourse on the ground that the case for extending the offence had not been made out.
Yet it is clear that existing law does not provide enough protection for children against sexual abuse within the home and the  Committee fails to make alternative proposals that will sufficiently strengthen it.
Indeed, some of its recommendations will have the opposite effect.
Under present law, a father who commits buggery on his daughter is guilty of that offence whether she consents or not and whatever her age.
If, however, he has oral sex with her and she is 16 years old or more, he can be liable for the offence of indecent assault only if it can be proved that she did not consent.
Non-consent is generally established by proof of violence whether actual, threatened or feared.
It is not at all clear that the type of threat which might be used in this kind of situation would suffice.
The father might, for example, threaten that he will inform the girl's mother of previous sexual activity between them or that he will commence sexual activity with a younger sibling if she does not comply.
The Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.2 does not, of course, apply here since it deals only with sexual intercourse procured by threat.
Under the Committee's proposals, a father who commits buggery with his daughter who is 16 years old or more will be liable only if proof of her non-consent can be established.
Moreover, proof of non-consent on a charge of buggery or indecent assault is likely to become harder.
On the other hand, acts of gross indecency procured by threat will become an offence and threats other than of violence will suffice.
Whilst this provision would be an improvement on the present law, threats may not always be easy to establish.
Few prosecutions are currently brought for procuring sexual intercourse by threat.
Furthermore, a father's position of power and influence in the home may render any form of direct threat unnecessary, particularly where the girl is of low intelligence, immature or dependent.
In such cases, she will clearly be left without any protection from the criminal law at all.
It is further the case that a father who gets his 14-year-old daughter to perform an act of fellatio on him or to masturbate him is not criminally liable.
This is because the crime of indecent assault requires the defendant to do something to the victim.
There is no indecent assault if the defendant, without force or threats or indecent touching, induces the victim to do something to him.
Where the girl is under 14, this gap in the law is filled by the Indecency with Children Act 1960.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee recommends that the age be raised to 16  under this legislation.
However, in the family situation, girls above 16 may well be in need of the law's protection.
Under the Criminal Law Revision Committee's proposals, therefore, fathers who have sexual intercourse with their daughters of 16 years old or more will commit the serious offence of incest whatever the circumstances.
Fathers who choose instead to commit acts of oral sex or buggery on them will commit no offence save where the girl's consent, in the narrow, legal sense of the term, is lacking or where it has been obtained by threat, which may be difficult to prove.
The Committee's position is hard to defend.
Far preferable is the approach taken in Victoria, Australia, where incest now covers the introduction of the penis into the vagina, anus or mouth of another person and the introduction of an object into the vagina or anus.
It might be thought that the crime of incest which covers parties who consent in the legal sense should not extend further than serious acts of penetration.
However, there is also a case for including acts of gross indecency performed on or with girls of 18 years and below who may still be at school and dependent on their parents, since such acts too may be highly damaging.
Fathers who, for example, induce their daughters of this age to fellate or masturbate them would thus become liable for incest.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee's final proposals are undoubtedly an improvement on those adumbrated in its Working Paper.
Greater recognition is afforded to coercive acts apart from those involving sexual intercourse.
It is only to be regretted that the Committee has not pursued this policy with sufficient boldness and consistency.
With a Woman
Rape is the most gender specific of all crimes: only a man over 14 can be the actual perpetrator, only a woman the victim.
In common parlance, however, the word rape is used to describe the sexual assault of men as well as women, as, for example, in the prison context.
There are those who believe that the crime of rape should reflect this.
Moreover, rather than perpetuate the stereotype of woman as passive victim, man as aggressor, rape, it is sometimes said, should be gender neutral with respect to perpetrators as well.
There is also a view that sexual crimes  against men are regarded with more gravity than sexual crimes against women and that if men as well as women could be the legal victims of rape, this might assist in changing attitudes towards the offence.
There is certainly some indication that the public perceives homosexual rape, particularly if perpetrated against a child, as an especially heinous offence.
In the summer of 1983, for example, a small boy was abducted and sexually assaulted by three men in Brighton.
The newspapers could write of little else for days.
The nation was invited to donate to a fund to help track down his assailants and the response was generous.
It was suggested to the Criminal Law Revision Committee that in the light of‘the strong feelings of revulsion’ which homosexual rape arouses and which may prejudice the defendant, such conduct should be dealt with as indecent assault rather than as buggery.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee revealed its own view of the matter by firmly rejecting this proposal and recommending instead that the maximum penalty for non-consensual buggery of a male should be increased.
The penalties for indecent assault prior to 1985 may also be seen as confirmation of a difference in attitude towards sexual assaults against men and women.
Thus, the maximum penalty for indecently assaulting a man was formerly ten years' imprisonment, whereas for a woman it was two years, rising to five where she was under 13.
A study of convictions for indictable sexual offences in 1973 revealed, however, that ‘…despite the disparity in maximum penalties for indecent assaults on males and females, the sentences actually imposed are quite similar.
There is little difference in the custodial rates for the two offences or in the length of sentences.’
Moreover, buggery of a woman still carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, whereas buggery of a male over 16 has a ten-year maximum.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee now recommends that, whether the victim is male or female, the maximum penalty for non-consensual buggery should be life imprisonment.
Its proposal that the maximum penalty for indecent assault should be ten years irrespective of the sex of the victim was implemented by the Sexual Offences Act 1985, s.3(3).
Whether or not it is practical or desirable to introduce gender neutrality into the law of rape depends very much upon the type of reform contemplated for the offence as a whole.
In New South Wales, Australia, where rape has been abolished and replaced by four new offences of  sexual assault, gender neutrality is clearly appropriate.
It would make little sense in this context to increase the categories of sexual assault simply to maintain gender specificity.
On the other hand, the argument for gender neutrality is less clear in the context of less radical reform.
Thus, for example, the existing offence of rape could be retained but reformed in a number of ways.
It could be expanded to cover certain forms of oral sex as well as vaginal and anal penetration by objects or parts of the body and could be rendered gender neutral.
This would contract the scope of indecent assault and remove non-consensual acts from the crime of buggery, which would continue to cover consensual anal intercourse between parties under the age of consent.
Such a rearrangement would be unlikely, however, to result in many rape prosecutions in which the victim was male or the defendant female.
Where the victim was under the age of consent, the prosecution would frequently charge the defendant with buggery or indecent assault to avoid the burden of proving lack of consent.
Moreover, convictions for non-consensual buggery of a male over 16 are less than frequent.
In 1973, for example, there were five.
There are unlikely to be more for non-consensual acts against males involving oral sex or object penetration.
Thus, if the law were changed in the manner outlined, the overwhelming majority of rape victims would remain female.
Similarly, since there are very few reported cases of sexual assault by women, save occasionally where they are acting as accomplices to men, few defendants would be female.
It seems fanciful to imagine that the existence of a handful of male victims and female defendants would have any impact either on the future development by the judges of the substantive law of rape or on the handling of rape cases by the police, or indeed on the way that rape is generally perceived.
A more likely scenario is that male rape victims would be afforded the same shoddy treatment as their female counterparts.
Male victims above the age of consent might well be perceived as homosexual or latently so even if they are not.
Whatever defence strategies are currently used in cases of non-consensual buggery, arguments commonly deployed against female complainants might more frequently be heard against male victims if they were brought within the scope of rape.
It might be suggested that the victim ‘asked for it’ by accepting a lift or an invitation to the defendant's home or that he ‘led him on’or consented and afterwards regretted it.
The victim's previous sexual history might also where possible be emphasised.
Whatever the symbolic advantages of gender neutrality in the law of rape, in practice, whilst the structure of sexual offences remains essentially the same, the effect of such an innovation could  conceivably be detrimental to male victims without being of any real assistance to female complainants.
Furthermore, it has been suggested in favour of the present law that ‘it emphasises the reality that sexual violence is predominantly  committed by men against women; it underlines the protection of the sexual autonomy of women.’
The case for expanding incest to include male as well as female victims is stronger.
The abuse of power, the breach of the special trust between parent and child which are the hallmarks of incest are clearly as significant where the victim is a boy.
The law may in this instance have a role to play in drawing the attention of society in general and professionals in particular to the fact that boys, too, may be the object of sexual exploitation within the family.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee's conviction that both rape and incest should be confined to vaginal penetration by the penis, has precluded any discussion in its Report of gender neutrality in either context.
It has, however, recommended that the crime of administering a drug to a woman for the purpose of obtaining sexual intercourse should extend to other sexual acts involving gross indecency and should protect males as well as females.
It has also proposed that the abduction offences should become gender neutral.
Thus, it would become an offence for a person of either sex to abduct a boy or girl under 16 or a severely mentally handicapped person of either sex with intent to have unlawful sexual intercourse or take part in an act of gross indecency.
The policy of gender neutrality is further pursued in relation to the proposed offence of procuring an act of gross indecency by threat which would be capable of commission by and against males as well as females.
It would be hard to dispute the desirability of any of these proposals, which would give to certain males the protection which they currently lack.
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse
Unlawful here means outside marriage.
Generally speaking, non-consensual sexual intercourse which takes place within marriage cannot constitute rape.
(a) The Phenomenon of Marital Rape
It is said that, for women, home is often the most dangerous place to be.
In India, dowry deaths — the murder of a wife for a disappointing dowry — are not uncommon and almost invariably connived at by the legal system.
Much the same was true of wife battering in England  until Erin Pizzey and others exposed the phenomenon in the 1970s and legislation was introduced to combat it.
If this has not been entirely successful, some recognition of the problem has at least been achieved.
By a strange process of intellectual compartmentalisation, however, other forms of violence within the family are ignored, or at least not recognised for what they are.
Thus, it is often pointed out that the statistics of murder include many domestic killings, the implication being that the figures are not therefore quite as grave as they seem.
Rape is the least acknowledged form of violence within the home.
The Policy Advisory Committee ‘did not see marital rape as a serious social problem.’
Sir Melford Stevenson described it as ‘the rarest possible offence.’
Professor Shorter implicitly denies that the problem exists for twentieth century women.
Thus, writing of two centuries ago, he states:
‘We may thus think of the subordination of women as the result of three different kinds of victimisation. 1.
Women were victimised by men, in the form of limitless sexual access.
Men's conjugal rights exposed women to an endless series of unwanted and unplanned pregnancies.’
He contrasts the position of modern women:
‘Then between 1900 and 1930 these various sources of victimisation came to an end.
Women gained access to relatively safe abortion, and thus gained control over their own fertility.
Men themselves acquired a more responsive attitude to women.
In short, a physical basis for equality between the sexes was established…
The men were now men remoulded by the modern family into affectionate husbands, and quite unlike the earlier contemptuous brutal males.’
He adds: ‘In our own time, a married woman who dislikes her husband's advances can leave the marriage.’
In England, women in general did not acquire access to relatively safe abortions until 1967 and then only on a limited basis.
It is certainly true to say, however, that because of the availability of contraception and abortion they are less oppressed by childbearing than they used to be.
But it cannot be assumed that these developments have in fact led to equality within the  sexual sphere of marriage.
Neither can it be assumed that a wife who is denied sexual autonomy will cease cohabitation.
Before the 1970s, one reason why wife battering was not perceived as a social problem was because it was argued that those who suffered it could leave and those who stayed could not be suffering.
It was left to Erin Pizzey to reveal that many, if not most, physically abused women had nowhere else to go.
That rape in marriage happens and not infrequently has now been established by a number of studies.
The most thorough and systematic of these was conducted by Russell in San Francisco in 1978.
Of a random sample of 644 female householders who were or had been married, 87 or 14% had been the victims of rape or attempted rape by their husbands or ex-husbands.
Since some women would no doubt have been unwilling to disclose experiences of marital rape (a few openly refused to do so), the 14% figure is, if anything, a conservative one.
Of particular interest in the light of Professor Shorter's remarks, is the finding that many women in the survey who were not raped did not consider that they had the right to refuse sex with their husbands.
They submitted ‘even when they had no desire for sex or were repulsed by the idea.’
Russell also found that economic factors were highly significant in determining whether a sexually abused wife remained with her husband.
She states: ‘Our quantitative analysis has shown that wives who were primary bread-winners at the time their husbands first raped them were more likely to take effective action.’
In their study of 60 battered women, Hilberman and Munson found that ‘sexual assaults were common, women describing being beaten and raped in front of the children.’
But Russell found that although battered wives were frequently raped as well, rape in marriage was by no means confined to women who were the recipients of other forms of domestic violence.
In England, a number of reported criminal cases reveal instances of marital rape and women's organisations have long been aware of the  problem.
A recent study conducted by Women Against Rape revealed that 60 out of 1,236 women who responded to a questionnaire on women's safety had been raped by their husbands.
(b) The Present Law
(i) The Origins of the Marital Rape Exemption
With certain limited exceptions, married men are exempt from liability for rape of their wives, although they can be prosecuted for any accompanying assault or violence.
The exemption is generally attributed to the seventeenth century writings of Sir Matthew Hale, and whilst this is in some measure correct, it is best understood in the context of the evolution of the law of rape as a whole.
It has been pointed out above that historically the law of rape was exclusively concerned with the protection of virginity.
In medieval times, the normal presumption of the courts was that any history or implication of consent on the part of the woman was a valid defence to an appeal of rape.
The thirteenth century eyre records testify vividly to the fact that at that time previous or subsequent sexual intercourse with the same man was fatal to such an appeal.
Thus, in 1202 at the Lincolnshire Assize, the defendant was acquitted of rape, having successfully argued in his defence that ‘tunc et prius et post fuit succuba eius ’— she had lain with him both before and afterwards.
Similarly, at the eyre at York in 1218–19, one Aldusa de Eton brought an appeal of rape against Simon son of Alan.
He was acquitted on the ground that ‘he had her for almost a year with her goodwill.’
At the Warwickshire Eyre of 1221, one Reginald was found not guilty of the rape of Margery daughter of Aelfric ‘because a long time before this he had her of her own free will, and again two years afterwards in the house of her father, and they say no cry was raised.’
It was decided that whilst Reginald should go free, the unfortunate Margery should herself be placed in custody for her false appeal.
In 1240 a rape defendant was acquitted on the ground that ‘before and since, he has lain with her [the complainant]often and not by force.’
In 1249, an appeal of rape failed ‘quid fuit precognita ’— because the defendant had known the complainant  before.
The Statutes of Westminster apparently extended the law of rape to cover all women, not merely virgins, but there is nothing in them to suggest that a man could be liable for rape of a woman with whom he had previously had consensual sexual intercourse.
Moreover, it is of interest that in 1279 a defendant was acquitted of rape because ‘he was betrothed to J [the complainant]before he lay with her.’
Betrothal appears to have carried with it a presumption of consent.
In the thirteenth century context, liability for marital rape would clearly have been quite inconceivable.
From the later middle ages onwards there is very little in the way of pleas, verdicts and judgments on rape.
The seventeenth century, however, saw the notorious trial of Lord Castlehaven as well as the pronouncements on rape of Sir Matthew Hale.
It has been suggested that Lord Castlehaven's case is authority for the proposition that a man can be liable for rape of his wife But Castlehaven was indicted as praesens, auxilians and confortans for holding his wife down to facilitate her rape by ‘one of his minions.’
His liability was thus as a principal in the second degree.
The case could, however, have paved the way for such a development in the law.
It is significant that the court held that ‘in a criminal case of this nature, where the wife is the party grieved and on whom the crime is committed, she is to be admitted a witness against her husband’ and there is no specific mention of a marital rape exemption by any party at any stage of the proceedings.
Sir Matthew Hale was to ensure, however, that the law did not proceed in this direction.
When Hale came to survey the law of rape in the seventeenth century, he was confronted by centuries in which very little had been said about the matter.
He would have been able to look at Bracton and the medieval law as well as at Lord Castlehaven's case.
Faced with such a dearth of modern authority, Hale had plenty of scope to steer the law in a different direction and this, to some extent, he did.
Thus, he pronounced against the rule that a man could not be liable for the rape of his concubine, stating that concubinage was evidence of consent, but no  more than this since the woman could withdraw from cohabitation and thus withdraw her consent.
It follows from this that any woman who had previously had consensual sexual relations with a man would similarly be protected if on a subsequent occasion she refused consent and he raped her.
The question therefore arose as to whether a wife should be treated any differently in this respect.
It was Hale's opinion that she should be.
He took the view that her consent alone could not be retracted since it was given for all time as part of the contract of marriage.
Hale's choice to retain the medieval approach to consent in the case of married women only was to shape the course of the law up to the present day.
(ii) Hale's Rationale for the Marital Rape Exemption
Hale justified the marital rape exemption in the following terms: ‘The husband cannot be guilty of rape committed by himself upon his lawful wife, for by their mutual matrimonial consent and contract the wife has given up herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot retract.’
This explanation may have convinced Hale but today it does not bear a moment's scrutiny.
If marriage is a contract, ‘it is unlike any other.’
In the words of Appleton C.J.: ‘…the rights, duties and obligations of [marriage]rest, not upon…agreement, but upon the general law of the State….
They are of law, not of contract.’
Even if a wife were expressly to agree to sexual intercourse on demand, such a promise would not in English law be contractually binding upon her.
Under matrimonial law, moreover, by consenting to marriage, a wife does not impliedly consent to have sexual intercourse with her husband whenever he pleases.
If he considers that she is refusing intercourse unreasonably, his remedy is a matrimonial one.
He may not take the law into his own hands.
Were it otherwise, it would follow that a man who assaults his wife purely in order to enforce her duty to maintain him, or to care for their children, should be similarly exempt from criminal liability.
That Hale's rationale is vacuous has been pointed out repeatedly.
Thus, for example, Smith and Hogan assert: ‘The basis for the general rule as stated by Hale is plainly fictitious….
The criminal law should not be based upon fictions.’
Curiously, however, Lanham ads Hale's rationale both convincing and compelling even in the modern  context.
He states: ‘What Hale is saying is that for the purpose of the law of rape the consent given at the time of the marriage ceremony cannot in law be revoked.’
He argues that the following extract from the marriage ceremony contained in the Book of Common Prayer is as significant today as it was when Hale made his pronouncement:
‘Matrimony…is not by any to be taken in hand…wantonly, to satisfy men's carnal lusts and appetites, like brute beasts but reverently, deservedly, advisedly, soberly….
First, it was ordained for the procreation of children….
Secondly, it was ordained for a remedy against sin, and to avoid fornication….’
It would seem to be inappropriate for the criminal law to remove a whole category of persons from its protection on the basis of words spoken at a ceremony of marriage which have no binding force.
It would seem to be still more inappropriate for the criminal law to deny its protection to parties (probably a majority in this country) who have expressly chosen to be married according to a wholly different ceremony.
However, the most obvious objection to Lanham's thesis is that the passage he quotes is particularly vague about the sexual obligations of marriage.
Certainly, nowhere within it does a wife pledge that she will have sexual intercourse with her husband upon demand: indeed, it is expressly stated that the purpose of matrimony is not ‘to satisfy men's carnal lusts and appetites.’
Yet without such a pledge, how can the ceremony be invoked as justification for a total marital rape exemption?
It must be concluded, despite the ingenuity of Lanham's thesis, that Hale's rationale has no foundation.
Yet in England the exemption has met no serious challenge from legislature or judiciary ever since.
Legal history appears to record a silence on the matter until the nineteenth century.
(iii) Nineteenth Century Developments
In 1885, Parliament passed the Criminal Law Amendment Act.
This created several offences designed to protect women from sexual exploitation.
Under subsections 3(1) and (2), it became a crime to procure women by threat or by false pretences to have sexual intercourse in any part of the world.
But wives, alongside common prostitutes and women of known immoral character, were excluded from the protection of section 3(2).
Husbands were equally exempt from liability under section 3(1) as well as for the offence of administering drugs to a woman with intent to stupefy her and enable a man to have sexual intercourse with her.
Parliament was thus taking the marital exemption into realms uncontemplated even by Hale, who believed that it was one thing for a man to have sexual intercourse with his wife without her consent, quite another for him to force her into sexual intercourse with  others.
Commenting on Lord Castlehaven's case, he stated: ‘Tho in marriage she hath given up her body to her husband, she is not to be by him prostituted to another.’
In 1951, prostitutes and immoral women were brought fully within the scope of the legislation, but wives remain unprotected.
Hale is unlikely to have approved of a further development which took place in connection with this legislation.
The three offences mentioned above were originally introduced to deal with men who procured women for the benefit of third parties.
It came to be accepted however, that a defendant who procured a woman by the means proscribed in order to have sexual intercourse with her himself was equally within their scope.
As a result, a husband who, for example, drugs his wife in order to have sexual intercourse with her is exempt from liability.
But a wife's implied consent and contract can hardly extend to being overpowered and stupefied by drugs for the purpose of intercourse.
Certainly there is no mention of this in the marriage ceremony!
As for the marital rape exemption itself, there was little in the way of judicial comment on the matter until Clarence in 1888.
Clarence had sexual intercourse with his wife knowing that he was suffering from venereal disease and without disclosing this fact to her.
He was charged with unlawfully and maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm and with assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
Rape was not charged but there are dicta on the subject from six of the 13 judges who sat in the case.
Two centuries after Hale's pronouncement, Pollock B. unequivocally expressed his support for the marital rape exemption in similar terms.
He stated: ‘The husband's connection with his wife…is done in pursuance of the marital contract and of the status which was created by marriage and the wife…has no right or power to refuse her consent.’
The other judges were less enthusiastic.
Indeed, Wills J. appeared to query the very existence of a marital rape exemption.
He commented:
‘If intercourse under the circumstances now in question constitute an assault on the part of the man, it must constitute rape, unless indeed, as between married persons rape is impossible, a proposition to which I certainly am not prepared to assent, and for which there seems to me to he no sufficient authority…
I cannot understand why, as a general rule, if intercourse be an assault, it should not be rape.’
The second and less sweeping challenge to Hale came from Smith J. who, whilst accepting the contract and consent analysis, suggested that the consent could in certain circumstances be revoked by the wife.
Thus, he stated:
‘Until the consent given at marriage be revoked, how can it be said that the husband in exercising his marital right has assaulted his wife?
The utmost the Crown can say is that the wife would have withdrawn her consent if she had known what her husband knew….
In my judgment, in this case, the consent given at marriage still existing and unrevoked, the prisoner has not assaulted his wife.’
Two judges took the view that whilst the matrimonial consent could not be revoked by the wife, this consent had a restricted ambit.
It did not apply to sexual intercourse under certain circumstances, as where the husband's conduct was of a particularly outrageous nature.
Thus, Field J. postulated the case of a wife in poor health who refused intercourse and who was forced to comply by her husband who enlisted the aid of a third party to subdue her.
He asks: ‘Would anyone say that the matrimonial consent would render this no crime?’
Similarly, Hawkins J. stated:
‘By the marriage contract a wife no doubt confers upon her husband an irrevocable privilege to have sexual intercourse….
But this marital privilege does not justify a husband in endangering his wife's health and causing her grievous bodily harm…
I can readily imagine a state of circumstances under which a husband might deservedly be punished with the penalty attached to rape.’
The fifth judge, Stephen J., appears to have considered that the wife's consent to sexual intercourse would in certain circumstances be vitiated.
He stated: ‘If we apply [the fraud vitiates consent]idea to the present case, it is difficult to say that the prisoner was not guilty of rape, for the definition of rape is having connection with a woman without her consent.’
Thus, almost a century ago, five judges were prepared to voice their reservations about the marital rape exemption.
Nothing bolder has emerged from the English judiciary since then.
In every case on the matter decided this century, the exemption has been upheld and Hale's rationale cited, often without criticism.
There is hardly any modern authority which suggests, as did the judges in Clarence , that either a wife can unilaterally in certain circumstances withdraw her consent, or else that the ambit of consent is restricted so that a wife is not deemed to consent to her husband where his conduct is egregious.
The judges  have been willing to concede little more than that separation agreements, divorce and certain other matrimonial orders which were not available in Hale's time must have some effect upon the exemption.
(iv) Twentieth-Century Developments
The first case to raise the issue of marital rape after Clarence was Clarke in 1949.
The wife had obtained a separation order containing a non-cohabitation clause from the magistrates' court.
In these circumstances, it was held that the husband could be liable for rape.
The exemption itself was upheld and the Hale rationale invoked.
There was no suggestion that consent could be revoked otherwise than by a court order.
Thus, Byrne J. stated:
‘The position, therefore, was that the wife, by process of law, namely marriage, had given consent to the husband to exercise the marital right during such time as the ordinary relations created by the marriage contract subsisted between them, but by a further process of law, namely, the justices’ order, her consent to marital intercourse was revoked.
Thus, in my opinion, the husband was not entitled to have intercourse with her without her consent.’
In Miller , in 1954, the wife had petitioned for divorce, after which her husband attacked and raped her, causing her actual bodily harm.
The court refused to accept that by petitioning for divorce she had revoked her consent.
It was held that ‘an act of the parties or…an act of the courts’ was necessary to revoke consent, and it was suggested that an agreement to separate, particularly if it included a non-molestation clause, would suffice.
Similarly in O'Brien in 1974, it was the pronouncement by the court of a decree nisi of divorce which was held to revoke ‘a wife's implied consent to marital intercourse.’
Even as late as 1977, Lane L.J.
in Steele cited Hale's rationale and upheld the marital exemption without query or question.
In this case, the husband had raped his wife following an undertaking to the court not to molest her.
It was because this undertaking was the equivalent of a court order and was fully enforceable by the court that he was convicted of the offence.
However, it was also stated that the exemption would be displaced if the parties by ‘an agreement between themselves [have]made it clear…that the wife's consent to sexual intercourse with her husband…no longer exists.’
An agreement to separate containing a non-cohabitation clause was suggested as an example of this.
This statement paved the way for and was indeed reiterated in Roberts in which the Court of Appeal held that consent had on the facts been terminated where there was a formal deed of separation, even though this  lacked both a non-cohabitation and a non-molestation clause.
But a formal agreement does not appear to have been regarded as essential.
If this is the case, the exemption no longer applies to couples living apart by mutual consent.
Hale's statement that a wife is not to be by her husband prostituted to another has also influenced judicial thinking in the twentieth century.
In Cogan and Leak , it was held that a husband could be liable for rape if he forced his wife to have sexual intercourse with a third party who was unaware of her lack of consent.
The novelty of the decision lies in the characterisation of the husband as principal in the first degree acting through the innocent agency of the third party.
The reasoning on this point has, however, attracted much criticism and it has been proposed that the husband should, in future, be held liable as an accessory in these circumstances.
(c) The Modern Argument for the Retention of the Exemption
Today reasons other than those voiced by Hale are given to justify the marital rape exemption.
Some of these were expressed by a minority of the Criminal Law Revision Committee in its Working Paper.
They are criticised in the following extract:
‘A minority of the Committee favours retaining the marital rape exemption on several grounds which may be summarised as follows:(1) The criminal law is not the best instrument for dealing with family matters.
There is substantial common ground between the majority and the minority on the issue of marital rape.
Both place heavy emphasis on the interests of the family as against those of the wife…
[The minority]believes that no good would come to children, husband or wife if she were given the protection of the criminal law.
If a wife reported the matter to the police, her children ‘might resent what she had done to their father’.
Her husband would have to face questioning which would be ‘greatly resented’ by him.
In the contortion of such reasoning, it is easy to lose sight of who has done what to whom and who in fact is the guilty party.
There is further concern lest the impetuous conduct of the wife in reporting the matter should impede reconciliation.
It is considered that in the last resort it is to civil remedies that she should have recourse.
But the assumption that reconciliation is a desirable goal in situations of this kind must be queried.
There is no reason for the law to seek to encourage a woman to reconcile with a violent and sexually brutal man.
Wives prepared to report marital rape to the police may well have husbands who fall into this category.
The dangers to which the minority refer currently exist under  the present law.
A husband who rapes his wife can be prosecuted for assault or an offence against the person if he uses force or injures her.
Therefore a wife can, in most instances, invoke the criminal process at the moment with the same possibility of offending husband and children and hindering reconciliation.
Moreover unmarried couples also have families yet a man can be liable for rape of a woman with whom he is cohabiting. (2) Proof of the offence would be difficult to acquire.
It is of course true that evidence will be difficult to acquire in cases of marital rape.
It does not follow from this that marital rape should not be a crime.
There are many crimes which are hard to prove but they remain nonetheless crimes.
It is no easier for evidence to be obtained where a man is cohabiting with a woman, yet rape is a crime in these circumstances.
(3) There may be a time lag between the occasion of the alleged rape and the reporting of it to the police.
This will exacerbate the problem of deciding whether or not to prosecute.
There is often a time lag between the commission of any rape and its reporting since the victim may have considerable misgivings about doing so.
This is a factor which the police are used to taking into account and [there should be]no difficulty in weighing it in the balance along with many other factors.’
It has also been argued that a lifting of the exemption could induce spiteful and malicious allegations by wives, particularly where divorce proceedings were involved.
But if a wife's allegation of rape is true, her motive for bringing it is no more relevant than that of a householder who notifies the police about a burglary merely in order to recover insurance.
On the other hand, a woman is unlikely to wish to involve herself and her family with the police and a criminal trial when no rape has taken place.
Moreover, it denotes a certain lack of confidence in the criminal process to believe that a totally false allegation would not sooner or later be revealed as such.
Recently, Lanham has argued for the retention of the exemption on the ground,inter alia , that many wives who are raped by their husbands have only themselves to blame.
He believes that non-violent rape can be ‘most excusable.’
It is apparently most excusable to rape your wife if she has for a period refused sexual intercourse ‘unjustifiably’ or if she has refused sexual intercourse unless her housekeeping money were raised, or even, curiously, ‘in order to win her back.’
There is, he considers, a second category of cases where fault is evenly distributed between husband and wife.
Examples are not provided but it may be suggested that a refusal by Scrooge's wife to have sexual intercourse unless her housekeeping were raised would fall within it.
Lanham suggests that if cases such as these were treated as rape, this would devalue the crime, which would be against the best interest of women.
Lanham's view that rape can be a perfectly understandable and forgivable way of dealing with the problems of a marriage echoes that expressed by Lord Dunedin in 1924 in a matrimonial case involving a wife who refused to consummate her marriage.
He remarked: ‘It is indeed permissible to wish that some gentle violence had been employed.’
Rape may have been the way to save a marriage in 1924.
But today, for most women, rape and violence in marriage are no longer acceptable.
The criminal law, so far from bolstering the institution of marriage by underwriting a right to rape, only undermines it.
It has also been suggested that rape in marriage cannot be compared to other forms of rape, since the effect on the victim must needs be far less traumatic.
Russell attempted to assess in a number of different ways the impact of wife rape on the victims in her survey.
She concluded that —;
‘just over one third of the marriages in which wife rape occurred (34 per cent.) involved extreme trauma (two victims attempted suicide), 30 per cent .
involved considerable trauma, 19 per cent.
involved some trauma, 1 per cent.
involved none, and in 9 per cent.
the degree of trauma was not ascertainable.’
She also sought to compare the impact of wife rape with the impact of rape by strangers and others, and found that 65 per cent.
of women raped by a relative who was not a husband and 61 per cent.
of women raped by a stranger reported being extremely upset, as against 59 per cent.
of those raped by a husband and 33 per cent.
raped by a friend, date or lover.
52 per cent.
of women raped by a husband and 52 per cent.
of women raped by a relative (not a husband) reported that the rape had a great effect on their lives, whereas the same effect was reported by only 39 per cent.
of those raped by a stranger and 22 per cent.
by a friend, date or lover.
She concludes that wife rape is one of the more upsetting kinds of rape.
Russell's findings are not altogether surprising.
Women are educated from an early age to distrust strangers, to avoid lonely places, to return home when it is light or to be accompanied when it is dark.
They are equally brought up to believe that marriage will provide them with a partner in whom to trust, who will love, protect and respect them.
In these circumstances, rape by a husband might very well be thought to be more disturbing in its effects than rape by that classic stranger leaping from the shadows.
Moreover, the stranger disappears, but the husband remains, as does the fear that he will do it again.
(d) Reform
Over the past ten years, academic writers have, with a striking degree of unanimity, argued the case for the abolition of the marital rape  exemption.
They have drawn attention to the injustice of exempting husbands but not cohabitees.
They have explained that the exemption might have seemed appropriate in Hale's time but is incompatible with the status of married women today.
They have pointed out that the existence of other remedies for wives in this situation is no reason for disentitling a wife to the protection of the criminal law and that the possibility of bringing charges for assault or wounding is an inadequate substitute for a rape prosecution which focuses upon the denial of another's sexual autonomy and integrity.
‘The exemption,’ it has been said, ‘has nothing to support it.’
In the words of Professor Williams, ‘it is no more than an authentic example of male chauvinism.’
In numerous jurisdictions, steps have been taken by the judiciary or legislature to limit or abolish the marital rape exemption.
There are places, however, where there has been an extension of the immunity.
(i) Expansion of the Exemption
In certain states of the United States, legislation has been introduced to extend the ambit of the marital rape exemption to cover, in some cases, men cohabiting with women, men who have had a previous sexual relationship with a woman, and even, in West Virginia, men who have been the ‘voluntary social companions’ of women, although their relationship has previously been non-sexual.
Furthermore, in some of these states, the marital exemption now applies to sexual assaults apart from rape.
Legislation of this type is regressive even by the standards of seventeenth century England.
Although there was clear authority at that time for the proposition that a man could not be guilty of the rape of a woman who lived with him outside marriage, Hale himself curtailed it by stating that cohabitation was not a defence but merely some evidence of consent.
By the standards of some United States legislators, therefore, Hale was a doughty defender of women's rights.
(ii) The Half-way House Solution
In some jurisdictions, the immunity has been curtailed but not abolished.
In New Zealand, it formerly applied only where husband and  wife lived in the same residence at the time of the rape.
In many states in the United States, as well as in the State of Victoria in Australia and in Scotland, the immunity has been lifted where the couple are living separately.
Elsewhere, separation is coupled with a further requirement.
In Idaho, for example, the couple must have lived apart for 180 days.
In Indiana, Michigan and Nevada, a petition for separation or divorce must also have been filed.
In Kentucky, Louisiana Maryland and Missouri, a separation order must have been obtained.
There can be no valid reason for denying the criminal law's protection to a wife save where she is living apart from her husband.
This sentiment was expressed by Cairns L.J.
in Reid in response to counsel's submission that a husband could only be guilty of kidnapping his wife if they were separated at the time.
He stated:
‘Nor do we see any reason why a wife who is not separated from her husband, even a wife who is still to be regarded as cohabiting with her husband, should lack this protection of the criminal law.
The notion that a husband can, without incurring punishment, treat his wife, whether she be a separated wife or otherwise, with any kind of hostile force is obsolete…’
In its final Report, the Criminal Law Revision Committee has retreated from the abolitionist position which it took in its Working Paper.
A majority of the Committee now takes the view that the exemption should no longer apply where the couple are living separately but should be retained where they are cohabiting.
The Report states:
‘The majority of us, who would not extend the offence of rape to married couples cohabiting at the time of the act of sexual intercourse, believe that rape cannot be considered in the abstract as merely ‘sexual intercourse without consent’.
The circumstances of rape may be peculiarly grave.
This feature is not present in the case of a husband and wife cohabiting with each other when an act of sexual intercourse occurs without the wife's consent.
They may well have had sexual intercourse regularly before the act in question and, because a sexual relationship may involve a degree of compromise, she may sometimes have agreed only with some reluctance to such intercourse.
Should he go further and force her to have sexual intercourse without her consent, this may evidence a  failure of the marital relationship.
But it is far from being the ‘unique’ and ‘grave’offence described earlier (paragraph 2.3).
Where the husband goes so far as to cause injury, there are available a number of offences against the person with which he may be charged, but the gravamen of the husband's conduct is the injury he has caused not the sexual intercourse he has forced.’
This paragraph provides a revealing insight into the narrow view of the offence of rape held by a majority of the Committee's members.
Elsewhere it has been suggested that ‘the overriding objective which the law of rape should seek to pursue is the protection of sexual choice.’
This objective is clearly rejected by the majority who apparently consider that a woman's right to choose should be protected by the criminal law in limited circumstances only.
For them rape is a ‘unique and grave offence.’
The reason why marital rape of a cohabiting spouse is not considered to be unique and grave is that the couple may well have had sexual intercourse regularly before the act in question.
The same might just as well be true, however, of unmarried cohabiting couples and of couples who do not cohabit.
Yet sexual intercourse without the woman's consent is rape in these circumstances and the majority does not propose that the law should be otherwise.
To suggest that rape is something more than sexual intercourse without consent runs counter to the view of the Heilbron Committee which considered that this was precisely the meaning of rape.
But even where marital intercourse is procured by extreme violence, this ought not, in the majority's view, to suffice for rape.
To suggest that in these circumstances ‘the gravamen of the husband's conduct is the injury not the sexual intercourse he has forced’ is entirely to deny any sexual autonomy for women within marriage.
Such a view will seem to many today to be both unacceptable and shocking.
The majority go on to point out that if the law were to punish ‘rape between cohabiting spouses…immediate imprisonment might not be appropriate’ and that imprisonment would be most unlikely where no injury was sustained by the wife.
They remark that this ‘might lead to all rape cases being regarded less seriously.’
Subsequently, however, they appear to suggest that the police would be unlikely to pursue such a complaint unless there was evidence of injury.
It would seem, therefore, that the courts would have little opportunity to sentence in cases where proof of injury was not available.
But even if judges were to exercise leniency on these infrequent occasions, it is surely far-fetched to consider that this could lead to all rape cases being treated less seriously.
Moreover, if, as the majority believe, there is a clear difference between rape of a cohabiting spouse and other forms of rape, then  the public and a fortiori the judiciary will surely recognise the distinction and appreciate that it will be reflected occasionally in sentencing.
The majority further contend that a wife who has reported a rape by her husband to the police may subsequently regret having done so and may wish to be reconciled with him.
She might, however, be unable to halt the investigative process even if she wanted to because the police would be under a duty thoroughly to investigate the complaint.
This argument is again unconvincing.
The majority concede that a complaint which is not supported by evidence of injury is unlikely to be pursued by the police.
In these circumstances, where the woman seeks to forget the matter, it is almost inconceivable that the police would pursue it.
Where the wife has sustained serious injury, then there is a strong case in favour of the investigative process continuing whatever the wife decides.
In an intermediate situation where injuries have been sustained but these are not serious, it is again extremely unlikely that the police would pursue an investigation where the wife refuses to co-operate.
The police have traditionally treated rape complaints with a certain reluctance and suspicion and where the complainant has been diffident about prosecution, have been only too content to let the matter drop.
Despite recent changes in police attitudes, this approach is still likely to prevail where rape of a cohabiting spouse is concerned.
The Committee was not without its own misgivings about non-cohabitation as a prerequisite for prosecution for marital rape.
It was concerned about the implementation of the proposal.
In matrimonial law, the courts have recognised that cohabitation may have ceased even where the parties live in the same dwelling, provided that they are no longer‘living with each other in the same household.’
The Committee considered that such a criterion was unsuitable as a basis for criminal liability.
It discussed whether a requirement should be imposed that the couple should not be living under the same roof at the time of the rape.
But there was concern that, since ‘it is by no means uncommon for the parties to a fragile marriage to separate and come together again in quick succession on a number of occasions, this would force the courts to enquire into the precise situation at the time of the rape.’
However this would seem to be no more awkward an issue of fact than those which dally confront the criminal courts.
The Committee has left the matter open in the hope that a satisfactory formula  can be constructed.
Should this prove to be impossible, the majority consider that the law should remain as it is.
Separation is not always the factor which is chosen to delimit the marital rape exemption.
Thus, in South Australia, the Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935–1975, s.73(5), provides as follows:
‘…a person shall not be convicted of rape or indecent assault upon his spouse, or an attempt to commit, or assault with intent to commit rape or indecent assault upon his spouse (except as an accessory) unless the alleged offence consisted of, was preceded or accompanied by, or was associated with —;(a) assault occasioning actual bodily harm, or threat of such an assault upon the spouse;(b) an act of gross indecency, or threat of such an act, against the spouse;(c) an act calculated seriously and substantially to humiliate the spouse; or (d) threat of the commission of a criminal act against the person.’
These provisions may be criticised on several grounds.
First, they fall short of the standard of clarity required of criminal legislation.
What, for example, is the scope of paragraph (c)?
Since the South Australian legislature expressly rejected the original Bill introduced by the Attorney-General, which would have abolished the immunity altogether, it would seem that an act calculated to humiliate a spouse could not consist of rape alone unless there were additional aggravating circumstances.
If this is the case, the legislation expressly denies the humiliation inherent in any form of rape.
Indeed, the legislation as a whole conveys the message that marital rape in and by itself is of insufficient gravity to warrant the intervention of the criminal law.
However, the most significant objection to the Act is that it has extended the scope of the common law exemption so that husbands are not criminally liable for acts of buggery or indecent assault perpetrated against their wives, save in the exceptional circumstances mentioned above.
(iii) Abolition
There is no marital rape exemption in the U.S.S.R., Czechoslovakia or Poland.
In the United States, it has been abolished in Florida, Massachusetts , Nebraska, New Jersey, Oregon, Kansas, Wisconsin, New York and Vermont.
In Georgia, the judiciary has held that its rape statute, which is silent on marital rape, does not implicitly incorporate the common law exemption.
In California, abolition is subject to a requirement that the offence be reported within 90 days.
In 1980, the Israeli Supreme Court held that a Jewish husband resident in Israel can be convicted of raping his wife and that the English common law rule should no longer apply.
Bechor J. who gave the judgment of the court stated: ‘English common law holds that a woman must submit herself totally to her husband.
This is an outrage to human conscience and reason in an enlightened country in our time.’
In Australia in 1976, judicial scepticism about Hale's doctrine was expressed in Caldwell v. R .
In 1980, the influential ‘Australian Women's Weekly’ published a questionnaire about sexual abuse to which 30,000 women responded.
13 per cent.
of them revealed that they had been the victims of marital rape.
The Government of New South Wales apparently took this finding into consideration in deciding to abolish the immunity.
It considered that there was strong community support for such legislation, which came into effect in 1981.
In Canada, the federal Law Reform Commission stated in its Report that ‘the great majority of those consulted by the Commission on this question favoured total abolition of the spousal immunity,’ and this was accomplished in 1982.
Most recently, the exemption was abolished in New Zealand by the Crimes Amendment Act (No. 3) 1985, s.2.
In Denmark, Sweden and Norway, no exemption exists.
However, in Norway, rape of a non-stranger is punished less severely, as is the rape of a wife in Sweden.
In England, the proposal advanced by a  majority of the Criminal Law Revision Committee in its Working Paper would similarly have abolished the exemption but distinguished marital from non-marital rape by requiring the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions in the case of the former before a prosecution could be brought.
This was to ensure that proceedings were not brought where the interests of the public or the family dictated otherwise.
But there were obvious objections to such a requirement.
It might be said to have gone further than Scandinavian legislation in distinguishing the position of the wife from that of her unmarried counterpart, since it would arguably have denied her equal access to the law.
By increasing the bureaucratic hurdles, some wives would have been deterred from pursuing the matter.
Moreover, the Director of Public Prosecutions himself, when consulted about the proposal, expressed doubt as to how the public interest criterion would be interpreted in such cases.
The most significant objection, however, was that it would have precluded private prosecutions, the importance of which was amply illustrated several years ago by the Glasgow rape case.
If the marital rape exemption had been abolished in England and the decision to prosecute left to the police, there is no reason to think that their approach to marital rape cases would have been anything other than cautious.
In 1983, the Attorney General issued new guidelines to the police which suggested that in all cases they should prosecute only when there was at least a 50 per cent.
chance of conviction.
The police have been criticised for their low prosecution record in rape cases and it is most unlikely that domestic rape would have been dealt with more enthusiastically.
Since the Criminal Law Revision Committee produced its Working Paper, the Crown Prosecution Service has taken over the task of prosecuting from the police.
The new scheme is intended,inter alia , to promote consistency and fairness and to reduce the number of cases which are brought where there is a lack of evidence.
Moreover, it is headed by the D.P.P.
who is required to promulgate guidance for Crown Prosecutors and will also make the prosecution decision in difficult cases.
Under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, s. 1(6), all existing powers  of the Director as to the institution and conduct of proceedings are available to all Crown Prosecutors and these are to be exercised under his direction.
Accordingly, it might no longer be thought necessary to distinguish marital from non-marital rape in the way suggested in the Working Paper since the public and family interest could be taken into account by the Crown Prosecutor with guidance from the Director.
This would, of course, have the consequence that private prosecutions would also be available.
If, however, further safeguards were thought to be necessary, it would be open to the Director to reserve such decisions to himself.
In abolishing the marital rape exemption, Parliament could presumably seek an undertaking that this be done from the Attorney General who has general superintendence over the discharge of the Director's functions.
Whether or not the D.P.P.
is used as a handmaid to reforming legislation, it is most unlikely that the floodgates will be opened if the exemption is lifted.
Certainly this has not been the experience in other jurisdictions.
In California, Diana Russell found that ‘it was almost exclusively wives who were extremely upset and who claimed great long term effects’ from marital rape who reported other acts of marital violence to the police, since the rape itself was not a crime.
She anticipated that fir from being deluged with relatively less serious complaints, it would only be those women ‘most traumatised by the experience’ of rape who would report it.
In England, the reluctance of the police to take action in domestic violence cases has contributed to a situation in which women do not generally invoke the criminal process in such circumstances.
It is unlikely that their enthusiasm for reporting marital rape would be much greater.
It seems equally likely that, even without adopting the Scandinavian scheme involving a different scale of penalties for marital rape, sentencing in such cases would tend to be more lenient than in other rape cases.
In Larger , a three-year sentence for marital rape was reduced to 18 months on the ground that the victim had sustained no physical or psychological damage.
She had, it was held, merely suffered an unpleasant and unwelcome experience.
Until it is appreciated that marital rape can be at least as traumatic as other forms of rape, such an interpretation is likely to be common, except perhaps where there is obvious and serious physical injury.
Without her Consent
(a) The Legal Requirement of Consent
According to the present legal definition, rape is sexual intercourse which takes place without a woman's consent.
But originally, the law of  rape required that sexual intercourse occur against the will of the victim.
This necessitated the use or threat of force or violence by the defendant and resistance by the victim.
Once rape ceased to be a capital offence, however, the judges became willing to broaden its scope.
was in Camplin that it was first established that rape could take place even though there was no force threatened or used provided that the victim did not consent to intercourse.
It thus became rape to have intercourse with a woman who was insensible through drink.
In 1872, it was held that it was similarly rape to have intercourse with a sleeping woman.
These decisions paved the way for Flattery and Williams in which rape was held to have been committed where the defendant, using neither force nor the threat of it, obtained the victim's consent to intercourse by a fraud as to the nature of the act.
Similarly, in 1885, a man have sexual intercourse with her.
In Scotland, the law appears to have developed differently.
In what continues to be the leading case of Chas.
Sweenie , the majority held that there must be some force to constitute rape and that it was not rape, therefore, to have sexual intercourse with a sleeping woman.
Generally speaking, it continues to be necessary to prove that the will of the victim was overcome by violence.
It is rape, however, to have sexual intercourse with a woman whose will has been overcome by the threat of immediate force or the deliberate use of drink or drugs to that end.
Yet Gordon suggests that where drugs are administered for another purpose,e.g .
that of robbing the victim, a defendant who has sexual intercourse with her whilst she is insensible will not be guilty of rape.
Certainly it is well established that a man is not guilty of rape of a woman who is too drunk to consent even where it is he who has coaxed her to drink.
Moreover, whilst sexual intercourse with a woman procured by husband impersonation is a statutory crime in Scotland, it would not appear to be rape where sexual intercourse is obtained by a fraud as to the nature of the act.
The question remains whether English and Scottish law are as  different as they seem.
Certainly in England some judges appear to have been unaware of the shift in emphasis which had taken place in the law.
Thus, in 1911, in Dimes , the jury was directed that the prosecution had to establish that the defendant had acted violently and against the will of the prosecutrix.
The trial judge emphasised that the facts failed to disclose any bruising of the victim's thighs or any other sign of struggle.
In Harling in 1938, Hilbery J. expressed the view that ‘a charge of rape requires to be sustained by evidence which satisfies the jury first of all that there was carnal knowledge, secondly that it was by force, and thirdly that it was without consent.’
In the course of his summing up to the jury, he stated:
‘In order to constitute the offence of rape…the prosecution must satisfy you that he effected his purpose by overcoming such resistance as the girl offered, you being satisfied that she was offering resistance and that he was overcoming it.
Did he convince you that no force was used to effect this purpose?…
If he did, then he is not guilty of rape, and you must acquit him…’
On appeal, not merely was no criticism levelled at this direction, but Humphreys J. himself stated that ‘where…the charge is one of rape it is necessary that the prosecution should prove that the girl or woman did not consent and that the crime was committed against her will.’
As late as 1965, in Howard , Lord Parker L.C.J. appeared to consider that in cases of rape other than where a child was involved, it was up to the prosecution to prove that the woman had physically resisted.
A decade later, in D.P.P .
v. Morgan , the trial judge stated:
‘The crime of rape consists in having unlawful sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent and by force.
‘By force’.
Those words mean exactly what they say.
It does not mean there has to be a fight or blows have to be inflicted.
It means that there has to be some violence used against the woman to overbear her will or that there has to be a threat of violence as a result of which her will is overborne.’
The Heilbron Report expressed the following criticism of this type of approach:
‘It is wrong to assume that the woman must show signs of injury or that she must always physically resist before there can be a conviction for rape.
We have found this erroneous assumption held by some and therefore hope that our recommendations will go some way to dispel it.’
It recommended that ‘as rape is a crime which is still without statutory definition, the lack of which has caused certain difficulties, we think that this legislation should contain a comprehensive definition of the  offence which would emphasise that lack of consent (and not violence) is the crux of the matter.’
In response to the proposals of the Heilbron Committee, the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1976 was passed.
This expressly states that rape is committed where sexual intercourse takes place without consent.
It does not, however, provide any definition of non-consent.
The absence of a statutory definition coupled with the dearth of judicial authority on the matter result in a situation in which the parameters of consent are by no means clear.
Thus, it is uncertain whether and to what extent consent may be regarded as absent where the defendant uses neither violence nor the threat of it.
It is unclear what standard of consent should be employed with respect to children or those of subnormal intelligence.
Some judges and academic authorities favour a narrow and some a broad approach to the meaning of the term.
Faced with this lack of clarity in the law, the police have been left to some extent to interpret it for themselves.
It might have been anticipated that the Criminal Law Revision Committee would seek to put an end to this uncertainty, particularly since, if any guiding principle has informed its final report, it is that the law should distinguish firmly between consensual and non-consensual sexual activity.
The Committee, however, declined to recommend any statutory definition of non-consent on the ground that it would be impractical to do so.
The problems surrounding the meaning of consent and different approaches to its proper scope will now be examined in greater detail.
(i) Violence, Threats, Fear and Fraud
Whilst the boundaries of consent are not clearly defined, it is recognised that a woman does not consent to sexual intercourse where a man uses violence to force her.
Similarly, a woman who submits to sexual intercourse having been threatened with or fearing serious injury or death is not regarded as having consented.
Moreover, it has been established for centuries that even where the threat of violence is less than this, consent will be negatived.
Stephen considered that it would be rape where a woman's permission was ‘extorted by force or fear of  immediate bodily harm.’
But even where a man threatens to use no more force than is necessary for him to have sexual intercourse with a woman and the force needed, bearing in mind their relative sizes and strengths, would be minimal, it seems to be accepted that this would be rape.
Thus, Professor Williams writes:
‘The threat need not be of extreme violence.
Common sense suggests that a person who submits to an act only because he believes that otherwise he will be over-powered and have it done to him anyway does not consent in law, even though the force necessary to overpower him will be small and non-injurious.’
It is not at all clear to what extent threats of violence to third parties will negative consent.
Professor Williams suggests that threats to the complainant's children will suffice, although there seems to be no express authority for this proposition.
In one unreported case, a threat to the woman's boyfriend was held to be insufficient.
Howard has suggested that threats of force directed at any person for whom the complainant ‘has or is presumed to have strong affections’ should negative consent.
But, it is not obvious why threats of violence should be limited even in this way.
If, for example, a man threatens to kill a third party who is a complete stranger to the complainant, her submission to sexual intercourse in these circumstances can hardly be regarded as true consent.
Where violence is neither used, threatened nor feared, it is not at all clear whether and when consent may be regarded as absent.
Professor Williams argues that the phrase ‘without consent’ should be given a narrow legal interpretation.
He considers that the nineteenth century cases of Camplin, Flattery and Williams accomplished no more than to include within rape sexual intercourse with an unconscious woman or one deceived by a specific type of fraud and that the 1976 Act merely declares the law as it was established at that time.
Thus, with certain limited exceptions, rape remains essentially a crime involving violence or the threat of it.
He justifies this view on the ground that rape is a very serious offence to which serious penalties attach.
Those who argue that rape should be viewed as more a crime of violence than a crime of sex might also prefer the scope of rape to be confined in this way.
The Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.2 is available for use where other threats are offered.
Dr. Scutt, by contrast, looks to the meaning of consent in civil law.
Duress invalidating consent to a contract is regarded as occurring where a party has been imprisoned or threatened with, for example, imprisonment, or violence, or harm to reputation, or criminal prosecution of a spouse.
She can see no reason why, at the very least, serious threats of this kind should not negative consent for the purpose of the law of rape.
Some support for her position has recently been given by the Court of Appeal in Olugboja .
In this case, the court repudiated the suggestion that consent should be given the narrow meaning advocated by Professor Williams and others and pointed to the distinction between consent and submission.
It suggested that submission obtained by threats other than of violence might suffice for rape and held that it should be left to the jury, with adequate direction from the judge, to make up its mind whether or not on the facts of each case the woman had truly consented.
Thus, the judge should focus the attention of the jury upon ‘the state of mind of the victim immediately before the act of sexual intercourse, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, and in particular the events leading up to the act, and her reaction to them showing their impact on her mind.’
It would be for the jury to decide whether consent was present, applying its ‘combined good sense, experience and knowledge of human nature and modern behaviour to all the relevant facts.’
Professor Williams considers it entirely inappropriate for the jury to be left ‘as a kind of sovereign legislature’ to decide the question of consent.
Dr. Scutt, on the other hand, has argued forcefully for consent to be regarded as a matter for the jury.
She writes:
‘The jury is indispensable to the common law justice system.
If rape is defined as ‘carnal knowledge of a woman without her consent’, then it makes nonsense of the proposition that the jury is the trier of fact if the judge takes it upon himself to tell the jury what is or is not consent.
If the purpose of the law is to protect women from acts of sexual intercourse to which they have not in fact consented, whether by reason of force actually applied, physical or other threat, or fear induced by the accused or by others, then the relevant question would appear to be: Did this particular woman, in these particular circumstances, submit to this particular man; or did she in fact freely consent to have intercourse with him?…if the law deems the woman to have consented to the act despite ample evidence of threats which rendered her submissive but non-consenting, then the law cannot be said to be serving its true function of protecting individuals from the imposition of non-consensual sexual intercourse.’
It is worth remembering, however, that juries have not been noted for  their sympathy towards rape victims.
It is suggested that Olugboja is unlikely to become a complainant's charter.
In its final Report, the Criminal Law Revision Committee concluded that a statutory provision was necessary in order to avoid the uncertainty which, in its view,Olugboja was likely to engender.
It was also impressed by the argument of the Policy Advisory Committee that there should be a clear legislative statement that rape is committed even where a woman does not sustain injury but submits through fear.
The Committee therefore proposes the enactment of a statutory provision which will clearly state that rape is committed where a woman consents to sexual intercourse as a result of threats of force, explicit or implicit, against the woman herself or any other person, ‘but that it should not be rape if, taking a reasonable view, the threats were not capable of being carried out immediately.’
The purpose of this provision would be to ensure that where threats other than of immediate violence were employed by a defendant, the woman would be regarded as consenting.
Although Stephen's definition of rape required fear of immediate bodily harm and this would appear to be the position in Scotland, there is no modern English authority to this effect.
This proposal will thus not merely have the effect of reversing Olugboja , it will place a new and unjustified limitation on the scope of rape.
The meaning of the word ‘immediate’ is likely to give rise to dispute in the courts, but it may be assumed that if, for example, a man threatens a woman that unless she has sexual intercourse with him, he will violently assault her in the presence of her children when they return home the following day, this will not be rape under the Committee's proposals.
Yet the woman may be justifiably petrified of the man and may have good grounds for thinking that whatever steps she takes, his threat will be carried out.
Or take the man who threatens a woman that unless she submits to intercourse, he will drive to the next town 50 miles away, buy a gun and return and shoot her and her children.
If the woman forthwith submits because she is terrified, would this be rape or would the threat be regarded as insufficiently immediate?
It is, of course, true that, had she paused to consider the matter, the woman might have realised that it could prove difficult to acquire a gun and that she would be able to seek help once he had left.
Yet it is hard to see why this defendant who has succeeded in terrorising a victim into submission should be any less guilty of rape than the man who threatens a woman that if she does not submit he will, there and then, overcome her resistance.
A law which declines to distinguish between the two situations is surely to be preferred.
There are further difficulties raised by this proposal.
The scope of the term ‘implied threat’ is not at all clear.
Suppose that a man enters premises as a trespasser and upon encountering a woman instructs her to remove her clothing so that he can have intercourse with her.
He does not threaten her in any way.
She is so startled and afraid that she complies.
Is it to be assumed that his very presence amounts to an implied threat?
Under present law, whether a man administers a threat or not, he can be liable for rape if he has sexual intercourse with a woman knowing that she has submitted out of fear.
If it is considered that there was no implied threat in this situation, will the defendant nevertheless be guilty?
It would seem to follow from the proposed provision that he would certainly not be guilty unless the woman had a reasonable fear of immediate harm.
But it could surely be argued further that a provision which mentions implied threats and does not refer to fear unaccompanied by threat must be interpreted to exclude such fear from rape.
If it is not rape to threaten a woman other than with immediate violence, questions will inevitably arise about other situations.
What, for example, of the 16-year-old girl attending boarding school who is confronted one night by the headmaster who demands to have sexual intercourse with her?
She submits, not because she is threatened with or fears immediate violence, but because she feels helpless to resist in a situation in which he is all-powerful and she is powerless.
It would seem to follow from the Committee's proposals that this is not rape, but no other offence would cover the defendant's conduct.
In other jurisdictions, an abuse of authority of this nature is clearly an offence and ought to be so in this country as well.
Far from succeeding in injecting certainty into the law, the Criminal Law Revision Committee's proposal regarding consent will ensure that confusion continues to reign.
This will further complicate the task of the police and further deter victims from reporting.
Indeed, it seems that the Committee was less concerned with certainty than with checking the expansion of the law of rape heralded by Olugboja .
If its proposals are implemented, rape will become more limited in its ambit than it was prior to Olugboja .
However, since the legislation will still declare that rape is sexual intercourse without consent and since no comprehensive definition of this requirement will be provided, the law will appear far more protective than in fact it is.
Procuring a woman by threat.
Under thy Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.2, it is an offence to procure a woman by threats or intimidation to  have unlawful sexual intercourse in any part of the world.
With this offence, the conceptual and linguistic problem raised by Olugboja of distinguishing consent from submission is avoided and the task of the prosecution rendered far easier.
Few prosecutions are currently brought under section 2, yet it is potentially a strong weapon against coercive behaviour.
Professor Williams, however, not only believes that rape should have a limited ambit because of the severity of the penalty, but that procuring a woman by threat should also be subject to limitations even though its maximum penalty is merely two years' imprisonment.
He considers that not every threat should suffice.
The threat should be of ‘such a nature as is likely to overcome resistance by an ordinary woman.’
Smith and Hogan also suggest an objective element to the test.
‘Perhaps,’ they state, ‘it must be a threat which a person of the age and with the other characteristics of the woman could not reasonably be expected, in the circumstances, to resist.’
The argument for an objective element seems to arise from a fear that trivial threats will otherwise result in liability.
They mention a situation where a man threatens a woman that he will never take her to the pictures again.
Women, however, are reluctant to report even serious sexual assaults to the police.
The prospect of trivial threats being either reported or prosecuted is very hard to envisage.
It is suggested that Professor Smith's approach to the definition of menaces in the crime of blackmail is equally appropriate in this context.
Thus, there should be a sufficient threat if, in the circumstances known to the accused, the threat might (1) influence the mind of an ordinary person of normal stability and courage (whether or not it in fact influences the person addressed), or (2) influence the mind of the person addressed, though it would not influence an ordinary person.
Such a formula would not, it seems, commend itself to Professor Williams, who further argues that the threat must not be merely a threat to withhold a benefit from the woman.
By way of example, he takes the case of a mistress who is provided with a flat by her lover.
She declines to have sexual intercourse with him and he threatens her with eviction and homelessness if she does not comply.
Professor Williams defends the man's right to utter such threats and considers that he should not be within the section's scope:
‘The man is entitled to leave the woman, to whom he is not married, and it would be wrong and impolitic to say that if he expostulates with her, pointing out that the inevitable consequence of her present conduct will be the  rupture of their relations, the result, if he succeeds in changing her attitude and sexual intercourse is resumed, is that he commits an offence.’
No one denies that a man is entitled to leave a woman or to expostulate with her.
The question is whether he is also entitled to threaten her and by this threat procure intercourse with her.
If the law is to protect women from forced sexual intercourse, he cannot be so entitled.
But Professor Williams would go further.
He even suggests that a threat to deprive a woman of something she has a right to expect should not necessarily be sufficient.
By way of example, he suggests a threat by a debtor not to pay the £100 he owes her.
Circumstances could be envisaged in which such a threat could be most material to a woman.
It is not clear why such a threat should be regarded as inadequate, nor does Professor Williams indicate the circumstances in which a threat to withhold a benefit to which a woman is entitled should suffice.
Professor Williams's views on the proper scope of the crime of rape coupled with the limited role he advocates for the offence of procuring by threat suggest that he does not consider that the criminal law should be over-active in protecting the sexual autonomy of women.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee's proposed definition of rape is even narrower than that of Professor Williams.
The Committee acknowledges that as a result of its proposal that only threats of immediate harm should suffice for rape, ‘some prosecutions will be brought under section 2 in circumstances where there could now be a prosecution for rape.’
It therefore recommends that the maximum penalty for a section 2 offence should be raised from two to five years.
Should its rape proposal be rejected, however, it considers that the two-year maximum penalty should remain.
In its Working Paper the Committee was prepared to recommend that the penalty be raised to five years even though no limitation on the scope of rape by threat was at that time envisaged.
Whether or not the Committee's proposals on rape are implemented, a two-year maximum penalty for obtaining sexual intercourse by threat would seem to be far too low.
Fraud.
It is rape to have sexual intercourse with a woman by impersonating her husband or by deceiving her as to the nature of the act.
In its Working Paper, a majority of the Criminal Law Revision Committee took the view that, where a woman has knowingly consented to the defendant's putting his penis into her vagina, this should not be  rape.
A minority of the Committee were opposed to this proposal.
The majority considered that such cases should in future be dealt with under the Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.3(1), which makes it a crime to procure a woman by false pretences or false representations to have unlawful sexual intercourse in any part of the world and that the penalty for this offence should be raised from two to five years' imprisonment.
In its final Report, the Committee has changed its mind.
It is now proposed that fraud as to the nature of the act and impersonation of any man, not merely a husband, should be regarded as vitiating consent for the purposes of rape and that a statutory provision should be introduced to this effect.
This would limit the possible effects of Olugboja , since it would ensure that a defendant could not be guilty of rape where he perpetrated a fraud of any other description.
The Committee fails entirely to discuss, however, whether mistakes of a similar kind should have a similar effect.
If a statutory provision is to be introduced, it is clearly desirable that it should also apply where the defendant exploits the victim's mistake.
The New South Wales legislation, for example, provides:
‘(a) A person who consents to sexual intercourse with another person —;(i) under a mistaken belief as to the identity of the other person; or (ii) under a mistaken belief that the other person is married to the person, shall be deemed not to consent to the sexual intercourse.
(b) A person who knows that another person consents to sexual intercourse under a mistaken belief referred to in paragraph (a) shall be deemed to know that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse.’
So far as section 3 is concerned, the Committee now proposes that the maximum penalty upon conviction should remain two years.
Once again, it may be doubted whether this is sufficiently high for the most serious cases.
On the other hand, it is also proposed that the word ‘deception’ should replace the words ‘false pretences’and ‘false representations.’
This should ensure that a deception as to the defendant's present intentions or as to his state of mind is covered by the section.
The Committee, quite rightly, does not recommend that only such deceptions as would influence a reasonable woman should attract  criminal sanctions.
Reasonable women, of course, do not believe that sexual intercourse is a cure for fits or a treatment for breathing which will improve the voice.
Yet it is precisely the woman or girl who is ignorant and gullible enough to believe tales of this kind who is ripe for sexual exploitation and whom the section should be most geared towards protecting.
(ii) The Consent of Children, Young Persons and the Mentally Subnormal
The Criminal Law Revision Committee took the view that the phrase ‘without consent’ was a legal term which should be given a highly circumscribed interpretation.
But it failed to discuss how consent should be interpreted where children, young persons and the mentally backward are concerned.
It is generally agreed that consent implies some knowledge on the part of the victim as to the type of act which the defendant is contemplating.
The degree of knowledge required, however, is a matter of some dispute.
In Fletcher , a nineteenth century case involving a mentally deficient 16-year-old girl, three judges expressed the view that, if such a girl acted out of‘animal instinct,’ she would nevertheless be regarded as having consented.
(Animal instinct would presumably involve at most an appreciation by the woman that the defendant intended to insert his penis into her vagina.)
In Dee , however, Palles C.B. deplored such a view, which he claimed was ‘abhorrent to our best feelings and discreditable to any jurisprudence in which it may succeed in obtaining a place.’
He considered that ‘Consent is the act of man, in his character of a rational and intelligent being, not in that of an animal.
It must proceed…from the will sufficiently enlightened by the intellect to make such consent the act of a reasoning being.’,
Professor Williams believes that the decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria in Morgan sets the correct standard of knowledge.
In this case, it was held that a woman lacked capacity to consent if she had neither the knowledge nor understanding to comprehend that (a) what was proposed to be done was the physical fact of penetration of her body by the male organ or if that were not proved,(b) that the act of penetration proposed was one of sexual connection as distinct from an act of a totally different character.
The Morgan test would not appear to require much more than a knowledge of the basic facts of life.
It does not require that the woman be able to appreciate the significance of sexual intercourse or the implications which it might have for her.
Professor Williams concedes that  the standard of knowledge which Morgan demands is a low one, but considers that this is appropriate in order to permit freedom of sexual expression to women of low intelligence.
He points out that there are supplementary statutory provisions which limit sexual relations with those whose intelligence and social functioning are ‘severely impaired.’
It may be thought, however, that the Morgan decision would offer insufficient protection to some women who just fail to meet the statutory criteria.
A further question which arises is whether the Morgan standard is appropriate for children and young girls.
A higher standard appears to have been required in Howard in respect of a six-year-old girl.
In this case Lord Parker L.C.J. held in effect that consent was to be assessed differently in the case of girls under 16.
Lack of consent must be proved by showing that the victim's ‘understanding and knowledge were such that she was not in a position to decide.’
He went on to state:
‘There are many girls under 16 who know full well what is happening and can properly consent.
However, so far as the present case is concerned, this little girl…was only 6 and it would be idle for anyone to suggest that a girl of that age had sufficient understanding and knowledge to decide whether to consent or resist.’
Consent may thus be said to require not merely a knowledge of the physical facts of sexual intercourse but some elementary appreciation of the significance of the act in its biological, social and moral context.
Clearly, the older the child, the easier it will be to establish consent in these terms.
If the courts decide to adopt the type of approach favoured by the Court of Appeal in Olugboja , the age of the girl would be one factor which the jury could be invited to consider in determining whether consent was present and non-consent might be more broadly construed.
The nineteenth century case of Nichol provides an example of the kind of situation in which a jury might fairly consider that no consent was present.
The victim was a 13-year-old pupil at a school run by the defendant's wife.
Whilst the latter was away, the defendant took over her teaching duties and made use of his position to abuse the girl sexually.
The report states: ‘She knew it was not right in him to act as he did and…she knew it was not right in herself in permitting him…she knew it was wrong in both, and that it was against her will at all the tunes.’
The judge in instructing the jury sought to direct its attention to certain factors which might have a bearing on whether or not the  defendant's actions were against the complainant's will.
Thus, the report continues:
‘The learned judge left the case to the jury, remarking upon the tender years of the girl, her situation under the care and authority of the prisoner and his wife, and the authority and influence which the prisoner had over her in the absence of his wife.
He observed that his authority and influence were likely to have put her still more off her guard than she would naturally have been from her age and inexperience; that a fear and awe of the prisoner might check her resistance…’
In circumstances such as these, it would be open to a jury to find that the girl had not consented even though no violence was used or threatened and despite her knowledge and understanding of the nature of the act.
Where the victim is under the age of 13, it will often be desirable to prosecute the defendant with having unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl of that age rather than with rape.
This offence also carries a maximum of life imprisonment and since lack of consent need not be proved, the girl will not be required to go through the ordeal of giving evidence on the matter.
There is a far stronger case for a rape charge once the girl has reached the age of 13, provided that the experience of testifying in court would not be unduly stressful for her.
Although the offence of having sexual intercourse with a girl under 16 has the advantage of not requiring proof of lack of consent, it carries a maximum penalty of just two years’ imprisonment.
Conviction for this offence may not, therefore, convey the gravity of the conduct involved where consent is lacking, nor in many cases will the two-year penalty suffice.
(iii) Consent and Police Attitudes
The absence of a clear definition of consent has left the police with some leeway to interpret the law for themselves.
In so doing, they would appear to be influenced by what they consider will be necessary to prove the matter in court as well as by their own, sometimes unenlightened, opinion of what ‘true’ rape really is.
A recent report by the Central Research Unit of the Scottish Office describes the approach of Scottish policemen to rape cases.
It has been indicated above that Scottish law developed slightly differently from English law.
Sexual intercourse has to take place against the will of the complainant and in general this means that some force or the threat of it must be used.
The Report, however, suggests that ‘There were grounds for thinking that in some cases detective officers were interpreting the law in a stricter fashion than might be required by a court of law.’
They quote one detective who said:
‘With this one there was very little injury and as well as that she was quite a big girl and it may very well be that at the end of the  day we could say that she didn't resist to the last and if she didn't then of course it's not rape it's a different crime, indecent assault.’
(Emphasis added.)
Another officer commented:
‘She's got to be in fear of her life really.
If you're looking at her and she's battered about the face and all that then initially it appears more credible than someone who comes in with no visible signs of injury.
It is a crime of violence and if we can't prove the violence then we can't prove the rape.’
The report suggests that the police regard true rape as occurring where one or preferably two of the following criteria are met:(1) complainer is attacked in her own home by intruder(s);(2)‘respectable’ complainer attacked by strangers;(3) complainer is severely beaten up;(4) complainer is attacked by assailants wanted by or known to the police for crimes of violence (especially against women);(5) assailant uses weapon;(6) assailant apprehended at scene of crime.
This suggests that the police are most likely to interpret an event as rape where it shares some of the characteristics of familiar and conspicuously criminal activity.
But it is not only in Scotland that police appear to over-emphasise violence in connection with rape.
In England, a detective sergeant has warned fellow officers to be wary of rape complainants who do not ‘show signs of extreme violence.’
Richard Wright's study suggests that whilst police do not necessarily look for evidence of extreme violence, they do seek evidence of some violence or threat.
Wright looked at 255 rapes or attempted rapes investigated by the police as ‘genuine’ offences during 1972–1976 in six English police areas.
Some form of physical violence was directed against the victim in about 80 per cent.
of cases.
Usually this was limited to ‘rough treatment’(defined as pushing, slapping, or roughly handling the victim but not punching or kicking her), but in 13.6 per cent.
of cases the violence was extreme.
Victims who suffered physical violence were also threatened in 43.4 per cent.
of cases.
In 6.6 per cent.
of cases, the victim was subjected to intimidation only.
Thus, a total of 86–8 per cent.
of victims whose cases were regarded as genuine were subjected to violence or intimidation and half of these were subjected to both.
The use of violence, it seems, is the extra factor which, for many police officers, turns non-consensual sex into rape.
There is a clear case for setting out in legislation other circumstances in which consent may be regarded as vitiated so that police officers may be encouraged towards a broader interpretation of the meaning of rape.
(b) Consent and Normal Heterosexual Relations
It has been suggested so far that many academic lawyers and policemen share the view that where a woman has sexual intercourse with a  man, she should be regarded in law as having consented to it save in exceptional circumstances as where violence or the threat of it is used.
One reason for this may be a desire to protect from criminal liability men whose conduct is not universally regarded as criminal.
Certainly, the use of some coercion in sexual relationships has not always traditionally been frowned upon.
Thus, Rousseau wrote:
‘To win this silent consent is to make use of all the violence permitted in love.
To read it in the eyes, to see it in the ways in spite of the mouth's denial…if he then contemplates his happiness, he is not brutal, he is decent.
He does not insult chasteness; he respects it; he serves it.
He leaves it the honour of still defending what it would have perhaps abandoned.’
Interviews conducted by Toner several centuries later suggest that attitudes have not altogether changed.
She writes:
‘A senior police officer and a police surgeon, both very pleasant and helpful, admitted that in their courting days they had indeed persevered and had sexual intercourse despite protests from the women they were with; an actor asked in fascination how it could possibly be called rape if a woman had gone so far before protesting; a dentist [stated]‘I have had it with dozens of women against their will.
I am normal, so that sort of rape must be normal.’
Sometimes the reluctance to label coercive behaviour as criminal takes extreme forms.
In a case involving a brutal sexual assault by a guardsman, Slynn J. stated: ‘It does not seem to me that the appellant is a criminal in the sense in which that word is used frequently in these courts.
Clearly he is a man who, on the night in question allowed his enthusiasm for sex to overcome normal behaviour.’
Thus for some, it seems, there is a continuum of non-consent, and rape is a point far along it.
The question is whether, as MacKinnon suggests, that point is further on from that at which women feel violated.
It is no coincidence that Rousseau also believed that women were incapable of the development and education required for citizenship and ‘must be trained to bear the yoke from the first…and to submit themselves to the will of others.’
A law which fails to protect a woman's right to refuse sexual intercourse fails to uphold her right to full and equal citizenship.
John Stuart Mill recognised this when, speaking of wives, he wrote:
‘Far from pretending that wives are in general no better treated than slaves…no slave is a slave to the same lengths and in so full a sense of the word as a wife is [for her husband]can claim from  her and enforce the lowest degradation of a human being, that of being made the instrument of an animal function contrary to her inclinations.’
In the twentieth century, the criminal process still fails to protect the sexual autonomy of women.
Furthermore, amongst those who influence the development of the law, it is still far from accepted that the overriding objective of the law of rape and allied offences should be the protection of sexual choice, that is to say, the protection of a woman's right to choose, whether, when and with whom to have sexual intercourse.
The Mens Rea of Rape
(a) D.P.P.
v. Morgan
The mental element of rape was considered by the House of Lords in D.P.P .
v. Morgan .
In this case, Morgan invited three strangers to have sexual intercourse with his wife.
He told them, so they alleged, that she was ‘kinky’ and was likely to struggle to get ‘turned on.’
Morgan denied having said this.
All four had sexual intercourse with her, using violence to overcome her resistance.
The three strangers claimed,inter alia , that they believed Mrs. Morgan was consenting.
The trial judge directed the jury that, unless their belief was based on reasonable grounds, it could not constitute a defence to rape.
They were convicted of rape, whilst Morgan was convicted of aiding and abetting.
They all appealed against conviction to the Court of Appeal and finally to the House of Lords.
It was held by Lords Hailsham, Cross and Fraser, with Lords Simon and Edmund-Davies dissenting, that there can be no conviction for rape where a man honestly believes that a woman consents to sexual intercourse and that his belief did not have to be reasonable.
However, the proviso was applied and the convictions upheld.
The speeches of Lords Cross, Hailsham and Simon in the case are all of some interest and merit further scrutiny.
(i) Lord Cross
Lord Cross paid some attention to matters of policy raised by the case.
He stated:
‘To have intercourse with a woman who is not your wife is, even today, not generally considered to be a course of conduct which the law ought positively to encourage and it can be argued with force that it is only fair to the woman and not in the least unfair to the man that he should be under a duty to take reasonable care to ascertain that she is consenting to the intercourse and be at the risk of a prosecution if he fails to take such care.’
He was, however, dissuaded from holding that a man's belief in consent must be reasonable because of the wording of the Sexual Offences Act 1956, s.1, which provides that it is an offence for a man to rape a woman.
He considered the ordinary meaning of the word rape and  concluded that in ordinary parlance rape does not connote sexual intercourse with a woman in the belief that she consents.
If the argument for imposing a requirement of reasonableness is a forceful one as Lord Cross suggests, then it is curious that he should consider that the ordinary use of the term rape is a good enough reason for forgoing such a requirement.
Moreover, Lord Cross's appeal to the meaning of the word rape in common usage and the ordinary man's understanding of rape is no more than a pretext for introducing his own view of what rape means.
Thus, he states:
‘Rape, to my mind, imports at least indifference as to the woman's consent….
To the question whether a man, who has intercourse with a woman believing that she is consenting to it, though she is not, commits rape, I think that he [the ordinary man]would reply, ‘No.
If he was grossly careless then he may deserve to be punished but not for rape.’
The ordinary man is none other than Lord Cross himself, ordinary usage, Lord Cross's usage.
However, perhaps the most surprising aspect of Lord Cross's speech is the apparent complacency with which he viewed the implications of his decision as he understood them.
For he considered that had the defendants been more subtle in the presentation of their defence, they might have been acquitted.
Had they conceded the truth of Mrs. Morgan's amply corroborated testimony instead of challenging it and simply argued belief in consent on the basis of her husband's assertions as to her sexual proclivities, they might have been believed.
Mrs. Morgan testified that she had been dragged by her husband from the bedroom which she shared with her small son.
She had yelled to her children to fetch the police.
Her assailants had covered her face and pinched her nose so that she could not breathe.
They had grasped her by the wrists and feet and dragged her to the neighbouring room.
She was held down on the bed whilst a variety of sexual acts were performed on her.
It is curious that Lord Cross could entertain with equanimity the prospect of an acquittal in circumstances such as these.
(ii) Lord Hailsham
Lord Hailsham held that the mental element required for rape was intent and that there was ample authority in support of this proposition.
He cited Archbold's assertion that ‘rape consists in having unlawful sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent by force, fear or fraud,’ claiming that the mens rea of rape was indicated by the words ‘force, fear or fraud.’
These words, however, as counsel for the respondent correctly pointed out, do no more than indicate the circumstances in which consent may be negatived.
They do not apply to  the mens rea of the offence and can certainly shed no light upon whether or not belief in consent must be reasonable.
Lord Hailsham further cited four nineteenth century cases.
One of these,Tolson , was a case on bigamy.
In the remaining three, which did involve rape or assault with intent to commit rape, the jury was directed that ‘Both the charges require an intent…to commit the act by force against her [the victim's]will.’
None of these cases, however, involved the issue raised by Morgan , namely, whether a mistaken belief in consent can negative liability for rape even where the mistake is unreasonable.
Indeed, there was no known English authority on this question.
Morgan appears to have been the first case in which the issue was raised in this country.
The likelihood is that had the matter come before the courts in the nineteenth century, they would have held that the mistake had to be reasonable, for it was generally considered at that time that mistake was a defence which would excuse a defendant from liability only where it was based on reasonable grounds.
Indeed, in Tolson this was expressed to be the case even where the crime was held to be one requiring proof of a mental element.
Lord Hailsham accepted the contention of modern academic writers that mistake is not a defence but is rather a matter of mens rea .
If the mens rea of a crime is intention, then the defendant who makes an honest mistake has no mens rea and is therefore not guilty.
If, on the other hand, the crime is one of negligence, the defendant may be acquitted only if his belief is reasonable.
The acceptance of such reasoning required Lord Hailsham to address anew the question of the mental element required for lack of consent in rape, since the nineteenth century judges upon whom he relied had never had the matter presented to them in these terms.
Lord Hailsham, however, used twentieth century reasoning and applied it to nineteenth century cases.
From the latter, he derived the proposition that intent is the mens rea of rape and to this he added recklessness.
Having done so, he concluded, as a matter of ‘inexorable logic,’ that a mistaken belief in consent meant that the defendant lacked mens rea .
The implications of this approach were not discussed; social policy considerations were, for the most part, neatly by-passed.
The inexorable logic was in fact sleight of hand.
(iii) Lord Simon of Glaisdale
Of the five law lords who delivered speeches in Morgan , it was only Lord Simon whose decision was at all influenced by social policy considerations.
Speaking of the requirement that a mistake be reasonable in many areas of criminal law and applying this to rape, he stated:
‘The policy of the law in this regard could well derive from its concern to hold a fair balance between victim and accused…
A  respectable woman who has been ravished would hardly feel that she was vindicated by being told that her assailant must go unpunished because he believed, quite unreasonably, that she was consenting to sexual intercourse with him.
The policy behind section 6 of the Sexual Offences Act is presumably that Parliament considered that a girl under 16 is generally unlikely to be sufficiently mature to realise the full implications of sexual intercourse; so that her protection demands that a belief by a man under the age of 24 that she herself was over the age of 16 should not be only an honest but also a reasonable belief.’
It will be argued here that the protection of all women, not merely those who might be classified as ‘respectable,’ is undermined by the absence of a requirement of reasonableness where mistaken belief in consent is alleged.
(b) The Aftermath of Morgan
The decision of the House of Lords in Morgan met with widespread public disapproval.
It was hailed as the ‘rapists’ charter.’
In the Commons, Mr. Jack Ashley M.P.
was given leave by an overwhelming majority of the House of Commons (228 votes to 17) to introduce a Bill which would have imposed a requirement of reasonableness where a mistaken belief in consent was alleged.
The Government's response was to set up a committee chaired by a judge (Mrs. Justice Heilbron) to look into the matter.
The Heilbron Committee took the view that the majority decision of the House of Lords was correct in principle, that it would neither cloud the real issues in rape trials nor encourage juries to accept bogus defences.
It concluded, echoing the sentiments of Professor Smith, that the appropriate mens rea for rape was intention and recklessness and to go further ‘would be to extend the definition of a grave crime to include conduct which, however deplorable, does not in justice or in common sense justify branding the accused as a guilty man.’
The Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill introduced in 1976 was designed to implement the Heilbron Committee's proposals.
Clause 1 reproduced the decision in Morgan and confirmed that the mens rea of rape was intention and recklessness.
The Heilbron Committee's endorsement of the decision, together with that of the National Council for Civil Liberties and the Criminal Bar Association, had succeeded in removing most of the opposition to it.
There was little debate on the clause but what little there was displayed a lack of understanding both about the legal significance of Morgan and its implications for women.
Thus, for example, the Minister of State at the Home Office, in defence of the decision, asserted:
‘A crime must be deliberate or reckless intent to do something that society brands as criminal.
Only that justifies punishment.
In civil legislation, there is clearly room for fault to be penalised if it is  merely a mistake.
We do that in relation to negligence generally in the civil courts, but not in the criminal courts.’
Of course, the criminal law does and always has penalised mistakes.
Any suggestion that the civil law alone deals with mistaken conduct is clearly erroneous.
The Minister went on to concur with Peter Bottomley M.P.
that the outcry which followed Morgan was not because the House of Lords had changed the law but because the public mistakenly thought it had done so.
It has already been pointed out that there was no authority on the precise issue raised by Morgan , so that in that sense the House of Lords could not be said to have changed the law.
On the other hand, the law relating to mistake was uncertain before Morgan .
The case was a departure from much pre-existing authority to the effect that a mistake to excuse must be reasonable.
In that sense Morgan had authorised a clear change of direction in the law.
There were further misconceptions about the effect of the inclusion of recklessness in the mens rea of rape.
Thus, Robin Corbett, M.P., who introduced the Bill, asserted:
‘We must tread carefully, because my postbag suggests that allegations of rape can arise from previously non-sexual relationships, where the man goes too far and persuades himself in the passion of a moment that ‘No’ means ‘Yes’.
However, we now have a chance to remove the fear from the minds of women that for too long the attitude to rape has been based on the unspoken belief that, in the end, no woman will refuse the sexual advances of a dominant man and that ‘No’, whatever the circumstances in which it is said, is simply a ‘tease’ and that women never mean it.
However, perhaps put more simply, one benefit of the Bill will be to increase the respect for women and for their right — because that is what it is —; to say ‘No’ and to be understood to mean ‘No’.’
At that time, a man who persuaded himself ‘in the passion of a moment’ that No meant Yes, or who believed that women who said ‘No’never meant it, would have escaped liability even where recklessness was part of the mens rea of rape.
The Bill did not therefore uphold a woman's right to say ‘No.’
Jack Ashley's Bill would have come far closer to doing so by requiring that belief in consent must be reasonable.
Several M.P.s argued that men were in need of protection in certain sexual situations and that Morgan and Clause 1 were necessary in order to provide it.
The Minister of State asserted:
‘There may be a point at which the woman has not resisted physically, at which the man has applied no physical violence or physical pressure, and yet the woman is not consenting.
It may be difficult  in certain circumstances for the man to understand that she is not consenting.’
John Lee, M.P., made a similar point: ‘This is, above all, an intimate field of emotional human relationships where rationality is not always to be expected of human beings.
I use the phrase ‘She did not say ‘Yes’ she did not say ‘No’and that represents a hazardous situation.
In seduction situations of this kind, where a woman fails to register lack of consent and no violence is used or threatened, the decision in Morgan is largely irrelevant, for in such cases the prosecution will be quite unable to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the woman's consent was lacking.
The case for the prosecution is lost regardless of the issue of mens rea .
Indeed, it is unlikely that a prosecution in these circumstances would be launched.
However, if the defendant were prosecuted and the defence conceded lack of consent, the defendant would certainly be acquitted in these circumstances even if the law required his belief in consent to be both honest and reasonable.
There are unlikely to be many more than four situations in which the defendant's case will rest on an application of the decision in Morgan , because his belief in consent was honest, though unreasonable.
The first is where the circumstances resemble those which arose in Morgan itself.
A has sexual intercourse with a woman at the invitation of B. The woman struggles and protests but B explains that this is mere play-acting.
A believes him.
A second situation is where the woman explicitly states that she does not consent and attempts to resist.
The defendant, because of his superior strength is able without much force to overcome her.
He, believing that women always behave in this way, interprets her ‘no’ as ‘yes,’her resistance as token resistance.
Alternatively, the defendant may, by his conduct, have so terrified the victim, that she does not dare register her non-consent.
He may, for example, have broken into her home or have violently assaulted her before attempting to have sexual intercourse.
He interprets her lack of protest as consent.
Finally, honest but unreasonable mistakes could arise in situations involving children or mentally subnormal women.
The matter which ought to have been debated in Parliament is whether a man needs the law's protection in circumstances such as these.
Talk of  the ambiguities which may arise in sexual situations is largely irrelevant in a discussion of the rights and wrongs of Morgan .
(c) A Woman's Right to Say ‘No’
The unequal status which women possess in society results in a situation in which what they have to say is for many purposes discounted or reinterpreted for them.
So it is in the context of sex.
Women who expressly state that they do not consent to intercourse may nevertheless be considered to consent to it.
Resistance may be dismissed as token.
To justify a treatment of women which denies their autonomy, resort has been had to a ragbag of ideas about female and male sexuality, varying from the bogus to the irrelevant and culled formerly from medicine and latterly from psychoanalysis.
Thus, for centuries it used to be thought that even if a woman expressed her lack of consent in every way within her power, if she conceived as a result of the intercourse, she must in fact have consented.
As late as 1812, this view was articulated by Dr. Samuel Farr whose book,Elements of Medical Jurisprudence , was published for the benefit of coroners and courts of law.
He wrote:
‘With respect to the next question, whether a woman, upon whom a rape hath been committed can become pregnant?
It may be necessary to enquire how far her lust was excited, or if she experienced any enjoyment.
For without an excitation of lust, or the enjoyment of pleasure in the venereal act, no conception can probably take place.
So that if an absolute rape were to be perpetrated, it is not likely she would become pregnant.’
Today, a man who argues an honest but unreasonable belief in consent is often appealing, whether directly or indirectly, to one or more of the following ideas about female and male sexuality.
(1) Woman as Masochist/Rape Fantasist
There is a view that women are by nature masochistic and derive pleasure from pain in sexual encounters.
It is also thought that some women enjoy fantasies of rape.
Some psychoanalytic writing appears to lend support to these assumptions.
However, generalisations about the sexuality of women is of no more relevance in a criminal trial than generalisations about sadistic tendencies or pornographic fantasies in men.
At issue in a rape case is whether this particular woman at this particular time consented to this particular act of sexual intercourse.
If it were assumed, however, that a particular complainant did have an unconscious desire to be raped, could this be relevant to the defendant's  liability?
John Forrester argues that Freud himself would have answered this question in the negative since he clearly considered that a subject's unconscious desires should play no role whatsoever in evaluating whether or not there was a conscious wish for an event to take place.
To be mindful of unconscious motivations in such an evaluation would, in Freud's view, have led to injustice.
Similarly, Professor Williams appears to discount the relevance of unconscious motivation in the assessment of a defendant's mens rea .
It would seem to follow that unconscious motivation should be regarded as similarly irrelevant where the complainant's wishes are concerned.
In practice, of course, it would be extremely hard to establish any such unconscious desires in the complainant.
But what of the complainant who consciously fantasises about rape?
Should her fantasy be regarded as relevant to her claim of non-consent?
Of course, both men and women harbour sexual fantasies which they would be horrified to see realised.
However, Professor Williams considers that the possible existence of such fantasies, whether conscious or unconscious, should in certain circumstances be investigated in rape cases.
He states:
‘That some women enjoy fantasies of being raped is well authenticated, and they may, to some extent, welcome a masterful advance while putting up a token resistance.
A little still she strove and much repented And whispering ‘I will ne'er consent’ consented.
This possibility needs consideration where the man was well known to the woman and where it is clear that she was not intimidated.’
This passage has been criticised by Forrester, who writes:
‘It slides from recognising the existence of rape fantasies to inferring from their existence a woman's conscious consent.
It is beside the point whether a woman enjoyed the masterly advance or not; what is at issue is whether she consented….
If the seduction misfires, if the woman does not consent, then there is no reason for attenuating the degree of her non-consent…a seduction that ends in rape is still rape.’
It seems strange, moreover, that Professor Williams fails to mention male rape fantasies or to suggest that these might be considered in assessing whether the defendant was prepared to override the victim's wishes.
Where a defendant in the face of evidence that a woman demonstrated lack of consent, alleges belief in consent on the basis of information given him by a third party, he may well, whether expressly or impliedly, be appealing to the idea of female masochism.
In Morgan , the defendants specifically alleged that they had been told that Mrs.  Morgan could be ‘turned on’ only by struggle and resistance.
A man may be willing to believe another who claims that a particular woman has a liking for sado-masochism or has other sexual preferences.
If the law grants him a defence in these circumstances, then he may have sexual intercourse with her and use violence upon her with impunity.
Neither the law of rape nor assault can touch him.
Such a state of affairs is hard to justify.
Whatever one man tells another about a woman's sexual inclinations and whether or not she demonstrates her unwillingness, it is hard to see why a man should be able to rely for consent on the word of another man or why there should be no obligation upon him to consult her himself.
(ii) Woman as Whore
It is believed by some that women who say no to sexual intercourse are merely playing sexual games and their ‘no’ means ‘yes.’
Alternatively, particular women may be viewed in this light.
A man may believe that a woman who has consented to him before or consented frequently to others will consent again and that her ‘no’ is equally a sham.
Once again the question arises whether a man, who persists in believing that a woman consents despite an active demonstration by her that such consent is denied, should have a defence to rape.
It may be argued that some men, in the heat of the moment, may genuinely be mistaken.
In the words of Michael Alison, M.P.:
‘We are talking about the disposition of the mind in the passion of sexual intercourse….
The mind is profoundly volatile.
There is a sense of all rational control or deliberation seeping away or being under much less deliberative control.
It is almost inherent in the nature of the passions and the acts we are concerned with that feeling overcomes or ceases directly to control and regulate action.
It is part of the natural spontaneity of the action, and it is bound to be like this.’
This depiction of male sexuality might be regarded as convenient and self-serving rather than accurate.
It is suggested that where a woman registers unwillingness, a man does have the capacity and should be required to ascertain whether or not her consent is present.
The ultimate question which arises in this area of law is whether a commitment to subjectivism should override all other considerations regardless of circumstances or social cost.
It is suggested that where a woman demonstrates her lack of consent, it is no hardship for a man to enquire whether her consent is present and that as a matter of policy the law should demand that he do so.
Moreover, where a woman dares not register her non-consent because of a man's violent or frightening behaviour, the law is permitting him to benefit from his own wrong if it grants him a defence on the basis of an honest but unreasonable belief in consent.
A mistake as to consent should therefore be required to be a  reasonable one, although in assessing reasonableness, any physical or mental disabilities of the defendant should be taken into account.
(iii) Young and Mentally Disordered Victims
What of the victim, be it child, young girl or mentally inadequate woman, who fails to make any demonstration of lack of consent because she does not appreciate the nature of the act or lacks the capacity to understand its significance?
Here the situation becomes more complex and a number of different possibilities need to be explored.
First, the defendant might argue that he believed in the victim's consent since she permitted penetration although he knew full well that she had no understanding of the act.
Is he to have a defence?
The answer to this question must surely be no.
If consent does not exist where a woman lacks understanding of the nature of the act and if the defendant knows of her lack of understanding, then he must have the requisite mens rea for the offence.
For the law to grant him a defence in these circumstances would be to grant a licence for sexual exploitation.
The same must be true of a situation in which the defendant pleads honest belief in consent on the ground that the victim permitted penetration although the defendant was aware that she might not understand the nature of the act.
Here the defendant has been reckless as to consent and should again be guilty of the offence.
The defendant may however have considered the possibility that the victim did not understand the nature of the act but have negligently (given his own capacities) dismissed it from his mind, although the risk was an obvious one.
Should a defence be available in these circumstances?
Once again the view taken here is that it should not be.
As Toni Pickard has saliently pointed out, it is possible for a man to ascertain whether a woman is consenting or not with minimal effort.
She is there next to him.
He has only to ask.
Since to have sexual intercourse without her consent is to do her great harm, it is not unjust for the law to require that he inquire carefully into consent and, it may be added, process that information carefully as well.
An unreasonable mistake in this context might be described in Pickard's words as ‘an easily avoided and self-serving mistake produced by the actor's indifference to the separate existence of another.’
A further situation might arise, however, in which the defendant alleges belief in consent on the basis of the victim's consent to penetration but where it did not occur to him that she might not understand the nature of the act, although the risk of this was quite obvious.
In such a case, a further question needs to be posed, namely, did the defendant realise the victim's age or that she might be mentally abnormal in some way.
If he did, then he was aware of the situation of risk and, it is suggested, should be acquitted only if his failure to consider that she might not appreciate the nature of the act was reasonable, bearing in mind his own capacities.
If, on the other hand, it never occurred to the defendant that the victim was young or mentally abnormal, and he was not aware therefore that he was in a situation of potential risk, he should not be liable for rape providing that he took reasonable steps to ascertain that she did agree to vaginal penetration, for in such a case his conduct is reasonable in the light of the facts as he perceived them to be.
(d) Mens Rea and the Three Remaining Elements of Rape
The Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1976, s. 1(1), indicates the mens rea for one of the four constituent elements of the actus reus of rape, namely, lack of consent, but the Act is silent as to the mens rea for the remaining components of the offence.
The common law authorities indicate that there must be an intention to have sexual intercourse without consent and this was confirmed in Morgan .
Bridge J. in that case asserted that the act of sexual intercourse is invariably intentional, a view which was repeated by Lord Fraser.
But sexual intercourse means vaginal penetration by the penis.
It is conceivable that on a charge of rape a man might argue that he had in fact meant to perpetrate an act of buggery and that the sexual intercourse that took place was unintended.
It follows that such a man would not be guilty of rape.
Similarly, whilst the defendant will almost always know that the victim is a woman, circumstances could be imagined in which a man charged with attempted rape in fact intended to have sexual relations with a man.
Since he does not intend to have sexual intercourse, he should be acquitted of attempted rape in this situation.
Equally unlikely but certainly possible is a situation in which the defendant has sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent, mistakenly believing that woman to be his wife.
The mental element with respect to unlawfulness remains to be determined, but it may be assumed after Morgan that it would be intention or recklessness.
(e) Mens Rea — Recent Developments
The decision in Morgan has been influential in related areas of law and in some other jurisdictions.
In Kimber , it was held that an honest but unreasonable belief in consent is a defence to a charge of indecent assault.
In New South Wales and South Australia,Morgan has been adopted and codified, although in Western Australia and  Tasmania, it has been held that the defendant's belief in consent must be reasonable, and this also seems to be the position in Queensland.
In Canada the Federal Supreme Court in Pappajohn v. The Queen introduced an interesting if limited modification to the Morgan principle.
The majority held that, whilst an honest but unreasonable mistake would negative liability, such a defence should be put to the jury only where the defendant expressly asserted belief in consent and where there was some evidence beyond his mere assertion.
This evidence must appear from, or be supported by, sources other than the accused.
In New Zealand, the Crimes Amendment Act (No. 3) 1985, s.2 rejects Morgan and expressly stipulates that belief in consent must be reasonable.
(i) D.P.P.
v. Caldwells
The decision of the House of Lords in Caldwell , in which the term recklessness was redefined and extended in the context of the Criminal Damage Act 1971, has produced speculation as to the meaning of recklessness in rape.
If the decision applies in this context, then a defendant will be guilty of rape if he has sexual intercourse with a non-consenting woman without giving any thought to the possibility that she might not be consenting even though the risk of this was obvious.
But how far is this consistent with the decision in Morgan ?
Is a defendant who fails even to consider that a woman might not be consenting still to be acquitted if he takes her consent for granted?
Caldwell might be thought to require a conviction in these circumstances.
In Pigg , it was held that Caldwell did apply to rape and this was confirmed in Thomas and also in Bashir , although with some modification.
But in R .
v. S., Breckenridge and Satnam and Kewal , it was held that Caldwell did not apply to rape.
It is clear that what the courts have rejected in these cases is the suggestion of any inroad into the decision in Morgan .
The defendant who has a belief in consent will be acquitted no matter how he came by this belief and whether or not he considered the possibility of non-consent.
This adherence to the decision in Morgan has extended to a reiteration and confirmation of Lord Hailsham's statement in the  case that a defendant who has intercourse ‘nolens volens , that is recklessly and not caring whether the victim be a consenting party or not,’ will be liable for rape.
In Kimber , Lawton L.J.
described recklessness in this context as encompassing an attitude of ‘indifference to the victim's feelings and wishes,’ a state of mind ‘described in the colloquial expression, ‘couldn't care less’.’
In Breckenridge, Satnam and S .
a similar approach was taken.
Defendants who ‘couldn't care less’ may have had thoughts about consent which through indifference to the matter, they fail to pursue.
Alternatively, a man may fail altogether to consider the issue of consent, the explanation for this being that the matter is one of no importance to him; he could not care less about it.
It is not entirely clear whether in the latter case the defendant is to be regarded as reckless or not.
Clearly, in Satnam and kindred cases, the purely objective stance which Caldwell has been interpreted to represent has been rejected.
Thus defendants who fail to think about consent because,e.g .
of low intelligence or a particular emotional state at the time will not be liable.
But the man whose failure to think is morally culpable, is distinguishable from such blameless defendants and it may be that the courts will not wish to exclude him from liability.
(ii) The Criminal Law Revision Committee Proposals
Rape.
In its Working Paper, the Criminal Law Revision Committee declined to consider the mental element in rape since Morgan and the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act appeared to have settled the matter.
The decision in Caldwell , however, persuaded the Committee in its final Report to address the issue but its approach reflects the current ambiguity in the case law.
The Committee stands by the decision in Morgan and rejects the idea that belief in consent should be required to be reasonable.
It does not criticise Caldwell but argues instead along the lines suggested in Satnam that:
‘It is questionable whether concepts applicable to offences involving inanimate objects, such as arson under the Criminal Damage Act 1971, should necessarily apply where what is in issue is a man's consciousness of the fact that the woman with whom he is having sexual intercourse does not consent to it.’
But the Committee then goes on to assert: ‘Sexual intercourse is an intimate act between man and woman, and a man is expected to have regard to the question whether the woman is consenting to the act or not.’
It would seem to follow from this that men who fail to have regard to this question should in some circumstances be criminally liable but it is not clear whether the Committee intends this or not.
It suggests that a man should be liable for rape if he knows the woman is not consenting, is aware that she might not be consenting or, as stated  in Kimber, Satnam and S. , does not believe that she is consenting.
The subjectivists have always insisted that a man who believes that a woman is consenting cannot be guilty of rape.
The Committee's proposal does not conflict with this canon, yet it could, arguably, take the law of rape beyond Morgan and into the realms of Caldwell .
A defendant who does not believe in consent could either be one who fleetingly turns his mind to the issue of consent but since he is indifferent to the matter forms no view at all or one whose indifference is such that he entirely fails to think about it in the first place.
The latter situation is described in the following passage from the New Zealand report:
‘It will no doubt be in only the rare instance that a man does not consider the possibility that the woman is not consenting, and yet does not actually believe that she is.
It is possible, though, to envisage the case of a man who does not even care enough, or think it important enough, to address his mind to the possibility that the woman may not be a willing party.
He may, for instance, have a general belief that the woman's wishes in sexual matters are immaterial, so that in a specific instance he does not bother either to enquire or to think about them.
An illustration of this can be found in cross-examination of a defendant in one of the trials we considered in the court files: Prosecutor: Why didn't you ask her if she was prepared to have intercourse with you?
Defendant: It didn't come to my mind.
Prosecutor: Do you appreciate that she is a person who has the right to refuse?
Defendant: No not really.
There is much to be said for an extension of the mental element in rape to cover this type of case, and it may be that this was the Committee's intention.
If it was not, then the Committee should have made this plain and opted for a different verbal formula.
Sexual intercourse with under-age girls.
Under the Sexual Offences Act 1956, ss.5 and 6, it is an offence punishable with a maximum of life imprisonment for a man to have sexual intercourse with a girl under 13 and an offence punishable with a maximum of two years’ imprisonment if the girl is under 16.
The age of consent was considered by the Policy Advisory Committee which recommended that it should remain at 16.
It took the view that ‘there has been no significant increase in recent times in the level of psychological maturity of girls under 16 and that [these girls]face greater problems today than their mothers did at their age.’;
This recommendation was supported by the Criminal Law Revision Committee, which noted that the policy behind the law is the protection of young girls.
Both Committees further considered  whether sexual intercourse with a girl under 13 should continue to be punishable with life imprisonment or whether the age limit for this offence should be reduced to 12.
The Policy Advisory Committee strongly advised that 13 should remain the age limit on the ground that girls of 12 are at a vulnerable stage of their lives, in particular because they are usually in their first year at a senior school and there is a risk that they will imitate the behaviour, including the sexual ways, of older girls.
This recommendation the Criminal Law Revision Committee has once again accepted.
But although the Criminal Law Revision Committee has declared its support for the present age of consent, its proposals concerning the mental element in sections 5 and 6 can serve only to undermine it.
Under section 6(3), a defendant who is charged with sexual intercourse with a girl who is over 13 and under 16 may avail himself of what is commonly referred to as ‘the young man's defence.’
If he is under 24, and has not been charged with this offence before and has an honest belief on reasonable grounds that the girl was above 16, he will have a defence.
The burden of proof in establishing the defence is upon the defendant on the balance of probabilities.
Where the girl is under 13, the defence is not available.
In a major study of sexual offences conducted by the Cambridge Institute of Criminology between 1950 and 1954 in which 3000 cases involving sexual offences were investigated, it was found that the proportion of offenders recorded by the police as having committed carnal knowledge of girls aged 13 to 16 who were not brought before the courts was much higher (46 per cent.) than for men charged with other heterosexual offences (12 per cent .).
One of the principal reasons for this was considered to be the existence of the defence for men under 24.
Today, there is a reluctance to prosecute young men who are not much older than the girl herself.
Older men are more likely to be prosecuted.
Some prosecutions are brought where the girl has in fact been raped.
The prosecution rate for unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 16 remains very low as compared with other heterosexual offences.
The Home Office Research Unit found that in 1973 it was 25 per cent., as compared with 81 per cent .
for rape, 83–5 per cent.
for incest, 63 per cent.
for buggery and 66 per cent.
for unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 13.
In its Final Report, the Criminal Law Revision Committee has recommended that there should be a full scale extension of the young man's defence to cover men of all ages.
It is proposed that whether the girl is under 13 or under 16, a man who believes that she is over 16 should not be guilty of any crime.
Moreover, the belief would not need to be a reasonable one.
The defendant whose belief is, objectively speaking, ludicrous would be exempt from liability.
Unlike the present law, it will not be up to the defendant to prove his belief, the burden of  proof will rest on the prosecution.
One of the reasons which the Committee gives for this proposal is that the law should be brought into line with the law of rape.
The practical implications of the two are quite different, however.
The defence of honest belief that a girl is over 16 is likely to have a far greater impact than the defence of honest belief in consent in the context of rape.
It is highly probable that many men will claim a belief that the girl was over 16 since, if sexual intercourse has taken place, this is the only defence available to the charge.
The defence of consent can obviously not be pleaded as it can be and generally is for rape.
A defendant may state that he honestly thought at the time that the girl was above 16 and that he never thought to enquire, or that the girl was dressed up and wearing make-up.
Mistakes about age are, after all, easy to make, particularly if no questions need be asked.
In many cases, it will be hard for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that he is lying.
In a rape case, by contrast, a defendant who says he believed in consent when the girl had demonstrated her lack of it may very well not be believed.
A plea of honest belief that a girl is above 16 is thus far more likely to be pleaded and with far greater success than a plea of honest belief in consent on a rape charge.
The result is bound to be that it will be far harder to acquire convictions in these cases than it is at the moment.
The new defences proposed are bound to increase the number of not guilty pleas.
This will mean that more young girls will have to be subjected to the trauma of giving testimony in court.
This in turn is bound to discourage some prosecutions from being brought.
In the name of tidiness and uniformity, the Criminal Law Revision Committee is proposing to introduce defences which can only undermine the protection which the law gives to under-age girls.
As Lord Simon recognised in Morgan , it is the role which the criminal law has in protecting girls under 16 from sexual exploitation and abuse which justifies the present law.
This rule cannot effectively be pursued if strict mens rea principles are applied, however appropriate these may be to other areas of the criminal law.
Conclusion
From its earliest origins, rape was a narrowly defined offence.
Today, despite radical social change and a decided amelioration in the status of women, its scope remains limited.
Certain valuable steps could be taken to reform and strengthen the law whilst retaining the present structure of sexual offences: the marital rape exemption could be abolished and liability for rape could be extended to cover defendants whose belief in consent, given their capacities, was wholly unreasonable.
Steps could also usefully be taken to strengthen other allied offences such as incest and obtaining sexual intercourse by threat by including within their scope acts apart from sexual intercourse whether performed against  males or females.
But further tinkering with the substantive law of rape could be counter-productive.
For example, the crime of rape could be expanded to cover other acts of sexual penetration.
However, convictions for rape are hard to obtain and defendants very often plead not guilty when charged, so that the symbolic advantages of such a change might be achieved at the expense of even fewer convictions for the conduct concerned.
Similarly, gender neutrality which is theoretically desirable might in practice have little to commend it if introduced into the law of rape as it is presently constructed.
It is suggested, therefore, that piecemeal reform has to be treated with a certain degree of caution.
In the chapter which follows, more fundamental alternatives will be considered.
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES
In its Report on Sexual Offences, the Criminal Law Revision Committee concluded that, whilst certain adjustments to it might be desirable, the law of rape as presently constructed was basically sound.
The Committee did not, however, consider the crime in context.
It did not look at rape as a social problem nor did it have regard to the difficulties which rape poses for the criminal justice system.
Its approach to the reform of sexual offences was legalistic in the sense that it was mostly concerned with the law itself, its consistency and logicality, its relationship to other laws of a similar kind and to the criminal law as a whole.
By contrast with this limited approach to reform, changes to existing rape laws of a radical nature have been contemplated and introduced elsewhere.
Radical reform is far more closely associated with the feminist movement.
In some places, women have been directly responsible for its introduction, whilst in others feminist ideas have influenced the law-makers.
The hallmark of proposals for radical reform is a rejection of the existing legal framework in favour of the introduction of new offences with a different emphasis.
Rape tends to be presented as a crime of violence with sexual overtones rather than as simply a sexual offence.
Arbitrary distinctions resting on the mode of penetration are abandoned.
But the aim of radical reform is not merely to change the law's approach so that it becomes more in tune with modern perceptions of sexual assault, but to address directly the problem of processing rape.
Thus, radical reform restructures rape offences in ways that it is hoped will facilitate the prosecution process without jeopardising the interests of the accused.
Furthermore, it is perceived to have an educative and symbolic function as well as a practical one.
Examples of radical reform, proposals for it and attempts to obtain it may be drawn from all parts of the globe.
In Italy in 1979, an ad hoc committee of women drafted a Rape Bill and proceeded to launch a ‘signature campaign’ to gather support for it.
The Bill would have altered the definition of rape which at the time was classified in the Italian Penal Code as a ‘crime against morals and custom’, so that it became a crime of violence against the person.
It would have abolished distinctions between vaginal intercourse and other sexual acts and prohibited cross-examination of the victim about her personal and sexual life.
Interviews conducted by Tamar Pitch with members of the committee revealed that the campaign's objectives included increasing public awareness of the issue of sexual assault and gaining recognition for the principle that violence against women was a serious offence.
The Italian campaign was to come to naught, but in a number of English  speaking jurisdictions, reform proposals along very similar lines were implemented before and after it.
In Michigan, the Women's Task Force on Rape was set up in 1973.
It was responsible for drafting a Bill and a campaign which resulted in the introduction of radical and influential legislation in 1974.
In 1972, two years before it was enacted, 90 people in Michigan were convicted of unlawful carnal knowledge, as the offence of rape was termed under the statute then in force.
However, in the same year in Detroit alone, at least 3,370 alleged victims of rape were treated in hospitals and 900 rapes were reported to the police.
The aims of the legislation and the expectations of those responsible for it are referred to in the following passage:
‘From the earliest articulation of the problem [of rape]it was argued that antiquated statutes provide little protection for the victim and hinder effective prosecution.
Michigan's Criminal Sexual Conduct statute held the promise of change that would be both instrumental and symbolic in impact: properly implemented it could bring about improvements in the criminal justice system, the conviction rate and the treatment of victims.’
In 1981, radical reform was also introduced in New South Wales, Australia, with similarly broad aims in view.
The new legislation was described by the Premier of New South Wales as follows:
‘This is an historic measure and one of the most important reforms this Government has ever presented to Parliament…
These reforms are designed to protect the victims of rape from further victimization under the legal process; to encourage rape victims to report offences to the authorities; to facilitate the administration of justice and the conviction of guilty offenders.’
In both Michigan and New South Wales, it was also intended that the legislation should play an educative and symbolic role.
Thus, the New South Wales statute was designed to ‘serve an educative function in further changing community attitudes to sexual assault.’
It was hoped that the Michigan reform would ‘confront and change cultural norms.’
In Canada, the aims of the women's pressure groups which played a major role in bringing about reforming legislation, have been described as follows:
‘Their original intentions were to lessen the humiliation experienced by the victim in a rape trial and to send a symbolic liberating and educational message to the rest of society, advising all that it was no longer acceptable to assault sexually (or batter, or ultimately to subjugate) women.’
Those advocating reform along broadly similar lines have also stressed the importance of this educational function.
Thus, Naffin writes:
‘Irrespective of its ability either to discourage certain forms of behaviour, or to bring offenders to justice, the law should delineate and prohibit behaviour which is socially abhorrent.
And more than this, the law should adopt the role of community educator.
It should condemn behaviour which is exploitative, violent, and/or involves the violation of one person's liberty by another.’
In this chapter, it is proposed to consider in detail the radical legislation passed in Michigan, New South Wales and Canada, with a view to assessing whether it provides a better solution to the problem of rape than that envisaged by the Criminal Law Revision Committee in England.
The Shape of Radical Reform
The legislation in Michigan, New South Wales and Canada has five central features in common.
First, a gradation scheme has been introduced.
Secondly, some attempt has been made to deal with the problem of consent.
Thirdly, the term rape has been abandoned.
Fourthly, the rules of evidence in sexual assault cases have been substantially altered.
Finally, the exemption from liability of certain males has been removed or curtailed.
Each of these features will now be considered in turn.
Gradation
(a) Advantages and Disadvantages
In each of the jurisdictions under consideration, the crime of rape (‘unlawful carnal knowledge’ in Michigan) has been abolished and the conduct which it covered re-distributed between several new offence categories with different penalties.
Thus, in New South Wales, for example, a new offence of sexual assault has been created consisting of four categories and covering conduct which would formerly have amounted to rape, indecent assault or non-consensual buggery.
Category 1 carries a maximum penalty of 20 years, Category 2, 12 years, Category 3, seven years and Category 4, four years.
(The maxima in Categories 3 and 4 increase where children under 16 are  involved.)
The gradation system in Michigan is more ambitious.
It covers conduct previously dealt with by a broader range of offences, including, for example, incest, sexual intercourse with under-age girls and with mental defectives, sodomy and gross indecency as well as rape and indecent assault.
Gradation schemes have a number of objectives.
One of these is to improve prosecution and conviction rates.
By re-classifying the conduct involved in such a way as to distinguish the grave from the less grave, it is hoped to discourage unwarranted pleas of not guilty and to overcome both the reluctance of prosecutors to bring charges and of courts to convict.
For, as Kalven and Zeisel noted, often when juries acquit of rape, their ‘stance is not so much that involuntary intercourse under these circumstances is no crime at all, but rather does not have the gravity of rape.’
If a gradation system has an effect of this kind, it would seem to have much to commend it.
But it has been suggested that there are dangers and disadvantages in such schemes.
There is first the problem of plea-bargaining.
It could be argued that defendants who might otherwise have been acquitted could be persuaded to plead guilty to lesser offences.
Alternatively, defendants might be able to strike favourable bargains and get off more lightly than they deserve.
It has to be recognised, however, that plea-bargaining is a clear feature of the system's operation under traditional rape laws.
Indeed, because of the difficulty of securing convictions for rape, there is a clear incentive for the prosecution to accept pleas to lesser offences.
Chapple looked at conviction rates in Seattle, Washington.
He found that in 1974, two years before Washington's new rape law was enacted, Seattle Police Department recorded 308 complaints of rape.
85 suspects were identified and 57 were charged with offences, but of these only 3 1 were charged with rape or attempted rape and only six were convicted.
However, 26 men were charged with other offences.
Chapple states:
‘Many of the suspects who were charged with an offence engaged in plea bargaining with prosecutors.
This bargaining process, which is openly practised and tolerated in Seattle and most other United States jurisdictions can result in reduction of the gravity and/or number of charges against an offender (e.g .
indecent assault rather than rape) and also in the sentence imposed.’
In Michigan prior to the reforms, the conviction rate for rape was also extremely low.
Between 1972 and 1974, for example, no more than eight convictions per month were recorded.
Defendants would, however, plead guilty to lesser offences such as assault, assault and battery and assault with intent to commit rape which carry low penalties.
Surprisingly similar findings were made in England by Richard Wright.
In his survey of all incidents involving a solitary offender recorded by the police as rapes or attempted rapes between 1972 and 1976 in six English counties, he found that 204 men were arrested for rape or attempted rape.
100 were first charged with these offences.
However, of these, 42 per cent.
pleaded guilty to a lesser offence such as indecent assault.
He states:
‘This was likely to have happened especially where the original charge was attempted rape.
However in a few incidents the initial charge had been for the full offence of rape….
In one case, for example, a victim developed car trouble and sought help at a nearby garage only to be raped by the mechanic on duty….
[Forceful penetration was corroborated by medical evidence.]
The mechanic was arrested and charged with rape.
He made it clear that he would plead guilty to indecent assault but not to rape or attempted rape and he was allowed to do so.’
It is noteworthy that, of the remaining 58 charged with rape or attempted rape, only 35 were convicted of these offences.
23 were convicted of a related non-sexual offence ranging from burglary (with intent to rape) to assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
Furthermore, of those convicted of lesser offences than rape many were fined (£30 was the highest fine) or put on probation for a year or two.
Traditional rape laws, therefore, also involve some sort of gradation and may well encourage plea-bargaining.
English law, for example, provides an offence of rape and attempted rape on the one hand with maximum penalties of life imprisonment, and indecent assault on the other, with a maximum penalty which has recently been raised from two to ten years’ imprisonment.
There is nothing in between.
Indecent assault is not designed to cover situations where the penis has entered the vagina, although it does appear to be used sometimes even where this has occurred.
The alternative for prosecutors is to accept a plea to a non-sexual offence such as assault occasioning actual bodily harm or unlawful wounding which carry maximum penalties of five years' imprisonment.
The object of radical legislation is to introduce a more refined and coherent form of gradation which will ensure,inter alia , that guilty defendants are not able to bargain their way into sentences which are far lighter than they deserve.
Legislation in the jurisdictions under consideration inserts extra tiers into the structure of sexual offences and introduces a more graduated scheme of penalties.
This should enable prosecutors to strike bargains at an appropriate penalty level.
It is also designed to ensure that defendants are convicted of offences which reflect the fact that the crime committed was one of sexual violence.
It is not at all clear, however, that an increase in the total number of guilty pleas will take place purely as a result of gradation schemes of this type.
On the contrary, it is conceivable that if the penalties at the lower end of the scale are substantially increased, for example the penalty for indecent assault, the number of guilty pleas will  be reduced.
Much will depend on other variables.
If sexual assault convictions are rendered easier to acquire, because, for example, of restrictions on sexual history evidence, guilty pleas become more likely.
The need for defendants to receive proper legal advice before pleading guilty is apparent whatever shape the law takes.
If reform of this kind were to take place in England the new Crown Prosecution Service should provide a further safeguard against abuse.
A further possible objection to gradation is that it limits the sentencing powers of the judge.
Under the present English law of rape, a judge has complete discretion as to sentencing and may take into account a variety of factors.
The argument here is essentially that a gradation scheme might lead to a lighter sentence in certain cases than would otherwise have been imposed.
However, in New South Wales, the lowest maximum penalty for conduct which would previously have amounted to rape is seven years.
In Canada, it is ten years and in Michigan it is 15 years.
These are all in themselves heavy penalties and there is no reason why the judge should not impose the maximum in a suitable case.
The imposition of a slightly lighter sentence in a few cases would seem to be a small price to pay for the conviction of more guilty offenders.
However, the experience in New South Wales so far suggests that sentences under the new dispensation are certainly no lower than they were under the old regime.
Of course, it behoves the legislator to distinguish the categories logically and justly.
It may be that in New South Wales, Category 3, which carries the seven-year penalty, has been constructed too broadly and that some conduct which it covers should have been placed within the more serious categories.
If so, this is an argument for re-defining it rather than for dispensing with gradation altogether.
It is also worth reiterating that traditional rape laws frequently give rise to light sentences for lesser offences.
Furthermore, gradation could equally lead to heavier sentences than might otherwise have been given for conduct which comes within the higher categories, although this could be regulated by appeal courts and sentencing guidelines.
Ideological objections may also be voiced to gradation schemes, for gradation clearly rests on the premise that rape encompasses a range of behaviour which is not of uniform gravity.
In Canada and New South Wales, the emphasis of the schemes is on violence, so that, broadly speaking, the more it is used or threatened, the more serious the offence becomes.
It might be argued that this approach downgrades sexual intercourse without consent where little violence or none at all is used.
It is suggested that, on the contrary, there is more potential for the recognition of the gravity of such assaults within a gradation scheme than there is where a unitary offence of rape is retained.
For where rapes are not differentiated, it tends to be assumed by police and prosecutors that true rape is rape with clear indications of violence.
By specifically designating non-consensual sexual intercourse as a distinct offence and non-consensual sexual intercourse accompanied by degrees of violence as separate offences, the criminality of the former is emphasised.
Whilst gradation may have much in principle to commend it, certain  criticisms may be voiced at the form which gradation has taken in the jurisdictions under consideration.
Each of these will now be considered in turn.
(i) New South Wales
In New South Wales, the Crimes Act 1900 now provides as follows:
‘Sexual Assault Category 1 — inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent to have sexual intercourse .
S.61B. (1) Any person who maliciously inflicts grievous bodily harm upon another person with intent to have sexual intercourse with the other person shall be liable to penal servitude for 20 years.
(2) Any person who maliciously inflicts grievous bodily harm upon another person with intent to have sexual intercourse with a third person who is present or nearby shall be liable to penal servitude for 20 years.
Sexual Assault Category 2 —inflicting actual bodily harm, etc., with intent to have sexual intercourse .
S.61C. (1) Any person who —;(a) maliciously inflicts actual bodily harm upon another person; or (b) threatens to inflict actual bodily harm upon another person by means of an offensive weapon or instrument, with intent to have sexual intercourse with the other person shall be liable to penal servitude for 12 years.
(2) Any person who —;(a) maliciously inflicts actual bodily harm upon another person; or (b) threatens to inflict actual bodily harm upon another person, with intent to have sexual intercourse with a third person who is present or nearby shall be liable to penal servitude for 12 years.
Sexual Assault Category 3 — sexual intercourse without consent .
S.61D. (1) Any person who has sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of the other person and who knows that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse shall be liable to penal servitude for 7 years or, if the other person is under the age of 16 years, to penal servitude for 10 years.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a person who has sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of the other person and who is reckless as to whether the other person consents to the sexual intercourse shall be deemed to know that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse.
Sexual Assault Category 4 — indecent assault and act of indecency .
S.61E. (1) Any person who assaults another person and, at the time of, or immediately before or after, the assault, commits an act of indecency upon or in the presence of the other person, shall be liable to imprisonment for 4 years or, if the other person is under the age of 16 years, to penal servitude for 6 years.’
It will be seen that Category 1, which carries a maximum penalty of 20 years, is confined to the malicious infliction of grievous bodily harm with intent to have sexual intercourse either with the victim or with a third party who is present or nearby.
Category 2, with its maximum penalty of 12 years, covers the infliction of actual bodily harm with intent to have sexual intercourse with the victim or a third party who is present or nearby.
It also covers a threat to inflict such harm upon a person with intent to have sexual intercourse with that person provided that the threat is made with an offensive weapon or instrument.
Where, however, the defendant threatens one person with actual bodily harm with intent to have sexual intercourse with another, no offensive weapon or instrument is necessary.
All other forms of non-consensual penetration fail within Category 3, which carries a maximum of seven years.
Category 4 consists of indecent assaults falling short of penetration where the maximum is four years if the victim is over 16, six years if the latter is under 16.
It was suggested in Chapter 2 that there is a clear case for distinguishing sexual assaults according to whether or not penetration is effected.
This distinction is maintained in the New South Wales scheme.
Thus, for the purposes of the first three categories, sexual intercourse is defined gender neutrally to include penetration of the vagina or anus by any part of the body or by an object, introduction of the penis into the mouth and cunnilingus as well as the continuation of any such intercourse.
Where the defendant has no intention to commit any of these acts, the sexual assault falls into Category 4 which is also gender neutral.
It is noteworthy, however, that Categories 1 and 2 do not require actual penetration to take place.
Where the victim is subjected to serious violence, an intention to have sexual intercourse is all that is required.
However, in many cases, that intention will be established by evidence that sexual intercourse in fact took place.
The major objection to the New South Wales scheme is that Category 2 is too narrowly defined.
Sexual intercourse which is forced by a threat to strangle the victim or to beat her senseless ranks only as a Category 3 offence if no weapon is used.
The same applies to gang rape, rape of the particularly old or young and rape accompanied by a non-injurious assault calculated to degrade the victim — such as urination or defecation upon her.
It might seem strange that rapes such as these carry a lower penalty than a Category 2 case in which the defendant threatens violence against one party with the aim of securing intercourse with another, but where no violence is perpetrated and sexual intercourse does not in fact take place.
In England, the guidelines issued by the Lord Chief Justice for sentencing in rape cases set out a starting point of eight years’ imprisonment for two or more rapists acting together, for men who rape victims in the victim's own home, for those who abuse  positions of responsibility over their victims and for rape involving abduction.
Yet all of these could amount to Category 3 offences in New South Wales.
A gradation system which fails to afford adequate recognition to the horror which the community may feel about certain forms of rape lays itself open to attempts at circumvention.
These may undermine the objectives of gradation.
In New South Wales, this has already occurred.
It seems that in order to increase the penalty in certain cases, prosecutors are combining Category 3 charges with charges for other offences such as burglary.
Whilst the New South Wales scheme may be criticised for the curious distribution of conduct between the first three categories of sexual assault, it is less fair to condemn it, as some commentators have done, because of the way in which it has been judicially interpreted.
Thus, in Smith , it was held that the legislation does not in fact create a ladder of alternative offences but rather that each of the offences must be charged where the facts so warrant it.
For example, where there is sexual intercourse without consent preceded by the infliction of actual bodily harm on the victim, this would require both Categories 2 and 3 to be charged.
Warren Young has commented that this development ‘demonstrates the uncertainty and ambiguity inherent in the New South Wales approach.’
However, it surely does no more than illustrate the desirability of including within the statute a provision which points out how gradation is intended to operate.
Judicial misinterpretation is only to be expected where radical reform is introduced.
(ii) Canada
The Canadian Criminal Code provides as follows:
‘Sexual Assaults (1)(Simple) Sexual Assault 246. 1(1) Every one who commits a sexual assault is guilty of (a) an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for ten years; or (b) an offence punishable on summary conviction.
(2) Sexual Assaults Involving Bodily Harm, Weapons or Third Parties 246.2 Every one who, in committing a sexual assault,(a) carries, uses or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation thereof,(b) threatens to cause bodily harm to a person other than the complainant,(c) causes bodily harm to the complainant, or (d) is a party to the offence with any other person, is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for fourteen years.
(3) Aggravated Sexual Assault 246.3(1) Every one commits an aggravated sexual assault who, in committing a sexual assault, wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.
Of the three gradation schemes under discussion, the Canadian is the simplest in so far as it creates only three degrees of offence.
These three new offences replace the old crimes of rape, attempted rape, sexual intercourse with the feeble-minded, and indecent assault on a male or a female.
The old offence of buggery has, however, been retained.
At the bottom of the ladder, simple sexual assault carries a maximum of ten years imprisonment.
the offence is sex neutral so that both homosexual and heterosexual conduct is covered and males and females can be both victims and perpetrators.
It is triable summarily so that now what used to be rape may be prosecuted as a summary offence punishable with a maximum of six months’ imprisonment or a fine of not more than $500.
Next on the ladder is an offence which carries a maximum of 14 years and is perpetrated where the defendant, in committing a sexual assault, carries, uses or threatens to use a real or imitation weapon or threatens to cause bodily harm to a person other than the complainant or is a party to the offence with any other person.
Aggravated sexual assault, which is the most serious offence of the three, carries a maximum of life imprisonment and takes place where the defendant, in committing a sexual assault, wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.
By contrast with New South Wales, the Canadian legislation draws no distinction between penetration and other sexual acts.
This is because in Canada the view that rape is less a crime of sex and more a crime of violence has been pursued with particular fervour.
In its Working Paper No. 22, the Canadian Law Reform Commission stated that one of its objectives was to ‘direct attention away from rape as a sexual offence and towards the right of every person to be free from physical assault.’
It was considered that to focus on penetration would be to continue to emphasise the sexual as against the violent aspects of the offence.
It seems also to have been hoped that detailed and embarrassing cross-examination of the complainant as to whether penetration had actually taken place would cease to be necessary with a reform of this kind.
Whilst there are clearly certain advantages in a law which does not distinguish between penetration and other varieties of sexual assault, several objections may be raised to the new arrangement.
First, the legislation nowhere defines what is meant by a sexual assault.
The meaning of the term is obviously crucial, particularly since there is a substantial difference in penalty between assault and sexual assault.
The predictable result of this has been a plethora of cases in which the courts have been called upon to rule in what circumstances an assault may be described as sexual.
This situation was not merely anticipated  but welcomed in certain quarters.
Thus, in its submission to the Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs about the proposed new law, the National Action Committee on the Status of Women commented:
‘We agree with the decision not to define sexual assault specifically.
This will allow judges to interpret the offence as they best determine.
And as the number of women appointed to the judiciary increases, we feel certain that the definition developed will be in the best interests of the victim’
Despite this assertion of confidence in the judiciary, there must be some doubt as to whether the law as it has evolved is in the best interests of the victim.
In Chase , for example, it was held that breasts were not included within the meaning of the term sexual, which covered only the primary sex organs.
Breasts, it was said, were no more sexual than men's beards and erogenous zones were not necessarily sexual, for otherwise ‘a person [could]be liable to conviction for stealing a good-night kiss.’
a In Gardynik , it was held, dismissing an appeal by the defendant, that sexual assault was not to be equated with the former offence of indecent assault, with its highly subjective moral overtones.
The additional element in sexual assault might be no more than the particular circumstances.
The court took issue with the decision in Chase and commented: ‘To hold that an assault involving such a patently sexual symbol as mammary glands is not a sexual assault is simply an unacceptable construction of the new offence.’
In Ramos , the trial judge again declined to follow Chase .
He concluded that the interpretation of the word ‘sexual’ might well ‘involve the court in consideration of sexology and human sexual behaviour’but that above all the court should approach the matter ‘with commonsense and basic societal values.’
He commented: ‘While one can observe that a breast is nothing but a modified sweat gland and, indeed, a secondary sexual characteristic, can it truly be heard that breasts are anything but intimately associated with sex or things sexual.’
In Dare it was held that it was for the trier of fact to determine whether an assault was a sexual assault, having regard to all the circumstances involved.
In Cook the British Columbia Court of Appeal also held that the former sexual offences should not be seen as setting the boundaries of the new sexual offences.
It declined to follow Chase , Lambert J.A.
stating:
‘I do not propose to offer a definition, where Parliament has declined to do so.
But I do not think that the characteristic that turns a simple assault into a sexual assault is solely a matter of anatomy.
I think that a real affront to sexual integrity and sexual dignity may be sufficient.’
The bewildering lack of certainty and clarity in the law which these cases illustrate is clearly undesirable for victims and may deter some from pursuing a complaint.
It may also have a negative effect on prosecutors who might be inclined to settle for a plea of guilty to assault instead.
A further danger is that the vagueness of the new offences might lead to their being constitutionally challenged as contrary to section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
In view of the ‘Charter fever’ that is currently spreading across Canada, this must be regarded as a substantial possibility.
Objection may also be taken to the new offences on the ground that rape has arguably been substantially downgraded as a crime where aggravating factors do not exist.
Rape and a pinch on the bottom may now occupy the same offence category and both may be dealt with in summary proceedings.
It might additionally be thought to be undesirable that trivial assaults have to be prosecuted with an offence carrying the heavy maximum penalty of ten years' imprisonment.
A further possible drawback to the Canadian scheme is the structure of the intermediate offence carrying the 14-year penalty.
In common with Category 2 of the New South Wales legislation, it has been said that this offence is ‘more significant for what it fails to include [than]for what it does include.’
Thus, threats to cause bodily harm to the complainant other than those involving a weapon are not included, although such threats will suffice if they are aimed at a third party.
On the other hand, actual injury to a third party will not suffice, although injury to the complainant will.
This category is in other respects, however, fairly broad.
Weapon is given a wide definition under section 2 of the Canadian Criminal Code and includes ‘anything that is designed to be used as a weapon or anything that a person uses or intends to use as a weapon, whether or not it is designed to be used as a weapon.’
Furthermore, unlike Category 2 in the New South Wales scheme, it also covers gang rapes.
Moreover, under section 245 of the Code, bodily harm includes any hurt or injury that interferes with the health or comfort of the complainant and that is more than merely transient or trifling in nature.
In the English case of Miller , it was held also to include an hysterical and nervous condition resulting from an assault.
If such an interpretation is followed in Canada, the ambit of this intermediate category will be broad indeed.
The distinction between the intermediate and the aggravated offence has also given rise to adverse comment.
One writer, for example, states:
‘An offender armed with a knife is in the same 14 year category as one armed with a blunt instrument.
Both use their weapons; the knife inflicts a minor cut in a non-dangerous area.
The knife carrier is now vulnerable to aggravated sexual assault charges.
The club-carrier strikes a blow to the victim's head, causing brain damage; there is, however, no external manifestation and no  danger to the life of the complainant.
This second hypothetical offender remains in the 14 year bracket.’
There are therefore certain disadvantages associated with the Canadian scheme.
On the other hand, its penalty structure might be thought to be preferable to that of New South Wales, for the maximum penalty for each category of offence is higher than in New South Wales and the ten-year maximum for simple sexual assault enables a heavier penalty to be imposed in serious cases which do not come within the higher categories.
(iii) Michigan
The Criminal Sexual Conduct Act provides as follows:
‘520b. (1) A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the first degree if he or she engages in sexual penetration with another person and if any of the following circumstances exists:(a) That other person is under 13 years of age.
(b) The other person is at least 13 but less than 16 years of age and the actor is a member of the same household as the victim, the actor is related to the victim by blood or affinity to the fourth degree to the victim, or the actor is in a position of authority over the victim and used this authority to coerce the victim to submit.
(c) Sexual penetration occurs under circumstances involving the commission of any other felony. (d) The actor is aided or abetted by one or more other persons and either of the following circumstances exists:(i) The actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated or physically helpless.
(ii) The actor uses force or coercion to accomplish the sexual penetration.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the circumstances listed in subdivision (f)(i) to (v).
(e) The actor is armed with a weapon or any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the victim to reasonably believe it to be a weapon.
(f) The actor causes personal injury to the victim and force or coercion is used to accomplish sexual penetration.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the following circumstances:(i) When the actor overcomes the victim through the actual application of physical force or physical violence.
(ii) When the actor coerces the victim to submit by threatening to use force or violence on the victim, and the victim believes that the actor has the present ability to execute these threats.
(iii) When the actor coerces the victim to submit by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim, or any other person, and the victim believes that the actor has the ability to execute this threat.
As used in this subdivision, ‘to retaliate’ includes threats of physical punishment, kidnapping, or extortion.
(iv) When the actor engages in the medical treatment or examination of the victim in a manner or for purposes which are medically recognized as unethical or unacceptable.
(v) When the actor, through concealment or by the element of surprise, is able to overcome the victim.
(g) The actor causes personal injury to the victim, and the actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated, or physically helpless.
(2) Criminal sexual conduct in the first degree is a felony punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years.
520c. (1) A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree if the person engages in sexual contact with another person and if any of the following circumstances exists:(a) That other person is under 13 years of age.
(b) That other person is at least 13 but less than 16 years of age and the actor is a member of the same household as the victim, or is related by blood or affinity to the fourth degree to the victim, or is in a position of authority over the victim and the actor used this authority to coerce the victim to submit.
(c) Sexual contact occurs under circumstances involving the commission of any other felony. (d) The actor is aided or abetted by one or more other persons and either of the following circumstances exists:(i) The actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated or physically helpless.
(ii) The actor uses force or coercion to accomplish the sexual contact.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the circumstances listed in sections 520b(1) (f)(i) to (v).
(e) The actor is armed with a weapon, or any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead a person to reasonably believe it to be a weapon.
(f) The actor causes personal injury to the victim and force or coercion is used to accomplish the sexual contact.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the circumstances listed in section 520b(1) (f)(i) to (v).
(g) The actor causes personal injury to the victim and the actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated or physically helpless.
(2) Criminal sexual conduct in the second degree is a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than 15 years.
520d. (1) A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the third degree if the person engages in sexual penetration with another person and if any of the following circumstances exists:(a) That other person is at least 13 years of age and under 16 years of age.
(b) Force or coercion is used to accomplish the sexual penetration.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the circumstances listed in section 520b(1) (f)(i) to (v).
(c) The actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated, or physically helpless.
(2) Criminal sexual conduct in the third degree is a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than 15 years.
520e. (1) A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the fourth degree if he or she engages in sexual contact with another person and if either of the following circumstances exists:(a) Force or coercion is used to accomplish the sexual contact.
Force or coercion includes but is not limited to any of the circumstance listed in section 520b(1) (f)(i) to (iv).
(b) The actor knows or has reason to know that the victim is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated, or physically helpless.
(2) Criminal sexual conduct in the fourth degree is a misdemeanour punishable by imprisonment for not more than 2 years, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both.’
The Michigan gradation scheme is by far the most comprehensive.
Unlike the Canadian scheme, it distinguishes heavily between penetration and other forms of sexual assault.
Sexual penetration is defined as ‘sexual intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio, anal intercourse or any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or of any object into the genital or anal openings of another person's body.’
Where sexual penetration is present together with a full range of aggravating factors, criminal sexual conduct in the first degree is committed.
Aggravating factors include, for example, where the defendant is armed with a weapon or where he causes injury to the victim and threatens her with future physical punishment, extortion or kidnapping.
Where sexual penetration takes place without the specified aggravating factors but in circumstances which include,inter alia , the use of force or coercion, criminal sexual conduct in the third degree is committed.
Thus, where sexual penetration takes place, there are two degrees of offence as against three in both Canada and New South Wales.
Where there is no sexual penetration but some other form of sexual contact takes place, there is a similar two-tier structure of offences.
Sexual contact ‘includes the intentional touching of the victim's or actor's intimate parts or the intentional touching of the clothing covering the immediate area of the victim's or actor's intimate parts, if that  intentional touching can reasonably be construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.’
Where sexual contact takes place in aggravating circumstances (which are the same as for a first degree offence), criminal sexual conduct in the second degree is committed.
In the absence of these factors, but where,inter alia , force or coercion is used, the crime concerned is criminal sexual conduct in the fourth degree.
It will be noted that where there is no penetration but aggravating circumstances exist, the maximum penalty which can be imposed is heavier than in cases where there is sexual penetration but aggravating circumstances are absent.
The Michigan scheme has avoided some of the pitfalls into which the New South Wales and Canadian models appear to have fallen.
It cannot be criticised for trivialising certain forms of rape by setting maximum penalties which are too low.
The dividing line between the categories would seem to be less arbitrary and illogical.
Moreover, the sexual aspect of the offence cannot be said to have been in any sense downgraded.
A further advantage which is claimed for this legislation is that it spells out precisely what forms of conduct are included within each degree of offence, and thus reduces the discretion of police officers and prosecutors.
These positive aspects of the Michigan law may, however, have been achieved at the expense of simplicity.
If the scheme is comprehensive, it may also be said to be an unwieldy instrument for judges and juries to use.
Indeed, interviews conducted by the Battelle Law and Justice Study Center with criminal justice personnel in Wayne County, Michigan, revealed widespread dissatisfaction with the new law.
Duncan Chappell writes:
‘Described as a ‘law professor's dream’, the law was said to be far too complicated for easy day-to-day use.
Many police and prosecutors admitted not understanding the law.
Said one prosecutor, ‘The old law was simple.
The only requirements for conviction were vaginal penetration and force.
Cases were won or lost on the facts, not the law.’
However with the new complex statute, he remarked, ‘Charges are fucked up.
Prosecutors use the wrong charge, they fail to identify the witnesses that corroborate the aggravating circumstances.
Pieces of evidence are not used.
Other deputies mess it up by trying to amend the charge with what they think the law should be.
Judges have a great disdain for the law —; they do not understand it.’
This is but the opinion of one prosecutor expressed not long after the legislation had come into force.
However, it is undeniably the case that the statute is less clear and concise than ideally it ought to be.
The construction of a gradation scheme is clearly no simple task.
However, a number of lessons emerge from the Canadian, New South Wales and Michigan experience.
First of all, there is much to be said for simplicity which, in Canada and New South Wales, has been achieved  in part by including within the scale a far narrower range of former offences than is the case in Michigan.
It seems also fair to say, that schemes which focus on penetration are more satisfactory than the Canadian arrangement.
On the other hand, the Canadian penalty structure has certain advantages.
There are always likely to be complaints about the precise distribution of conduct within the ladder of offences, but by permitting a maximum penalty as high as ten years for the lowest category, the relegation of conduct to it becomes less significant.
Finally, if misconstruction is to be avoided, it may be useful for legislation to explain how gradation is intended to operate so far as the charging and prosecution of offences is concerned.
Bearing in mind these considerations, and some of the criticisms which have been levelled at existing gradation schemes, a ladder of offences could possibly be constructed as follows, to deal with non-consensual conduct presently covered by rape, indecent assault and buggery.
Category A, carrying a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, would consist of sexual assaults involving penetration (as defined in New South Wales) and accompanied by the infliction of grievous bodily harm upon the complainant or a third party.
Category B, carrying a maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment, would cover sexual assaults involving penetration accompanied by the infliction of actual bodily harm on the complainant or a third party; a threat to inflict such harm with a weapon upon the complainant or a third party; a threat to inflict such harm upon a child; and the participation of more than one defendant in the sexual assault.
Category C, carrying a maximum penalty of ten years' imprisonment, would cover all other sexual assaults involving penetration.
Category D, carrying a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment, would cover indecent assaults not involving penetration.
This scheme combines some of the virtues of the New South Wales and Canadian legislation.
Whilst there might be certain advantages to be gained from the inclusion of a broader range of aggravating features in the higher categories, these are probably outweighed by the complexity this would produce.
This could impede the prosecution process which gradation is intended, after all, to facilitate.
Consent
Defendants who plead not guilty to rape, generally do so on the ground that the victim consented.
In the New Zealand study, for example, out of the 79 defended cases looked at, consent was the principal defence in 49 and a subsidiary defence in a further nine.
It thus featured as an issue in 73 per cent.
of cases.
The problems to which the non-consent requirement gives rise have been the subject of frequent comment.
Thus, it has been said:
‘A crucial problem in the law of rape is precisely that it focuses unswervingly upon the non-consent of the complainant.
Did she  consent or did she not?
That is the question.
It is she who is the object of attention.
The prosecution must prove beyond all reasonable doubt that she did not consent and the defence will be  irresistibly tempted to raise that doubt by suggesting that she is the type of woman who might well have done.
The judge, moreover, will warn the jury of the danger of accepting her uncorroborated evidence.
Perhaps the wonder should be that any convictions are returned.’
The Tasmanian Law Reform Commission expressed the matter even more forcefully: ‘The present focus on consent virtually demands that a defence counsel who is doing his job properly must challenge the sexual conduct and personal integrity of the complainant and attempt to present her in the most unfavourable light.’
The South Australian Report also noted:
‘Lack of consent of the victim, as one of the key external elements of rape, is clearly a problem.
It creates difficulties for the jury (in interpreting its meaning), for the victim (in focusing the trial on her behaviour) and for the Crown (in endeavouring to overcome the stereotyped notions of consenting sexual relations from which the jury is likely to derive its interpretation of consent).’
One way of approaching the problem of consent through law reform is to change the rules of evidence relating to corroboration and sexual history.
In addition to such steps, in Canada, New South Wales and Michigan, attempts have been made to tackle the non-consent requirement itself.
(a) New South Wales
(i) Consent and Categories 1 and 2.
In Categories 1 and 2 of the New South Wales scheme, the word consent is not mentioned.
In both instances, the focus of attention is entirely upon the actions of the defendant.
Symbolically, this arrangement may have much to commend it, but in practical terms its impact ought not to be over-estimated.
Category 1 makes it an offence maliciously to inflict grievous bodily harm upon another person with intent to have sexual intercourse.
However, it is precisely where the infliction of grievous bodily harm has taken place that rape is most easily established under a traditional rape law, so that the absence of a non-consent requirement in these circumstances is not particularly significant.
Moreover, there is some evidence to suggest that most victims who report rape do not suffer serious injury.
Although 20.4 per cent.
of the victims studied by Amir in Philadelphia had been brutally beaten before, during or after the rape, other studies suggest a fairly low percentage of serious injury.
Certainly in the New Zealand study, it was found that of the 83 cases looked at, 41 per cent.
of complainants had no injuries at all, 42.2 per cent .
had only minor injuries and only 15.6 per cent.
required medical treatment or hospitalisation.
Similarly, Wright found that most of the victims in his sample had received no injuries.
Serious injury occurred in fewer than six per cent.
of attacks.
Thus, out of 297 victims, 17 were seriously injured.
Similarly, out of 196 victims in the Scottish sample, 5–6 per cent.
or 11 were seriously injured.
If the figures in New South Wales follow a similar pattern, then only a small minority of reported cases would fail within Category 1.
More cases are likely to come within Category 2 however.
Here the offence is committed where the defendant inflicts actual bodily harm upon the complainant with intent to have sexual intercourse.
Actual bodily harm need not be serious harm and it has been held to include a hysterical and nervous condition.
A higher proportion of victims is likely to have suffered injury of this sort.
In those cases where it is possible to bring a prosecution under either Category 1 or 2 will the question of consent be excluded entirely from the court's consideration?
The answer to this question is clearly no.
Consent will remain an important issue under both categories.
It is likely to form the basis for an assertion that the injury was not inflicted with the requisite intent.
For example, the defendant may argue that the injury was not inflicted with intent to have intercourse but occurred after consensual intercourse or was inflicted during a quarrel, after which there was a reconciliation and consensual sexual intercourse took place.
Similarly, where the defendant is charged under Category 2 with threatening the complainant with an offensive weapon or instrument with intent to have sexual intercourse, he may state that he brandished a knife to persuade the victim to hand over money or for some other purpose unconnected with sexual intercourse and that sexual intercourse in fact took place with consent.
On the other hand, there may be a number of situations in which the victim's consent will no longer be relevant under Categories 1 and 2.
For example, a defendant will presumably not be able to say that he injured the complainant intending to have sexual intercourse with her but she then consented.
But what if he asserts that the victim was a masochist who consented to the injury and subsequently to the intercourse?
Two issues are raised here.
The first is the extent to which  consent to injury can be a defence in circumstances such as these.
In Attorney-General's Reference (No. 6 of 1980 ), the Court of Appeal endorsed the decision in Donovan and held that the intentional infliction of any bodily harm was an offence unless the victim consented and the defendant's action was justifiable in the public interest.
If this decision is followed in New South Wales, the prosecution will not be prevented from establishing actual bodily harm under Category 2 or grievous bodily harm under Category 1 on the ground that the victim consented to it since such injury can hardly be in the public interest.
There is a further and separate issue, however.
If the victim were a masochist or if the defendant and the victim were involved in sado-masochism, will the prosecution be able to establish that the assault was committed with the intention of having sexual intercourse, assuming that the requisite intent is ‘purposive and not foresightful’ as Dr. Woods suggests.
Take the case of the masochist whose partner inflicts harm upon her because it is only in these circumstances that she will have sexual intercourse.
Here the defendant has clearly occasioned actual bodily harm with the purpose and intent of having sexual intercourse.
In the case of sado-masochism, the couple may derive sexual pleasure and stimulation from inflicting and receiving injury.
In so far as sexual stimulation is generally geared towards sexual intercourse, the purpose of their violent activity may well be regarded as sexual intercourse where there is evidence that this subsequently took place.
The requirement of intent will thus, once again, be fulfilled.
On the other hand, the defendant should not be liable where he inflicts injury before or during intercourse but without that aim in view.
Where a couple are involved in sado-masochism, they are unlikely to report the matter to the police.
In the unlikely event that a prosecution were brought in these circumstances, and it was clear that a sado-masochistic pact existed between the parties, the judge could take this into account in sentencing.
However, it might be thought that where sado-masochism takes place between adult consenting parties and the injury sustained is not serious, the law should not intervene at all.
Judges in sympathy with this view may reject the English authorities and require that actual bodily harm be committed without the victim's consent.
Such an approach would also solve a further problem mentioned by Cunliffe, who suggests that a mere bruise or a love bite would bring a defendant within Category 2.
It is of course possible that where either is inflicted as part of the preliminaries to intercourse, a defendant  could be brought within the section even where the recipient fully consented to such acts.
Although the chances of a complaint being made or a prosecution being brought in these circumstances seem remote, it is conceivable that a prosecutor with censorious views could make use of the legislation for purposes for which it was not intended.
Homosexual couples might be a possible target.
If, however, consent becomes a defence where actual bodily harm is alleged, the problem does not arise.
It has been claimed that there are further situations in which consent will be irrelevant to a prosecution under Categories 1 and 2.
Cunliffe criticises the new legislation on the ground that a man could be liable under Category 2 where he engaged in consensual sexual intercourse if this results in either the rupture of a woman's hymen, the transmission of a sexual disease or her pregnancy.
Rupture of the hymen could theoretically be a Category 2 offence where the defendant deliberately set out to do so in the belief that he would thereby be able to have sexual intercourse with the woman.
However, he should be able to argue that the hymen was ruptured during and as a consequence of intercourse and that it was not deliberately ruptured with the aim of having sexual intercourse.
Precisely the same is true where a venereal disease is communicated or pregnancy ensues.
Even if it is assumed that actual bodily harm has been inflicted in these circumstances, the defendant has inflicted it during intercourse but has not inflicted it in order to have or continue having sexual intercourse.
(ii) The Possible Advantages of Categories 1 and 2
It is clear that the issue of consent has not been effaced by Categories 1 and 2.
If this is the case, what advantages, if any, do these categories have over a traditional rape provision?
One advantage is that they relieve the prosecution of the burden of proving sexual intercourse, which is helpful where precise forensic evidence is lacking.
It is certainly true, moreover, that under both categories the evidential burden upon the prosecution is confined to establishing the injury and the necessary intent.
There is no need for the prosecution in the first instance to provide evidence of anything more.
However in England, the evidential burden on the prosecution may not be any greater than it is under Categories 1 and 2 in many of the situations which they cover, for, as Glanville Williams has pointed out: ‘If the prosecution gives evidence that violence was used, this should be enough to discharge the evidential burden on the issue of consent and take the case to the jury…
The defence will then be under the practical necessity of  giving evidence to establish consent.’
The same would apply to a threat of violence.
It is clear, furthermore, that Categories 1 and 2 do not impose an evidential burden on the defendant as far as the consent issue is concerned, for generally speaking, where the defence seeks to do no more than deny the prosecution's assertion, it is entitled to have its claims placed before the jury.
Under the New South Wales legislation, an assertion of consent would generally amount to a denial that injury was inflicted with intent to have sexual intercourse.
It may be concluded, therefore, that the advantages which Categories 1 and 2 afford to the prosecution are by no means as great as they might at first sight appear to be.
(iii) Category 3
Liability under Category 3 arises where sexual intercourse takes place without consent.
It will most frequently be used in situations where the defendant has employed some violence against the victim but there is no evidence of injury or where he has threatened her with violence without using a weapon.
Many cases will thus fall within it.
It will be recalled that 41 per cent.
of the cases in the New Zealand study involved no injury and in Wright's study the figure was 59 per cent.
Because of the typical disparity in strength between men and women, a rapist frequently does not need to inflict injury in order to overpower his victim.
Consent continues to be the central issue under Category 3.
The legislation makes some attempt to list circumstances in which consent will not be regarded as present, but the list is short and is not intended to be comprehensive.
Section 61D(3) provides as follows:
‘For the purposes of subsection (1) and without limiting the grounds upon which it may be established that consent to sexual intercourse is vitiated —;(a) a person who consents to sexual intercourse with another person —;(i) under a mistaken belief as to the identity of the other person; or (ii) under a mistaken belief that the other person is married to the person,…shall be deemed not to consent to the sexual intercourse;(b) a person who knows that another person consents to sexual intercourse under a mistaken belief referred to in paragraph (a) shall be deemed to know that the other person does not consent to the sexual intercourse;(c) a person who submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of threats or terror, whether the threats are  against, or the terror is instilled in, the person who submits to the sexual intercourse or any other person, shall be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse; and (d) a person who does not offer actual physical resistance to sexual intercourse shall not, by reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual intercourse.’
It will be noted that the decision in Papadimitropolous , in which it was held that a victim who mistakenly believed that she was married to the defendant at the time of sexual intercourse nonetheless consented to it, is overruled by the section.
Moreover, husband impersonation which constitutes rape in England has been extended so that any mistake as to the other person's identity is deemed to negative consent.
(b) Michigan
The old Michigan law which preceded the 1974 reform placed an extremely heavy burden of proof upon the prosecution, which had to prove beyond reasonable doubt both that force had been used by the defendant and that the victim was unwilling.
This meant that, once the prosecution had established the use of force, it had to go on to prove that the victim had ‘resisted to the utmost from the inception to the close of the attack.’
It was only in the more enlightened judgments that it was held that resistance was unnecessary where the complainant was overcome by fear.
One of the main aims of the Michigan legislation was to lighten the prosecution's burden.
It was felt that once evidence of force had been adduced, it should not be necessary for the prosecution to show in its evidence in chief that the victim had not consented.
The 1974 legislation would appear to have accomplished this objective.
The prosecution no longer has to establish that the complainant resisted.
Indeed, the word consent does not appear within the legislation at all.
In its evidence in chief, the prosecution need do no more than adduce evidence of one of the circumstances required by the offence of criminal sexual conduct.
However, it seems equally clear that the defence will frequently be able to raise the issue of consent.
For example, the Act makes it an offence to engage in sexual contact or penetration in circumstances in which the actor causes personal injury to the victim and force or coercion is used to accomplish the contact or penetration.
The prosecution will discharge its evidential burden in a case such as this by adducing evidence of contact or penetration accompanied by personal injury and the use of force.
The defence will then be able to argue that  the complainant consented to sexual intercourse and that force was not used in order to accomplish the contact or penetration.
Arguably, the defence has no evidential burden to discharge in this situation, for, since the defence is seeking to do no more than deny the basic elements of the prosecution's case, any assertion of consent by the defence should be placed before the jury.
This view has not, however, been taken by the courts, which have generally insisted upon some evidence of consent before a jury direction on consent is required.
With respect to certain other forms of criminal sexual conduct, however, the legislation has, on the face of it, succeeded in ruling out consideration of consent altogether.
Thus, for example, criminal sexual conduct in the first degree is established where the defendant engages in sexual penetration with another and the actor is armed with a weapon or any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the victim reasonably to believe it to be a weapon.
It is similarly established where the defendant engages in sexual penetration with another and this occurs ‘under circumstances involving the commission of any other felony.’
The victim's consent would seem to be immaterial in both instances.
It has been held, however, that consent is still a defence in these circumstances.
If this is the case, then it should be up to defending counsel to set it on its feet and persuade the judge to place the matter before the jury.
Where sexual intercourse takes place before the barrel of a gun, it seems quite appropriate that it should be up to the defence to discharge an evidential burden with respect to consent.
It is similarly arguable that it should be up to the defence to provide a proper foundation of evidence for an assertion that a woman who has been robbed by a man nonetheless subsequently consented to sexual intercourse with him.
Recent decisions have all supported this view.
It is worth noting that many rapes do involve weapons and many take place in the context of another offence.
Wright found that in 19 per cent.
of the cases in his survey, the victim was threatened with a weapon.
A similarly high proportion of cases (19 per cent.) in which weapons were carried by defendants was found in the Scottish survey.
In Amir's study, weapons were used in 21 per cent.
of cases, whilst in Clerk and Lewis's Canadian study the figure was 13 per cent.
The New Zealand study also recorded that in 20 per cent.
of cases submission was obtained by the threat or use of a weapon.
In Wright's  study, in one out of ten cases, rape took place in the context of a non-sexual crime such as burglary or robbery.
Research into the operation of the new law suggests that so far as judges, prosecutors and defence counsel are concerned, consent remains an important issue.
However, it was also found that the significance of consent had decreased as a result of the legislation, as had the importance of resistance by the complainant.
This seems a good enough result.
Consent will frequently be an issue in sexual assault cases.
Legislation can do no more than place the matter in its correct perspective.
(c) Canada
On the face of it, the Canadian legislation would appear to have done very little to tackle the issue of consent.
Section 244(1) (a) of the Canadian Criminal Code provides: ‘A person commits an assault when, without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person.’
Lack of consent remains, therefore, an integral part of the crime of sexual assault.
If Glanville Williams is correct, the burden of negativing consent will rest on the prosecution, although evidence of the use or threat of force should be sufficient to take the matter to the jury.
This will leave the defence to raise the issue of consent, which will then be left to the jury.
The Canadian provisions would seem to be no better than the English in this respect.
Section 244(3) provides a short list of situations in which consent will not be deemed to exist.
It reads:
‘For the purposes of this section, no consent is obtained where the complainant submits or does not resist by reason of(a) the application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;(b) threats or fear of the application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;(c) fraud;(d) the exercise of authority.’
The list bears some resemblance to that which is contained in the New South Wales legislation for the purposes of Category 3.
It appears to broaden the categories of non-consent so that, for example , fraud is not merely confined to fraud as to the nature of the act or husband impersonation, as it is at English common law.
However, there are certain criticisms which must be levelled at this provision.
It is not made clear whether or not it is intended to be exhaustive.
It does not include mistakes other than those occasioned by fraud.
Moreover, criteria such as‘fraud’ or ‘exercise of authority’are exceedingly vague and arguably provide too much scope for judicial interpretation.
Finally, the wording of the sub-section seems to invite the defence to argue that the complainant's submission did not occur by reason of the factors mentioned.
(d) Solving the Problem of Consent
It may be concluded that the problem of consent is unlikely to vanish whatever means are adopted to deal with it.
Realistically, it is likely to remain an issue in the majority of sexual assault cases.
There are, however, three strategies which might be worth considering.
First, there may be a case for shifting the evidential burden of establishing consent on to the shoulders of the defence in certain cases, such as where there is evidence of injury inflicted by the defendant, where weapons are used or where sexual intercourse takes place in the context of the commission of another grave offence.
Generally speaking, as a matter of practical necessity, the defence will have to produce evidence of consent in these circumstances in any case, but where an evidential burden exists, a failure to produce such evidence will ensure that the issue of consent is not left to the jury.
Secondly, legislation could provide that evidence of resistance need not be adduced by the prosecution in order to establish lack of consent and that in those cases where the evidential burden of establishing consent is on the defence, evidence of lack of resistance should not suffice.
Finally, there may be something to be said for a non-exhaustive list of situations in which consent will be negatived.
Abolition of the Word ‘Rape’
In neither Michigan, Canada nor New South Wales is the word rape used in the legislation.
The Michigan statute creates a crime of criminal sexual conduct to replace the old offence of carnal knowledge.
In Canada and New South Wales, rape has been abolished in favour of new offences of sexual assault.
In New South Wales, the definition of sexual intercourse has been expanded so that it covers a range of sexual acts apart from vaginal penetration.
Males may now be the victims of the offence and females the perpetrators of it.
The same is true in Michigan where the term sexual penetration is used.
However, this in itself is not a reason for abandoning the term rape.
Certainly in other jurisdictions where sexual intercourse has also been broadly defined, the term rape has been retained.
Similarly, although each of the jurisdictions has divided the traditional offence of rape into several categories, this in itself does not necessitate abandonment of the term rape.
In Victoria, for example, a gradation of offences has been created but the term rape is preserved.
Certain arguments do exist for retaining the word ‘rape’ even if radical reform involving a gradation system and an expanded definition of sexual intercourse is introduced.
Thus, it may be thought that the term rape conveys the full horror of the event.
It stigmatises the conduct, which is important if the public is to view it with an appropriate degree of revulsion.
There are, however, strong counter-arguments in favour of a change in terminology.
In its Report on Sexual Offences, the Canadian Law Reform Commission stated: ‘The Commission has come to the conclusion that the very use of the word ‘rape’ attaches a profound moral stigma to the victims and expresses an essentially irrational folklore about them.’
Similarly, explaining the use of the term sexual assault in the New South Wales legislation, Woods states: ‘It was widely believed that the term ‘rape’ involved an unacceptable stigma for victims.’
This is not to say that sexual assault carries no stigma, but the term is vaguer and the stigma arguably less.
Moreover, the word rape conjures up certain stereotypical images: it is associated with psychopaths, extremes of violence, strangers and innocent young victims.
Juries may therefore be  reluctant to impose the stigma of it on an offender save in the most extreme cases.
They may consider that many forms of non-consensual sexual intercourse are not so grave as to be labelled rape.
It has already been suggested that this is the reaction of many policemen.
Thus, in order to distance the law from the many preconceived cultural notions about rape, rapists and rape victims, a new terminology may be thought to be desirable.