

WATCHER
In the evening, Lucien again sought out the roof garden of the Anywhither residence.
To his disappointment, Bessie and Edgebone were already sitting there enjoying the night air.
An enormous jug of Edgebone's home-brewed ale sat on the floor between their chairs.
Bessie poured Lucien a generous tankard-full.
Neither Walterkin, nor any of the other children, were anywhere to be seen.
Bessie sighed contentedly and leaned back in her heavily cushioned chair, pulling her red shawl more tightly round her shoulders against the evening chill.
‘This is the best time of the day,’ she said, taking a mouthful of ale.
Edgebone nodded and smiled, reaching out to squeeze his wife's plump knee.
She patted his hand.
‘The stars are so clear,’ Lucien said.
He sat down on the rug in front of the Anywhithers and leaned back on straight arms, gazing up at the sky.
‘You've an interest in the constellations?’
Edgebone asked.
‘I know very little,’ Lucien said, and was about to add, ‘it was not part of the Vibrancy studies’, but remembered in time that that was a remark suitable only for Walterkin's ears.
‘I studied the stars as a boy,’ Edgebone said.
‘I can still name many.’
He pointed.
‘The Queen's Robe, the Crouching Hound, the Slaughtered One.’
‘I can only remember the Maid's Hook,’ said Bessie, ‘because it stands all on its own in the heavens and has such a definite shape.’
‘Where is that, then?’
Lucien asked, entering into the spirit of the Anywhithers' conversation.
He was enjoying their company.
Bessie pointed.
‘There,’ she said.
‘What is that one, Edge, the one that looks a bit like a crown?’
There was some pointing and explaining as Bessie indicated the cluster of stars she meant.
Edgebone rubbed his face.
‘It's not a crown, it's a cat's head,’ he said.
‘It's called the Night Watcher, I think.’
He laughed.
‘When I was a kiddie, we were told that if its eyes ever turned red, the world would die.’
Both Bessie and Lucien stared intently at the constellation.
Lucien narrowed his eyes, until the shape of the stars truly resembled the watchful countenance of a cat.
It seemed to be staring right at him.
He blinked and looked away.
‘Don't some of those batty Jeppy folk call their prophet the Night Watcher?’
Edgebone remarked.
Once the ale was finished, Bessie and Edgebone went back into the house to go to bed.
Edgebone had to get up early for work in the morning.
Lucien remained alone on the roof, gazing out over the shimmering city.
‘Somewhere,’ he thought.
‘Somewhere…’
His thoughts became no more definite than this, a wistful longing with no proper form.
Presently, he heard the foliage rustling behind him, and turned to see Walterkin coming over the edge of the roof.
He was not surprised to see the boy.
‘Shouldn't you be in bed?’ he asked.
Walterkin made no comment.
He sat down silently on the floor against one of the chairs.
Lucien felt distinctly uncomfortable.
Walterkin emanated a powerful brooding air that seemed peculiar in one so young.
His face looked pale and waxy in the starlight, his hair, freshly washed, was white as bleached silk.
‘Lucien,’ he said.
Lucien's flesh crawled.
The voice sounded different, older.
He had to move suddenly to dispel the grip of fear.
‘What?’
‘You are so…’
Walterkin's voice faded away.
He knelt up and leaned towards Lucien.
His hands reached to touch  Lucien's face.
‘Will you forget me?’ he asked in an adult's voice.
‘Stop it!’
Lucien hissed, and slapped the boy's hands away.
Walterkin moved away and sat down with raised knees.
He put his hands over his mouth and giggled.
At the sound, the strange atmosphere seemed to rise from the roof garden like a vast bird soaring up into the sky.
‘What were you thinking of?’
Lucien asked, aghast.
‘I don't know,’ Walterkin said with a shrug.
‘I wasn't thinking anything.
Something made me want to touch you.
Are you angry?’
‘No.
Yes.
I should be,’ Lucien answered in confusion.
‘I don't want your parents suspecting I'm trying to seduce you.
You're so young.’
‘Nobody saw us.’
‘That doesn't matter.
It was a silly thing to do.’
‘I know.
It's so strange.
Sometimes I feel so strongly I want to do that — touch you — and yet it doesn't seem like my idea.
Does that make sense?’
Lucien grimaced.
‘Sounds like growing up to me.
But I don't want to be part of that, Walterkin.
I can't be.
Please respect that.’
‘I do.
I said I'm sorry.’
‘Then we'll forget it.’
‘Good.’
Walterkin grinned with apparent innocence.
‘So, what happened next in your life?
What was the House of Mandru like?’
Lucien wondered whether it was a good idea to continue telling his story to the boy, given the direction it was heading in.
What happened next…
Perhaps he should omit the details.
Wouldn't it be encouraging Walterkin's obvious attraction to him if he didn't?
‘Aren't you sick of hearing about me yet?’
His smile, he knew, was unconvincing.
‘Of course not.
It's another world.’
‘I don't know.’
Lucien shook his head and sighed.
‘I don't think we should continue these talks.’
‘Lucien!’
Walterkin cried, sounding hurt.
‘You said you'd forget what just happened.
Don't you trust me now?
I'm not a child.’
Lucien didn't answer.
Contesting that remark would only provoke an angry response from the boy.
Walterkin narrowed his eyes.
‘Why fool yourself?
You know you need to tell me.’
Lucien put his head into his hands.
The boy was right.
He could not stop now, even though his common sense told him he should.
The release inspired by the telling was too sweet.
Lucien had had little experience of female-kind in his life, and it was the women of Mandru's household who were the most kind to him during the first traumatic days of his life there.
It was the women to whom he turned for comfort.
Their first instinct, upon seeing someone in distress, was to touch, to hug and hold.
Lucien could sink into their arms and escape his anxieties.
Closing his eyes against a warm breast, he became a child again, he felt safe.
This made him aware of how much he'd been missing before in the cold, masculine environment of the academy.
He swiftly chided himself for such thoughts; he'd been taught to shun physical contact, even on a platonic level.
But he was so fevered and bewildered, he could not refuse the comfort offered.
He felt too weak to think rationally.
Because the women were so strange to him, it was as if he could sense the warmth of their spirits as a palpable force in the house.
He was aware of their presence, their smell, their power, even when he was alone.
The Ixmaritians in Mandru's household did not have to share rooms as they had in Por Tanssie.
Each had a comfortable, good-sized room of their own in which to live.
It was the first private space Lucien had ever occupied and, until he got used to it, made him feel edgy and a little frightened.
After he'd been coaxed out of the cart in the yard, three serving women had carried him into the house.
He'd lolled half-conscious in their arms as they carried him along corridors and up stairs.
They seemed to him to be nothing more than soft, huge shapes.
They were like friendly bears.
Behind his closed lids, light flickered orange, pink and then black.
Sometimes, the women stopped to talk to somebody, but he could not understand their words.
Eventually, they laid him on the bed in his own room, and undressed him.
Later, when lucidity returned to him, the recollection of that made him blush and cringe, but at the time he did not care.
The women bathed his body where he lay, gently turning him, wiping his limbs and face with soft, scented cloths.
Then they peeled  back the bedcovers and laid him on a crisp sheet, covering him from the waist down with another sheet.
They gave him fortified water to drink.
After this, a female healer had come into the room, dressed in an Ixmaritian robe but with a colourful blanket thrown over her shoulders.
She was much younger than the serving women and her aura was rather more severe.
After she'd attended to Lucien's wound, which was hurting so much he could not tell when she was touching it, she lit a bowl of tamara weed and other herbs to induce sleep.
Bitter-sweet smoke filled the room, and the women held their shawls over their mouths and noses, backing away.
‘I don't know how long I slept for,’ Lucien said to Walterkin.
‘Perhaps it was for days.
I only know that, at some point, I awoke into a noontime heat although the sun did not fall directly into my room.
The curtains were long and gauzy, fluttering in a slight breeze.
My throat felt dry, my eyes heavy and painful to move.
The air beyond my room was full of alien sounds — voices calling, laughter, clattering, animal noises.’
‘What was your first thought?’
Walterkin asked.
Lucien frowned and considered the question.
‘My first thought?
It was probably ‘I am alive’.’
‘And the second?’
Lucien shrugged.
‘It is difficult to recall exactly.
I was wary though, I do remember that.
At some point I did wonder whether I had more humiliation and torture to look forward to.
Then I met Azmaveth, and many of my fears were eased.’
‘Azmaveth?’
Lucien detected a sharp note in Walterkin's question.
‘She became my friend,’ he explained.
‘You're awake?’
A young woman moved into Lucien's line of sight.
Lucien had never seen an Ixmaritian priestess in the flesh before, but he recognised her robes from illustrations in the sacred texts of Paradouze: a long green gown of soft linen covered by a darker green tunic of embroidered, stiffened cotton.
Her eyebrows met over the bridge of her nose.
Her lips were large.
Crossing to the bed, she put a hand behind Lucien's head, raised it, and offered him a few sips of water  from a rough ceramic bowl.
Lucien gulped the water greedily.
She put the bowl down on top of a chest of drawers standing next to the bed and folded her arms.
For a few moments, she regarded Lucien gravely, and then shook her head.
‘You are not the first, you will not be the last,’ she said, and then smiled at him.
Lucien felt so dazed he could not remember what a smile was supposed to mean; to him, it looked vaguely threatening.
‘You should thank your Lord Paradouze you came to Mandru,’ she said.
‘It is not too bad here.’
Mandru was a nonconformist.
Unlike the more staid and less affluent families of Racervine Park, residents of Scarcement Chase did not adhere so strictly to Ixmaritian law.
Distance from Shanariah, coupled with enormous tithes to the Church and the fact that many of the Ixmarite hierarchy owned estates in the district and were therefore friends and neighbours, guaranteed the residents a certain freedom of belief.
As long as they paid their dues, they did not suffer interference from the Ixmarites.
Later, Lucien realised just how fortunate he'd been when Mandru's agent had made a bid for him at Por Tanssie.
From other Ixmaritians in the house, he learned that certain estates, even in Scarcement Chase itself, tended to adopt a more stringent Ixmaritian code for their vibrancers and priests.
Life in such places could be very hard.
‘How long did it take you to realise that?’
Walterkin asked.
‘It must have all seemed very strange.’
Lucien nodded.
‘It was.
I had to accept what had happened to me in the past before I could even begin to accept the changes in my life.
More than anything, I wanted Paradouze to help me understand why I had suffered.’
Walterkin frowned.
‘You mean that even after what had happened to you, you never questioned your faith?’
Lucien nodded again, gesturing with stiff fingers.
‘Of course not.
Paradouze was the only person to whom I'd ever felt close.
I saw Him as my only friend.
Therefore, there had to be a reason for all that had happened.
I was convinced it would eventually be revealed to me.’
‘And was it?’
Walterkin risked a nervous grin.
Lucien pulled a sour face.
‘Perhaps I'm still looking for it.’
The men and women of Mandru's household interacted rather more freely than was common among the upper class of Shanariah.
In Lucien's family, they had only come together at the times appointed by the Church: meals, various holidays, family councils and those mysterious, Church-nominated occasions when children were conceived.
At the Earthlight manse, women had been attended only by female servants, and men by male servants.
Under normal circumstances, Lucien would have been reared by his uncle, Enkhari, who was not a blood relative but the lover of his father.
It was a common practice in noble Shannish society for married couples to have lovers of their own sex.
This followed the pattern of an obscure Ixmaritian legend concerning Ixmar and his female aspect, Atavenom.
However, Enkhari had died young, a year before Lucien had left home.
Because it would only be for a short time, Lucien's parents had decided it would not be a religious transgression for his aunt Pershti, his mother's lover, to look after him.
At Mandru, the Lady Nehushtah, Mandru's exotic Ixibatabian wife, had male as well as female attendants, and all the Ixmaritians lived together in the same building, regardless of their gender.
At first, this made Lucien nervous, especially the first time he came across a half-clad female sauntering along the sky-lit corridor outside his room on her way to the bathrooms.
He never found the proximity of women offensive or objectionable, which was probably due to Pershti's gentle influence (she had not been Shannish), but it took Lucien a while to overcome a feeling of discomfort, having so many of them around him.
They intrigued him immeasurably, almost as if they were rare and unusual animals or birds, although at first he was often too shy to speak in their company.
They made a great fuss of him, because he was new and had come from Por Tanssie which had a bad reputation.
After he'd been at Mandru for a while, Lucien learned that Mandru had refused to have any more boys from Por Tanssie after his last purchase from that academy had committed suicide.
The only reason he'd changed his mind was because he'd received advance notification that there would be a choice morsel on offer that day — a boy named Garimel.
Mandru's agent had been outbid, however, and he'd been reluctant to return home empty-handed.
Lucien wasn't quite sure how he felt about being a second choice, but comforted  himself with the knowledge that Garimel had undoubtedly been bought by a less lenient household.
If he had to be a slave, it was better to have a fair master.
The priestess introduced herself as Azmaveth.
‘Mandru will want to see you,’ she said.
‘But only when you're well.
How do you feel?’
In response Lucien could only blink, but he turned his head to examine his surroundings.
The floor was of pale, unpolished wood and there was a brightly coloured rug on it, with a pattern of stripes and a fringe at either end.
The bed was low but wide, and made of the same pale wood.
He was propped up on three pillows, which felt strange to him.
In Por Tanssie, the students had always slept flat on their beds.
On either side of the bed, ornate brass oil lamps were attached to the wall, and there were two more on the opposite wall of the room.
‘The rooms aren't bad,’ Azmaveth said, folding her arms.
She smiled at him.
‘Come on.
Say something.’
Lucien croaked.
‘Almost!’
Azmaveth said.
‘Here, have another drink.’
Azmaveth came from the north and spoke with a strange accent.
After Lucien got to know her better, she told him shocking things.
Apparently, she had been taken by an Ixmaritian academy as part of a tax levied against her family, whose crops had suffered a blight one year and who were in severe financial hardship.
She told Lucien how much the northerners resented the Ixmaritian tithes, and how in some cases people had shed their blood to resist them, a course of action that had been doomed to failure.
‘We learn in the academies,’ she said, ‘but not what they think they teach us.
We learn to keep silent, to keep faith in ourselves.
On the surface, we obey, but inside we wait.
One day, we will reap the harvest of this silence.’
Lucien had no idea what she meant by this.
He could find no comparison between Azmaveth's simmering endurance during her training and his own obedient years at Por Tanssie.
‘But what of Ixmar?’ he asked her.
‘If we suffer in life, it is only to earn our way into His Celestial Mansion when we die.’
He recoiled in horror as Azmaveth spat on the floor.
‘Ixmar!
Pah!’ she snarled, and then regarded Lucien with a wary eye.
‘If you are lucky, you will learn.
You might wake up.’
Her remarks confused Lucien, but at the same time he was very interested in what she had to say.
She spoke scathingly of Por Tanssie and said it was a place where rich men paid for position and status with sons.
This made no sense to Lucien.
He knew it was a person's natal chart that decreed whether he should become an Ixmaritian, and where he would be educated.
Yet Azmaveth seemed so passionately sure about what she said.
‘A natal chart is like a portrait,’ she said.
‘Certain features can be enhanced, others suppressed.
Think about it.’
Lucien experienced the first inklings of how the Ixmarites might possibly manipulate their own rules for their convenience.
There had been no quietly sprouting seeds of rebellion at Por Tanssie; of that he was sure.
The vibrancers had truly believed what they'd been taught and had never questioned anything.
Now, Azmaveth had told him that in other academies, conditions were very different.
The students harboured hidden resentment and committed deceit.
Lucien found it hard to doubt Azmaveth's words because of the zeal with which she spoke, but he still had difficulty believing her.
Azmaveth only laughed at Lucien's perplexity.
She told the other girls about it and they found his ignorance quaint and charming.
‘He will wake up once his body is drained of all their noxious potions,’ one of them said, with a grin.
‘What do you mean?’
Lucien demanded.
‘They kept you asleep there,’ Azmaveth said.
‘They fed you poison.
In some cases, it rots the brain.
We've seen it.
We've seen what happens to some of them.
They can't cope with real life and kill themselves.
You were lucky.’
She grinned.
‘Believe me, you have many awakenings to look forward to.’
Salaquin Mandru sent word that he wanted to see his new Ixmaritian vibrancer a week or so after Lucien had recovered from his fever.
During this time he'd settled with ease into the household, which had surprised the girls who looked after him; they had anticipated difficulty.
It was they who showed him where everything was — the Ixmaritian refectory, the exercise courts, the recreation room, the chapel.
The male  Ixmaritians paid him little heed and seemed to look at him as if he was a freak, but two girls, who occupied the rooms next to his own, became his especial friends.
They were named Ketura and Sydel, both of them vibrancers themselves.
This alone was enough to intrigue Lucien: female vibrancers.
From them he learned that his arrival had increased the number of Mandru's vibrancers to eleven.
Five of these were women, the youngest of whom was Sydel, who was nineteen.
The oldest was a woman of thirty-eight, whose name was Sabraxis.
She supervised all the other vibrancers, both male and female, and choreographed performances.
When Mandru was in residence, he commanded a performance at least once a day as part of his Ixmaritian devotions, which were rumoured to be half-hearted at best.
Sometimes, when there were guests in the house Mandru liked to have a vibrancy performed after supper, or during the afternoon, purely for entertainment.
Vibrancy as entertainment was a new concept for Lucien to grasp.
In his eyes, it seemed to demean the art.
Nehushtah, Mandru's wife, also liked to watch vibrancy performances, although she had no grasp whatsoever of their religious significance.
It was considered a treat to perform in Nehushtah's chambers, despite her peculiar foreign ways, because she always showered the Ixmaritians with gifts and gave them delicious food and wine for refreshment.
Once his leg healed, Lucien quickly found that he would be kept busy.
He spent more time on the Vibrancy at Mandru than he ever had in Por Tanssie.
Sabraxis was a stern mistress, but she was very imaginative and continually updated the traditional pieces.
New ideas from the other vibrancers were always welcomed and experimented with.
From a Vibrancy point of view, Lucien could not have been happier.
He was expected to practise for several hours a day, but was entrusted to supervise his own timetable.
There were two large exercise courts in the house, where he could either practise alone or with others, depending on his schedule for forthcoming performances.
Discipline was only introduced in the event of a vibrancer becoming visibly sloppy in their work.
Then, Sabraxis would make the individual concerned practise with her five hours a day for a week.
That was generally punishment enough for any offender.
Sabraxis had the stamina of a horse.
Sabraxis had come to visit Lucien in his room as soon as he was well enough to converse.
She was a tall, muscly woman, of handsome countenance, her faded blonde hair held up with an array of jewelled combs.
Like all the other vibrancers in the house, she wore loose trousers and a shirt of pale colours, but also affected a bright red embroidered waistcoat to denote her superiority in status.
She instructed Lucien to be careful with his leg, and to exercise the rest of his body only while lying or sitting down for a while.
She did not want him to exercise his leg until the infected burn had healed completely.
The brands were something all Ixmaritians received before being sent out into the world, but only Por Tanssie conducted the procedure without anaesthetic and proper medical care.
Sabraxis, like Azmaveth, made no secret of what she thought about Por Tanssie.
She even called Caringolat a pervert, who derived pleasure from making boys suffer.
Lucien was horrified by her remarks but said nothing in Caringolat's defence.
In only a few days, he had learned it was better to keep silent in that respect.
As soon as he was able, Lucien began to exercise every day before going down to the refectory for breakfast with Ketura and Sydel.
He knew he should obey what Sabraxis had said, but was concerned he might lose condition if he remained inactive.
Consequently, he endured the pain as he went through a few simple movements.
One morning, he was struggling bravely through a particularly agonising sequence when there was a knock at the door.
At first, he didn't respond.
He thought it was Ketura who generally came to call for him before breakfast.
She always knocked and then walked in without waiting for a response.
That too had taken a little getting used to.
In Por Tanssie, no one would have marched into a room uninvited in case the person inside was in a state of undress.
The knock came again, and Lucien called, ‘Yes?’
The door opened and a young priest came into the room, a wiry man of middle height.
He was the first male to visit Lucien since his arrival.
‘I am Tavalouze,’ said the priest.
‘I've been sent to fetch you.’
‘For what?’
Lucien asked.
He had seen the priest in the refectory before, but had never spoken to him.
‘The master of the house has requested your presence.’
Lucien experienced a thrill of dread.
‘But I've not yet eaten,’ he said.
‘Lord Mandru is taking breakfast presently,’ the priest said with a wry grin.
‘I have no doubt you will be fed in his salon.’
He indicated the way with one hand.
‘If you are ready?’
Lucien's first instinct was for disguise.
Until that moment he had not felt uncomfortable exposing his face, or even certain parts of his body, in the company of the other Ixmaritians in the house.
But it was inconceivable that he should meet the lord of the house inadequately dressed.
His sacristine robe had been disposed of, being totally ruined, and his veil had disappeared with it.
Lucien could not endure the thought of appearing barefaced in front of a stranger, especially a person of great status.
He hesitated in confusion, while the priest rolled his eyes.
‘Lord Mandru will not eat you for breakfast!’ he said.
‘There is nothing to fear.
Please, hurry up.
It is not proper to keep our beloved master waiting.’
‘I am not suitably attired,’ Lucien said.
The priest folded his arms and subjected Lucien to a slow head to foot inspection.
‘You look fine to me.
Still, your feet are bare.
Why not put your slippers on?’
Lucien's hands flew to his face.
‘I have no veil.’
‘You do not need one here.
Come along.’
‘Wait!’
Lucien hurried to the wardrobe where several garments were hanging up for his use.
He sorted through them in a numb panic.
Shirts.
Trousers.
Woollen tunics.
Nothing else.
No gloves, no veil.
In desperation, Lucien shrouded himself in an outdoor cloak, and wrapped a thin, fringed shawl, which had been left as decoration over a table under the window, round his head and face, tucking its corners carefully beneath the cloak's hood.
The priest Tavalouze stood looking at Lucien with a faint smile on his face, but said nothing.
Lucien found his insouciant manner both insulting and offensive, hardly correct behaviour for a priest of Ixmar.
Tavalouze led the way to Mandru's morning salon.
The family lived in the eastern side of the house, separated from the kitchens, laundry and servants quarters by a covered walkway that bridged the gardens.
Lucien could not see very far in front of himself because of the tablecloth over his face and was unaware of the bewildered and amused glances he  received from passing house staff.
Tavalouze said nothing but strode ahead of Lucien, his worn sandals slapping loudly against his feet and the marble flags of the corridor.
Lucien, keeping close behind, noticed that Tavalouze's robe was a little stained, and his hair was as unshaped and straggling as a beggar's.
He was surprised that the Mage Initiate, an elderly man who supervised the clerics of the household, had not chastised Tavalouze for his appearance.
The priests who'd officiated at Por Tanssie had been as neat as soldiers.
When Tavalouze and Lucien entered Mandru's salon, a Vibrancy was in progress.
Every morning, Mandru liked to indulge himself in religious spectacle, although the Ixmaritians all doubted whether this was inspired by faith and devotion.
His morning room overlooked a terrace, where foamy-plumed wading birds with long beaks stood proudly, if mindlessly, in a wide pool.
The room itself owed much to Ixibatabian fashion, being decorated in deep reds, terra cotta, and ochre yellow.
Brass lamps hung from the roof, which were unlit.
Light came through the stained-glass skylights, which were predominantly green and blue, and through a wall of windows of clear glass that held the faintest hint of turquoise.
The room was permeated by a fresh bitter odour of crushed fern, which combined pleasingly with a heady floral scent being exuded by fragranced fountains at the far end of the room.
The odours, the colour and quality of the light, the sound of falling water, combined to create an atmosphere of tranquillity and space.
In comparison, the human presences were bulky and intrusive.
To Lucien, the Vibrancy performance was a perverse travesty because the dance was accompanied by music — a flute and a couple of hand drums played by two young musicians sitting next to the windows.
Lucien immediately recognised the movements of the dance as being those of a classical piece: Paradouze being taught the sequences of the Vibrancy by His uncle, the cat-headed snake Smoobillow, a body of knowledge which Paradouze would later pass on to humankind.
Here, however, all similarity between the piece Lucien was familiar with and what he saw being performed before him ended.
In Por Tanssie, the vibrancers had always been instructed to keep a certain distance between them.
Sometimes, allusions to physical proximity were unavoidable, but  it was never, on any occasion, represented literally.
Here, however, the vibrancer taking the part of Smoobillow held Paradouze, who was being played by a girl, close against his body, shaping the young limbs into the correct movements.
Caringolat and the other tutors at Por Tanssie would surely have been stupefied by such a lewd spectacle.
Was Caringolat aware how the precise and fastidious sequences of the Vibrancy were being corrupted beyond Por Tanssie?
It still hadn't occurred to Lucien that more than likely Caringolat didn't care.
Reclining on the couch beside the long, gauze-veiled windows, Salaquin Mandru was watching the performance from heavy-lidded eyes.
Two servants were arranging his breakfast on a table to one side, while two other vibrancers sat on cushions in front of Mandru's couch, apparently discussing, or criticising, the performance.
Lucien was appalled by their indecency, their uncovered faces, their indecorous sprawling, their undisciplined laughter.
They were both male; Lucien recognised neither of them.
He only realised they were vibrancers by their costume, for their postures were lax and their hair, unlike the tidy short haircuts of Por Tanssie students, very long.
They appeared to be extremely familiar with the master of the house, for they demonstrated no obvious signs of respect for his person.
To Lucien, they were an insult to the Vibrancy; common and coarse.
Prim and disapproving inside his cloak and makeshift veil, Lucien directed his attention to Mandru himself.
Salaquin Mandru was an exhausted-looking man of early middle age, who had the kind of craggy face that becomes more attractive upon closer acquaintance.
He wore a heavy velvet robe of deepest crimson and indigo, trimmed with black fur.
Beneath it he wore black velvet leggings, and his feet were encased in black slippers, decorated with gold embroidery.
Lucien had already questioned his new friends extensively about the master.
He'd been told various stories that had supplied small but interesting details about Mandru's personality and private life.
Apparently, he never wore much jewellery, unlike the majority of nobles that visited him, but that which he did wear was of fabulously high value.
He'd sent both his children abroad to Ixibatae for their education, in order to please his wife.
Rumours suggested his  marriage was not the most harmonious.
Once Mandru had even been frank enough to remark to one of the vibrancers that the sound of Nehushtah's voice gave him a headache.
Lucien had also been warned that Mandru's liberal attitude towards his Ixmaritians was misleading; his demesne ran like a well-oiled machine, and he abhorred waste.
Laziness was punished, and persistent laziness prompted expulsion.
Mandru expected the best from his Ixmaritians and would sell one without a thought if they did not live up to his requirements.
Many of his acquisitions had eventually bored him and had been disposed of by auction, but the most accomplished and entertaining individuals were rewarded, once they became too old or unattractive to perform their requisite duties, by unconditional liberation from the household and a generous pension.
Even in his ignorance, Lucien saw at once that it was essential he make a favourable impression upon this man.
Lucien and Tavalouze remained near the door of the room until the Vibrancy was concluded.
Then, as the final genuflexions were being made, Mandru clapped his hands together once, and the vibrancers bowed to him in a solemn fashion, before running from his presence through a curtained doorway behind his couch.
The girl exited the room in a series of flamboyant somersaults, and the musicians stood up to follow her, their instruments tucked beneath their arms.
At this point, Tavalouze cleared his throat and announced in a clear voice, ‘My Lord Mandru.
May I present Lucien Earthlight, the new vibrancer from Por Tanssie.’
With a firm hand, he propelled Lucien forward.
The room had fallen uncomfortably silent except for the tinkling of the fountains.
Lucien kept his eyes lowered behind his substitute veil, striving to maintain a straight spine, but with his head bent forwards.
It was a posture of submission and respect.
He could feel the attention of strangers' eyes fixed upon him, and was glad of the veil.
Through a grille of lace, he studied the marquetry of the wooden floor.
A face, worked in subtle blocks, seemed to stare back at him.
There were lilies sprouting from its mouth.
It looked like someone being suffocated by flowers.
Was it supposed to represent that?
At least it provided somewhere for Lucien to anchor his attention.
Several muffled sounds came from Mandru's corner of the room, which could have been stifled laughter or exclamations of surprise.
‘Tavalouze.’
The voice was deep and stern, but held a note of humour.
‘Is this a prank?
What is this shuffling ghoul you present to me?
Do you desire to bring laughter to my breakfast table?’
Tavalouze's light voice came from behind Lucien's back.
‘by no means, my lord.
Laughter at breakfast is bad for the digestion.
I collected the boy from his room as you directed, and he saw fit to equip himself in a…presentable manner.’
Mandru laughed.
‘I see.
Boy, come closer!’
Tavalouze again pushed Lucien further into the room.
Lucien dared to raise his head.
Mandru was staring right at him, a wide smile stretching his face into ropes of muscle.
One of his teeth was silver.
‘Well, boy,’ he said, gesturing.
‘Show me.
Reveal to me the great secret.
It must be worth the revelation!’
One of the vibrancers at his feet uttered a faint laugh.
Lucien was unsure what Mandru meant by these remarks.
Was he supposed to perform a Vibrancy now?
Would it be incorrect to plead disability?
He wanted to do his best the first time he performed, and knew he was not in peak condition.
Also, the robe would be cumbersome.
Tavalouze sidled up behind him and said in a low voice, ‘Remove your hood, the veil.
Take it off.
He wants to see your face.’
‘But that's not possible,’ Lucien hissed back in alarm, as quietly as he could.
Tavalouze leaned closer to whisper cruelly in Lucien's ear, ‘Nothing that Mandru asks is impossible.
You'd best remember that, or it'll be the auction block for you pretty swiftly.’
Lucien made an anguished sound, prompting the priest to sigh.
He pinched Lucien's arm through his cloak.
‘Listen, you either do it yourself and preserve your precious dignity, or someone else will do it for you.
Take that ridiculous cloth off your head!’
‘A problem, Tavalouze?’
Mandru enquired delicately.
‘No, my lord,’ the priest answered.
‘The boy is coy.
Allow me to persuade him.’
He again whispered to Lucien alone.
‘Now, or I'll do it for you!’
He put his hand on the back of Lucien's neck in a threatening manner.
Ducking away from the contact, Lucien fumbled awkwardly with the fastenings to his hood.
He had never felt so ashamed.
In Por Tanssie, he had felt privileged, superior to the common herd of humanity.
In the presence of people who had not undergone religious training, his face, his body were sacred and should be revealed only during the course of the Vibrancy.
Now, he was having to unveil himself for nothing more than curious inspection.
He shook himself free of the hood and pulled the shawl off his head, his face burning in humiliation.
He dared not look Mandru in the eye.
He felt exposed and puny.
His head felt cold.
Mandru made a pronouncement.
‘Too pallid.
Have him taken into the sun at least once a day.’
Then, he turned aside and said to one of the vibrancers lounging against the legs of his couch, ‘Who purchased this one?’
‘Dorian,’ was the bored reply.
‘There could not have been much of a selection this time, then.
It's a pity the recommended individual commanded too high a price.
I should have anticipated it and upped my limit.’
‘If you are displeased, perhaps you could have this one sent back,’ the vibrancer said.
‘He is far from a beauty.’
Mandru laughed.
‘I could not be so cruel.
If they're not irretrievably addled, the puppies from Por Tanssie cut a sharp caper.
We'll give him a chance.’
During this exchange, Lucien decided Mandru's inspection must be over, and began to pull the hood over his head once more.
The remarks that had been made about him were confusing.
He wondered how he could have displeased the man as he'd yet to perform for him.
Before he could conceal himself again, Mandru's voice came across the space between them.
‘Make it known we have no shrouded corpses in this house!’
The remark was presumably addressed to Tavalouze.
Lucien lowered his hands.
Was Mandru disappointed with him because of his face, his appearance?
What was wrong with it?
How could it possibly be important?
Lucien had never before considered how much appearances could mean.
He had never been encouraged to think about the way he looked, other than to keep his body fit for the Vibrancy.
His vanity had been trained only in certain directions.
He was desperate to escape this appalling interview.
None of the  women he had met in Mandru's house had made him feel ugly.
They liked him, they fussed over him.
What had he done wrong here?
One of the vibrancers stood up and sauntered behind Mandru's couch.
‘Is it worth seeing the rest, do you suppose?’
He had an abundant mane of yellow hair and a face and body of classical proportions.
Lucien presumed he was looking at something deemed beautiful.
He had to admit there was very little similarity between himself and this splendid creature.
‘Who can tell?’
Mandru replied.
‘If you want him disrobed, you should instruct him to move,’ said the vibrancer still sitting on the cushions.
‘Otherwise he will die of shame.’
His voice was deep but perfectly modulated; a voice of music, a chorister's voice.
His skin had an olive hue, signifying foreign blood, and his indecently long hair was very black, worn in a multitude of thin braids and confined at the back of his neck.
He leaned casually backwards against the couch, his knees raised.
His expression was calculating, perhaps cruel.
Under his gaze, Lucien no longer felt even faintly human.
Mandru made a short gesture in his direction.
‘I've no time for that now,’ he said.
‘I want to see him,’ said the vibrancer standing behind the couch.
Mandru turned to look at him.
‘Are you requesting a favour?’
The yellow-haired vibrancer shrugged.
‘I was thinking of your entertainment alone, my lord.’
Mandru grinned, and tapped the seated vibrancer on the shoulder.
‘You show us,’ he said.
The dark vibrancer turned his head.
‘Me?
Whatever for?’
‘Are you questioning my order?’
Mandru asked.
The vibrancer stood up.
‘That, as you are aware, is beyond me.’
He made a silky genuflexion at the couch.
‘For your pleasure,’ he said.
The yellow-haired vibrancer leaned forward.
‘As the brat will be touched by your hands, Res, the pleasure can only be his.’
Mandru made a sound of irritation.
‘Don't torture the lad.’
Terrible dread rose up within Lucien.
He knew these people planned something terrible, although in his ignorance  and confusion he had not grasped entirely what.
The dark-haired vibrancer strode lightly across the intervening space, pausing before Lucien and shaking his head.
He looked Lucien in the eyes only once.
There was no expression of reassurance in his gaze; it was utterly cold.
Lucien had unconsciously drawn up his hands to his chest.
He could only whisper one word.
‘Don't.’
The vibrancer ignored the word.
He took hold of the collar of Lucien's shirt and pulled hard so that the soft fabric ripped like parchment.
Lucien cringed.
He could not bear this violation.
Some harsh, agonised sounds must have come out of him.
The dark-haired vibrancer pulled the shirt down past Lucien's shoulders and stepped back, gazing at a point beyond Lucien's shoulder, perhaps at the priest behind.
‘Is that all?’ called the yellow-haired vibrancer, with a laugh.
‘Yes.
That's all,’ the other replied.
‘Stand straight, boy!’
Mandru snapped at Lucien.
‘Let me have a look at you.’
Tears had come to Lucien's eyes.
Showing emotion in such a way doubled his shame.
He could not believe what was happening to him.
Tavalouze poked him between the shoulder blades until he straightened up.
There was no further admonishment.
‘Actually he has a good neck,’ Mandru said.
‘Yes, the lines are clean.
Perhaps even pleasing.
Shame about the hair.
Do they have to hack them about like that?’
The dark-haired vibrancer moved back to the couch and sat down on the floor again.
‘You called me a dog the first time you saw me,’ he said.
‘Don't you remember?
A partly shaved dog!’
‘This one does not look like a dog,’ Mandru said.
‘No,’ agreed the yellow-haired vibrancer.
‘A mouse perhaps?’
Mandru waved a finger at Lucien.
‘Mind you, like this they are a challenge.
I like to see them bloom.’
He smiled.
‘Cover yourself, boy, don't stand there so wretchedly.
No one 's going to hurt you.’
Lucien found the torn edges of his shirt and with trembling fingers pulled it up over his shoulders.
‘Come here,’ Mandru said, beckoning Lucien over to the couch.
‘Are you really afraid?’
Lucien felt he should not answer in the affirmative.
He shook his head.
‘I'm glad of that.’
Mandru leaned back on his couch and made an expansive gesture to include his vibrancers.
‘They have teased you,’ he said.
‘Don't mind it.
They do it to everyone.’
‘I don't mind, my lord,’ Lucien said in a small voice.
Despite his humiliation, he was desperate to earn some measure of approval.
‘See, it can speak,’ Mandru said.
He indicated the table of food beside the couch.
‘Now, the ordeal is over, and you can share breakfast with us.’
Lucien could imagine nothing worse than trying to eat in front of these people.
He knew he'd be sick.
He wished one of his female friends were here.
He had no allies in this room.
‘Tavalouze, you are always hungry,’ Mandru said.
‘Come and join us.
I want to hear about your trip to Gallimaufry.
Did you catch a glimpse of the venerable Archimage?’
Tavalouze marched forward and gracelessly threw himself down on the cushions.
He immediately began to help himself to the food.
‘No, I'm afraid not,’ he said.
‘Although I did watch the Ten in session from the visitors’ gallery.’
‘Fascinating!’
Mandru said, and everyone laughed.
Lucien felt he had been forgotten.
A serving girl gave him a plate of fish and eggs, which he stirred with a fork, but did not eat.
No one noticed.
Far from calming down, his heart had begun to beat faster.
When could he escape?
It seemed inconceivable that he was of the same race as the two vibrancers sitting near him; inconceivable, too, that they shared his art.
And their appearance must be what was considered beautiful.
Could he ever be like that?
Was it even necessary?
The dark-haired vibrancer caught him staring and gave him a withering look.
He oozed an air of power and confidence.
‘You are not a slave,’ Lucien thought.
‘You never have been.’
Eventually, the meal was concluded and Mandru stood up, prompting everyone else to do the same.
He touched the shoulder of the yellow-haired vibrancer and directed a short glance at Lucien.
‘I look forward to seeing you perform,’ he said.
‘I will do my best for you,’ Lucien said.
He could see that  this remark pleased Mandru.
It seemed speaking when you felt like it was a way to gain approval.
Mandru smiled and nodded, and preceded his entourage from the room.
Only Tavalouze and Lucien remained.
‘Can you find your own way back?’
Tavalouze asked, and then answered his own question.
‘Oh, probably not.
Come along.
I'll take you.’
Lucien hesitated.
‘The one who touched me, who was he?’
‘Don't think about that,’ the priest replied.
‘Mandru's favourites like to let everybody know their position, that's all.
I've seen them do that many times.
You were lucky though.
They didn't strip you naked.
I've seen that, too.’
‘What was his name?’
Lucien asked.
Now that the experience was over, he felt dazed and light-headed.
The priest shrugged.
‘Resenence,’ he said.
‘Resenence Jeopardy.’
‘Did you fall in love with him then?’
Walterkin asked.
‘With who?’
Lucien stood up and walked to the front edge of the roof.
His leg pained him, a memory of pain.
It was nearly daylight.
A low pall of smoke hung over the nearby buildings; there had been a dawn funeral, a burning.
Lucien could smell only incense.
‘Resenence Jeopardy,’ said the boy.
Lucien shook his head.
‘No.
He held a prominent position in the household.
It was suspected he serviced both the master and the mistress in their chambers.
It was probably true.’
He limped to the side of the roof and looked down into the yard.
‘Was he already a prophet then?’
Lucien turned round.
Walterkin had a mischievous expression on his face.
Sometimes, it seemed as if he knew every detail of this story already.
A startling realisation came to Lucien.
‘You've met him, haven't you?’
‘Was he already a prophet then?’
Walterkin repeated, ignoring Lucien's question.
Lucien made an impatient gesture.
‘The gift of prophecy is not generally something you simply acquire.
You either have it or you don't.
Jeopardy was an actor then, I suppose.
He scorned religion.’
‘What changed him?’
Lucien wanted to say, ‘I did,’ but he knew that wouldn't be, couldn't be, true.
He shrugged.
‘The potential for what he became must have been in him all the time.’
He paused.
‘Walterkin, you must tell me.
Have you met him?’
Walterkin dropped his gaze.
He shrugged.
‘I have seen him,’ he said.
‘Lots of people in Gallimaufry have.’
‘That's not what I mean.
You know it isn't.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Walterkin said.
‘I have nothing to tell you.
Nothing to give in return.
I'm sorry.’
Lucien walked to the front edge of the roof again, looked down into the street.
‘I did not expect it,’ he said.
POISON
It is a dolorous thing for a paladin to lose his faith, for it is his faith, more than his physical strength, which sustains such a man.
It is the solid tower into which he can flee at any time for sanctuary.
To lose it is to become homeless in a world that is suddenly alien and hostile.
Dauntless Javelot, paladin of the Order of True Valiance, had been trying to deny that his faith was dying.
‘It is only a passing melancholy,’ he told himself.
‘A delusion, a distraction, a temptation, a lie.’
He rode through an ancient forest alone.
There was no one to contradict him.
At one time, the Order of True Valiance had been a strong and powerful body of men, slaves to no one and nothing.
But that had been a long time ago.
Now it was simply a staggering movement, paying lip service to Ixmarity, cravenly begging permission to exist, and then buying that permission.
Their god was not the god of Ixmarity, or any of his relatives.
Their god was True Valiance, a splendid celibate of noble brow and sturdy limb, whose destiny was to seek out injustice in the world and restore what was lawful and proper.
In the past, when warring factions had been rife on the island, families of breeding had automatically sent at least one son to train in the Halls of Valiance in the western region of Gleberune and, as a consequence, generous donations had showered into the Valiance coffers.
Then the Glebes had come to the island, the petty tribal squabbles had been  quelled, and Ixmarity established as the major religion.
Valiance did not belong in Ixmar's pantheon.
Although its voluntary recruits diminished, the order had managed to limp on for nearly two centuries under Ixmarity's watchful eye.
The Church viewed it with derision rather than suspicion.
But then, nearly twelve years ago, a young and ambitious deacon in the Church militia had decided to further his career by carrying out a survey of all small cults in Gleberune.
The name of that deacon was Wilfish Implexion.
Dauntless had been a young boy then, newly recruited into the order and eager to prove himself worthy.
He could remember Implexion coming to the Valiance Redoubt, a sardonic and mocking personality.
It was known that Implexion had been responsible for the dissolution of many sects in Gleberune, and that he would resort to violence if his injunctions were not obeyed.
The Grand Masters of Valiance argued long into the night with Implexion and his staff, claiming that Valiance should not be viewed as a rival religion, but simply as a fellowship that promoted justice for the weak and helpless.
Implexion eventually gave in to the Grand Masters' begging and pleading and, for a fee, agreed to present Valiance's case to the Chamber of Ten.
The outcome of this magnanimity was that True Valiance was allowed a doubtful annex to Ixmar's pantheon, instated as a squire to one of Ixmar's sons.
This concession cost the order ten per cent of its yearly income.
The income itself was not grand by any standard.
Donations had foundered.
Nowadays, the only noble families who sent sons to the Valiance Redoubt were those who had formerly  espoused faiths other than Ixmarity and were now, under the ever-expanding rule of the Church, so impoverished by Ixmaritian tithes they were desperate to offload children in any direction.
Most income came from the hiring out of paladins as mercenaries in territorial disputes.
It was an ignoble end to a once splendid venture.
Dauntless found it hard to maintain his belief, or indeed suspend his disbelief, in what he was doing.
And what was he doing anyway?
At the direction of his lance master, he had been patrolling the ancient forest of Haling Heart, south of Scaraby, for three seasons and had found no quests with which to occupy himself, never mind accrue funds for the order.
Before he could return to the  Redoubt, he would have to earn an income deemed acceptable to the Lance master and his treasurer.
Dauntless cursed the ballot through which he had been burdened with this particular region to patrol.
Nobody lived in the forest but hewkins, charcoal-burners, gypsies and deranged vagabonds, who were probably discarded bastards.
None of these could afford to hire him, even had they needed his services.
Dauntless had been forced to live off berries and the flesh of rabbits.
His horse, formerly a destrier of statuesque proportions, had become a spindly nag beneath him, undernourished, and in need of corn.
He himself had acquired a cadaverous appearance; a shrinking manikin within his leather and steel-scale carapace.
Sometimes, the leering face of Wilfish Implexion came back to haunt him.
Dauntless blamed Implexion for his circumstances.
A heartless, power-hungry dolt who had no grasp whatsoever of what chivalry meant had brought the order to its knees, reduced its paladins to figures of ridicule.
How Dauntless hated that man.
When, three years ago, news of Implexion's investiture into the Chamber of Ten had come to the Redoubt, Dauntless had locked himself in one of the private chapels for two days.
He had fasted and prayed, desperately seeking the answer to why men such as Implexion succeeded in life, at the expense of others, and noble men such as Dauntless's peers and superiors were doomed to failure.
Eventually coaxed from his seclusion by his lance master, Dauntless confessed his doubts and disillusionment.
The master had replied that success or failure in life had little to do with whether people were good or bad.
It had to do determination and persistence.
He also added drily that religion could be used as a tool of control if sufficient political and financial power was behind it.
Dauntless's faith had begun to founder then.
No matter how long the lance master lectured him about truth to oneself, inner nobility and purity, the words seemed hollow in the light of his first remarks.
Those were the words that stuck in Dauntless's brain.
Now, Dauntless had no hope.
Maybe he would continue to ride pointlessly around the forest of Haling Heart until he died in the saddle, and maybe even then he would still ride pointlessly around.
Sometimes, he wondered whether he might have died already and not realised it.
Perhaps the only thing that kept Dauntless Javelot from perishing of dreariness and despair was the fact that no matter how long he rode through the forest, he never seemed to visit the same place twice.
The rational part of his mind knew this could not be the case, and that it was most likely he'd been travelling in circles.
Sometimes, he would catch glimpses of wonderful things through the trees: silver wolves slipping like fluid between the gnarled trunks, their eyes the blue of an early autumn sky; hewkin maidens of astounding loveliness dancing in a spotlight of moonbeams, curling their slim green hands towards him in bird-like gestures; ghost children with berry-red faces and tomb-black eyes, laughing down at him from high branches.
These revelations never failed to lift his spirits, if only temporarily.
In optimistic moments, he liked to think the forest itself was concerned for him and keeping him alive.
When he saw the black-haired woman sitting beside the stream, he thought at first she was simply another ephemeral vision transmitted by the trees.
He was sure that as he approached her image would waver and fade.
He had been following the narrow forest path downhill for some leagues, the trees soaring ever taller overhead, so that the sunlight came down in muted bars between the leaves.
The calls of the birds seemed very far away, high above the gloom of the forest floor.
Here, nothing grew except needle-like blades of sparse grass, which made Dauntless's horse curl back his lips and roll his eyes when he'd tried to eat it.
Pale, bulbous knobs of fungi clinging to the tree trunks exuded a sticky scent and a faint suggestion of phosphorescence.
Dauntless had seen nothing remotely intriguing for hours; this was not one of the most attractive areas he'd travelled through.
Then, he had become aware of a gout of light pouring down through the trees, and an ache of green against his eyes.
The forest path had widened into a grassy glade, a fairy haunt no doubt, and probably dangerous to lone travellers.
A silvery thread of water cut through the forest lawn, a gambolling secret between high narrow banks.
And sitting on the edge of this stream, embraced by the mellow light, was a female creature, who could have been human or fairy or perhaps neither.
As the paladin approached, however, the woman appeared undeniably solid and real.
She was sitting with her back to  him, and did not turn round even though she must have heard the sound of horse's hooves on the hard pebbled path behind her.
An old rusty-coloured wool coat, a pair of battered black boots, ragged black woollen stockings and a worn leather bag lay on the ground beside her.
Matted black hair covered her back like a shawl.
Her feet were plunged into the water.
Dauntless Javelot was no callow youth and had learned, through sour experience, that it was not always prudent to approach strangers found in desolate spots.
However, he cared little about his life at this time, and it was possible that this lone female might be in need of courteous assistance.
He did not think about how certain dreadful fates do not encompass death, though death would be a welcome release from such destinies.
His horse, Contralto, was dazedly looking around himself, as if wondering whether the grass covering his fetlocks was real or illusory.
Dauntless dismounted and loosened the saddle.
Still the woman did not turn round.
Dauntless shambled over to the edge of the stream and threw himself face down on the grass, cupping handfuls of water and throwing it over his head, gulping it greedily.
‘Sir,’ said a voice, ‘in your place, I would have refreshed myself some inches upstream from my feet, for I have been walking in these boots for months, and the juice flowing away from me cannot be sweet.
Or is it your intention to drink my soil?’
Dauntless's dark wet hair was hanging over his eyes.
He looked at the woman through a shimmering haze.
She was twisting a hank of hair between the fingers of her hands, her stained and torn crimson skirts hoiked up over her knees.
She had the face of a cat or a witch, but although she was smiling at him in a queerly macabre way, she looked exhausted and forlorn.
Dauntless found he was having trouble remembering how to speak.
The woman sighed.
‘Am I to expect ravishment now, or something similar?
Please don't kill me, for I have things to do.’
At these words, Dauntless was driven to spring to his feet, his body automatically recalling how to sweep a magnificent bow.
‘Madam, I am a paladin of True Valiance.
You have  nothing to fear from me, in any respect.
My life is dedicated to honour and justice.’
‘I am relieved to hear it,’ said the woman.
‘Have you anything to eat?’
Dauntless shook his head.
‘No, but perhaps in this spot I might find wildlife to slay.’
‘Hmm.’
The woman twisted her mouth to the side in an expression of some scepticism, and glanced narrowly at the horse that was gratefully cropping the grass around them.
‘I never expected travelling on foot to be so arduous,’ she said.
‘So comfortless, so time-consuming, so fruitless.
How big the world is!
I feel as if I have been wandering through this forest for an eternity, and it is some days since I have found anything to eat.
Hunger, I find, is not a condition to relish, and there was me thinking I had a small appetite.
Forgive me, sir paladin, but at this point I am contemplating eating your animal alive.’
‘A pointless exercise.
He carries little meat.’
‘Neither do you, it seems.’
She smiled again, a fierce, desperate expression.
Dauntless reviewed his feelings about imminent death.
Perhaps it would be a release to suffer extinction at the teeth of this woman.
She was not beautiful, and hardly fey as he had come to expect from the fair sex, but there was something undeniably compelling about her.
Perhaps she had been dropped onto his path on purpose.
Perhaps this was a test.
‘So where are you travelling to?’ he asked.
Did her unkempt condition preclude making a quest out of her?
It was doubtful she carried much money, but even so, could he possibly ignore a lady needing assistance?
The woman shrugged.
‘I am trying to reach the city of Gallimaufry.
I am looking for someone — at least, that was the original intention.
Now…’
She sighed.
‘It seems impossible I'll ever find who I'm looking for.
Too many corners, too many paths.
And I am convinced this forest is enchanted; it leads a person in circles.’
Dauntless drew himself up to his full height, causing the woman to squint up at him.
‘Madam, I too have been a wanderer in these woods for some time.
However, perhaps if I were to concentrate my efforts on finding an emergent path for your good self, I would be successful.
My aim in life is  to serve.
Therefore, I would be honoured to offer you my assistance, my sword arm and a seat on the back of my horse.’
The woman stared at him for a few moments as she mulled over his offer.
Then, she nodded.
‘I suppose that will be all right.’
Dauntless felt a little chagrined she wasn't more impressed and grateful, but then he supposed he looked little other than a lunatic scrap himself at that moment.
‘I am Dauntless Javelot,’ he said, with another short bow.
‘It is beyond me to ignore a lady in distress.’
The woman took her feet out of the stream and dangled her arms between her upraised knees.
‘I am Cleo Sinister,’ she said.
‘Your offer is charitable; at least I hope so.
I cannot afford to pay you.’
Cleo wished now that she hadn't visited the mad woman.
It had seemed an expedient course of action at the time, as she'd waited there in her kitchen, in the late afternoon dark, for Wakelate and his client to return to the house.
The child's corpse must have been loaded onto some form of transport that had been waiting beyond the yard.
Soon, Cleo thought, Wakelate and his client would return so that their business could be concluded, and a measure of liquor shared, as was the custom in Wakelate's house.
Presently, she was alerted by the sound of hushed male voices in the yard below.
She heard someone blow their nose loudly, and a wheedling complaint followed.
She could not make out the words, but knew instinctively they'd been uttered by the uncle of her child.
Wakelate came into the kitchen and Cleo, still standing stiffly by the sink, watched him turn on the gas of one of the wall lamps.
‘It is dark,’ he said, needlessly.
Cleo said nothing, only hugged herself tighter.
Wakelate applied a sizzle stick to the sibilant huffing of the gas.
Funereal light bloomed in the room.
Wakelate examined Cleo's tense posture with apparent embarrassment, and then blew out the sizzle stick with a mournful expression.
He shrugged at her.
‘Where is that man?’ she demanded.
‘Bring him in!
He needs attention.’
Wakelate did not bother to conceal his surprise at this request.
Normally Cleo avoided his customers after her first inspection.
‘He is using the privy,’ he said.
Cleo sighed heavily and turned to face the window.
Wakelate left the room, and Cleo heard him making gruff remarks through the privy door on the landing outside.
Shortly, he accompanied the dead child's uncle back into the kitchen.
The man had to be supported by Wakelate's arm; he appeared almost witless with grief, turning a wide-brimmed hat in his hands.
Cleo narrowed her eyes at him in approximation of a sympathetic glance, although in her heart she felt no pity at all.
She found the man's weakness incomprehensible.
Should Ixmarity have demanded a relative of hers to torture and kill, she'd have hidden them, helped them run away.
No one could tell her what to do!
And yet, despite his obvious distress, this man had not even tried to save his nephew other than, through his lamentable dithering, allowing the poor child a few more days of life.
This same dithering had also damaged Cleo irrevocably.
It had allowed her to form an attachment to the child, an attachment doomed to ruin; she could never forgive that.
Wakelate settled the man into a chair and brought out a dusty bottle of valerian wine.
It was mind-numbingly potent and generally only used by the Sinisters to calm hysterics.
‘You cannot give him that,’ Cleo said sharply.
‘How will he get home tonight?’
‘My dove, we can offer him accommodation,’ Wakelate responded.
He was not often prone to unbusinesslike displays of compassion, but when the spirit of charity took hold of his heart, he became unsuitably ferocious in his generosity.
Sometimes Cleo wondered how he'd ever managed to make such a lucrative living as a poisoner.
‘Stay here?’
Cleo cried.
‘Totally inappropriate!
This poor creature should be back with his family who undoubtedly need him at this dreadful time.’
‘I should, I should,’ the man agreed, raising his head from his hands.
His grief was undeniably genuine.
‘There, you see?
Bring out the brandy.
That will do.’
Wakelate nodded glumly and made a new excursion into the pantry.
‘You are kind, madam, kind,’ said the grieving uncle, wiping his eyes and blowing his nose into a huge silk handkerchief.
‘I know you cared for the boy yourself.’
‘What was his name?’
Cleo asked.
‘I called him Inky, but now I would like to know his real name.’
‘She called him Aspirant,’ said the man, shaking his head and stuffing his handkerchief back into the pocket of his coat.
‘She always had hope.’
Cleo sat down opposite the man and laced her hands neatly on the table.
She watched him carefully as Wakelate brought in the brandy and poured out a generous measure.
The man appeared to have regained a certain amount of composure.
He nodded politely to Wakelate and took the glass of brandy with a crooked little finger.
He drained the measure in one gulp.
‘So, what will you do now, Mr…?’
Cleo hesitated and smiled widely.
‘Please, give me a name.
We have shared much together these last few days.
I would like to address you personally.’
The man flicked a glance at Wakelate, who stood behind Cleo's chair.
He must have made some assuaging gesture.
‘You may call me Banyon,’ he said.
Cleo nodded.
‘Thank you.
Be assured of my discretion.
However, to my question: will your family be safe from the Church once you have given them Inky's — Aspirant's body?’
The man did not respond for a while, but pressed his fingers firmly into his eye sockets.
‘Well?’
Cleo prompted.
Banyon sighed and raised his head.
‘We can only hope that Implexion's agents will be appeased by our offer, although it is likely we will still be penalised for failing to furnish them with a living child.
’ He shook his head dismally and held out his glass for Wakelate to refill it.
‘Yet, oh sweet Ixmar, no penalty will be too high!
I could not let the boy suffer.’
‘What of the mother?’
Cleo asked.
She envisaged a spoiled, pampered woman, whose sole concerns were those connected with her own safety.
There would be tears, yes, but how many for the child?
Banyon shrugged, his body shuddering with another dismal sigh.
‘It is hard to tell,’ he said.
‘Alas, it will always be hard to tell.’
Cleo frowned.
‘What do you mean?’
Banyon pulled a face to indicate distaste.
‘She has not been…with us , in the proper sense, since she returned to  Scaraby.
Her mind is still with Jeopardy.
It always will be.’
‘Then why did she come back at all?’
Cleo demanded.
The man's face hardened.
‘We do not know!
She cannot tell us!
By Ixmar, if I knew the scoundrel's whereabouts, I'd have his guts!
It is clear to all of us that he must have discarded poor Lina…’
He hesitated, realising he had unwittingly released another name.
Cleo stared at him blandly.
‘He must have used her,’ Banyon continued.
‘What a scoundrel!’
He glanced at Wakelate.
‘The Church should arrest him.
I made my displeasure on that score quite clear to the ecclesiarch's agent.
If the wretch wasn't free to have his way with helpless women, then tragedies such as ours would not occur.
Who is it that takes the burden of grief?
Him?
Most certainly not!’
Banyon shook his head in weary disbelief.
‘Surely your sister must know where Jeopardy is,’ Cleo suggested.
Banyon eyed her fiercely.
Obviously that had occurred to him too.
‘If she does, she cannot, or will not say.’
‘Perhaps she feels loyal to the man,’ Cleo said.
Her remark seemed to agitate her guest.
‘She is quite beyond any such feeling,’ he said.
‘Jeopardy has ruined her.’
‘How has he ruined her?’
Cleo insisted.
‘It was her choice to run away with him, and her choice to return here.’
‘She was bewitched!’
Banyon declared.
Behind Cleo's chair, Wakelate made a few pitiful noises of social discomfort that Cleo ignored.
‘Have you evidence of that?’
She shook her head.
‘No, I don't think you have.
You said yourself you don't know what happened to her.
It could be anything.’
She sat up straight.
‘I would like to meet her myself.
Perhaps she would talk to me.’
‘Impossible!’
Banyon pushed his glass away from him so sharply, it fell over and spilt a small pool of brandy on the table.
‘Cleo, my dove, you know that is impractical,’ Wakelate said in a low voice.
‘Why?’
Cleo demanded.
‘Because we live in the Burrows and are not fit company for the rich people uptown?
Because this man here does not want to admit he knows the likes of us?’
Her eyes had become very dark.
‘Your sister's son spent his last days with me.
Have you no thought of her feelings?
She might want to speak to me!’
Banyon stood up so hastily his chair fell over behind him.
‘I  no longer wish to discuss this matter with you,’ he said.
‘Come, Mr Sinister, we must conclude our business.
I am anxious to return home.
What is the balance of your account?’
Wakelate turned away.
‘None.
Take your leave, sir.
There is no further charge.’
Banyon made an anguished sound and, after burrowing in his coat pocket, threw a handful of coins onto the table.
‘You are generous, sir, but I have no wish to be in your debt.’
He glanced at Cleo coldly and pulled on his hat.
‘Good night to you both.’
After he'd left the room, it filled up with a stressful silence.
Cleo stared at the scattering of coins.
They gleamed gold in the lamplight.
‘My dear,’ Wakelate said, after a few minutes, ‘I know you are stricken with grief, but I fear you overstepped propriety just then.’
He had obviously been searching for appropriate words of censure during the silence.
Cleo hissed in reply, stood up quickly and marched up to her bedroom, slamming the door behind her.
The blood in her veins seemed to be singing in fury.
She would not be denied her wishes.
Lying in bed, wearing most of her clothes, Cleo listened to Wakelate activating his squeaking floorboard.
They had both retired to their rooms very early.
A mindless litany repeated itself endlessly in her mind: ‘Find Jeopardy, find Jeopardy.’
Despite the almost annoying quality of their persistence, the words had a certain romantic ring that appealed to her.
She wished she could fulfil her search for this singular man from her bed, by the power of her mind alone.
If she concentrated hard enough, would she feel his presence out there in the world?
Her own world did not extend far beyond the boundaries of the Burrows; central Scaraby was still largely alien territory to her.
However, because of what had happened during the last few days, she knew she could not simply let this matter fade from her mind.
With the death of the child, she felt that a cycle of her life had rolled to its conclusion, yet she was unsure of how to address the new beginning.
In such a short time, she had become obsessed with the idea of Resenence Jeopardy.
Was it possible she'd somehow inherited mad Lina's dementia through the beautiful eyes of her child?
This unseen woman was almost as fascinating to Cleo as  Jeopardy himself.
Was she a rare and special creature, some fabulous beauty, of whom Jeopardy had been fond, or had she simply been a vessel for his seed?
What exactly was this Cult of Jeopardy?
Cleo was convinced her search for the holy man should begin with the mad woman who had borne his child.
First, of course, Cleo had to find her.
Supposing that Banyon had given his real first name, and that of his sister, a few enquiries should produce results.
Cleo could perhaps use one of her old contacts in the city, one of the young men whose ardour she had inflamed.
Eventually, Cleo heard the sound of Wakelate's boots hitting the floor, followed by a complaint from his bedsprings.
He cleared his throat a few times and groaned like an aged dog in pain.
No other sounds were forthcoming.
Presently, Cleo was able to discern the rattle of gentle snoring coming from the adjoining room.
She eased herself slowly from the bed.
Over the years, she'd kept back a portion, every week, of the money Wakelate gave her to buy food at the market.
This small act of concealment had partly stemmed from the fact that she herself had never had money.
The knowledge that a fat bag of coins was hidden among her stockings in the top drawer of her dresser gave her a cosy feeling of security.
She also had an irresistible urge to deceive Wakelate and get away with it whenever she could, even though such deceptions were very easy to accomplish.
In matters concerning his domestic life, Wakelate was notoriously sightless.
Cleo had never really thought about how she might spend the money, other than considering it to be insurance against the unlikely events of Wakelate either casting her off or dying and leaving her penniless.
There was another collection of pilfered items secreted in Cleo's stocking drawer, of which Wakelate was unaware.
These were a dozen or so stoppered glass bottles containing a selection of Wakelate's most virulent and inventive poisons.
He never kept a catalogue of his stock, so it had been easy for Cleo to pour out a generous measure from each flagon on the upper shelf in Wakelate's workroom.
She kept them in a black velvet bag and would occasionally take them out, when Wakelate was busy, to stand them in the sunlight.
She liked to look at the dreadful toxins through the jewelled prison of their coloured glass bottles: ruby red, peridot green, indigo  blue.
Sometimes she had to fight an urge to unstopper one of the bottles and press the deadly lip of glass to her mouth.
It was the same feeling as that experienced when standing at the edge of an enormous drop and the desire to jump seems overpowering.
Cleo took the velvet poison bag and the money pouch out of her drawer, together with a handful of stockings, and stuffed them into an old leather holdall in which she'd formerly kept a collection of limbs, torsos and heads from broken porcelain dolls.
Tonight, she would leave her husband and the tall house in the Burrows.
Tonight, she would begin her search for Resenence Jeopardy.
She was not frightened by the enormity of her plan.
Despite her relative inexperience of the world, she was prepared to face its terrors alone.
Anyway, she had long been bored.
It was time for a change.
As she crept from her room and edged slowly down the stairs — avoiding the most creaky — she put from her mind any thought that Wakelate might follow her.
He would miss her when she'd gone, certainly, and it was not impossible that he might be driven to drink away his grief, resulting in one of his rare fits of violent temper.
She preferred not to consider what might occur should he find her again during one of these fits.
Creeping past Dame Kleetie's door and fleeing like a shadow across the yard, Cleo opened the gate and stepped out into the alley beyond.
As it was night, the Burrows was rustling with clandestine life.
As Cleo hurried down the alley, she was aware of furtive whisperings in the shadows, the grate of metal, panting breath, and once the sound of bare flesh being slapped.
There was a smell of burning fat in the air and, in the distance, the bray of raucous singing.
There was one particular youth whom she thought she might approach for information.
Lorimer De Belving was the youngest son of a family that considered the very finest blood of Scaraby coursed through their venerable veins.
She'd enjoyed a brief dalliance with Lorimer a few years earlier, after she'd met him at one of the receptions Wakelate had attended, incognito, on business.
Wakelate had been invited to the De Belving residence in order to inspect a potential candidate for poisoning — some obstructive colleague of the De Belving patriarch.
The nature of Wakelate's business necessitated that he and  his wife should blend in with the other guests.
This was not a requirement that rested easily with Cleo, who liked to show off, and while obeying Wakelate's orders to a certain degree, she always took pleasure in singling out a male at these dull gatherings, on whom to focus the power of her charms.
At the De Belvings', she'd levelled smouldering, smoky gazes at young Lorimer over a black feather fan, until he obeyed her wordless summons and approached her.
Then she pretended to be a mute — she always invented some oddness about herself when consorting with the preening rich boys of the city.
While her husband occupied himself with making mental notes as to his proposed victim's physical constitution and disposition of character, Cleo amused herself with Lorimer, communicating with him by pulling delightful impish faces and fluttering her hands.
Lorimer had been enchanted by her apparent demure silence and, later, following a particularly emphatic hand gesture on Cleo's part, had escorted her outside.
While Wakelate Sinister furtively discussed business with Lorimer's father in an inner office, Lorimer had gratefully coupled with Cleo up against one of the cold, marble statues that lined a colonnaded walk along the back of the house.
Cleo had subsequently met the young De Belving several times at a squalid inn on the outskirts of the Burrows in order to have sex with him on a greasy, flea-invested bed in an upper room.
As a lover, he had bored her, but she liked the idea of his having to steel himself to visit her in the filthy venue she had chosen for their affair.
She had ended their relationship by rediscovering the ability to speak and berating his sexual performance.
With flaming face and wilting manhood, Lorimer had furiously thrown money at Cleo where she lay upon the bed, her skirts up round her waist.
He'd called her a Burrows whore, a soulless hag.
But Cleo had only laughed at his insults, and later added the scornfully thrown coins to her collection in the stocking drawer.
She did not care that he'd called her a whore.
One thing that particularly attracted her to seeking his assistance now was that he, more than any of the other lily-skinned boys she'd seduced, had been terrified of his family discovering his stealthy dalliance with the poisoner's wife.
Cleo knew where the De Belving residence was.
She had an audacious plan in mind.
She left the rancid air of the Burrows behind and crossed the Hempelier Bridge of the River Utmost, which served as a boundary between the Burrows and Inner Scaraby.
Passing the imposing facade of Ixmar's wife Aufiria's fane, she hurried up the wide paved road that led to Candlegate, a rich area where she would find the De Belving estate.
Eventually, after walking along many avenues flanked by big houses and grand, white, marble wayside shrines, keeping her direction heading uphill, Cleo came to another wide bridge which was decorated with gilded wrought-iron curlicues.
This was Ladyfoot Span.
It crossed the River Carrow and led directly to the estates of the rich.
As she walked across it, Cleo gazed at the blaze of lights shining out from the imposing architectural piles that dominated the hills ahead.
This was a world that shunned her.
She crept through it like a cat, keeping to the shadows, avoiding anybody who might ask what her business was in this place.
The De Belving manse was more like a palace than a house, having an ostentatious spire at each corner from which flags bearing the family seals declared their status on the wind.
A heavily embroidered Ixmarite flag hung virtually lifeless from a pole in the centre of the roof, weighed down with gold thread.
This advertised the De Belving's favour-currying with the Church.
Cleo knew their sedate yet sumptuous soirées were always peppered with gourmand bishops.
The gardens surrounding the building were fussy and characterless, the statues of the colonnade representing dour-faced De Belving ancestors in shapeless robes.
As she approached the back entrance to the place, Cleo reflected that, even if she'd had the money, she would never want to live in a building like this.
There was nowhere, either inside or out, where a person could sprawl in comfort.
Every room was supervised by hideous paintings of humourless De Belvings and all the furniture seemed designed to inflict an ache upon the muscles of the human body.
It was no wonder, on reflection, that Lorimer had been so eager to spend time in Cleo's irreverent company.
It had undoubtedly been the only time he'd been able to relax.
Cleo marched up to the butler's door, which was slightly more grandiose than the servants' and tradesmen's entrances situated to either side, as it boasted the added splendour of  being reached by a flight of steps.
The bell pull had a brass handle polished lovingly to lustre.
The steps were neatly blacked, the wood of the door polished to a satin finish.
It advertised a character of fastidious and correct nature, someone whose collars would be uncomfortably starched.
Cleo mounted the steps and pulled smartly on the bell.
Very shortly, the door was opened by a maid whose uniform was as severe and stiff as the habit of a nun.
Her expression was pinched and tired.
Cleo asked to speak to the butler.
Her mission, she explained, was of the greatest delicacy and while she was loathe to broach the matter with the matriarch of the De Belvings, it was too serious to be discussed with anyone but the most trusted member of the household staff.
Reluctantly, the maid consented to request an audience for Cleo with the butler, Master Jobbernole.
From her expression, it appeared she had little faith that this august personage would oblige.
However, it seemed the news that a low-class woman had presented herself at the back door alerted Master Jobbernole to the possible reason for her presence and its consequences.
He responded to Cleo's summons with haste.
The man was as sleek as a seal, much as Cleo had expected.
Like many of his kind, he was cadaverous and nasal-voiced.
His long face was set in a lugubrious expression, and he had a slight squint owing to the length of his nose, which, to Cleo's eyes, was a veritable proboscis.
He invited her into one of his lesser parlours.
The house smelled of cooking meat.
Dinner would recently have been served.
Cleo knew that most of the noble families took their evening meal late.
Seeing no point in beating about the bush, she spoke directly.
‘My visit concerns Master Lorimer De Belving,’ she said.
The butler inserted a hooked finger into his collar, grimaced and huffed.
He obviously anticipated what was coming next.
‘In what manner, young woman?’
Cleo patted her belly.
‘I'm carrying his child,’ she said.
‘A circumstance which I doubt that his mother, the Lady Claudia, will greet warmly.’
‘I find it hard to believe Master Lorimer could be responsible for your condition,’ droned the butler.
‘Are you quite sure you are…accosting the right person?’
‘Quite sure,’ Cleo replied.
‘Ah, come on now, Master Jobbernole, you know what these young noblemen are like.
A quick fumble in a downtown tavern while they're drunk, with no thought about consequences.’
She then went on to describe certain physical attributes of Lorimer De Belving that would be known only to an intimate.
Jobbernole listened painfully to her remarks, but did not bother to make further enquiries.
Cleo concluded it was probably not the first time he'd had to deal with a situation like this.
‘You are asking for money, I suppose,’ he said frostily.
Cleo shook her head.
‘No, all I'm asking you for is a few moments of Master Lorimer's time.
If I have any further requests, I prefer to make them to him personally.
He will know me instantly.
Tell him that Cleo, the poisoner's wife, wishes to see him.’
Jobbernole could not prevent the raising of his eyebrows at that point.
Cleo could almost hear him thinking, ‘A poisoner's wife?’
‘I will see whether Master Lorimer is at home,’ he said.
‘Of course you must appreciate I cannot guarantee he will see you.’
‘Then, if that should be the case, perhaps you'd better mention my predicament to Lady Claudia,’ Cleo said.
The butler sniffed once and retreated, despising etched into every feature of his face.
After he'd gone, Cleo giggled to herself, and examined the room.
She stole a white porcelain cup, edged with gold, which was standing on a table beneath the window.
She did not bother stealing the saucer.
She was not sure what she would do if Lorimer refused to see her.
It was doubtful that Lady Claudia would furnish her with the information she needed, no matter how much the family reputation was at stake.
This was where an element of danger lurked.
Cleo had seen Lady Claudia on her previous visit and had recognised the woman instantly as a merciless tyrant to whom prestige and dignity meant more than legal rectitude.
Cleo knew it was not beyond Lady Claudia to have her neck wrung in order to remove any threat to the De Belving honour.
She would simply have to trust in Lorimer's dread of his mother.
The minutes passed, and Cleo began to feel edgy.
Would Jobbernole return with a brace of male servitors, throw her  into a sack and thereafter into the River Carrow?
Would she be taken out into the slaughter yard behind the servants' quarters and have her throat cut?
Horrible images assailed her mind.
She was on the point of fleeing from the building, and was in fact pressed up against the door, listening intently for any sounds outside, when footsteps approached rapidly.
Cleo only had time to jump backwards before the door opened.
There, looking older and puffier about the face than she remembered, was Lorimer De Belving.
He was alone.
‘Oh!’
Cleo exclaimed, and then managed to smile.
Lorimer did not return the expression.
He shut the door and stood with folded arms in front of her, a young man of handsome countenance, although already in the early stages of dissipated decay.
‘What is this, you filthy witch?’ he hissed.
‘You cannot possibly be pregnant with my child.
I haven't laid eyes on you in an age.
What do you really want?’
‘Very little,’ Cleo said.
‘Don't look so scared.’
She grinned.
‘I'm sure my presence is distressing for you, so I will keep this meeting brief.
I need to know where I can find a woman who has recently returned to her family after having run away with a man called Resenence Jeopardy.’
Lorimer barked an unconvincing laugh.
‘How, by Ixmar's eyes, should I know the answer to that?
How dare you come here like this!
If I give you money, will you go away?’
‘Lorimer, please listen,’ Cleo said patiently.
‘This woman is named Lina.
She is from a noble family.
She has a brother named Banyon, a middle-aged man, fat and fair-haired.
They've recently had trouble with the Ixmariters, concerning a child.’
Cleo saw a stealthy expression of recognition cross Lorimer's face.
‘I've never heard of these people,’ he said with feeble conviction.
‘You are lying,’ Cleo replied.
‘Come now, Lorimer, you don't want unpleasantness.
Just tell me what I need to know.
Where does Lina live?’
Lorimer clawed his hair.
‘I cannot tell you.
It's obvious you mean them harm.’
Cleo shook her head.
‘No, you are absolutely wrong.
It is vital I speak to Lina.
It was I who cared for her murdered child through his last days.’
‘You?’
Realisation dawned and his mouth stretched into an unpleasant smile.
‘You mean the Salamancas had their nephew poisoned ?’
‘You don't need to know about that,’ Cleo said, but she could see she'd caught his interest.
This was clearly interesting gossip.
‘Salamancas…
Where is their estate?’
Lorimer sauntered across the room and sat down on a chair by the butler's fire.
He was still grinning like a fox.
‘You tell me what you know about them, and I'll return the favour,’ he said.
‘Lorimer, I'm in a hurry!’
He shrugged.
‘Play fair, Mistress Sinister.’
‘All right.’
She knew she was violating Wakelate's code of practice in the worst possible way, but absolved herself by remembering that her need was great.
Lorimer listened avidly to all she said.
He laughed out loud at the end of her story.
‘What a tragedy!’ he exclaimed, gleefully rubbing his hands together.
‘We'd heard of Lina's return, of course, although they tried to keep it quiet.
And there was rumour of a child and Ixmarite interest.
Well!
This is news indeed!’
‘Where are they?’
Cleo asked.
Lorimer pointed behind him with his thumb, out of the window.
‘Their estate lies next to ours,’ he said.
‘You have only to hop over the wall to reach them, supposing their dogs don't get you.’
‘Take me to her,’ Cleo commanded.
She was not unaware that Lorimer had warmed to her during her disclosures.
Lorimer laughed.
‘Me?
I think not, Mistress Sinister.
It would cause a scandal.
Come now, I've obliged your request.
Shall I give you coins as well?
The story was worth it!’
Cleo adopted an expression of appeal.
She brushed back her long black hair.
‘Lorimer, please!
Lina's family will not want her to see me, but I am quite convinced she herself would welcome my presence.
She has been treated sorely, Lorimer.
Her child has been taken from her and killed!
I had an affection for that child myself.
As a woman, I need to see her.
I'm sure she will feel the same.’
Lorimer guffawed loudly.
‘What is this?
Compassion from the stone-heart whore?
I must be dreaming.’
‘I have learned much since I last saw you,’ Cleo said, in  a small, contrite voice.
‘Perhaps I am not the person you remember.’
Lorimer eyed her intently for a few moments.
‘You are still a handsome minx, Cleo Sinister, I'll say that for you.
But you broke my heart once, crushed me into the dirt.
Can I ever forgive you that?’
Cleo blinked her huge dark eyes slowly.
She said nothing.
Lorimer sighed and slapped his knees.
‘Oh, I must be a madman!’ he declared.
‘But this might be an adventure, and further revelations from the lips of the Lady Lina would not be without reward!
Can you climb, Mistress Sinister?’
‘I can do whatever is necessary,’ she replied.
The meaning was not lost on Lorimer De Belving.
Lorimer and Cleo left the De Belving manse by the butler's door.
Lorimer had thrown a dark coat, belonging to Jobbernole, over his splendid indoor clothes in order to affect a certain measure of disguise.
He led Cleo through the kitchen gardens to the wall that separated the two estates.
Here, there was a door which was of course locked.
But because the servants of both households often had business with one another, Jobbernole possessed a key.
Lorimer had taken charge of this before he'd left the house.
The Salamanca estate was much more to Cleo's liking.
The gardens consisted of tree-lined walkways, and the statues gleaming pallidly in little grottoes along the way represented mythological figures, naked and half bestial.
‘What about the dogs?’
Cleo whispered.
‘They know me,’ Lorimer responded.
‘You are a frequent visitor, then?’
Cleo asked.
Lorimer shrugged.
‘I have…friends…among the staff here.’
‘Of course!’
By this time, the hour was getting late, and few lights burned in the windows of the Salamanca household.
It was a beautiful building, quite plain in design, but constructed of snowy-white stone.
It was approached by a shallow flight of steps on all sides, as if standing on a plinth.
Lorimer took Cleo round to the left side of the house, which was thickly covered in ancient ivy.
Balconies poked out through the burgeoning leaves.
Cleo was alert for any patrolling servant, but Lorimer  seemed oblivious to such hazards.
A trio of enormous hounds came bounding round the building, causing Cleo to gasp in alarm.
They barked loudly a few times, but Lorimer ran swiftly towards them.
‘Plato, Vesta, Rouen!’ he called, in a hissing voice.
In moments, they were snuffling at his thighs, jumping up with gleeful whines to lick his face.
Cleo hung back doubtfully.
She was always wary of dogs.
After placating the hounds, Lorimer jumped up onto the wall of the house with surprising agility and began to climb the ivy.
‘Lorimer!’
Cleo hissed.
He glanced down.
‘I said we would have to climb,’ he replied in a low voice.
‘Follow me!’
Cleo cast a dubious glance at the dogs who were all looking up at Lorimer with smiling, gaping mouths and wagging tails.
‘Won't we be heard?’
Lorimer uttered a disparaging sound, leaning down to talk to her, hanging onto the ivy with one hand.
‘Salamanca has cut back on its staff,’ he said.
‘Its mines are failing.
Inside this place, half the valuables have been sold.
There is little security.
Also, should someone come across me, they would remember how the De Belving coffers have assisted Salamanca in its affliction.
Eyes, I feel, would become mysteriously blind.
We are good neighbours.
Still, that is no reason for me to advertise my acquaintance with such as yourself.
We must be cautious and surprise Lady Lina in her chamber.
Come!’
With one last glance at the dogs, who mercifully ignored her, Cleo began to scramble up behind him.
She was cynically amused by the fact that Lorimer seemed so familiar with this form of ingress into the Salamanca manse.
The climb was intensely disagreeable.
Her ankles were scratched by the brittle ancient stems, her fingers scored.
Birds, nesting in the ivy, squeaked as she disrupted them.
Large spiders and segmented insects streamed ahead of her through the leaves, as if to escape attack.
Presently, Lorimer climbed over the edge of one of the balconies.
He stood looking down at Cleo, rubbing his sore hands.
‘I believe this is our destination,’ he said.
‘It is fortunate you are so intimate with the geography of this house,’ Cleo grunted, hauling herself up beside him.
Lorimer grinned and beckoned her over to the long windows.
The drapes were partly closed and a dim light could be  seen burning within.
The windows were opened slightly to admit fresh air into the room.
Lorimer poked his head inside and then boldly opened the windows further and stepped over the threshold.
Cleo, more cautiously, followed.
It was immediately apparent they were in a lady's room.
All the decorations were white and festoons of snowy lace-gushed from every appropriate appointment.
A large white bed dominated the room, and within it lay a porcelain-pale figure, propped up by banks of pillows, its shadowy eyes wide open.
This figure did not move as Cleo and Lorimer approached the bed.
The eyes did not even blink.
‘Lina?’
Lorimer murmured.
‘It is I, Lori.
Do you remember me?’
Cleo appraised the woman in the bed.
Her skin, like nearly everything else in the room, was ghostly white, yet strangely bruised along one cheekbone and about the neck.
Her hair, braided into a long plait which fell over one shoulder, looked dusty and lustreless.
Her lips, which were almost as pale as the rest of her face, were cracked and papery.
She wore a high-necked white nightdress.
In age, she was perhaps in her late twenties or early thirties, although as she was so thin and haggard, it was difficult to estimate with any certainty.
Lorimer took one of the motionless hands that lay outside the coverlet.
‘Oh, but Lina, you are ill,’ he said.
Cleo assumed he was shocked by the woman's appearance.
At his words, Lina Salamanca's body shuddered in the spasm of a monstrous sigh.
Her eyelids flickered, although she did not train their stare upon her visitors.
‘Who is that?’ she asked in a faint voice.
‘Is there someone there this time?’
Lorimer repeated his introduction, which provoked only a groan from the woman in the bed.
Cleo pushed her way forward.
‘Lina, my name is Cleo Sinister,’ she said in a businesslike tone.
‘Perhaps you have heard of me?’
Lina Salamanca frowned.
‘Who's there?’ she murmured, and her head turned restlessly upon the pillows.
‘Oh, is that a voice?’
‘Yes, Lina, it is,’ Cleo said baldly.
‘I've come to see you about your son, Aspirant.’
Lina gasped.
‘Aspirant!’
‘Yes, that's right.
I looked after him for a few days before he died.’
Lina uttered a faint wail.
‘Ah, dead, dead!’ she groaned.
‘Cleo,’ Lorimer interrupted, ‘perhaps it would be better to proceed more delicately.’
Cleo directed a hiss over her shoulder, and sat down on the bed.
‘Lina, listen to me.
I want you to tell me about Aspirant's father.’
‘Dead!
Dead!
I too am dead!’ the frail woman gasped.
‘No, you are not,’ Cleo corrected.
‘I know you can talk to me.
Tell me about Resenence Jeopardy.’
The sound of his name seemed to work like magic.
Lina turned her head to look at Cleo and a cunning intelligence stole into her eyes.
‘What about him?’ she snapped.
‘Where can I find him?’
The woman laughed.
‘Find him?
You can't.
No one can.
You'll never take him.
None of you!
Oh, put away your leather bar.
You'll not beat it from me.’
Cleo glanced round at Lorimer.
‘They beat her,’ she said.
‘Perhaps we should leave,’ he answered.
Cleo shook her head.
Pursing her mouth, she lifted Lina's limp hand in her own strong brown fingers.
‘Lina, I am not an Ixmarite.
Listen to me, listen.
My husband was the man commissioned by your brother, Banyon, to poison your son.
I did everything I could to save the boy's life, but to no avail.
Now, I am discarding my former life.
Like you, I am fleeing Scaraby.
Like you, I intend to seek sanctuary with Resenence Jeopardy.
You must tell me how to find him.’
Lina's mouth stretched into a sneer.
‘You?
You think you can have him?
No one can!
No woman alive!
He'll not want you!’
‘Where is he?’
Cleo insisted, ignoring her remarks.
Lina sighed.
‘If I knew that I would not be here,’ she said, in the most lucid tone Cleo had yet heard her utter.
‘Lina, are you mad?’
Cleo asked.
The woman narrowed her eyes at her.
‘Mad?
I don't know.
Sometimes, I forget things.
Sometimes all I can remember is his eyes, Resenence's eyes, and how he looked at me once.
What am I doing here?
What happened?
Oh yes, I know.
He sent us back.
All of us.
He sent us back to have our children killed!’
‘Why?’
Lina's face crumpled into a grimace.
Tears gathered in her eyes.
‘I don't know.
He spoke to me.
He inspired me to  return.
I can't remember what he said to convince me, but I obeyed his request.
I had no choice.
I could never deny him.’
Her body shuddered in another racking sigh.
She swallowed as if it caused her pain, her face screwed up.
‘Perhaps I dreamed it.
Perhaps he said nothing, and I came back here in a dream…’
Her eyes flicked wide open.
She pulled her hand from Cleo's grip and grabbed her wrists.
‘Find him!’ she hissed.
‘Find him!
Kill him!
Kill him for me and my dead son.’
Then she fell back on the pillows.
‘How do I find him?’
Cleo asked in an even voice.
Lina blinked twice.
‘I came into the city through the water tunnels.
I came north-west, therefore you should travel south-east.
There is a forest called Haling Heart that covers the land to Gallimaufry.
He'll end up there sooner or later.
His destiny lies in that city.
He always said so.
One day, if you wait, if you look, if you listen, you will find him there.’
Lina sighed again and closed her eyes.
‘I can tell you nothing more.’
‘Not even how you came to follow such a man?’
Lina opened her eyes once more.
She looked infinitely tired, infinitely ancient, infinitely sane.
‘Not even that,’ she said.
Her eyes strayed to where Lorimer De Belving was standing in agonised embarrassment behind where Cleo sat.
‘Visit me,’ Lina said to him.
‘On one day or another, I might be allowed to recognise you.’
‘Lina, what must be done?’
Lorimer asked.
‘What is wrong with you?’
‘I loved him,’ she replied.
‘And love of the man twisted my heart into a dry rope.
His image, his strength, occludes my mind.
Sometimes, he leaves no room inside me for reality.’
She licked her lips and looked once more at Cleo.
‘The boy, did he…’
‘He knew nothing,’ Cleo said gently.
‘Nothing.
I did all that I could.’
Lina nodded.
‘Banyon promised me that,’ she said.
‘Now, both of you, go away, go away, go away…’
Her voice lapsed into a whisper.
Lorimer touched Cleo on the shoulder.
Cleo glanced up at him and then rose from the bed.
Together they went to the window.
As they walked back through the haunted lanes of the Salamanca gardens, Cleo voiced her thoughts to Lorimer.
‘There was so much I wanted to ask her,’ she said, stabbing the air with her hands.
‘So much.
If only I'd had more time.
A day in her company, a week.’
Lorimer had apparently been so affected by what he'd seen and heard in Lina's room, he could barely speak.
At the door between the two estates, he turned to Cleo and touched her arm.
‘I know little of what you women were speaking of,’ he said, ‘but I feel I should counsel you against seeking this man Jeopardy yourself.’
Cleo shook her head.
‘Don't bother,’ she said.
‘What else can I do?
Stay here with you?
Oh, don't look so afraid.
I was joking.’
‘At least let me’
‘I want nothing from you,’ Cleo said.
‘Nothing.
Thank you for taking me to see Lina.’
With no further words, she set off across the wide lawns of the De Belving gardens, scattering a couple of sleepy peacocks as she went.
Once, she turned to wave.
Lorimer watched her as the shadows swallowed her small, defiant shape.
He watched the empty darkness for some time afterwards.
SCRYING
Wilfish Implexion woke up with Jeopardy's name on his lips.
He woke gasping, the heavy bedclothes twisted round his legs.
He'd been fighting the prophet, but every time he'd laid hands on the man, he'd changed shape, become a cloud, a venomous snake, a wildcat, a mad woman.
‘What is it?’
The woman lying next to Implexion had woken up too.
She was a shadow beneath the huge, swaying canopy of the bed.
‘Dream,’ Implexion said shortly, rubbing his face.
‘Nothing.’
‘You said his name again,’ the woman said.
‘It woke me.’
She sighed and, pushing aside the canopy curtains, got out of the bed and shrugged on a green muslin bathrobe.
Implexion stared at her.
She went to stand next to the long windows at the end of the room.
The curtains were open; she was a shadow in a pool of moonlight.
He was confident she wouldn't say anything further about the dream.
She never did.
She knew her place.
A man like himself needed a woman like her.
Discreet, mature.
Inanna Grisaille; she supervised the clerks in the Chamber of Ten's office.
She and Implexion had been conducting a casual affair for years; she knew him better than anyone.
She had learned more things from his silences than others had from his most garrulous speeches.
True, she was getting a belly on her now, her neck had started to sag, but her attractions had always gone beyond the merely physical.
She pressed her forehead against the glass of the window, a flag of thick dark-brown hair hanging down her back.
Was she feeling ill?
‘Nana, come back to bed,’ Implexion said gruffly.
‘I can't sleep with you pacing about.’
Inanna wheeled round quickly, her robe flying open, revealing the pale length of her body.
‘How long is this ridiculous charade going to continue?’ she demanded.
‘I beg your pardon?’
For a moment, Implexion thought she meant their affair and was attempting to push it into the realms of firm commitment.
‘This business with Jeopardy,’ she said baldly.
Implexion groaned and covered his face with one arm.
‘Night after night, I hear you complaining in your sleep,’ Inanna continued, prowling back towards the bed.
‘Night after night, that name, that damned name on your lips!
You are obsessed, Wilf, obsessed!’
Implexion sprang up in the bed.
‘Hold your tongue, woman!
Church business should not be discussed in the bedroom.’
‘Look at you!’
Inanna made a bitter sound and sat down on tapestried coverlet.
‘It will be the death of you.
It's eating your life away.’
‘I will not discuss this with you.’
‘Why not?
What are you afraid of?’
Implexion realised the argument could become ugly and he might be provoked into making remarks he'd regret.
‘Nana, you must understand,’ he said gently.
‘This is a difficult time for everyone.
I am not obsessed with Jeopardy, but simply concerned about the effect he could have on our society.’
‘Rot!’
Inanna declared.
‘He is one man, just one man!
If he's such a threat, I can't understand why you haven't dealt with him before now.
It's absurd.’
‘I know,’ Implexion said quietly.
Inanna made a growling sound, threw off her robe, and crawled back between the bedcovers.
‘I'll say no more,’ she said.
‘If there's one thing I pride myself upon it's my disgust of prying women.
But I don't want to hear that name uttered this room again!’
She turned her back on Implexion and pulled the covers over her head.
He could feel her seething with suppressed anger.
Implexion lay in the darkness, his arms behind his head.
You are obsessed, he told himself.
That is the power of the man, that is where the danger lies.
He fascinates you, lures you into the chase.
Then why give in to him? he asked himself.
Why not turn your back?
You know, in your heart, it is the last thing that charlatan wants.
The ecclesiarch had tried so hard to penetrate the mystery of Resenence Jeopardy, to understand the mechanics of his attraction.
How many Jeopardites had he interrogated, even tortured, to learn the truth of exactly why they were compelled to follow the man?
He remembered when he had led a regiment of Church militia into the Swinkbacks, driving a ragged group of Jeopardites before them.
Rain had lashed the bare rocks, turned the narrow gully beneath the horses' hooves to mud, stripped the spare trees of their flimsy leaves.
They had cornered the Jeopardites in a canyon where a few makeshift tents indicated a Jeopardite camp had been discovered.
‘Bring me the women first,’ Implexion had said, striding into the largest tent and making it his temporary headquarters.
They'd not been drabs either, those women.
Daughters of good houses, tattered as gypsy whores but still with a plum in their mouths.
‘Tell me,’ he'd said to the first.
‘What made you give up your privileged life to join this man?’
She'd stood there, shivering with the cold, her already ragged clothes ripped further by the rough handling she'd endured at the hands of the militia.
Her chin had gone up straightaway.
He could tell she'd been used to ordering people about at one time.
‘I think you already know,’ she said in a clear, ringing voice.
He sensed the accusation, even the scorn, behind her words.
‘I asked you a question.
Be so kind as to answer me.
To be blunt, you can be a sensible young woman and be escorted back to your family, or carried out of this wilderness in a sack.
The choice is yours.’
The woman folded her arms, flared her nostrils.
She was not afraid of him or his threats.
What was that flame that burned inside her and sustained  her?
Implexion was sure she was nothing more than a spoiled and pampered daughter of a rich house, as ill-prepared for privation as it was possible to be.
Something had changed her.
Someone.
She seemed to sense his thoughts.
She smiled.
‘You want to know about Jeopardy?
He is a god.’
Implexion laughed politely.
‘I think not.
Try again.’
‘Meet him, then you will see,’ the woman said.
‘Once you have had contact with Jeopardy, you can never be the same again.
But perhaps you are already aware of that.’
Implexion looked at his hands.
‘Take her away,’ he ordered the nearest guard.
The others had revealed little more.
They would have endured the worst torment he could have devised rather than betray Resenence Jeopardy.
It was not the Church's policy to execute the members of noble families retrieved from Jeopardy's clutches.
The Ten would not hear of it.
They were always sent home; their families could deal with them as they wished.
Implexion had stood in the mud of the canyon, the pathetic tents being demolished around him by his militia.
He had watched Jeopardy's high-born women being bundled into an open cart.
Proud creatures with the rain dripping off their straggling hair, their bare, muddy shoulders.
They'd hugged one another.
They had not wept.
Five males, who had accompanied them and who were of lower stock, had been hobbled together to follow the cart.
They would be impaled by the roadside as an example.
If I could only interrogate him, Implexion had thought.
Just an hour — less than that, minutes.
If only I could…
The cart had trundled out of the canyon, an equerry brought Implexion's steed to him.
He'd mounted, turned the animal in a circle, gazing up at the sheer, wet cliffs.
Was anything of Jeopardy left in this place?
Was he watching at this present moment from some hiding place high in the rocks?
As with all his dealings with the Jeopardites, Implexion could recall the event in detail even now; the chill squall of the weather, the earthy smell, the quality of the light in the metal-grey sky.
Jeopardy had been watching him.
He was sure of that.
If we could only learn his secret, Implexion thought, staring into the moonlit darkness of Inanna's bedroom.
Ixmarity would know no bounds, if we could only learn his secret.
Lucien had slept too long.
An hour after noon he wandered out of the room he shared with Bessie's children and went into the kitchen, where he splashed water on his face.
It seemed no one else was at home.
The house was full of a sleepy afternoon quiet.
From the street, the yodel of a sulphur blender could be heard, extolling the virtues of his ointments.
On the wall next to the sink, a V-shaped formation of peacock-blue cheese beetles, each the size of a man's fingernail, arrowed towards the floor.
Their metallic carapaces flashed, as if someone was shining a light on them.
They reminded Lucien of something that had happened a long time ago, but he couldn't remember what.
He sighed.
He felt drained, as if he'd been drunk the night before.
His head felt packed with damp sacking.
Trickles of water ran down inside his collar.
He felt strangely angry.
At dawn he'd woken up briefly, plagued by the vanishing wisps of a vague and irritating dream.
He knew it had featured Resenence Jeopardy, but the details were indistinct.
One thing he could remember, however, was that in the dream Jeopardy had been communicative, Jeopardy had listened to him.
Lucien couldn't remember what he'd said to the prophet.
Now, in the afternoon, he was haunted by Jeopardy's presence.
As always, Lucien's dreams had invented a happier history for him.
He knew the man he dreamed of did not exist.
After making a foray into Bessie's pantry, Lucien helped himself to a quick meal of bread and meat.
Then, throwing on his coat, he ventured out again.
Perhaps, this time, there would be some hint, some clue, as to where the Jeopardites had fled.
Gallimaufry itself seemed lethargic that day.
Hawkers in the street yawned as they advertised their wares.
Lucien saw a street juggler drop one of her multicoloured balls; it was glass and smashed instantly on the pavement.
Eventually, his wanderings led him to the ornate frontage of a steam-house.
These establishments could be found in every district in Gallimaufry; places where citizens could relax in the vapours of restorative perfumes.
An  advertisement upon the outer wall advised Lucien of the advantages of an ennubelation in lively-sprig essence.
Feeling that anything was worth the price if it removed the torpor from his brain, Lucien handed over a coin at the reception booth and went inside.
Attendants in stiff, white robes swooped forward as soon as he entered (indicating tips would have to be paid), offering to show him to the changing rooms.
The roof of the foyer consisted of an enormous green glass dome.
It cast an unflattering light upon the skin, it made voices echo.
Reluctantly, Lucien handed over another coin to one of the attendants and was conducted through a maze of corridors to an enormous room, where Gallimaufrians disrobed behind screens.
The attendants folded the clothes and exchanged them for a token, before placing them upon tiers of racks.
Customers were given long, belted robes to wear on their way to the baths.
Having paid for a private room, Lucien was escorted by a young vaporeuse through another labyrinth of corridors to a row of cubicles.
On the wall outside each of them was an array of brass knobs and gauges, with which the staff of the establishment set the jet speed and volume of the essences.
Steam hung heavily in the air, a thousand battling perfumes.
The girl asked Lucien if he would like his steam bath to be followed by an aromatic rub.
He declined, conscious of the mark on his leg that advertised his truancy from Ixmarity, although the thought of being massaged with perfume appealed to him greatly.
The girl pulled a face of annoyed disappointment to show Lucien that by not taking full advantage of her services he was really wasting her time.
Then, with a shrug, she opened one of the cubicle doors and ushered him inside.
The room was made of unpainted white stones.
There were no windows.
Lucien settled himself upon the only piece of furniture — a bench — and leaned back against the wall.
The vaporeuse asked him what level he preferred the steam to be set at.
He told her he was unfamiliar with the process, and that he would trust her judgment.
She shrugged and closed the door, with the final remark that she would come back once his paid time was up.
Presently, steam began to hiss from ducts overhead.
Lucien breathed deeply and closed his eyes.
Far from invoking a sense of wakeful alertness, the essence  seemed only to induce further drowsiness.
Lucien could feel a cloud of sleep stealing through his limbs.
He took off the hired robe and lay down naked on the bench.
The wood was pleasingly warm and aromatic; the hot steam washed over him in tingling waves.
Then, just as it seemed that sleep was a compulsion he could no longer resist, Lucien heard a noise in the room.
It sounded like footsteps, followed by a sliding noise, as of someone pressing themselves against the wall and sitting down.
Immediately, Lucien sprang upright and threw the robe round his shoulders.
He knew he should be alone.
He had not heard the door open.
The cubicle was thick with fragranced fog but he could just make out a dark hunched shape on the floor near the door.
‘This is a private room!’
Lucien cried, aware of a tremor of fear in his voice.
The shape shifted in front of him.
‘Lucien, I did not think you'd mind sharing with me.’
It was Walterkin Anywhither.
‘You followed me!’
Lucien said.
‘Don't be angry.
I wanted to surprise you.’
‘This is not a surprise, but a shock,’ Lucien said.
‘How dare you creep up on me like that!’
Lucien felt vulnerable and threatened.
If Walterkin could sneak in on him so easily, anybody could.
He should have remained alert.
‘I want to hear more stories,’ Walterkin said.
‘Here?’
Lucien laughed.
‘I don't think so.
You should have waited until I returned to your mother's house.’
‘But here is the right place,’ Walterkin argued in an even voice, ‘for the next part of your history.’
Lucien could not see the boy's face through the steam.
Perhaps I am dreaming, he thought, perhaps I have simply conjured him up.
He might not really be here.
I'm sure the door didn't open.
And yet, I am relieved he is here.
Why?
Because I need to purge myself of the past more than anything.
And will this next part be painful?
No.
More painful to hide it inside.
It seemed as if Walterkin's request for more information had become a subliminal trigger which Lucien could not, or did not want to, ignore.
He lay down once more upon the bench and, his lungs filled with a crush of flower essence, began to speak.
Resenence Jeopardy had a lover.
Her name was Amber Epipheny, and she was a female vibrancer.
Amber was a fiery, independent creature; very beautiful.
She stalked around the House of Mandru as if she was always in a rage about something.
Her hair was dyed an incredible brutal red.
In sunlight, it appeared transparent like flames.
By lamplight it was a smouldering fire, a smoke around her shoulders, from which her dark green eyes sparked like chips of precious emerald.
Like Jeopardy, she walked with the confidence of royalty.
Anything positioned beneath the tilt of her chin seemed to escape her notice.
Every morning, at an early hour, Amber and Resenence practised movements together in one of the dance courts.
Few other Ixmaritians of the household used the court at this time, as most of them preferred to begin their exercises once breakfast had been digested.
Lucien, however, liked the comparative privacy of the court and, once he'd become familiar with the routines of the household and felt confident enough to venture around alone, went there often to limber up for an hour before his own breakfast.
Also, although he would have denied it had any influence at all, Ketura had told him Jeopardy used that court, and that he always practised early.
The first time Lucien went there, it was out of curiosity.
Ketura had neglected to include the information that Amber would also be present, and he had felt strangely disappointed when he realised Jeopardy was not alone.
The pair whirled round one another like columns of fluid.
They practised, as Lucien always had, without music, scorning even the metronomic hand drums that other Ixmaritians favoured.
At first, Lucien had watched them in awed fascination, hardly daring to practise any movements himself for fear of ridicule.
After only two visits, however, the novelty wore off, and it was patently obvious that Jeopardy and his partner were oblivious of his presence; it became easy to ignore theirs.
Lucien knew that, to them, he was a nobody.
From their lofty height of existence, it was as if they could not even see him.
Lucien had had no social contact with Resenence Jeopardy since his interview with Mandru, but had thought about him often.
He had questioned Sydel and Ketura about him, and they were happy to gossip.
They were quite convinced that if Jeopardy had not been quite so stunning to look at, most people would  not like him at all because he was arrogant and cold.
Lucien told them that he believed Jeopardy to be a shallow individual, an offence to the art of Vibrancy.
Both Ketura and Sydel had strongly contested this.
‘His work is the only thing that sustains him,’ Ketura said.
‘Certainly not for the religious significance of it, but for the dance itself.
He takes it very seriously.’
Lucien found he had not wanted to hear that.
Sydel told him that when Jeopardy argued with Amber, it was never about love, but always about the Vibrancy.
‘He does not see her as a woman,’ Sydel said.
‘True, she is his partner, she helps him, and when his body calls for lust, she is there for him, but I would not say she is a prime concern in his life.’
‘Nobody is,’ Ketura added, ‘which is perhaps why he is so fascinating.
There is an element of challenge involved in his acquaintance.
Is this why you are asking all these questions?’
Lucien had flushed at that.
He did not want the girls to know that Jeopardy interested him.
After hearing what they had to say, Lucien told himself he disliked Jeopardy.
Nor was he much impressed by Amber Epipheny.
The pair of them seemed pompous, arrogant and vain to the point of caricature.
Lucien grudgingly had to admit that they were first-class vibrancers, but to him they still seemed an insult to the art.
He knew they abused their bodies with liquor and narcotic essences.
He knew they soiled themselves with one another.
They must have little self-respect.
And surely their behaviour was an offence to Paradouze.
One morning, Azmaveth came running down the corridor outside Lucien's room to intercept him before he went to his practice.
She told him that she and some others were being escorted by the household guard on an expedition to the country that day.
Nehushtah, Mandru's wife, had decided upon it the previous night.
‘Come with us,’ Azmaveth said.
Lucien wrinkled his nose.
‘Oh, I don't know…
I don't really feel like it.
There's something I'm working on today.’
Azmaveth made an exasperated noise.
‘Who wants to work when you've been offered a holiday?’ she asked.
‘Come on, Lucien, you'd enjoy it.’
‘I've got to perform for Sabraxis tomorrow,’ he said.
‘She  wants to judge my development.
I want to make sure my movements are perfect.’
‘Oh, Lucien, you can work this evening,’ Azmaveth insisted.
‘Listen, you should take the trouble to ingratiate yourself with Nehushtah.
Her favour incurs many privileges.’
Lucien secretly disapproved of the way his colleagues fawned over the lady of the house.
To him, it seemed that the privileges of Nehushtah's acquaintance consisted only of the opportunity to get intoxicated in her chambers.
He had seen Nehushtah only once as she'd weaved her way, in a froth of acolytes, across the gardens.
He hadn't liked what he'd seen.
She was too tall and sensual of feature, too voluptuously loose in her movements to command his respect.
He sensed that the touch of her attention engendered immoderation, and also that, should she meet him, she would not like him either.
He shook his head.
‘Thanks for asking me, Veth, but I can't.
Another time maybe.
I feel like I'm on trial at the moment.
I don't want to disappoint Sabraxis.’
Azmaveth wouldn't give up easily.
‘You can practise any time,’ she said.
‘Trips out only happen now and again.’
Lucien shrugged.
‘I take my work seriously,’ he said.
The implied criticism hung in the air between them for a few moments.
Then Azmaveth made a dismissive gesture with her arms.
‘You should have stayed in Por Tanssie and become a tutor,’ she said scornfully.
‘Or they should have sold you to some terrible household where you'd have been treated like a dog.
Someone else should have been allowed to come here.
Someone who'd have appreciated what's on offer!
You can be such a bore, Lucien.’
Lucien shrugged again, awkwardly.
He suspected she might be right.
Exercising his body slowly and with care in the practice court, Lucien was aware that, despite the cross words he'd just had with Azmaveth, he was actually content in his new surroundings.
He'd been in the house for nearly six weeks now and although he had not yet been called upon to take part in a Vibrancy performance, he had all the time in the world to practise.
Sabraxis had given him a schedule to work through, most of which he knew already as it was based upon traditional pieces.
She had also made one or two favourable  remarks on the occasions she'd seen him working out, and had assured him that, once he'd attained the standards she'd set for him, he could look forward to being given a fairly prominent role in the next major presentation.
Mandru had been away on business for much of the time since Lucien had arrived, so performances had been few.
Nehushtah generally commanded only the talents of her favourites.
However, Lucien knew that once autumn took hold of the land, Mandru would remain in residence in order to supervise the harvest.
Then, there would be at least two presentations a day, perhaps more when guests were in the house.
So far, Lucien had not sullied his art by performing to music, but he was aware that as soon as Sabraxis had approved his ability, that would be the next thing he'd have to learn.
He was unsure about whether he'd be able to do this, and was also uncomfortable knowing that soon he'd be performing merely to provide entertainment for Mandru and his guests.
The thought of this not only made him feel uneasy, but embarrassed.
At least Mandru did not expect his Ixmaritians to perform naked, as was the traditional custom.
Still, judging from Sabraxis' remarks and the fact that, despite its defects, Por Tanssie did provide incomparable training, Lucien felt sure his new master would acclaim his talents.
Lucien happily fantasised as he practised.
He saw an awed and grateful Mandru, wiping tears from his eyes after Lucien had completed a performance.
He heard Mandru tell all the other Ixmaritians that never had he seen such eloquence of posture, such moving pathos.
Lucien accepted this praise with downcast eyes, aware that the most accomplished of Mandru's vibrancers were biting their knuckles in shame, because they had not practised diligently enough to emulate Lucien's glowing performance.
Transported in such blissful reverie, Lucien raised his arm into a graceful curve, a black swan against the faintly orange glass of the floor-length windows of the court.
He poised motionless on his toes, caught in a timeless stance.
Raised voices intruded coarsely into his meditations.
The argument must have been going on for some time, although Lucien had been hardly aware of it.
As usual, he had blanked out any other presence in the court in order to concentrate on his movements.
‘One day, you son of a whore, I will kill you!’
The abuse was uttered by a female throat.
Jolted from his daydreams, Lucien had time only to feel a rush of air as Amber Epipheny swept past him.
She was in such a hurry to leave the court, she almost knocked him over.
Lucien made a small, indignant sound, his arms flailing before he recovered his poise.
Amber was forced to notice him, but instead of apologising, she curled her lips into an ugly snarl.
Lucien was astonished.
He had never suffered such vulgar treatment from another vibrancer before.
In Por Tanssie, interruption of a student's practice was prohibited, whatever the reason.
Wilful impediment of the sacred moves was not only ill-mannered, but the worst form of blasphemy.
Amber, however, seemed to have little consideration for Lucien or what was considered sacred.
Her face set in a mask of intense fury, she slammed the doors hard as she left the court.
The echo of her exit filled the high-ceilinged room for some seconds afterwards.
‘Bitch!’
Behind Lucien, Resenence Jeopardy punched the wood-panelled wall of the court, causing one of the tapestries to swing ominously.
Lucien was shaken to the core by all this rude conduct.
It was unthinkable that two vibrancers could behave in such a manner.
Uncertainly, he turned his back on the prowling form of Jeopardy and attempted to curl his body into the movement Amber had disrupted.
He closed his eyes and two images entered his mind.
One was of Azmaveth and her friends bundled into a comfortable carriage, being taken to some silvan retreat to eat, drink, sing and dance.
He experienced a sudden pang of regret he'd rejected her offer.
The other image was of the person behind him, Jeopardy, with his hair unplaited and his eyes fierce, pacing like a caged animal along the wall.
Lucien broke out of his movement and stood perfectly still, staring through the orange light.
He sensed this moment was of prime importance.
Something had happened.
‘What happened, Lucien?’
The boy was invisible in the steam.
It hissed malevolently into the tiny cubicle, its herby bitter odour masking a certain taste of earthiness.
Lucien sighed.
‘Something happened in my mind, Walterkin.
It was like a door opening.’
‘Was there light beyond the door?
Was there a garden full of flowers?’
Lucien rolled his head from side to side upon the wooden bench.
The steam was burning his lungs.
‘No.
It was dark, dark and frightening.
But fascinating too.’
‘And this door had Resenence Jeopardy behind it?’
Lucien could not answer.
After a few moments, Walterkin said, ‘Perhaps it was the same for him.’
Lucien shook his head.
‘No, it wasn't.
It couldn't have been.’
‘But he must have noticed you then.
He must have.
Or did he leave the court without speaking?’
Lucien closed his eyes.
‘In one reality, perhaps he did.
In another, he called to me and asked — no, demanded — I finish his practice with him.
Jeopardy and Amber had been working on a piece which they intended to perform when Mandru returned home.
Their argument had been about that; some minor point or another.
Something unimportant.’
‘He was very young then?’
‘We both were.
And yet he seemed so…not wise, that isn't the right word, aware of life, I suppose.
He seemed older.’
‘What was it like when you touched him?’
Lucien looked sharply at the boy.
‘I don't think I did, not then.’
‘You must have.
You were performing together.
What did he smell like?
What colour were his eyes?’
‘You are very interested in Resenence Jeopardy,’ Lucien said.
He heard the suspicion in his own voice.
‘You make him come alive in a way that none of his fancy speeches can,’ Walterkin said.
‘Tell me how you felt.’
Lucien sighed.
Behind his closed eyelids, he was back at the House of Mandru, surrounded by the dusky orange light of the exercise court.
Before him was the heat of another soul.
‘You!’
Jeopardy yelled.
‘You're from Por Tanssie, aren't you?’
Lucien shrugged.
‘Yes.’
Jeopardy made a curt gesture with his arms.
‘Then you should be good enough to work with me.
Nearly.
Come  over here!
Do you know the Denouncement of Atavenom sequence?’
‘Of course.’
‘Well, I've modified it in this way.
Can you follow?’
He performed a few precise movements.
Lucien could see the adjustments.
In some ways, they improved the sequence, introduced a more fluid element.
He copied the movements well enough for Jeopardy to smile.
‘Almost!’ he said.
Lucien knew his imitation had been perfect.
He performed the movements again, adding an embellishment of his own.
‘Don't get clever,’ Jeopardy said sharply.
‘It corrupts the pure lines.’
Over the few weeks he had been in Mandru's house, Lucien had acknowledged Jeopardy's beauty and talent, but had also despised him.
He would never admit to himself that this was because Jeopardy seemed beyond him; Lucien was convinced he could never be included in Jeopardy's elite circle of friends, and so it was easier to dislike him, to pick fault and criticise.
Now, everything had changed, and their bodies were moving round each other in the orange light of the dance court.
Jeopardy was close enough for Lucien to touch.
He could see the colour of Jeopardy's eyes — brown, but tinged amber by the light.
When he looked at Lucien, there seemed to be a shadow of amusement in his eyes, a sureness.
Later, Lucien told himself that this shadow had been of the future.
Jeopardy had always known the future, or had perhaps chosen it himself that day.
They had practised together for only an hour, yet it seemed like an eternity.
Lucien knew that Jeopardy had worked him hard, tested his limits.
He felt sure he had exceeded Jeopardy's expectations.
He himself had enjoyed the practice immensely.
He felt that Jeopardy coaxed the best out of him.
When they'd finished, Jeopardy said, ‘You're not bad.
How would you like to continue that piece with me?’
Lucien hesitated.
‘What about’
Jeopardy cut his question short with a grimace and an angry gesture.
‘I'm asking you.
Yes or no?
There are no other considerations.’
‘I've yet to pass Sabraxis’ tests,’Lucien said, eager to accept, but afraid of doing so.
‘Perhaps I should get her permission.’
‘Don't be stupid,’ Jeopardy said.
‘Just tell her.
Same time tomorrow?’
He'd left the court before Lucien could stutter an assent.
Lucien had sought Sabraxis out right after breakfast.
She did not seem surprised at Lucien's news.
‘You're talented,’ she said.
‘Res will want to use that.’
‘You don't mind if I work with him, then?’
Lucien asked.
Sabraxis smiled.
‘Why should I?
Just don't let him swamp you.
And that doesn't mean you get out of your test tomorrow.
I want to see you before lunch.’
Lucien couldn't help asking her what his position would be should he fail her test.
‘You won't fail,’ Sabraxis said.
‘You know that already.’
All day, his mind swam in a dreamy haze.
He confessed to no one but Sabraxis what had happened in the exercise court that morning.
During the afternoon, he accompanied a clutch of lazy Ixmaritians out to the gardens where they sat in the sun and gossiped.
Sydel commented on Lucien's preoccupation.
‘You look smug today,’ she said.
‘What's on your mind?’
‘Nothing,’ Lucien replied.
The girl narrowed her eyes at him.
‘You are so hard to read,’ she said.
‘I get the feeling you're hiding something, yet what can you possibly hide?’
She shook her head.
‘You have ambitions, Lucien, don't you?’
‘Sydel,’ he said, ‘there is something, but if I tell you about it, it might not happen.’
She looked at him askance and opened her mouth to ask a question.
Lucien looked away.
She said nothing.
Lucien feared that if he told the other vibrancers he was working with Jeopardy, it would excite resentment among them.
After all, Jeopardy commanded high status within the house and Lucien was only a newcomer.
He was also afraid that when he turned up for the next practice, Amber and Jeopardy's argument would be resolved, and he would no longer be required.
Everyone knew that the couple argued constantly.
The argument turned out to be of longer duration than normal, and Lucien practised with Jeopardy for seven consecutive days.
They worked well together.
Jeopardy was pleased, even to the point of suggesting they should perform the piece for Mandru together when the time came.
Lucien  dared not believe this might happen.
Far from resenting Lucien's new-found favour, the other vibrancers in the house began to treat him with a new respect once his alliance with Jeopardy became common knowledge.
Suddenly, he was one of them.
At first, he'd worried that Amber Epipheny would be jealous of him, and wondered whether she'd confront him about the matter.
But she simply ignored him as she always had and began to practise with the yellow-haired vibrancer who'd been with Jeopardy in Mandru's salon on the morning Lucien had met the master.
His name was Marist.
They prudently used the exercise court that Jeopardy never frequented.
The only gossip which came back to Lucien was that Amber thought him too plain in appearance to work well with Jeopardy, and considered him merely a tool that her lover was using in an attempt to provoke her.
She obviously saw no threat in Lucien.
Other Ixmaritians commented on Lucien's practice sessions with Jeopardy; they made jokes about Jeopardy's difficult nature, which Lucien found very funny.
He laughed, and made jokes back.
In his heart he felt he was betraying something very new and delicate, but he could not stop himself.
He was bemused by his sudden close proximity to such a powerful individual and enjoyed the attention this brought him from others.
The more time he spent with Jeopardy, the more he realised Jeopardy only ever saw people as extensions of his work.
Lucien had believed commitment to the Vibrancy involved a strict and pious discipline.
Now, he knew otherwise.
In some ways, Jeopardy was more committed to the Vibrancy than he was himself, but there was little discipline as far as his private life was concerned.
To Lucien, he was a hedonist.
When Jeopardy was not working, he was often intoxicated.
He and Lucien never talked about anything but their work.
Lucien was never invited to participate in recreational activities.
Jeopardy was not interested in house gossip.
Other people's lives bored him and he became sharp and irritable on the one occasion Lucien tried to impart some interesting snippet of information Azmaveth had told him.
Jeopardy was selfish and self-centred, but irresistibly compelling.
When he smiled, the warmth in his eyes, so stunning for being so unexpected, made up for his cranky disposition, his  overwhelming pomposity.
Lucien enjoyed spending time in his company, but anticipated the day when this flimsy alliance would end.
He could sense nothing permanent, nothing significant, in their relationship.
Then one night, the dream came.
As he dreamed, Lucien was wandering through a vast network of halls and chambers, which were crammed full of people, all talking loudly.
He eventually came to a kind of theatre, which he also knew was Mandru's morning room, expanded to vast proportion.
There was a stage at one end, where the fountains usually were, over which water was pouring in a frothing cataract.
Everyone from the house was in the room, sitting in a spacious balcony seat high above the stage.
Lucien knew that a performance was about to be enacted, a performance by Resenence Jeopardy.
He was about to join his companions on the balcony when someone whom he could not see touched his arm and told him he was needed somewhere else.
‘Where?’
Lucien asked.
There was no reply.
Then he was walking round the building once more, searching for something.
He knew he had very little time before the performance began.
It was very dark, the lights yellow and dim.
People milled everywhere, dressed in black, murmuring in anticipation.
Lucien walked down endless dark corridors.
His search, the place where he was needed, had now become the auditorium, the balcony where his friends were waiting for him.
He was trying to find his way back, but the building was so large, so labyrinthine, he kept getting lost, seeing the same blank faces, the same corners, the same stairs.
Then Jeopardy was there, coming from nowhere as people do in dreams.
He took hold of Lucien's hand.
‘Come with me.’
They mounted a wide staircase, more brightly lit than any place Lucien had yet visited.
People walking up and down the stairs paused to watch them pass.
I am with Resenence Jeopardy, Lucien thought in his dream.
He is the greatest of all vibrancers.
He is about to perform for the Archimage himself.
At the top of the stairs, somewhere beyond a short, misty journey, Jeopardy led Lucien into a room where a handful of musicians were preparing themselves for the coming performance.
It seemed as if the instruments they held — long pipes  and hand drums — were somehow becoming part of their bodies.
They ignored the newcomers.
Lucien and Jeopardy sat down upon rough wooden boxes that had presumably once held the instruments.
Lucien could feel sharp splinters digging into his skin through his clothes.
‘Look at me,’ said Jeopardy.
Lucien did so, and behind him he felt a kindling of curious scrutiny from the musicians.
Their conversations were slowing down.
They were listening.
Jeopardy's eyes were almost black; an unwavering stare.
His hair was loose round his shoulders, a wild mane.
He took both of Lucien's hands in his own.
‘I want you.
I need you,’ he said.
Lucien felt a dreadful thrill, dreadful in its literal sense, full of dread.
He was conscious of the silence behind him, a strong sense of disapproval.
‘No,’ he said.
‘I want you.
I need you.’
‘Stop!’
Lucien pulled his hands out of Jeopardy's grasp and put them over his ears, his eyes.
‘You mustn't!’
‘I can't stop.
I have to tell you.’
‘What about Amber?’
Lucien said.
‘Don't say these things to me.
She'll hate me.’
‘I don't care.’
Lucien stood up, tried to back away.
‘I care,’ he said.
‘Lucien, I love you.’
‘You don't!
Be quiet!’
He was staring at the wall, a cold, white wall.
‘I don't want this.
I don't!’
‘Lucien, don't deny me.’
Jeopardy was weeping; tears of desperation, of need.
Even as it terrified him, Lucien was triumphant.
Even as he denied it, he knew he wanted it.
‘I won't listen to this!’
He ran out of the room, down the stairs, back into the auditorium.
He ran to his seat, sat down among his friends, said nothing.
In another balcony, opposite where he sat, a grand figure in the golden robes of the Archimage was being conducted to his seat, accompanied by ten faceless men in black cloaks.
Then the room went dark.
A strange glow was emitted by the water on the stage, which gradually increased in brilliance until it revealed a vibrancer performing the opening sequence of a presentation.
But it was not Resenence Jeopardy who danced.
It was an older  man, with a beard.
A large, lumbering man, who fumbled through the ankle-deep water without grace.
The room filled with angry consternation.
What has happened?
Where is the one we have come to see?
The man on the stage raised an accusing finger and pointed right up at Lucien.
Everyone turned to look.
‘You did this,’ said the man.
‘You destroyed him.
You did this!’
Lucien stood up, shouted back.
‘I did not.
I didn't ask for it.
It's not my fault.
I don't want it!’
Lucien woke up with a racing heart.
He could not believe what he had just lived through.
It was the first of many dreams.
‘It was a torment to see him again after that.’
‘You woke up to yourself.’
The steam seemed to have cleared a little and Lucien could see that Walterkin sat up straight against the far wall, his knees raised, his hands dangling between them.
‘Lucien, do you believe in the power of dreams?
Do you believe dreams reflect reality or that they are real?’
Lucien shook his head.
‘No…’
He shrugged.
‘I don't know.
I strongly felt that Resenence had come to me in the dream and yet, when I awoke, when the morning came, I told myself I had created it myself.
It was my secret longing.
He had nothing to do with it, and yet, even now, it seems so powerful, so strong, so clear.
I remember his face as he spoke.
I remember his grief, his agony.’
‘Was he different with you after the dream?’
Lucien sighed.
‘I don't know.
I was looking for signs afterwards.
I read omens in everything, significance in everything.
It might have been a lie.
I noticed his concern for me, and I know he was concerned, but that might have been there all along.
I don't know.
It's impossible to tell now.
All I do know for sure is that I woke up loving him.
A fruitless, pointless love.
He couldn't see people.
He was blind to them.
Maybe he sent me the dream.
I don't know.
I have to ask him, I think.
I never told him about it.’
Lucien was so disturbed by the dream that the following morning he considered staying in his room and not going  down to the exercise court to practice with Resenence.
He was afraid the events of his dream would be clearly written in his eyes.
However, the need to confront this new-found object of desire overcame his trepidation.
He had to see.
Would there be a change?
There wasn't.
Resenence Jeopardy still expected him to work hard, was still friendly and attentive, but hadn't he been like that the day before?
In desperation, Lucien cornered Azmaveth at breakfast.
‘I have to speak to you,’ he said.
‘You look disturbed, Lucien,’ she observed.
‘Yes, I can see you do need to speak to me.’
She took him to her room where they could have privacy.
‘What has happened?’
Now that he had the opportunity, Lucien was too embarrassed to speak.
Azmaveth sighed and folded her arms.
‘Who is it?’ she asked in a resigned tone.
Lucien sat down on her bed, wringing his hands in despair.
‘I dare not say,’ he said.
‘Are you afraid I'll tell people?’
He looked up at her, studied her face for a moment.
‘No.’
She smiled and shook her head.
‘I know, Lucien.’
He glanced away.
‘Do you?’
‘It's Jeopardy, isn't it?’
Lucien cringed beneath her appraisal.
He dug the heels of his hands into his eyes.
‘I knew before you did,’ she continued.
‘I have an instinct for these things, Lucien.
I could sense what you felt inside.
It shone from you.’
‘I hate this,’ Lucien said.
‘I don't know what to do.’
Azmaveth sat down beside him.
‘There are several things you could do,’ she said.
Lucien looked at her with utter wretchedness.
‘What?
He is oblivious of other people.
They mean nothing to him.
And yet…’
He shook his head.
‘And yet?’
Lucien told her about the dream.
‘Azmaveth, in my heart, I feel the dream spoke truly to me, yet the evidence of reality tells me otherwise.
I feel so confused.
What is real?’
Azmaveth rose from the bed and crossed to a chest of drawers.
She opened the top drawer and withdrew an object wrapped in purple silk.
‘May I consult my sticks about this matter for you?’
‘Sticks?’
Azmaveth unwrapped the silk.
Within, tied together with a red ribbon, were about three dozen etched and painted wooden sticks of varying length, the longest being the size of a grown man's finger, the shortest the size of a child's.
‘Karipo sticks,’ she said.
‘They're Ixibatabian.’
Lucien frowned.
‘Isn't their use prohibited under Ixmaritian law?’
Azmaveth sighed.
‘Of course.
Do you want some insight into Jeopardy's head or not?’
‘I don't know.’
Lucien eyed the sticks, which Azmaveth was still holding out for his inspection, with suspicion.
‘Only senior officers of the Church can attempt divination.
You know that as well as I. We are too young, too inexperienced.
We might invite catastrophe.’
‘Oh, don't talk such nonsense, Lucien!’
Azmaveth cried.
‘Do you believe everything you're told?’
Lucien flinched away from the scorn in her voice.
She had said those words to him many times, reminding him of his indoctrination at the hands of Por Tanssie's officials.
‘Oh, very well,’ he said.
‘But I doubt you'll learn anything.’
Azmaveth did not argue but knelt down on the floor by the bed and laid out the silk square in front of her.
She untied the sticks and rubbed them together between her palms.
After a few moments of apparent concentration, she handed the sticks to Lucien.
‘Do as I did,’ she instructed.
‘Rub them together.’
Lucien took the sticks from her.
They felt warm to the touch, slightly damp from Azmaveth's palms.
He let them roll between his hands.
Could Jeopardy's thoughts and intentions really be intimated by a bunch of coloured twigs?
It seemed unlikely.
Still, he had little to lose.
‘Now, let them fall over the cloth,’ Azmaveth said, ‘from a height of two handspans.’
Lucien obeyed this instruction and waited while Azmaveth leaned over the cloth, making small sounds of recognition, surprise and consternation.
‘Well, what do you see?’
Lucien demanded.
‘There is no doubt,’ she said, shaking her head.
‘No doubt of what?’
She looked up at Lucien, and he saw immediately that her eyes were troubled.
‘I would not have believed it,’ she said, ‘but the fall of the sticks is emphatic.’
‘What?
What?’
‘He loves you,’ she said.
‘Look.’
Lucien's heart seemed to turn over within his ribs.
He felt slightly sick, there was a humming in his ears.
‘Look at what?’ he snapped.
‘It's just a jumble of sticks!’
‘No, really.
Examine the juxtaposition of these three here, the ones that form a triangle.’
Azmaveth indicated the significant sticks.
‘Love, concealment and — this one — the emblem of the sacred dancer.
It's too much of a coincidence.’
‘That could just refer to me,’ Lucien said.
Azmaveth shook her head.
‘I did not ask them about you, I asked about Jeopardy.’
Lucien hugged himself.
He had begun to tremble.
‘Did he send the dream to me, Veth?’
‘Yes,’ she answered, ‘but he might not know it.’
Lucien rubbed his face.
‘Oh, this doesn't help!’ he cried.
‘I don't want to feel like this.
I've no idea what to do about it.’
Azmaveth considered something for a few moments and then nodded to herself, as if she'd made a decision.
‘There are options,’ she said.
‘I believe Jeopardy is interested in you, but is not consciously aware of it.
Therefore, he has to be made aware of his hidden thoughts.
Once this happens, events should take a natural course.’
Lucien looked at her in alarm.
‘I can't tell him!’ he cried.
Azmaveth shook her head quickly.
‘No, no, I'm not suggesting you do.
You have to send a dream back to him.
You have to remove any obstacles.’
‘How?’
She shrugged.
‘Well, I could do that for you.
I have the ability, Lucien.
I'm a northerner.
Ixmarity is not my native religion.
You know what is.’
‘Profanity.’
He hugged himself tighter.
All he knew of the northern religions was that they embraced demonology and witchcraft.
‘Azmaveth, you are talking about heresy against Ixmar!
Only the Archimage and his ecclesiarchs have the  ability to influence reality.
If anyone else attempts it, it is a delusion, a blasphemy, an incursion into Ixmar's realm.’
‘Oh, you would say that, wouldn't you!’
Azmaveth exclaimed.
‘Lucien, you look wretched.
You have never loved before.
How long do you want to suffer?’
‘I want this feeling to go away, that's all,’ he said primly.
‘I didn't say I wanted to do anything else about it.’
Azmaveth uttered an exasperated snort.
‘You have to start living one day.
Why not begin now, with the best?’
‘You are not a priestess, you are a demoness!’
Lucien said.
‘A temptress!
I should denounce you.’
‘Yes, perhaps I am all the things you say,’ Azmaveth replied, ‘but you won't denounce me.
I am your friend, after all.’
Lucien watched her as she gathered up the sticks.
He sensed that despite her words, his outburst had hurt her.
He sighed deeply.
‘All right, all right ,’ he said.
‘Do whatever you can.
Make something happen.’
‘Are you sure?’ she asked in a cold voice.
‘As you suspect, it would be witchcraft, a crime in Ixmarity's eyes.’
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘I'm sure.
The moment I set foot in this house, my world turned upside down.
I might as well complete the process.’
Azmaveth nodded, but made no further comment.
She tied up her sticks and wrapped them in the silk again.
She went back to the chest and opened another drawer.
Lucien watched in silence as she removed a brass censer and a black veil.
‘Are you going to do it now?’ he asked.
She did not turn round but busied herself with placing a palmful of incense into the censer and lighting it.
‘It is the best time,’ she said.
‘Your emotions are strong at this moment.’
She carried the censer carefully over to the bed and placed it on the floor.
Then she covered her head with the black veil.
‘Breathe the smoke, Lucien.’
Lucien leaned forward a little way.
The perfume of the incense was sharp yet voluptuous.
Even after the first inhalation, he felt a little dizzy.
Why am I doing this? he wondered.
Why can't I stop?
It was against all he believed in and yet some inner part of him would stop at nothing to attract Jeopardy's notice.
He told himself he was not looking  for a lover, but simply the opportunity to tell Resenence about the dream.
He did not want to pollute his body; he wanted a purely cerebral affair.
‘You must really want this to happen,’ Azmaveth murmured.
‘Really, really want it.
Because it will happen once we've finished here.
It will happen.’
She began to chant in a low, eerie voice, words in a language foreign to Lucien.
He heard the power in her voice, the confidence.
He knew then that she spoke the truth.
‘You practised magic, Lucien!’
Walterkin was laughing.
‘There was no other way.
I could not wait.’
Walterkin shook his head.
The steam had almost completely cleared now.
Soon, the attendant would come to tell Lucien his session was over.
‘I confess I feel shocked,’ Walterkin said.
‘I didn't think you would have used magic.’
‘Why not?’
Lucien felt faintly insulted.
He sat up on the bench and pulled on the robe.
‘Because of your faith, your love of Paradouze.
Didn't you think of Him at all?’
Lucien smiled grimly.
‘The truth is, no one was further from my mind at the time than my god.
Already I had been corrupted by Mandru's household.’
The boy shrugged.
‘I know too little of you, yet I know too much.
I have learned a lot from our conversations.’
Not for the first time, Lucien wondered exactly what it was this peculiar boy hoped to gain from dragging his history out of him.
as if she'd been waiting outside for a convenient pause in their conversation, the vaporeuse knocked on the door and opened it.
She asked whether Lucien required a further session.
He declined.
His skin felt scorched enough as it was, although he had to admit his head felt clearer.
The girl made no comment about Walterkin being there, but seemed to know him vaguely, judging from the way they spoke to one another on the way back to the changing rooms.
Lucien wondered whether Walterkin had bribed her to let him into the cubicle.
Outside, the city seemed to have become livelier, although Lucien realised that earlier he must have projected his own lethargy onto his surroundings.
‘I shall take you to Hartshorn Park,’ Walterkin announced.
‘We can continue our conversation there.’
‘Aren't I keeping you from something?’
Lucien asked.
‘Shouldn't you be working for your mother?’
Walterkin did not answer the questions.
He led Lucien onto a narrow street lined by tiny, dark shops.
All of them seemed to be toy shops.
‘Do you know what magic is, Lucien?’
The tone of Walterkin's voice implied he would dispute whatever answer Lucien gave him.
Consequently, the answer was delivered stiffly.
‘Yes.
You invoke the spirits of the incense to make them work for you.
You ask for something and, if they feel disposed, they will aid you.’
Walterkin grinned widely and stared at the ground as he strode along.
‘You know so little!
Magic is the ability to shape reality through the strength of your own belief.
If there are spirits at work at the time, they come only from yourself, not from the fume of the incense.
Why should spirits aid living beings?
What arrogance is it that drives people to believe they can have power over them?
The perfume helps focus your will, but it is your will alone that weaves the spell.’
‘Who told you that?’
Lucien's voice was sharp.
Walterkin looked up at him, his face beatific.
‘The park gates are just down here.
It's not far.’
The effect of Azmaveth's magical working was almost immediate.
The following morning, Lucien nearly retched in horror when he walked into the practise court and saw Amber Epipheny conversing with Resenence Jeopardy.
Her gestures were emphatic but, from a distance, did not appear threatening or abusive.
Jeopardy was leaning against the wall, his head thrown back, arms folded, looking down at Amber with inscrutable eyes.
Lucien hovered by the door.
Had he visualised his desires to Azmaveth inaccurately when he'd breathed the fume?
Amber should not figure in this design.
What was she doing here?
Jeopardy's eyes slid to the left and he caught sight of Lucien.
He raised a hand and beckoned him over.
Lucien had the direst of forebodings about obeying that summons, but was powerless to resist it.
Amber swung round on him in a flash of red hair.
‘It seems we've found a prodigy,’ she said.
Her tone was not exactly friendly, but its harshness was of bemused disbelief rather than jealous suspicion.
She looked him up and down.
‘Grow your hair,’ she said.
‘Your features are fine, but on the whole indistinct.
I think hair would improve that.’
She turned to Jeopardy.
‘Of course, you must make him wear a wig or some kind of decoration for the performance itself.’
Jeopardy grinned.
‘You have a delicate touch, my lovely,’ he said, ‘your tongue is a feather.
Ignore her, Lucien.
As a vibrancer, you are superb.
Dance your best, and I will be happy.
If you cut off your nose and ears before we perform, I shall not complain, so long as it does not mar your ability to dance.’
Lucien shrugged awkwardly.
‘I don't mean to insult you,’ Amber said.
‘But it is the truth.
What is wrong in telling someone how to make the best of themselves?’
She smiled, and Lucien was surprised to discover that, like Jeopardy, Amber became a different person when she smiled.
‘Res has no appreciation of beauty,’ she said.
‘They did wicked things to you at Por Tanssie, boy.
The place is run by a lunatic.
I've heard about it.
Has anyone advised you yet to unlearn all the rubbish they taught you there?’
‘Yes,’ Lucien said.
‘But it was not all rubbish.’
Amber looked faintly surprised he had contested her remark.
‘But of course not.
You wouldn't be a prodigy otherwise, would you?’
She reached out to touch Jeopardy on the cheek, her hand gliding to rest on Lucien's shoulder as she prepared to leave.
‘He speaks highly of you,’ she said.
‘In some ways, I regret losing my opportunity to perform this piece, but I don't begrudge you yours.’
She swept magnificently from the hall, clearly aware of, and gratified by, her own gracious magnanimity.
Lucien watched her go, thinking, ‘Oh, Paradouze, I am nothing, a puny scrap.
A good vibrancer, but an unattractive scrap.
What was I thinking of yesterday?’
The shame of believing he could initiate any intimacy with Resenence Jeopardy made him flush.
Jeopardy pushed himself away from the wall, his arms still folded.
He wandered towards the windows on light feet, a panther's tread.
Lucien turned his back and began flexing his  limbs.
This was too horrible.
He felt guilty thoughts were written all over his face.
‘She is quite wrong.’
Lucien turned round.
Jeopardy still had his back to him.
‘What?’
‘About you.
You look fine.’
He spun round and smiled, effortlessly dropping into a series of forward flips to land at Lucien's feet.
‘Are you ready?’
Lucien could not look into Jeopardy's eyes after that, and the practice went badly.
He felt dazed and confused because he could not decide what Jeopardy had meant by his remark.
His limbs seemed out of his control, he fumbled and slipped.
He missed his cues.
This ineptitude infuriated Jeopardy.
Never a person to hold back criticism when he felt it was needed, he lashed Lucien mercilessly with harsh words, and threw up his hands in despair when Lucien fouled yet another movement.
Eventually, after an hour of torment, Jeopardy swung out of a configuration with the words, ‘It is clear we will accomplish little today.’
Lucien slunk from the court a tortured thing.
He was convinced Jeopardy would hate him for ever, change his mind about the performance, change his mind about his prowess.
For the rest of the day, Lucien could not stop thinking about Jeopardy.
He analysed every moment of the morning practice, haunted by the echo of Jeopardy's voice, the image of his smile, the even teeth inside that smile.
Lucien was convinced his feelings were based on more than physical desire.
He believed that Resenence Jeopardy had penetrated deeper into his soul than that.
The following day's practice session began no better.
Attempting to execute a difficult move, paralysed in the core of his muscles by nervousness, Lucien lost his footing and ruined the sequence.
Jeopardy stumbled and nearly fell.
Lucien thought Jeopardy would strike him and cowered backwards, stooping down.
‘What is wrong with you!’
Jeopardy demanded.
His hands were curved into claws.
Do not let me wince, Lucien prayed, wincing.
‘Well?’
Jeopardy grabbed hold of Lucien's wrist.
He felt the bones twist within his flesh.
‘Been at the liquor, have you.
The silly weed?’
‘No!’
Lucien's voice could be nothing but indignant.
Such  substances were Jeopardy's weaknesses, not his.
‘I did not sleep well, that's all.’
Jeopardy made a scornful sound.
‘That should make no difference.
Don't whine at me!’
 Lucien tried to pull away.
‘I'll do the movement again.
Let me go!’
Jeopardy's lips curved into a snarl.
He released Lucien's wrist and turned his back, lifting his arms over his head, reaching behind him for his shoulders.
He leaned backwards, his hair hanging down until it nearly touched the floor.
‘Then dance,’ he said.
‘And get it right this time.’
You are enjoying this, Lucien thought.
What is it you want from me?
He performed the movement faultlessly.
‘Strange how a feeling of inadequacy can be changed by anger into indignation,’ Walterkin said.
‘Angry, you performed well.’
They were sitting together on the grass of Hartshorn Park, some distance away from a gravel path where tourists wandered up and down, pointing towards the follies and monuments around them.
‘A state of affairs Resenence Jeopardy used often to extract the best performances from his colleagues,’ Lucien said drily.
Walterkin nodded and put his hand into his trouser pocket, taking out a small mirror in a gilded frame.
‘And did he use the same formula in his intimate relationships?’
He held the mirror up so that Lucien could see into it.
I look old, Lucien thought, so old.
There are lines round my eyes and my hair has become a hag's rope.
He would not recognise me now.
Is my body the same?
What was once muscle has become plaited wood, frayed and plaited wood.
I am too thin.
‘I cannot name, or articulate, the formula Resenence used in his personal relationships,’ Lucien said.
‘It is too complex, beyond words.
I could never understand it.’
‘Why should you have wanted understanding?
What would that have gained for you?’
‘Something,’ Lucien said.
‘Something.’
‘You were obsessed by him,’ Walterkin observed, laying the mirror flat in his palm.
‘You still are.’
Lucien could not summon an objection to this observation.
‘It would seem so.
I seek to exorcise it, although in many ways my obsession has become my life.
What will be left for me if I  wriggle out of its skin?
Life would become dull.
I would need to discover new obsessions.’
‘Life itself is an obsession.’
Lucien nodded and sighed.
‘That might be true.’
He pressed his fingertips against his brow.
‘You have to understand part of what caused the obsession.
In Por Tanssie we were fed toxins that killed our desires.
No doubt in some houses, Ixmaritians were forced to continue this practice.
Mandru did not insist on it because he was a sensualist.
He enjoyed observing the affairs of his staff; it intrigued him.
I had nothing inside me to dampen my blood; it caught fire.’
‘And did this fire become a conflagration, did it burn itself out or was it doused by water?’
Walterkin laughed.
‘It became white-hot.
It blinded me.’
Lucien rested his chin in his hands.
‘He touched me that day.
We had performed the movement so many times, our bodies slipping past each other into a new configuration.
That day, he caught hold of me.
Looked at me strangely.
I could not interpret it.
He said.
‘I am not what you think I am,’ and I asked him what he thought I believed him to be.
‘Cold,’ he said.
Then what are you?
I asked, but it was only in my head.
‘I have great fears,’ he replied.
‘You will never understand.’
At that point, I did not want to.
I was beyond appreciating the proximity of his flesh.
I could not feel it.
Confusion numbed me utterly.
I regret that.
Now, I remember, and I put sensation to the memory, but it is only a fantasy.
I felt nothing.’
‘It was your magic coming true then, but there was a cost.’
Lucien nodded thoughtfully.
‘I should have known that.’
THE HAUNT
Dauntless Javelot had never imagined a woman could be such abrasive company.
In his mind, he had believed the female breed to be compliant, sighing creatures.
Cleo Sinister possessed neither of these qualities, nor did she appear to be familiar with other desirable attributes such as obedience, silence and the possession of gentle manners.
Dauntless tired of her voice, tired of her bony fingers digging into the cracks of his leather carapace as she clutched for balance astride the horse behind him.
Her hair blew forward like a dusty web and stuck to the corners of his mouth.
He knew that she carried a pouch of poisons.
The fact that this singular, somewhat oppressive female was seeking out a religious man seemed absurd.
Dauntless doubted whether she could direct her attention upon anything long enough to sustain a sense of faith.
Travelling, which had once been such a bore to him, was now a continual nightmare.
And yet it seemed her annoying presence somehow energised him.
For so long, he'd felt like a phantom.
Now, in the company of Cleo Sinister, his senses seemed to be waking up.
Sounds, sights and smells were more vibrant.
Could it be that unpleasant experiences were necessary to make a person feel real in the world, or was it caused simply by proximity to another living soul?
Whatever the reason, Dauntless bit his tongue and resolved to put up with Cleo Sinister.
If he was to be a martyr to this  strange woman's caprices, then so be it.
Valiance had surely put her in his path.
Perhaps this vexing quest was the proof he needed that Valiance existed.
If Cleo represented a hair shirt, he would wear it, and withstand the chafing.
He would carry out the quest he had appointed himself; take her to her holy man.
‘Have you not heard of Resenence Jeopardy?’ she'd asked him on the first day of their acquaintance.
He'd frowned.
‘No.
What is it?’
‘It is not an it, but a he,’ she'd replied.
‘A man of great power.
I knew his son before my husband killed him.’
‘Oh.’
‘My husband is a poisoner.
I never loved him,’ she'd explained airily, pulling leaves from a tree overhead and showering Contralto's head with annoyed insects.
Dauntless hoped they would not sting.
‘But despite his faults — which I confess were many — he was adept at killing.
He taught me well.
I know much about the human constitution and what it takes to stop it working.’
Dauntless felt distinctly uncomfortable with this blithe confession.
‘I'm sure we will find many uses for my skills upon our journey,’ Cleo said.
Dauntless began to dread the future.
He wondered how long they could travel before they met anyone Cleo felt inspired to poison, and whether he would change his mind about his commitment to her before then.
At night, he courteously surrendered his domed leather tent to Cleo's use.
Far from being grateful, she complained of the smell within and declared that sleeping in the open air had its merits.
She did not decline the offer, however, which forced the paladin to sleep on the ground, with his head on Contralto's saddle, beneath the trees outside.
Each evening, before they slept, Dauntless attempted conversation with his new companion.
She was not reluctant to talk about herself, and described with glee how she had left Scaraby through the sewers, emerging on the northern verges of Haling Heart.
She asked no questions in return, however, and when Dauntless volunteered information about himself, appeared bored in the extreme.
Still, it appeared her advent had summoned a little luck into his life, for suddenly they  began to discover plentiful growths of grass potatoes, forest leeks and turtle-berries, a welcome change from the stringy little rabbits and bitter roots they had eaten until then.
Gradually, their surroundings changed, and they emerged into an unfamiliar area of Haling Heart, which while being more lush, was also wilder and difficult to negotiate.
What paths existed were mostly overgrown.
One afternoon, after they had been travelling together for several days, Cleo ordered Dauntless to pull Contralto to a halt.
‘What is it?’ he asked irritably.
The previous day, she had demanded halts at least a dozen times, claiming they were being followed by something in the undergrowth, to the left of their narrow path.
Dauntless had patiently examined the foliage every time, but had found nothing to suggest pursuit.
‘I can hear something,’ Cleo said.
‘I can hear voices.’
Dauntless could hear nothing but the chomping of Contralto's teeth against his bit and the distant scream of birds high above.
‘There's nothing’
‘Wait!’
Cleo interrupted.
‘It came again as you were speaking!
Go forward!’
Sighing, Dauntless urged Contralto up the path.
Presently, he too heard the faint ghost of a sound, almost too muted to identify.
It was the laughter of children.
Ignoring the paladin's complaints, Cleo kicked Contralto's flanks to make him trot, and presently they came to a place where the path widened.
Tree branches met high overhead, creating a wavering green canopy through which sunlight fell in shadows and coins of light.
Sitting in a rough circle on the grassy mud path were three children.
Dauntless was instantly suspicious because there had been no sign of human habitation for days.
Cleo, however, leapt from Contralto's back and, paying no attention to Dauntless's warnings, walked smartly to where the children played.
They were not very old, perhaps as young as four or five.
There were two girls and a boy, all of them dressed in sparkling white clothes.
The girls had long ringlets of the deepest black that cascaded down their backs, while the boy's hair, similarly black and lustrous, was tied in a ponytail at his neck.
Their skins were as pale and smooth as cream, their eyes wide and slanted.
They seemed to glow in the flickering green-gold  gold light, as if embraced by a holy nimbus.
Cleo felt an overwhelming sense of familiarity.
It was like stepping backwards in time.
‘Hello!’ she said brightly.
The children ignored her approach, but now turned their heads towards her.
None of them returned her smile.
All looked at her with wary distrust.
Cleo entered their halo of light and squatted down among them.
Close to, the illusion of glowing feyness dissipated.
They appeared to be ordinary children, their white clothes a little soiled by mud and grass stains.
The boy's face was grubby around the mouth.
‘What are you doing here?’
Cleo asked them.
She looked into the circle of their cabal, and saw what had occupied them.
‘A doll's tea party!’ she exclaimed.
‘What fun!’
Her voice, however, wavered.
Dauntless dismounted from Contralto and led the horse forward.
He looked down over Cleo's shoulder to see what the children were doing.
There were about half a dozen porcelain dolls sitting among them, the kind with which his sisters had played as children.
He had been intensely frightened of those dolls as a young boy.
They'd been too lifelike, while too still.
Their glass eyes had been horribly knowing.
The dolls he was looking at now were old and battered, their clothes colourless and torn.
One was blind, having no eyes.
Another, whose face was made of wax, had been hideously disfigured, as if the victim of a conflagration.
Others were missing limbs, or hair.
In the centre of the circle of dolls and children was a metal cauldron, the size of a milk pan.
In a soup of pond water, twigs and shredded leaves, small china limbs and glass eyes floated with eerie realism: dolls' limbs, dolls' eyes.
A huge wooden spoon protruded from the cauldron.
Observing his scrutiny, one of the little girls solemnly lifted the spoon out of the grisly soup and offered it to Dauntless.
He took a step backwards; the horse snorted and shifted restlessly behind him.
‘My name is Cleo Sinister and this is Dauntless Javelot,’ Cleo said.
She gestured behind her.
‘Our horse is called Contralto.’
She took the spoon from the girl and pretended to drink from it.
‘Mmm!’ she murmured appreciatively.
‘What are your names?’
‘I am called Hope,’ said the larger of the two girls, tossing back her hair.
‘This is my brother and sister, Sanguin and Eternia.’
‘Where do you live?’
Cleo asked.
The children exchanged a glance, passing it round their circle like a secret.
‘In a big tree,’ said the boy.
The two girls giggled.
‘What fun!’
Cleo said.
‘I would like to live in a tree too.
I don't live anywhere at the moment.
This forest is my home.
I would like to see where you live, perhaps talk to your parents.’
‘Cleo,’ Dauntless said warningly, ‘you know nothing of these children.
They could be the progeny of bandits or gypsies!’
‘Give us a fingernail and we'll show you,’ said Hope.
Cleo extended her hands.
‘Alas, as you can see, my lovely nails are all broken down.
I couldn't even bite off a sliver.’
Hope frowned.
‘No, we meant from the root.
A whole fingernail.’
She picked up a little knife which had been lying in the lap of one of the dolls.
Its handle was the carved wooden figure of a mermaid with huge painted eyes.
‘I can cut it out.’
Cleo withdrew her hands swiftly.
‘The price is too great,’ she said.
‘But I have poisons.’
‘Cleo!’
Javelot cried in exasperation.
Cleo and the children ignored him.
Hope shook her head.
‘Oh, we have plenty of those.
We have everything we need.
Everything.
Except living things.’
‘What are you?’
Cleo asked.
The boy threw out his arm at astounding speed and touched her face.
Cleo could see that where the sleeve of his shirt was drawn back, his skin was a greenish colour, like chicken meat that was beginning to rot.
She put up her hand to her face and found it wet.
When she examined her fingers, they were red with blood.
‘We are fenniks!’
Sanguin cried.
Uttering a cry of disgust, Dauntless leapt forward and dragged Cleo up by the arm.
She did not resist, but narrowed her eyes at the children.
‘You are too light in colour for fenniks.
I think you are something else.’
‘Cleo, we must go,’ Dauntless pleaded.
‘These brats are ghouls.
Look at them!’
The children had got to their feet and stood in a line across the path, observing the two adults with passive faces.
They had gathered up the dolls in their arms, some of which were nearly as big as they were.
Their eyes looked dark in faces too  pale.
The green light surrounding them now seemed to be imparting a sick lifeless pallor.
Dauntless helped Cleo up onto Contralto's back, swiftly following her.
The horse appeared reluctant to pass the children, so Dauntless drew his sword and waved it in their direction in a threatening manner.
The children moved reluctantly to the side.
Contralto, eyes rolling, ears flat, skittishly began to mince past them.
The smallest girl, Eternia, suddenly jumped forward and grabbed Cleo's foot.
‘We are your friends!’ she cried, her small white face screwed up in an expression of bewilderment.
‘Your friends!
We want to see your wedding dress, your coloured combs!’
She tugged earnestly on Cleo's boot.
Cleo made a sound of distress, and Dauntless applied his heels to Contralto's shuddering flanks.
The horse jumped forward a few paces with his limbs bunched up and then, holding himself for a brief moment in a static rear, galloped off in sheer terror down the path.
Cleo looked back once.
As she expected the children had vanished perhaps into the trees.
‘This forest is full of very peculiar things,’ Dauntless said.
He was attempting to comfort Cleo, who had been uncharacteristically silent since their encounter with the children.
He could feel her trembling against him.
‘I've seen nothing like that,’ she said.
‘Haven't you?
Well, I've seen strange children aplenty,’ Dauntless replied with contrived joviality.
‘Funny little faces peering down at me through the branches overhead.
Who knows what they are?
They are certainly not human.
Don't let it upset you, Cleo.’
‘I'm not upset,’ Cleo retorted.
‘Not in the way you mean.
It's just that they reminded me so much of the poor child my husband killed.
I loved that child.
They could have been his siblings.’
‘Perhaps that was deliberate,’ Dauntless said in a sturdy voice.
‘If they were spirits, or rogue hewkin babes, they could have plucked an image from your mind, like a berry from a bush.
You must put them from your thoughts now.’
Cleo sighed heavily.
‘My face hurts,’ she said.
‘That boy scratched me deeply.’
‘You must put something on it.
Who knows what venoms lurk in those creatures’ claws.’
Dauntless kept an eye on the tree trunks to the side of the path and eventually spotted a growth of swage mushroom, just above head height.
He pulled Contralto to the side and stood up in his stirrups to gouge a handful of fungus from the bark.
This he kneaded into a pulp and then gave to Cleo to hold against her scratched cheek.
She complained of how it stung, but eventually her lamenting subsided and she rested her head against his shoulders.
For an hour or so they continued to travel through the sighing trees, Cleo slumped against Dauntless's back.
The pathway had virtually disappeared and now Contralto pushed through breast-high bracken.
The hissing of the leaves overhead had become soporific.
Dauntless himself was fighting an urge to doze.
Cleo suddenly became alert behind him and pulled herself upright.
‘Look!’ she cried excitedly, pointing past his face.
‘Through the trees!
The walls of a house!’
Dauntless cringed as she bellowed in his ear.
‘It's only a ruin,’ he said.
‘I don't think so.
There's smoke.’
Dauntless sighed.
‘But who would live here?
There are no paths, no sign of life at all.’
‘Then surely a very interesting person must live here,’ Cleo said.
Dauntless uttered a caustic laugh.
‘As interesting as the monsters who scratched your face and wanted to cut out your fingernails, hmm?’
The trees thinned to reveal what once might have been a clearing but which now resembled only a poisonous-looking wilderness.
The black walls of an enormous sprawling house rose menacingly from the rank weeds and thorns and, as Cleo had noticed, a thin reed of smoke was seeping from one of the many narrow chimneys.
Dauntless regarded this imposing edifice with dismay.
The roof was full of holes, all of which sprouted grass and moss.
Most of the windows were broken, and those that weren't were boarded over.
Judging from its appearance, he doubted that whoever lived there could be of a benign character.
Cleo did not seem to share his forebodings.
‘How  wonderful,’ she exclaimed.
‘It's so big!’
She began to wriggle down off Contralto's back.
‘No!’
Dauntless thundered.
‘We are riding past!’
But his order was ignored.
Cleo scampered to the edge of the clearing and looked back.
‘There is a pathway here,’ she cried.
‘Cleo, come back,’ the paladin shouted, without much confidence of being obeyed.
He watched with the direst of misgivings as Cleo began slapping a path for herself through the wilderness ahead.
Fetid muscle-grass sagged against giant stands of thorn-apple, elephant rhubarb and halo thistle.
Nettles with leaves the size of dinner plates fought a battle for possession of the clearing with garrotte vines, which sought to strangle the nettles with tendrils that sprouted vivid scarlet trumpet flowers.
Sighing, Dauntless urged Contralto to follow Cleo into this prickly, toxic jungle.
He was relieved somewhat by the fact that the horse did not balk at approaching the house.
By the time Contralto had won free of the nettles, Cleo had already reached the door.
Lifting a huge door-knocker in the shape of a retching demon, Cleo advertised their presence to whomever was concealed within.
Taut with nervous expectation upon the horse, Dauntless expected one of two scenarios to ensue: something maddened and destructive would erupt at the signal of Cleo's knock, or else there would be utter silence and no response at all.
He considered what action he should take concerning both of these possibilities.
If the former should occur (presuming whatever came out of the house did not destroy Cleo immediately, and he was not without hope that this might happen), he would draw his sword and attack.
If the foe seemed too large or numerous to deal with, he would withdraw discreetly and leave the witless Cleo to her fate.
He'd had more than enough of her reckless approach to potentially lethal situations.
Under these circumstances not even Valiance could blame him for abandoning his quest.
However, should Cleo's entreaty elicit no response, he might consider investigating the building with her.
It might possibly be occupied only by a raddled ancient, of no threat.
At first there was no response to Cleo's knock, at which Dauntless was greatly relieved.
She looked back over her  shoulder at him and pulled a sour face.
Then, squaring her shoulders, she lifted the knocker again and pounded it repeatedly against the door.
Almost immediately, frenzied barking erupted beyond the door, which to Dauntless sounded like a pack of hellhounds released from sorcerous slumber.
Cleo took a single step backwards down the short flight of steps that led to the door.
Dauntless leapt down from Contralto's back.
There was a crash, as of heavy, well-muscled animal bodies being hurled against the door, and Dauntless was sure he perceived the wood shaking on its hinges.
‘Cleo,’ he said, ‘come here.
Now!’
She looked back at him once, her fingers clasping her face, but she did not stir.
The cacophony within the house seemed to last for several minutes, but was perhaps only of seconds' duration.
Then the door creaked open an inch or two.
There was a sound of chains rattling, and the fervid snarling of the beasts increased.
Dauntless took down his sword from its saddle sheath.
Contralto huffed and pulled in his chin with foreboding at the angry growls.
Cleo did not feel at all frightened.
Her childhood in the Burrows had well acquainted her with fearsome beasts of all shapes and sizes.
As whoever stood beyond the door fought with its security measures, she considered her own plan of action.
It sounded as if there were several animals waiting to launch themselves upon her.
She knew how to blind mad dogs with her bare hands, and also how to break their jaws, but she was also very proficient at a less violent form of defence, which her father had taught her.
She knew that if she stood very still and sent forth quiet animal-soothing thoughts, it was often enough to discourage attack.
As a young girl in the Burrows this method had saved her on more than one occasion from a corner of adversity.
It was not a technique she was comfortable using, however.
The door opened a few more inches and a pair of wide dark snouts pushed through, snuffling noisily.
‘Good day,’ Cleo said in a loud, clear voice.
Another smaller snout, quite white, appeared at the bottom of the door.
‘We are travellers, and though we are not lost in the true sense of the word, we perhaps lack direction.’
While she had been speaking, the dogs had been struggling to get through the narrow crack of open door.
Cleo stood on  tiptoe, trying to see who hid behind the door.
The animals managed to push their heads through the gap, which were quickly followed by powerful shoulders, massive bodies and, mercifully, a pair of wagging tails.
A third animal, which was a small, short-legged creature, weaved out between the prancing legs of his companions, barking in a high-pitched voice.
Cleo staggered back from the loving assault being bestowed upon her by the two larger animals.
She put her hands against their huge hard heads, and the warm power of them gave her confidence a strange boost.
This surprised her, for generally she did not like dogs.
She remembered the hounds at the Salamanca estate.
In what ways were these animals different from them?
Or was it she who was different now?
She drew herself up to her full height.
‘I am Cleo Sinister,’ she announced.
In the open doorway stood an unkempt though not unattractive young man who was dark of hair and eye.
He appraised Cleo with an expression of suspicious enquiry.
‘What do you want?’ he demanded, looking past her at the paladin, who was brandishing his sword.
The small dog was sniffing round Contralto's heels, causing the horse to skip nervously from side to side.
Cleo smiled and smoothed her skirts, finding them quite wet with dog spittle.
‘Well, we are seeking hospitality,’ she said.
‘We saw the smoke from your chimney through the trees.’
‘Visitors are few to these parts,’ the young man responded with distrust, ‘on account of the isolation and, to be sure, the condition of our estate.’
‘It is a wonderful estate,’ Cleo exclaimed.
‘It is like a house I dreamed of once, where I wandered through its rooms for an eternity.’
The young man glanced behind himself dubiously, into the interior.
‘Have you any money?’ he asked abruptly.
‘Yes,’ Cleo replied boldly.
‘Hmmm.’
The young man stroked his chin, and then apparently came to a decision.
‘Very well, you are welcome to enter and partake of our hospitality.
What there is of it.
I hope you're not expecting anything too grand.’
‘I expect nothing,’ said Cleo.
‘That way, I am rarely disappointed by life.’
She turned to Dauntless and summoned him  peremptorily.
‘Paladin, tether Contralto to that tree.
We are to be guests of this house.’
The dilapidation and solitude of the house effectively concealed the commerce that was conducted within its walls.
Cleo and Javelot soon discovered that it was occupied by five individuals, who were stowed away in far chambers like ideas in a vast empty brain.
The young man who had let them in introduced himself as Malengin Fole.
‘We are a scientific community,’ he said as he led them into a dismal cavernous hall, ‘and also a spiritual one.’
‘In what way scientific?’
Cleo asked.
‘One of our number, Master Dratslinger, harnesses ghosts by means of vibration.
We assist him in this task and some might, because of that, categorise us as musicians.’
‘Indeed,’ Cleo exclaimed.
‘Is it by music, then, that you seek to tame the spirits?’
Malengin Fole frowned a little.
‘Yes, I suppose so, but our creations are perhaps not accessible to a trivial mind.’
‘I am intrigued,’ Cleo declared.
‘So what is the spiritual aspect of your community?’
‘As I said, we work with ghosts.’
They crossed the dark hallway, which smelled strongly of damp and dog, the animals themselves charging gleefully back and forth across the floor.
There was no matting underfoot, and hardly any light because the windows, high up over a ponderous staircase, were all begrimed.
‘No woman lives here,’ Cleo thought.
Malengin Fole led them through several apartments, all of them apparently abandoned.
Evidence of decay and neglect was manifest.
Wallpaper and plaster were parting company with the walls and high ceilings, and decomposing furniture lay everywhere, as if hacked apart by axes.
Cleo hoped that some upper part of the building was more habitable.
‘It seems the scientific mind precludes the accumulation of more tangible comforts,’ Dauntless observed quietly to Cleo.
Malengin, however, overheard him.
‘We have to attract the ghosts,’ he said, as if that were explanation enough for the dissolution.
Eventually they arrived at an enormous kitchen.
Here, it seemed, some labour had been applied to physical comforts, although there was little evidence of efficient housekeeping.
Ropes of onions and garlic hung from ancient rafters, and sacks of rice and potatoes were crammed beneath a huge stained table.
Boxes of apples, which filled the air with a sickly sweet perfume, were stacked beside a cracked sink that was flanked by warped wooden draining boards.
The floor was of cracked tiles, and in several places pale weeds grew from the cracks.
Above the sink, ivy had burrowed its way through the walls and was now spreading in profusion towards the ceiling.
A row of curtainless windows punctuated the wall behind the sink, all of them opaque with ancient grime.
Cleo wanted to see outside.
She had to rub the filthy glass in order to see anything.
There was a wide, cobbled enclosure, flanked on all sides by sagging black buildings.
Numerous poles were set into the mossy cobbles of the yard, connected at a height of six feet or so by thin cords.
They resembled washing lines, although instead of clothes, several dozen peculiar wooden and metal contraptions were pegged out.
They resembled musical instruments, though remarkably different from any Cleo had seen before.
‘What strange laundry you have,’ she remarked.
‘New devices,’ Malengin explained.
‘They have been varnished and are hanging out to dry.’
‘But the wind is blowing dust and leaves up from the ground,’ Cleo said.
‘Won't that spoil the varnish?’
‘On the contrary,’ Malengin said, attempting, with difficulty, to turn one of the three taps over the sink.
‘It imparts a certain voice of earth into each instrument.
Would you care for tisane?’
His efforts were rewarded by an agonised groan from the plumbing, a shudder, and a thin trickle of water.
‘Very much so,’ Cleo said.
‘I am parched.
How about you, Dauntless?’
‘A small cup,’ the paladin said, eyeing with misgiving the black grease-encrusted cooking range that squatted in a corner like an enormous metal dragon.
Thick pipes sprouted from several places in the range, some disappearing through holes in the ceiling, others through the floor, while one snaked along the skirting board before vanishing through a door.
Malengin set about preparing the beverage.
He opened a door on the range and was rewarded by a cough of brilliant flame which gusted briefly into the room.
He shovelled a small  amount of coal inside, and then placed a kettle on one of the hotplates.
He directed Cleo and Dauntless to seat themselves on a bench at the table.
It creaked and wobbled ominously under their weight.
‘So, where are you travelling to?’
Malengin asked.
‘You say you are not lost, yet it seems unusual for someone to come across this spot.’
‘We are on a quest,’ Cleo said, pre-empting Dauntless's explanation.
‘For what?’
Malengin leaned against the sink with his arms folded.
The idea appeared to amuse him.
‘A man,’ Cleo said importantly.
‘A great man.
His name is Resenence Jeopardy.’
Melangin pulled a sour face.
‘Ah yes, I have heard of him.’
‘Out here?’
Dauntless said.
‘How surprising!’
Malengin went back to the range and peered at the kettle.
‘Not really.
You forget we entertain spirits.
Many have died in Jeopardy's train.’
Cleo sighed and rested her chin in her hands.
‘I would have expected it,’ she said dreamily.
‘The mere idea of the man is romantic.’
Malengin smiled at Cleo's observation.
‘He is more of an idea than a man,’ he said.
‘How so?’
Cleo asked.
Malengin, however, did not answer, but offered Cleo and Dauntless two stained cracked mugs filled with something that appeared to be heated pond water.
Cleo stared at the contents with dismay.
‘Don't worry,’ Malengin said, ‘the water here looks acrid, but tastes well enough.
It has an earthy tang.
However, you might find it unusual.
This might help.’
He took down a large earthenware flask from a shelf above the range, unstoppered it, and poured a measure of golden liquid into Cleo's mug.
An inviting smell of liquor rose on the steam.
Cleo sipped.
She could taste fire; little else.
Dauntless declined the offer of liquor, and sipped with evident distaste at the tisane.
‘You think this Jeopardy character doesn't exist, then?’ he asked.
‘We have not researched the phenomenon extensively,’ Malengin replied ponderously, ‘but there are certain aspects that speak of legend rather than fact.’
‘Such as?’ the paladin enquired.
Malengin shrugged.
‘Miracles are ascribed to him, which I find hard to believe.
They say he can be in several places at once, can work magic, hypnotise with his eyes, cause death, resuscitate corpses, make women pregnant with a glance.
Surely, if such a puissant individual existed, he would enjoy greater fame and also far greater power and influence than he does.’
‘But not all the legends can be lies,’ Cleo protested.
‘I met a woman who'd borne Jeopardy's child.
I cared for that child myself.’
‘His children are all dead,’ Malengin said, and then smiled.
‘Well, so the stories would have us believe.’
‘It's true I saw one die,’ Cleo said, and her wistful words invoked an uncomfortable silence in the room.
Dauntless was discomfited by the way Cleo was so open with Malengin Fole, a man he had instantly distrusted.
He had, in Dauntless's opinion, a murderer's brow.
For someone who appeared so gleefully wicked and amoral, Cleo seemed surprisingly dim when it came to character judgment.
Dauntless wondered again what he was doing in her company.
Had she really been sent to him by the spirit of True Valiance himself, to test his chivalry and honour?
He dared not conjecture, but the possibility of that was the only thing that prevented him from abandoning her.
He observed with simmering rancour as she began to tell Malengin about her life in the poisoner's house in Scaraby.
Had she no sense of discretion?
Then, as if drawn by the presence of strangers, another of the household came into the kitchen.
Alerted by an ominous creaking sound coming from near his feet, Dauntless glanced down to see a trapdoor in the floor being opened from beneath.
A peculiar head slowly rose from the hole and peered into the room with patient animal scrutiny.
Dauntless flinched away in distaste.
At first glance, the head seemed to consist solely of a long nose protruding from a tangle of hair, thereby resembling the countenance of a maned vole, though considerably larger in size.
‘Ah, Flittern,’ said Malengin, bestirring himself from beside the cooking range.
‘We have guests.’
‘I smelled as much!’ declared the newcomer, a remark which served only to inflame Dauntless's discomfort.
‘Are they here to buy?’
‘Buy what?’
Cleo asked.
‘Our merchandise,’ Flittern said, and with a jerk of long, spidery limbs, he leapt up out of the hole.
Cleo's jaw dropped open in surprise.
‘You are looking at Flittern Rattletrap!’ announced the man, extending a limb to shake Cleo's hand.
He was an alarmingly tall and thin individual, whose long, bedraggled dark hair fell nearly to his waist.
He brought a pungent, earthy scent of cellars with him, which was not wholly unpleasant.
‘Pleased to meet you,’ Cleo said, ‘but I don't want to buy any ghosts.’
Flittern Rattletrap rippled his attenuated fingers on the air.
‘Ghosts?
Oh, you do not understand.
We have more than mere ghosts on offer: wights, visitants, creep-haunts, duppies, spooks both gaseous and plasmic, bogles, lych-folk and ghouls.’
Cleo's face did not register any enthusiasm.
‘On the other hand,’ Flittern said, folding himself onto the bench beside her, ‘we could perhaps tempt you with a bottled rogue amorous thought, distilled at the first quarter of the moon, and salted with a spark of starlight.
Such a pretty sight.
The bottles are first-class and blown on the premises to your explicit specifications.’
Cleo shook her head.
‘No thank you.’
Flittern Rattletrap frowned.
‘Oh, then perhaps’
‘These are not customers, Flit, they are paying guests,’ Malengin interrupted.
‘Oh.’
Flittern's face fell.
Then he grinned and opened his mouth, as if to list further commodities produced on the premises, when a further member of the household came into the room, this time through the doorway above ground.
This young man had orange hair that fell in tangled plaits from the crown of his head.
Cleo thought he had a trickster's face, like that of a malevolent clown.
Like Flittern Rattletrap and Malengin Fole, he wore dark-coloured garments that had nearly fallen into rags.
‘This is Tumblejack,’ Malengin informed his guests.
‘He is an evocator of unsurpassable skill.’
‘Indeed,’ said Tumblejack, bowing extravagantly to Cleo.
‘For as little as a copper coin, I will utter a howl guaranteed to wake the dead.’
‘Perhaps now is not the right moment,’ Flittern suggested.
Tumblejack shrugged.
‘People have said that no moment in the existence of the universe is propitious for the ejaculation of one of my howls.
If that is the case, and bearing in mind I intend to ignore such advice, then surely all moments are of equal suitability.’
He opened his mouth and emitted a short mournful squall, which set Cleo's teeth on edge.
Dauntless felt his skin crawl.
He mistrusted all of these bizarre individuals with equal zeal.
According to the lore of True Valiance, necromancy in any form was an abomination.
He was soiling himself simply through his proximity to these sorcerers.
It was not impossible they planned to work some malign mischief upon himself and the gullible Mistress Sinister.
Cleo, as perhaps he should have anticipated, seemed delighted by this motley collection of ghost-trussers.
She was grinning from ear to ear, her eyes sparkling in excited anticipation, like a child watching magicians at a carnival.
Dauntless decided to take a firm stand in the matter.
He cleared his throat and spoke loudly.
‘We had best be on our way soon, Cleo, before dark falls.’
Cleo directed a glance of extreme malevolence in his direction.
‘What, to sleep in that disgusting tent of yours again?’ she exclaimed angrily.
‘What a happy prospect!’
‘You are welcome to stay here awhile,’ said Malengin in a silky voice.
‘At least overnight.’
‘That is kind of you,’ Dauntless said firmly, ‘but time presses’
‘Thank you very much,’ Cleo interrupted.
‘I need a rest from travelling.
I have decided the horse is an inclement beast, and this land is hardly friendly to travellers.’
Dauntless was aghast.
Was she mad?
Could she really countenance spending a night of long dark hours in this ruin, a ruin whose sole purpose was the gathering of ghosts?
He shuddered.
Discomfort in the open air was far preferable to him.
He stood up.
‘I think perhaps we should confer in private on this matter,’ he said.
‘Whatever for?’ she replied.
‘I have made up my mind.
Come along now, paladin, be flexible.’
She grinned.
‘Or is it you're scared of ghosts?’
‘I,’ Dauntless declared, ‘am a paladin of True Valiance.
I am afraid of nothing.’
Simply by reminding himself of this fact, he felt inspired by a new confidence and was just about to  lift Cleo physically from her seat when yet another resident of the house made an appearance.
She came in through the yard door, and from the moment he saw her, Dauntless could tell she was a sorceress of deftness and strength.
Her arrival effectively stemmed any action he was about to take.
She was not a tall woman, being a hand's width shorter than Cleo, but her small frame was crammed with energy.
She was dressed in a long white robe of finely pleated linen, which was belted loosely at the waist.
Her teased black hair surrounded her like a storm cloud.
All the men in the room seemed cowed by her presence.
‘Fole, what is this?’ she demanded.
‘I did not realise we had guests.’
‘May I introduce Apanage, the mistress of Drago Dratslinger,’ said Malengin.
He turned to the lady and executed a nervous bow.
She inclined her head with derision.
‘Actually,’ said Tumblejack, ‘whether these people are guests or not is a moot point.
They were just arguing about whether they should leave.’
‘I am hardly surprised,’ Apanage declared.
‘Look at the state of this place!
What are you thinking of, entertaining guests here in your revolting lair?
You should have summoned me at once.’
Without waiting for an explanation from the men, who had all assumed sheepish expressions, the lady gracefully turned towards Cleo and Javelot, her arms extended.
Poisonous-looking talons embellished the end of each delicate finger.
‘I am not in the least amazed you have been discouraged by the noisome ambience of these apartments,’ she said, darting an evil glance towards her colleagues, ‘but I assure you we have more appealing accommodation elsewhere in our little establishment.’
‘We really should be on our way, madam,’ Dauntless said, with a stiff bow.
‘Although we are grateful for your kind offer.’
‘Dauntless!’
Cleo cried.
‘Why are you so intent on making me miserable?
I yearn for a night beneath a sound roof, without insects crawling in my hair and vermin nibbling my toes.’
She rubbed the painful scratch on her face as she spoke.
Dauntless directed a glance at Cleo to convey it was unlikely she'd be free of such nuisances anywhere in this place.
Apanage glided forward and intervened.
‘Please, you cannot be in such a rush.
At least let me take you to the rooms I share with Master Dratslinger.
You must be hungry.
Let me feed you and provide soothing balm for the lady's wound.
I am sure my lord will be most interested in meeting you.
Variety is too infrequent in these parts.’
She reached out and touched Dauntless's arm, apparently unaware of the shudder that convulsed his flesh.
‘I can see you are distressed by the business conducted here, but I can put your mind at rest.
You could be no further from danger than in our apartments above the stables.
We do not allow the least whiff of spiritual curd or coagulum to cross our threshold.
Come there with me now.’
‘My companion is a paladin,’ Cleo explained to Apanage.
‘He is mistrustful of matters arcane and weird.
You must forgive his apparent rude conduct.’
Together, the women led a vaguely protesting Dauntless from the house and out into the yard.
Outside, they dodged and ducked between the lines of drying instruments.
A gentle breeze was investigating the cavities and strings of each device, which produced an eerie yet subtle cacophony; an accidental music.
Cleo turned and craned her neck to take in the massive black pile rising behind them.
The house seemed to watch her with a calculating eye.
She smiled at its brick countenance.
‘A house like this should have a name,’ she said, ‘but I saw no inscription at the front.’
‘We call it The Haunt,’ Apanage told her, with a shrug.
‘It is simple, while precise.’
‘The Haunt,’ Cleo repeated.
‘Yes, I like that.’
In fact, she liked everything about the dismal house with its strange air of disuse.
She liked the moss-covered cobbles of the yard, and appreciated the random design of the shaggy tufts of grass hanging down from the eaves of the ancient stable blocks ahead.
Fan-tailed doves, which evidently roosted in the haylofts above the outbuildings, complemented the wind-music with a rhythmic cooing.
Cleo could not understand why Dauntless was not similarly enchanted by the place.
Once they'd come out of the house, he'd shaken himself free of the women and had now adopted a surly silence.
He'd made no move to leave, however, and scuffed along behind them.
Apanage glided forward beside Cleo, her robe trailing along the ground.
One of the monstrous hounds had followed her out of the main house and now pressed close to her legs.
Apanage laid her hand upon its broad head.
‘Drago has renovated sections of the loft area,’ she said.
‘It is where he formulates his experiments and conceives designs for new instruments.
Fole and the others help him complete his designs, and subsequently assist in invoking the spirits.
Sometimes, I regret, there is a frightful racket, but occasionally the discordant melds into harmony and a new resonance is reached.
It is at these times that the ghosts flock most cordially to our summons.’
‘What do you do with the ghosts when you've got them?’
Cleo asked.
‘Generally, we bottle and sell them,’ Apanage replied.
‘Fole and Rattletrap go to the Crypticole Market — it is held infrequently and its location must of necessity change often, owing to its nature.
All manner of exotic produce is bought and sold there.
We barter the bottled ghosts for the things we need: provisions, new materials and suchlike.’
Dauntless was impelled to break his silence.
‘Isn't bottling rather a cruel thing to do to a spirit?’
His voice sounded gruff.
‘Oh dear, you have awoken his sense of decency!’
Cleo exclaimed.
Dauntless frowned at her.
‘Well, after my travails upon this sad world are done, the last thing I would want is to view eternity from the inside of a bottle.’
Cleo shrugged.
‘The spirits we invoke are never trapped for eternity,’ Apanage said, smiling sweetly at Dauntless.
‘At the most, they are confined only for a century or two.
After that the bottle will undoubtedly have broken or some fool will have accidentally released the spirit.
What are a couple of centuries in comparison with eternity?
I imagine it must seem like the blink of an eye to a ghost, don't you?’
‘I have no way of knowing,’ Dauntless replied, pointedly.
Apanage's smile assumed a more acid cast.
‘I am having difficulty appreciating why the fate of these ghosts, who were unknown to you in life, mean so much to you,’ she said.
‘Dauntless is a paladin,’ Cleo reminded her, ‘and therefore believes himself to be pious and true.
His mission is to assure that everyone he comes across has a happy life.
I presume he must also want them to have a happy death.
Isn't that right, Dauntless?’
‘Oh dear!’ said Apanage.
Dauntless merely uttered a gibbering sound and abandoned the argument.
The living area and workrooms inhabited by Apanage and Drago Dratslinger were certainly more comfortable than those of the main house.
A sprawling area of loft, still retaining a pleasant aroma of musty hay, had been transformed into a spacious apartment.
Coloured rugs covered most of the ancient dusty floor and the walls were of bare brick, but hung with decorations constructed from skulls, feathers and tapestry, which Apanage announced she had contrived herself.
Cleo exclaimed over the rooms and their appointments with delight.
Dauntless remained sour of countenance.
After applying balm to Cleo's face, Apanage took them to Dratslinger's workroom.
It was a small chamber, with a single round window.
Light from outside fell meagrely into the room; illumination was chiefly provided by scores of candles which were stuck onto every available surface and adorned wrought-iron candelabra hanging from the ceiling.
Dratslinger looked up when Apanage led her guests into the room, an expression of irritation on his face.
His workbench held an array of half-finished instruments and the air smelled heavily of varnish.
In appearance he was a tall and forbidding character, whom Cleo thought at first was rather too grim of face.
However, once his mistress had informed him they had guests, his dour features brightened up considerably.
He was eager to show them the instrument he was constructing.
‘Look at this,’ he said to Cleo, and handed her the delicate instrument, which was a web of vanes and strings.
Cleo ran her fingers over the strings and a frail sound came out.
What ghost would this summon? she wondered.
Could it call Inky's shade to me?
‘You have a wistful look about you,’ Drago said.
‘I knew a girl once who had such a look.
She had seen a massacre.
She looked as you do, hungry for ghosts.’
Cleo put the instrument down.
‘I am not looking for a ghost.
I am looking for a man.’
While Drago and Apanage went into the small kitchen next to Drago's workroom to prepare a meal, Cleo and Dauntless sat in a cosy parlour where a log fire warmed the stones of an enormous chimney breast.
The floor was covered in woven, woollen rugs coloured purple and blue.
The visitors were  joined by the monstrous dog who'd come from the main house: her name, Apanage had told them, was Fawn.
Now, she lay panting by the fire, warming her flanks and apparently listening to the humans' conversation.
‘These people are so funny,’ Cleo hissed, smiling.
‘Funny?
Insane, more like,’ Dauntless answered.
Although his instincts could pick up no sense of immediate threat in these rooms, he still felt far from at ease.
‘I like it here.
It's cheering me up.’
‘Cleo,’ Dauntless said firmly, ‘has it occurred to you that the business they're involved in is very dangerous?
These people seem like halfwits unaware of the hazards.
Although they're full of droll talk and amusing mannerisms, they are still necromancers.
Don't forget that.’
Cleo pulled a sour face.
‘You always have to spoil everything,’ she said bitterly, and lapsed into silence, her buoyant mood crushed.
Dauntless watched Cleo carefully as she sat on the rugs beside the dog, stroking its short, dense fur.
Sometimes she seemed such a gullible innocent, sometimes she was an infuriating harridan, sometimes a malevolent witch.
Now, she appeared simply as she really was: a woman who was tired and drawn, and far from home.
It was as if she'd let the qualities of courage and daring, which were only masks she wore to protect herself, slip from her face.
She looked lost.
Dauntless wondered what went on in her head.
She talked of quests, of finding this absurd religious character, but he was unsure of her conviction.
Relaxing before the fire in the warm room, he felt he could view Cleo Sinister with unprecedented clarity.
He suspected that, inside herself, she was totally bewildered and perhaps despaired of ever finding Resenence Jeopardy.
Over the years, Dauntless had become used to loneliness, but he suspected that for Cleo it was a new condition which she was having trouble getting used to.
He knew that she thought him to be a stiff and unimaginative person.
Sometimes her caprices made him behave as if he was.
Sometimes, he really wanted to abandon her, yet looking at her now he could not imagine why he ever felt that way.
She seemed so fragile; her bravado was an act.
It was his duty to protect her.
‘Cleo, have you asked yourself whether you are doing the right thing?’ he asked.
‘What do you mean, paladin?’
Cleo said.
‘I have escaped  marriage to a poisoner who killed someone dear to me.
I am driven to seek the man who sired that dear child.
How could I ever question what I'm doing?’
Dauntless sighed.
‘But the man is a dream.
Didn't that character Fole virtually say so?
‘He is more an idea than a man.’
Somehow the feeling in my bones agrees with that statement.’
‘I cannot believe he is not real,’ Cleo said.
‘How can an idea father a child?’
‘He may be dead.
The Ixmarites would not tolerate such a man for long, I am sure.’
‘You don't know that.’
Cleo lay down beside the dog, resting her cheek on one hand.
She continued to stroke the animal, but her movements had become less languid.
‘I have to find him, Daunt.
As to why, I cannot truly say.
I can only remember listening as a child's body was carried down the stairs of my husband's house, and the way the moon came into my kitchen as I listened.
I can taste the liquor in my throat, which I drank to still the pain in my heart.’
She looked directly into Dauntless's eyes.
‘I have never loved, Dauntless Javelot.
Never.’
Dauntless had to drop his gaze.
He felt embarrassed, yet cursed himself for feeling that way.
Cleo sighed.
‘I wonder whether I ever can or ever will be able to love.
All I am sure of is that in the face of that child, as he lay dead upon the couch, I saw something of my own future.
Something which was destined to influence me.
A sick obsession overcame me.
I projected the child's face into his own vanished future and attempted to see the man he would have become, the man I intend to find.’
She paused and shook her head.
‘This makes no sense even to me.
What hope have I of making sense to you?’
Dauntless reached out and touched her shoulder.
‘And what will you do if you find your dream?’
She turned round and smiled at him, in a watery fashion, because her eyes were near to tears.
‘I don't know,’ she said.
‘What can I possibly do?’
Dauntless shrugged and squeezed the flesh and bone of her shoulder through the worn cloth of her dress.
‘Follow him, I suppose,’ he said.
‘Isn't that what he would expect and want?’
Cleo turned away and rubbed her nose, sniffling loudly.
‘I have made this search my life,’ she said.
‘But if I'm honest, I must admit that I regret it now.’
Dauntless leaned towards her earnestly.
‘Then return to Scaraby!
I will take you there if I can.’
Cleo shook her head.
‘No.’
She frowned.
‘I do not miss Wakelate at all.
I barely remember him…’
Then she sat right on the rug, and the dog opened her jaws to let her tongue hang from her mouth.
It looked as if she was grinning.
‘Daunt,’ Cleo said, ‘I can never go backwards.
I see that so clearly.
It is as if the path is closed to me.
Neither can I deviate from the path I have chosen.
Is this a sacred thing, that I can only go forward?
Is it a true dream, or am I deceiving myself?
Will Resenence Jeopardy give me some kind of knowledge?
Is that what I'm seeking?’
‘You are clutching at down-seeds in an autumn wind,’ Dauntless said.
Cleo sighed, and opened her mouth to speak, but at that moment the door to the parlour creaked and Drago Dratslinger and his mistress brought in the meal they had prepared for their guests, and the talk turned to that of wood and spirits, of how to trap a wandering soul.
After the meal, Drago told them that he had recently completed a new instrument and that at midnight he and his colleagues were planning to play together, in order to invoke some ghosts.
Apanage's task during the operation was to bottle the spirits while they swayed deliriously to the music.
Dauntless looked far from happy that a ghost-bottling session would be conducted while he was staying at the house.
He had been uncharacteristically relaxed and jovial during the meal, which had both surprised and pleased Cleo, who'd anticipated having to apologise for him all the time.
Now, his mouth clamped into the grim line she was familiar with.
It presaged difficulty.
‘Perhaps you and Cleo would like to participate in our little experiment,’ Drago said to Dauntless.
‘I think I must decline that offer,’ he replied with strained laughter.
‘What would we have to do?’
Cleo asked.
‘Is it dangerous?’
‘Not at all,’ Apanage replied.
‘The ghosts are driven quite stupid by the music.’
Cleo's face assumed a calculating expression.
‘Can you conjure particular ghosts?’ she asked.
Dauntless glared at her.
‘You are thinking of the child!’ he said harshly.
‘You are mad.’
Apanage and Drago looked surprised, although they said nothing.
‘You are a cruel, heartless beast!’
Cleo yelled at Dauntless.
‘Have you no understanding?’
‘I understand only that you intend to meddle in things you know nothing about,’ he said.
The Dratslingers now looked embarrassed.
‘There is no danger,’ Apanage repeated lamely.
‘I cannot participate in necromancy, Dauntless said in a tone of voice indicating that he would not be persuaded otherwise.
‘It is against the lore of True Valiance, and as your protector, Cleo, I must insist you don't take part yourself.’
‘I'll do what I want!’
Cleo spat, and turned earnestly to Apanage.
‘Please, I'd like to join in.’
‘No!’
Dauntless cried, which prompted an angry wail from Cleo.
Apanage's measured voice interrupted them.
‘We don't want to cause an argument,’ she said, and turned to Dauntless.
‘Look, neither of you have to participate in the conjurations if you don't want to.
If Cleo wants to be present, she can simply watch from outside the circle.
It is quite safe, I promise you.
And sometimes the ghosts are so pretty to look at.
It would be a shame if you missed seeing them while you are here.’
‘Oh, Daunt, don't be such a bore!
Let's go and see them,’ Cleo said firmly.
‘I can't,’ he insisted.
Cleo pulled an aggrieved face.
‘Then you must wait here,’ she said.
‘I'm not going to miss it.’
With glum weariness, Dauntless realised that, in order to keep to his quest, he would either have to restrain Cleo physically, which the Dratslingers might prevent, or else accompany her to whatever  eldritch ceremony was about to be performed.
Some instinct told him he should not let Cleo out of his sight.
‘If I come with Cleo, you must allow me to draw my own  circle of protection,’ he said to the Dratslingers.
‘Would the symbols of Valiance interfere with your procedures?’
‘That is very unlikely,’ Drago said drily.
‘Do whatever makes you feel happy.’
About an hour before midnight, Cleo and Javelot were taken across the yard and up a rickety stair on the outside of the main house.
The moon was full, the sky clear; it seemed an ideal time for the manifestation of ghosts.
Apanage led the company, carrying a large glass lantern; her pale, tiny shape made her appear like a spirit herself.
Drago unlocked the door at the top of the stairs, and led the way into a high narrow storeroom.
Using the lantern, Apanage lit candles set in sconces on the wall.
The candlelight revealed that the room was packed with old iron bathtubs which were full of wooden rocking horses.
Their painted eyes seemed to be full of a malignant resentment, as if they'd once been living horses that had been turned to wood by an enchantment.
Cleo ran her hands through their manes and tails, which were made of real horsehair, exclaiming in wonder.
‘An earlier experiment,’ Drago explained, frowning at the tubs.
He indicated a door at the end of the room.
‘If you'd care to come this way.’
After scrambling along a series of dark and dusty corridors which were lit only by Apanage's lantern and the feeble light of the moon fighting its way through filthy skylights, Cleo and Dauntless were eventually led into a spacious attic.
Malengin Fole, Flittern Rattletrap and Tumblejack, having used a stairway inside the house, were already there, preparing their equipment.
Under Dauntless's watchful eye, Cleo prowled around the attic, exploring.
There was very little floorspace as every available area was covered with materials that might have been rubbish, or else discarded and half-completed instruments.
Perhaps the jumble of wood, cloth, metal and coal were even items of importance for the ghost-bottlers' art.
Complicated paraphernalia composed of long, delicate wooden struts and gossamer silk hung from the roof, as well as various instruments that seemed astronomical or alchemical in design.
Cleo wondered whether the rapid fluttering sensation she could feel in her chest was inspired by fear or excitement.
In some ways, she shared Dauntless's misgivings about the forthcoming event.
Cleo had never, to her knowledge, seen a ghost, although she had often sensed their presence in the shadowed, tragedy-haunted alleys of the Burrows.
She had heard that the sight of some spirits was so terrifying, it could drive a person insane, never to recover their wits.
The occupants of The Haunt were all rather peculiar.
Was that conclusive evidence that insanity was the salary of meddling with necromancy?
What would the ghosts look like?
Perhaps there would be nothing to see, and their manifestation would simply be advertised by an intense cold in the room or a sparkling plasma.
Perhaps they'd be malevolent, ugly and aggressive.
Cleo realised she was frightened, but if there was the slightest possibility she could catch sight of Inky's shade, she was prepared to risk whatever might happen over the next few hours.
Wouldn't her presence in this house summon him here?
The business with the children in the wood and the subsequent discovery of this place was too much of a coincidence, surely.
Cleo glanced at Dauntless.
He was sitting near the far wall, as far from everyone else as possible and, having cleared a space in the rubbish around him, had drawn a crude circle on the floor with a sliver of chalk he had begged from Apanage.
Cleo noticed he had left the circle incomplete; she knew he expected her to join him within its protection before he sealed it.
She was not sure whether she wanted to sit within the circle; it might seem more like a restriction than protection.
She might not be able to run away should she feel the need.
Drago Dratslinger seemed to perceive her unease.
He strode to her side and placed a paternal hand upon her shoulder.
‘There is very little risk associated with our processes,’ he said.
‘What do ghosts look like?’
Cleo asked hurriedly.
‘Are they like floating bedsheets with eyes, or glowing skeletons, or banks of mist?
I've never seen one.’
Drago shrugged.
‘Ghosts assume many guises,’ he replied.
‘Sometimes, it is impossible to tell the entity is discarnate; it can look just like a living person.’
‘But can they be horrible?’
Cleo demanded.
‘Can they be so hideous in appearance the mere sight of them drives you mad?’
Drago chuckled and with a sweeping gesture indicated his companions.
‘Are any of my friends drooling and witless?
No.
That should be evidence enough.’
Cleo eyed the manic grin of Tumblejack, the cadaverous sway of Rattletrap and the imp-like perversity of Malengin's countenance with qualms.
‘In truth, sir, it is very difficult for me to judge,’ she said, ‘owing to the fact I have never met any people like you before.’
Drago laughed indulgently.
‘I take that as a compliment, whether it was meant or not.
Now, I suggest you go and sit with your friend inside his circular drawing.
I think he needs your company.’
He propelled her to where Dauntless was sitting, in wide-eyed tension, upon a pile of sacking.
He had now drawn several arcane symbols round the boundary of the circle in a shaky hand.
‘Could we not take some part in your work?’
Cleo asked impulsively, unsure whether or not she really wanted to.
Drago rubbed his jaw.
‘Hmm, this circle might interfere with any melodious resonances, but I suppose I could give you a rattle each to shake.’
‘Wouldn't that summon the ghosts directly to us?’
Dauntless rasped.
‘Wouldn't they stamp upon the chalk of my circle and break through the protective insinuati?’
He shuddered and directed a baleful glance at Cleo.
Drago shook his head.
‘No, the spirits are drawn, irresistibly to the acid strains of my six-vaned lamentarion.
They jerk in surrender to the pulse of Fole's hammerskins, the tremulous yodelling of Tumblejack's voice.
They gyrate in perplexity as Rattletrap confounds them with scales upon his chasmochord.
The contribution of rattles would merely provide a backdrop.’
This information did not appear to inspire Dauntless with confidence.
He spoke to Cleo in a prim voice.
‘Despite these assurances, I am far from happy with the idea of arcana being present within the circle.
Cleo, as you insist on being here, please indulge me by being content simply to watch the proceedings.’
Cleo sighed.
‘Oh, very well.’
She scuffed through the gap in the chalk circle and threw herself down on the sacks.
Privately she was relieved Dauntless had refused to let Drago give them rattles.
Sometimes she exasperated herself with the stupid ideas she had.
While Cleo and Dauntless tried to arrange themselves comfortably upon the sacking — which smelled malodorous in the extreme, as if the dogs had been using it as a toilet Apanage busied herself with the ghost-bagging equipment.
She employed a series of nets in her art that seemed so insubstantial, Cleo could not imagine how anything as ephemeral as a spirit — which surely lacked substance in a material sense could be entrapped within them.
The shimmering folds of the nets were arranged in a looping canopy above where the musicians played, and effected a startling, glowing paleness in the untidy gloom of the attic.
Thin silk cords and silver chains hung down from the nets, which Apanage adjusting by pulling and tweaking them.
With a final attunement, she nodded to Drago.
‘All is prepared.’
Drago lifted a huge stringed instrument and slung it round his neck.
To Cleo it appeared to consist of a jutting arrangement of elephant tusks, stretched membranes and taut strings.
Drago applied his fingers to some of the strings and adjusted a turnkey on the end of one of the tusks.
The instrument emitted a doleful exclamation, at which Drago winced and scowled, before making more improvements.
Finally, satisfied with the tuning of the machine, he signalled to the others.
Malengin Fole stationed himself behind a series of upright drums.
Some were as high as his chest, while others came only to his knees.
He began to beat out a rhythm on them, using a pair of long bones — perhaps the thighs of an ox, Cleo thought — as drumsticks.
Flittern Rattletrap hammered the strings of a low-throated stringed instrument, his feet stamping time.
The sound was not unpleasing, and Cleo began to tap her foot.
She noticed Dauntless tapping his fingers against his raised knees.
Then Dratslinger's howling lamentarion screamed out a few chords, Tumblejack began to give tongue like an animal in severe affliction, and the true invocation began.
The cacophony all around her was enough to numb Cleo's senses to any supernatural phenomena.
She put her hands against her face, thinking, ‘I shall stand this for only a few seconds more, then I shall leave.’
She glanced at Dauntless beside her.
He, too, seemed horribly distressed by the raucous din.
His face had become very white, his eyes almost  sunken in their sockets.
‘Well, at least it is not affecting me that badly,’ Cleo thought, and pinched him sharply on the arm to get his attention.
It was as if he did not even feel it, for there was no response.
‘I do believe this music, if music it is, is making him ill,’ Cleo thought.
‘Spineless creature!’
Not for the first time, she began to wonder just how much protection the paladin afforded her.
He had assured her he would be able to lead her out of the forest, but so far they seemed only to have become tangled further in its mazy pathways.
Perhaps she should steal Contralto and gallop off alone to find the edge of Haling Heart.
as if summoned by the music, a pang assaulted her heart.
She felt a renewed desire to seek out the prophet Resenence Jeopardy.
She was wasting time here.
Tumblejack's howling voice rose to a final ascension around her; her heart leapt in hope and renewed faith.
She felt reborn.
Cleo leapt to her feet within the circle, submitting to the ear-splitting climax of the music.
Then the manifestation occurred.
It began as a faint glowing cloudiness that hung in the rafters of the attic, which was exactly the sort of phenomenon Cleo's mother had described in the ghost stories she'd told her daughter as a child.
It gradually descended and changed in colour, until it became a blue-grey mist seething over the heads of the musicians, almost as if the sweat generated by their exertions was steaming in cold air above them.
The air in the attic, however, was far from chill, and the sweat of men had never smelled so strange.
‘It is like stale flowers,’ Cleo thought, ‘or musty sugar.’
Her heart began to beat faster, her body filled with energy and she jumped up and down on the spot.
Was it Inky coming to her?
Was it?
Dauntless grabbed hold of her skirt.
‘Sit down!’ he hissed.
‘You will attract attention.’
Cleo ignored him.
The mist slowly condensed into a whiter substance, which continued to swirl and roil beneath the nets.
‘My, this one's a strapping brute!’
Apanage yelled, adjusting the tension of her cords and chains.
‘But not too strapping for your nets?’
Cleo called back, straining to be heard above the din.
Apanage did not reply.
She was darting back and forth across the clutter on the floor, tweaking cords and muttering  beneath her breath.
The ghostly cloud hung beneath the nets, tumbling and churning in time to the pulsing rhythm of the music.
‘Play harder!’
Apanage urged.
‘The apparition yet resists!’
Drago tore tortured notes from the lamentarion, Tumblejack pranced and roared, Flittern made his instrument groan and thunder, while Malengin was a blur behind the drums, chips of bone flying off his skin-hammers.
‘Oh my,’ Cleo thought, putting her hands over her ears.
‘The roof will fall in, the rafters will crumble.’
In fact, a shower of dust, cobwebs, bat droppings and laths had indeed begun to splatter down upon the musicians and their small audience.
‘Nearly!’
Apanage cried, her sepulchral gown a flying mist about her scampering limbs, the spectral mist a flying tantrum above her.
The warm air in the attic suddenly turned cold.
Cleo's breath steamed before her face.
A shrill whistle could be discerned, audible above the scrape and screech of the music.
It was a sound that seemed to plunge needles into the roots of Cleo's teeth and through the backs of her eyes.
Beside her, Dauntless had become rigid, sounds of torment squeezing from between his clenched jaws.
His eyes were round and staring, and a thin, bloodied foam seeped from the corners of his distorted lips.
‘He's having a fit!’
Cleo cried out, but nobody took any notice of her.
Stretched out against the nets was the solidifying form of a ghost.
Cleo could see clawing limbs and the suggestion of a malevolent face.
She could not imagine how Apanage's flimsy nets could ever contain such a monster.
‘Now!’
Apanage cried, and the music reached a deafening crescendo, which made Cleo realise just why these people had elected to live out in the middle of nowhere.
Neighbours would surely have objected in the strongest terms to such a racket.
The creature writhed and grimaced in the most horrible manner, malignance imprinted in its every contour.
It most definitely was not Inky.
‘It deserves to be bottled,’ Cleo thought.
‘It's terrible.
It deserves to be trapped!’
Suddenly, Apanage tweaked a sequence of cords and chains, and the net lifted in a momentary puff of silk before  floating down to consume the apparition.
Cleo thought at first that the net would only drift right through the spirit, but it swiftly formed a sparkling ball round its prey, and Apanage lost no time in drawing the opening of the silk tightly together.
Then she produced a large green glass vase, which she attached to the closed orifice of the net.
As the music sobbed and sighed to a conclusion, she breathed upon both the bottle-neck and the opening of the net, gradually releasing the tension on the cords as she did so.
Now that the music had died down, Cleo wanted to ask a hundred questions, but fear of somehow affecting the efficacy of the operation held her tongue.
She sat down again beside Dauntless, casting him nervous glances.
His fit seemed to have abated, but he appeared to be only half conscious.
‘Daunt!’
Cleo whispered, prodding him in the ribs.
‘Are you all right?’
Slowly, he turned his head and blinked at her.
His skin was damp and pallid.
Cleo felt a stab of guilt for having forced him to suffer the ghost-bagging.
Then she absolved herself by remembering it was he who'd insisted on accompanying her.
She shook his arm.
‘It's over now.’
He did not appear reassured.
Impatiently, Cleo turned away from him and directed her attention back to Apanage's machinations.
She was still breathing evenly upon both bottle and net, when suddenly the net expanded and then deflated with an abrupt whooshing sound.
The outside of the green bottle became crusted with frost.
Apanage deftly drew the bottle away from the empty net and inserted a magical cork into its neck.
She held out her trophy to Cleo and Dauntless.
‘Ha! held fast!’ she said.
‘Attracted by the warmth of human breath and the possibility of escape, and trapped by such.’
‘Well done,’ said Cleo feebly.
Apanage tossed the bottle into the air and caught it again.
‘Catch!’ she said.
‘We have other morsels to bag tonight!’
She threw the bottle over towards Cleo's lap.
Cleo instinctively cringed, not wishing to have any contact with the vessel, but before the bottle reached its target, it exploded.
Glass flew everywhere in a treacherous emerald shower.
Cleo screamed and ducked.
She felt an icy wind howl over her, a graveyard stench enter her throat, a chill finger touch her cheek.
Dauntless whined and twisted his body beside her.
She grabbed hold of him in terror.
And then everything became still.
Dauntless panted in  wordless terror.
His limbs felt paralysed, his vision obscured.
A child, a dreadful child!
It had loomed over him out of the spectral mist, more horrible by far than the ghoul brats he and Cleo had encountered in the forest.
As Apanage and her friends had cavorted about, gleefully operating their equipment, Dauntless had quailed beneath the smoky glance of the dead child's spirit.
He knew then that the occupants of The Haunt were aware exactly of how dangerous their business was, and also that it was the thrill of that danger which sustained them.
They were touched by it, in more than obvious ways.
Awarded a vast and sudden insight, as if Valiance himself had spoken the words, Dauntless knew that the ghosts were more than mere spirits of dead people.
They were all the thwarted ambitions, evil intentions, bitter memories, crushed hopes and suppressed lusts that had emanated from human hearts since life began, and which now invisibly thronged the air.
The Dratslingers and their troupe plucked these impulses from the ether, made them coagulate, gave them form.
What they sold in bottles was not a collection of spooks, but the wordless cry of frustration and despair that was the dark side of the collective human soul.
Exactly what the contents of those bottles were used for by whoever bought them Dauntless dared not imagine.
And the child, who was a sad memory from Cleo's heart, had looked at him.
It had pointed insubstantial fingers in his direction.
It had grinned.
It had spoken.
‘You will die, Dauntless Javelot.
You will die upon the road.
Very soon.’
And then the nets had smothered it, the glass had contained it, but not for long.
What flew forth from the shattered bottle was not the ghost memory of a child, but something else.
Something that had grown from it.
It was attached to Cleo and Dauntless in some way, and it was still with them.