

Editorial: Community Care, Social Work, and Social Care
DAVID CHALLIS and RICHARD HUGMAN
David Challis is Reader in Social Work and Social Care, and Assistant Director of the Personal Social Services Research Unit at the University of Kent.
Richard Hugman is Senior Lecturer in Social Work at Lancaster University.
The focus of this Special Issue of the British Journal of Social Work has been chosen to reflect 1993 as the year in which the full implementation of the United Kingdom NHS and Community Care Act is taking place.
The changes emerging from the Community Care legislation in the United Kingdom, like other countries, can be conceived of as constituting in general terms a move from institution based care, an accompanying move to enhance home-based care and the development of improved mechanisms of co-ordination and enhanced case management (Challis, 1992a).
The most explicitly analogous changes to those in the UK have been occurring in Australia with the development of multidisciplinary geriatric assessment teams to assess entry to publicly funded care, the development of the Home and Community Care Act to develop enhanced home care services with additional central government funding and the community options programme, designed  to provide co-ordinated care at home for the most vulnerable through case management (Ozanne, 1990; DCS, 1986; Graham et al., 1992).
Similar changes are simultaneously occurring in a large number of advanced societies (Challis, 1992b; Kraan et al., 1991), albeit in slightly different ways for different client groups, Of course this simple conception of change requires further elaboration.
Firstly, institutions for long-term care for elderly people in many countries consist of nursing homes and relatively few have the numbers of long-stay hospital beds evident in the United Kingdom.
Those European countries which appear to place greater emphasis upon long-stay hospital care are those, such as Spain  or Greece, which are currently developing their social welfare provision from a comparatively low base (Anderson, 1992).
Secondly, whereas the predominant concern in the care of elderly people has been the prevention of an unnecessary move into institutional care, in mental health care much of the focus has been upon the closure of long-stay hospitals.
The consequences of this latter factor have been to at times lead to the definition of community care as ‘non-hospital care’(Parker, 1990).
Indeed the term ‘Community Care’ seems to be quite specific to English speaking countries and elsewhere the term ‘home-based care’is commonly employed.
Thirdly, the structure and organization of services, the means of funding care services, whether by insurance or by state funds, and the mix of providers, whether public sector or not for profit based, all contribute to the diversity of care systems.
Fourthly, despite the all inclusive terminology, such policies have tended to be driven in Governmental terms at least by the pressure of ageing populations.
Indeed it may be a symbolic irony that the implementation of the NHS and Community Care Act has occurred in the European Year of Older People.
THE UK COMMUNITY CARE CHANGES
After the Seebohm Report (Cmnd. 3703) with the creation of the local authority social services departments in 1971, expectations of improved community care services were not fulfilled to the extent expected.
Policy documents expressed commitment to Community Care but the relationship between broad policy goals and the specific activities of service providing agencies was not at all clear.
Certainly the development of community care did not take place in the way that might have been envisaged.
Thus for example, the proportion of total social service department expenditure upon elderly people increased from 38.1 to 45 per cent between 1973 to 1979 but the percentage of expenditure on community services remained the same and continued to be so into the mid 1980s (Parker, 1990).
That is to say that increased expenditure on elderly people occurred due to growing numbers of aged in the population but there was no overall shift in the way in which resources were allocated.
The policy agenda of the Conservative administration after 1979 reasserted the importance of community care and a series of initiatives were undertaken involving the transfer of finance from health to social care, as a means of enhancing the development and co-ordination of care in the community.
To some extent this emphasized a definition of community care, used particularly in relation to people with mental health  problems, which came to mean a form of care which was non-hospital care and therefore included residential care.
Hence the ‘Care in the Community’ Initiative (DHSS, 1983) was designed to provide a series of alternatives to long-stay hospital care (Renshaw et al., 1988; Knapp et al., 1992).
Co-ordination was still seen as predominantly a ‘top-down’ process by planners and did not at this time focus upon activities at the client level.
However the long standing official policy of community care, in which social services departments were expected to play a major part was thwarted by the unforeseen consequences of financial restraint.
In the face of growing needs arising from an ageing population, the only substantial source of funds available for care was through the Social Security System which enabled elderly people to enter voluntary and private nursing homes whereas the funds to develop care at home by health and social services were limited and restrained as part of the overall policy to reduce public spending.
Hence there was a serious distortion in policy which between 1981 and 1985 led to the number of places in private and voluntary residential nursing homes rising by 138 per cent, from 39,000 to 93,000 despite a policy commitment to community care.
The cost to the public purse for this increased from 10,000,000 in 1980 to 1,000,000,000 in 1989 (Cm. 849).
Entry to these homes was not determined by assessment of need but by the eligibility of the potential resident for financial support.
The effects of this shift in expenditure were analysed in detail by the government's own auditors in an influential report in 1986 (Audit Commission, 1986), which identified the perverse incentives that such a system of funding created and criticized the organizational fragmentation and failure to match resources to need in community care.
Similar pressures influenced the Australian reforms (Ozanne, 1990; DCS, 1986).
The Government appointed a special advisor to report upon possible solutions for community care and this report was published in early 1988.
It recommended a more co-ordinated approach to the funding and management of care placing the responsibility for allocation of funds, assessment of need and co-ordination of care with the local authority social services department.
To ensure a more effective use of resources, case management was proposed (Griffiths, 1988).
THE NEW COMMUNITY CARE POLICY
The majority of these recommendations were accepted by the Government in a policy document in 1989 entitled Caring for People (Cm. 849).
This document had six key objectives for service delivery (para. 1.11):
i
To promote the development of domiciliary, day, and respite services to enable people to live in their own homes wherever feasible and sensible.
ii
To ensure that service providers make practical support for carers a high priority.
iii
To make proper assessment of need and good case management the cornerstone of high quality care.
iv
To promote the development of a flourishing independent sector alongside good quality public services.
v
To clarify the responsibilities of agencies and so to make it easier to hold them to account for their performance.
vi
To secure better value for taxpayers' money by introducing a new funding structure for social care.
In order to effect these objectives a number of changes were to be made in the provision and funding of social care.
The main changes were:
1.
Local authority social service departments were to be responsible, in collaboration with medical, nursing and other interests for assessing individual need, designing care arrangements and securing their delivery within available resources.
Assessment would be undertaken both for people seeking day and domiciliary care services and for those seeking admission to publicly funded residential and nursing home care.
These activities would include the appointment of case managers for individuals such as the vulnerable elderly when it was appropriate.
2.
A new funding structure would place responsibility for the financial support for those who enter residential care with the local authority who would have to assess their need for such a placement.
The social security funds spent upon residential care were to be transferred to the local authorities.
3.
Local authorities will be expected to make maximum use of the independent sector.
4.
Local authorities will produce and public clear plans for the development of community care services in their areas.
These were highly significant proposals and meant a radical change in the nature of community care in the United Kingdom.
Establishing a ‘lead agency’ as the single source of funding for the social care for elderly people is designed to act as a financial incentive for the social  services department to develop alternative and less expensive community care options.
The local authorities are expected to assess and identify the combination of services that best suits the needs and circumstances of an individual, and to monitor the quality of care provided and to review matters from time to time.
Much greater coherence and specificity is given to the policy compared with previous developments by the detailed guidance on different aspects of implementation issued to local authorities (SSI/SWSG, 1991a, b, c).
And finally, a greater diversity of provision, a mixed economy of welfare, is expected to develop and the public social services are expected to move from the role of monopoly provider into that of the ‘enabling authority’ who, by developing their purchasing, contracting, and planning role, will in part be providers in a market but will also be those who create a market of care services which takes account of local needs and demands.
Assessment and case management can be seen as the cornerstones of a policy which is directed to achieve a degree of ‘downward substitution’ at the margin between settings.
This is based upon the proposition that some people require lesser levels of care than that provided in the care setting in which they are located, and that it is more cost-effective for them to be supported in a less dependent setting (Challis, 1992c).
The effective implementation of such a policy depends particularly upon effective management of the interface between institutional and homebased care, through screening and provision of intensive home care, where both assessment and case management are critical.
Indeed the possible consequences of poor practice in this area could lead to a growth in institutional placements with the funding for home care being transferred to pay for this — the converse of a policy of community care.
Hence a great deal is dependent upon the implementation of the policy at the practice level and therefore upon the training, staff skills, and resources available to those undertaking the work.
The link between policy goals and style of practice can clearly be made.
Thus, although the main thrust of the National Health Service and Community Care Act is concerned with financial and managerial structures and the only explicit definition of a practice role is that of Assessment in Sec.47, other practice roles are implicit and have to be inferred or derived from guidance or policy documentation.
Nevertheless this is the most prescriptive statement of the professional roles in this field that has yet been made.
CONCERN ABOUT IMPLEMENTATION
Much of the discussion about implementation has been focused on the transfer of resources and the adequacy of the amounts transferred, both  transitionally and in the longer term.
These are necessarily crucial factors.
However, it is important not to neglect the style and form of the implementation process itself which will impact directly upon those who receive services and will also determine how scarce resources are allocated.
The implications of recognizing the practice content of these changes encompass four aspects.
These are firstly the development of new forms of alternative homes or home-based care; secondly the design of appropriate assessment procedures and techniques; thirdly the creation of intensive case management services to provide co-ordination of care at home; and fourthly the organizational and managerial response towards more integrated systems exemplified by such initiatives as the Care Programme Approach for people with mental illness.
It is this set of implementation questions which are addressed by the papers in this special edition of the journal.
THE PAPERS IN THIS ISSUE
The papers here cover the main client groups seen as central in the development of community care: elderly people, people with chronic mental health problems, and those with a learning disability.
Only younger people with physical disabilities have per force been omitted.
This may be a consequence of the precedents of the Disabled Persons Act 1986 which is acknowledged within the NHS and Community Care Act.
The papers included here also tackle the main features required to implement effectively the new approach which we have outlined above.
Mansell and Beasley look at new forms of residential care for people with learning disabilities and who exhibit particularly problematic forms of behaviour.
The study reported here examines small staffed homes for these individuals which provides an example of creating alternative ‘homely’ environments to provide long-term care for very demanding individuals.
This study provides detail about the impact of this style of service compared with traditional institutional care and the authors note the ‘importance of combining therapeutic objectives, opportunities created by service design and organisation and the amount of quality of staff performance to determine the outcome of care for people’.
A study of this kind has relevance for attempts to provide new forms of living environments for other client groups.
These have sometimes taken the form of ‘alternative homes’(Bond and Bond, 1990; Lindesay et al., 1991).
Other recent studies have commented on the necessity to create a range of supported accommodation which includes groups living within larger residential homes (Wilcocks et al., 1987; Booth, 1985) to core and cluster schemes of ordinary style housing and independent  living schemes (Monach and Thomas, 1987; Phillips et al., 1991).
However the important ingredients for successful care outcomes identified by Mansell and Beasley demonstrate the necessary link between goals, structures, and practices less evident in many studies of residential care.
Hughes looks at comprehensive assessment of elderly people and their carers.
The allocation of publicly funded places in long-term care is contingent upon assessment in the future.
The nature of this assessment will therefore be critical to the effective implementation of policy.
However there are no measures which contribute to standardization, and therefore equity, as for example in the Australian geriatric assessment teams.
Inter area and inter authority variation may thus prove to be great.
The author stresses that the nature of assessment is a complex activity requiring skill and being more than the gathering of information which is but a first stage in the process.
Following the collection of information, itself contingent upon cues identified in the assessment process, there is a need for the exercise of judgement in summary and formulation.
It would seem that much effort up to now has focused upon information gathering to the neglect of the other two processes.
This raises issues of conflict between managerial imperatives and practice goals, and the difficulty of achieving needs-based assessment in a context of resource scarcity.
Huxley identifies the variety of style and type of case management and some of the factors associated with effective implementation.
These include clarity of goals and specificity of target group.
Interestingly he identifies examples of the use of case management in care of emotionally disturbed children, an area of work which is not widely known in the United Kingdom although practitioners might wish to argue that it is implicit in much of practice expectations.
The paper stresses the need for clarity in the development of models of the care management process which link the organizational environment and practice incentives and take account of the complexity and variety of human needs which such services must tackle.
Schneider discusses the attempt to provide co-ordinated care on discharge from hospital for people with mental health problems, the Government's care programme approach.
Examining the broad statements in community care plans and detailed information from agencies actively implementing the care programme she identifies some of the confusions between the care programme and care management approaches which if not resolved will lead back to some of the implementation problems identified in Huxley's paper.
The need for clarity of goals is again highlighted in this study.
Moreover the importance of the organizational element to the implementation of community  care policies is stressed through the role of care programming as a tool in the evaluation of service integration.
COMMUNITY CARE: PAST CONCERNS, PRESENT REALITY
Major questions may be asked about the pace of the expected implementation of the policy.
Unlike the Australians, who have a ten year time frame for the implementation of community care policies (Gregory, 1991), no such explicit statement is evident in the UK.
This tends to over-emphasize the immediacy of recent changes.
However it is worth remembering that the themes addressed by the papers in this issue are long-standing within social work and social welfare although at different times arising in response to different influences.
For example ideas about more homely living environments can be traced to the early part of this century (Roosens, 1979), a concern with nature and form of assessment harks back to the Charity Organisation Society (Sainsbury, 1989), co-ordination of care was stressed in the Seebohm report and has featured in most subsequent discussions (Cmnd. 3703; DHSS, 1982) and the need for planned hospital discharge has featured in critiques of the mental health services (Cmnd. 6244; Jones, 1988).
It would be unrealistic therefore to see implementation as an event but more as an ongoing process of experimentation and development.
Within a longer time frame it may also become more apparent what is likely to be the impact of the Community Care Reforms on the more general features of social work itself.
It is interesting to compare the enthusiasm of the NASW (1992) in the US for Case Management as a social work role with the reservations expressed by BASW (1990).
Certainly an increasingly explicit definition of social work, essential if a General Council is to be realized, will necessitate a clear focus by both individual practitioners and social welfare agencies on all the aspects discussed in this issue.
The papers help us to identify critical aspects of implementation of community care.
If these are not addressed coherently, along with broad structural issues of funding and organization, it is likely that the hopes of many people with a crucial stake in this area and even the roles of local authorities themselves in this field may well be subject to disappointment and re-evaluation.
Small Staffed Houses for People with a Severe Learning Disability and Challenging Behaviour
JIM MANSELL and FRAN BEASLEY
Jim Mansell is Director of the Centre for the Applied Psychology of Social Care and Professor of the Applied Psychology of Mental Handicap.
Fran Beasley is Community Care Plan Co-ordinator with Westminster Social Services and was formerly a Research Fellow in the Centre.
SUMMARY
This study reports a longitudinal evaluation of the effectiveness of community-based residential services, individually designed for people who, in addition to their severe or profound learning disability, have very serious challenging behaviour.
Observations were made over three years, tracking individuals in both pre- and post-move settings.
Overall, the results suggest that even for this client group (who are traditionally the most difficult to place) small staffed homes can provide improved client experience as measured by engagement in meaningful activity; but that to do so requires attention to the quality of staff performance as well as to basic material and social resources.
INTRODUCTION
The small number of people who, in addition to severe or profound learning disability, show really serious problem behaviour present a major challenge to the replacement of large hospitals with other types of services.
It is these people who are most difficult to place and who are most likely to be returned to institutions (Sutter et al., 1980; Intagliata and Willer, 1982; Vitello et al., 1983), where they are likely to remain unpopular patients who are avoided by staff (Grant and Moores, 1977; Raynes, 1980).
There is considerable uncertainty, reflected in Department of Health (1984, 1989) guidance, about the extent to which community care is feasible for this client group.
The Darenth Park project, a large-scale hospital replacement programme (Korman and Glennerster, 1985; 1990) itself faced this problem.
A small proportion (about 20) of the 660 people living in the hospital in 1984 were widely regarded as presenting such serious challenges that it had been planned to move them to new sub-regional institutions rather than community services.
In 1983 and 1984 this policy was re-examined in the light of modern developments in learning disability services and changing practice in the region itself (Mansell, 1989).
In a major departure from previous policy, the Regional Health Authority and its District Health Authorities opted for community services following the ‘Ordinary Life’ model (Kings Fund Centre, 1980) for people with severe learning disability who presented very challenging behaviour.
Recognizing the lack of expertise in developing sufficiently well-organized and structured services on this model for these clients, the Authority established a Special Development Team based at the University of Kent, to help local agencies develop appropriate services.
Using a process of individual service planning with the local health authority, coupled with extensive practical help and some transitional financial incentives, the team helped establish and support community placements (Special Development Team, 1988; Toogood et al., 1988).
This support was available for up to eighteen months, after which time the local service agency assumed full responsibility for the service.
This study was commissioned as an evaluation of the effectiveness of the community-based residential services set up by district health authorities with support from the Special Development Team.
At the outset, it was decided to use direct observation of how clients spent their time as the principal measure of effectiveness.
Directly accessing the experience of service users avoids inadvertently confounding measures of process and outcome; where evaluations have used measures of, for example, individual programme goals achieved it may be that the result owes more to staff activity (in this case, in setting achievable goals) than to real differences in client experience (de Kock et al., 1988; Repp and Barton, 1980).
Activity patterns have been increasingly widely studied in research on British learning disability services (Felce et al., 1980; Mansell et al., 1984; Rawlings, 1985; Felce et al., 1986; Joyce, 1988) and are beginning to be used in routine service monitoring (Hewson and Walker, in press).
There is, therefore, a good basis for comparison of results with other studies.
Although activity patterns themselves do not provide much information about such qualitative goals as the choice open to an individual, or the respect in which they are held, it is at least arguable that improvements in these areas will be reflected in the variety of activities and the extent of the person's participation in them; and that if low levels of  engagement in meaningful activity are found this reflects a genuine problem whatever other measures may indicate (Mansell et al., 1987).
Although some attempts have been made to use interview schedules (O'Neill et al., 1981) direct observation currently provides the most accurate way of measuring client activity patterns (Joyce et al., 1989) in a study population who are unable to speak authoritatively for themselves.
STUDY DESIGN
CLIENTS
This paper presents results for eighteen clients accepted on to the Special Development Team caseload, who were living in NHS mental handicap hospitals at the time of referral, eleven of whom had moved to staffed houses in the community.
Details of the team's full caseload, in terms of the location of clients at the point of referral, the nature of the challenging behaviours and progress with the design and implementation of Individual Service Plans for clients in each of the referring districts is available elsewhere (Special Development Team, 1988; Emerson et al., 1987; 1988).
The most common form of challenging behaviour amongst this group, and hence the most likely reason for referral, was serious violence towards other people and the material environment.
Typically, problems included scratching, punching, kicking, biting, and the throwing of objects (chairs, tables, crockery) at people.
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the people included in the study including scores on the Adaptive  Behavior Scale (Part 1)(Nihira et al., 1974) and challenging behaviours identified by interview and/or observation during the study.
The Adaptive  Behavior Scale requires a rater to record the level and/or consistency of individual performance in living skills; it has been widely used in American and British studies of deinstitutionalization.
These data show that this is indeed a very disabled group of people.
In addition to severe or profound learning disability, every individual in the study had multiple self-stimulatory behaviours, made inappropriate vocalizations (such as moaning or screaming) and very challenging behaviour.
Five people also had epilepsy, two were suspected of autism, two were thought to have psychiatric disorders and one had phenylketonuria.
Two people had, at some point, been detained under the Mental Health Acts.
The average age of the clients in this study was 31 and on average these individuals first received institutional care at the age of 10.
Table 1.
characteristics of study participants
SETTINGS
All clients involved in this study lived in two large hospitals in Kent, Darenth Park and Leybourne Grange.
Ten people lived on ordinary wards at the beginning of the study, and eight lived in special units reserved for those with the most challenging behaviour.
Each community service was individually designed for one or two people in the study group, usually living with one or two people with less severe disabilities in a staffed house or apartment.
Three people (GF, MM, and MS) lived in houses which were on the same site as other residential facilities (called ‘campus’ houses in the remainder of this paper).
For two people this was a temporary placement.
The third moved to a house which was not supported by the Special Development Team but where the home leader had been trained by the team and was receiving further training at the University.
All these services require substantial management and specialist support beyond the initial setting-up period, which has often proved difficult to provide.
Several placements have broken down, including that for one person in this study (WG), who was returned to hospital at the last datapoint (this person has since been brought back to a staffed house in her home district).
MEASUREMENT AND DESIGN
The study used repeated observational measures to provide empirical evidence of client activity (Bijou at al., 1968) and a combination of experimental-control group comparison and single-case design methodology to determine clinically significant relationships between client activity and the environment.
This is a methodological approach which has been productive in other studies of innovative learning disability services (Felce et al., 1986; Rawlings, 1985).
The particular benefits of this approach for this study were that it provided quantitative data on important treatment/intervention issues in a population where group-comparison studies alone would be inappropriate, because of the individual nature of each person's challenging behaviour and the small number of potential subjects.
The study was planned as a multiple time-series design across subjects, in which individuals form their own controls and staggered transfer to new services would control for confounding variables (Campbell and Stanley, 1966).
Clients could therefore join the study after its onset and could move at whichever point in time their new services were ready.
Since an earlier study (Wing, 1988) had reported no improvement in  client experience of some of the first people to move out of Darenth Park Hospital, in services which themselves turned out to replicate many of the organizational features of the hospital, it was decided to include some measures of the physical and social environment as well as of client experience.
If client experience did not change, it was important to know whether this was a result of the failure of the experimental service to work, or a failure to properly create the experimental service.
The material richness and space of the physical environment were recorded once in each condition.
Staff allocation to the living unit was recorded on each visit by examining duty rotas.
The principal measure was non-participant observation using a 20second momentary time-sample.
The measure (Beasley et al., 1989) samples how much time the individual handicapped person spends in various categories of behaviour: for example , time spent in leisure activities; persona or self help type of skills; using complex equipment; other practical tasks or domestic chores; work or formal educational activities; going for walks; in seclusion or time spent doing nothing at all .
Attempts on the part of the client to interact with other people as well as the nature of other people's contact to them (positive, negative, conversation, or assistance) and each person's challenging behaviour was also recorded, using individually specified definitions.
The number of staff and clients within the same room was also recorded every five minutes, in order to examine the impact of staff ratio on client experience.
The data collected represent ‘composite days’ in the lives of each individual.
Observations were taken over three weekdays within a few days of each other to cover the period between 8.00 a.m. and 7.00 p.m., so that at each datapoint there were 1980 (11 hours x 60 minutes x 3) observations of activity for each individual.
Information was collected on seven occasions over three years.
Inter-rater reliability was assessed across codes, individuals and data-points; mean weighted occurrence/ non-occurrence reliability has been between 84 per cent and 95 per cent on each occasion.
RESULTS
The first comparisons presented concern the overall differences in the types of environment included in the study.
In these comparisons, all observations in a particular environment have been averaged.
In terms of basic resources, the small staffed homes were very different to the institutional settings they replaced.
The institutional wards provided much more space than houses, but this space was often shared with large numbers of people.
For example, the typical living space available to clients in institutions in this study was 173m 2 shared by 19 people, compared with 31m 2 shared by two to four people in a typical house.
Moreover, no rooms were locked in the houses, whereas in hospital environments, and in particular special units, between 15–35 per cent of the living unit was likely to be unavailable to clients.
Amongst others, these included the kitchen (in almost all cases), bedrooms, bathrooms, staff rooms (office and rest), cleaners cupboards, laundry, and other storerooms.
In hospital environments basic services such as cooking and laundry were organized centrally and cleaning was undertaken by domestics.
In the homes these activities were intended to be a major source of participation by the people served, with appropriate levels of staff help.
The material environment was often barren and sometimes bizarre on the wards of hospitals and special units (for example, one ward had seventeen sideboards and wall-units in the ‘lounge’).
The physical condition of some of these living units were dilapidated.
There was usually literally nothing for clients to do but sit, watch television, or walk about.
The houses were much richer environments, decorated and equipped with the wide range of furnishings and domestic items one would expect to find in an average household.
STAFFING
The staffed housing projects each served many fewer people and had much higher staffing ratios than the other kinds of service.
Records of the number of staff on duty collected at the same time as the observational data show that, on average, the staff/client ratio in hospital wards was 1:3.5, in special units 1:1.6 and in the houses 1:0.9.
Not only were the staffing ratios higher in community-based services but the observation data also suggests that the staff were ‘delivered’, in that they actually spent more time physically in the presence of clients (staff were present in 91 per cent of observations in the houses and 86 per cent in the three ‘campus’ houses compared with 74 per cent in the hospital settings).
People living in the houses were also less likely to be in the company of individuals who had competing needs to their own; clients living in staffed houses were likely to be the only service user in the room for 63  per cent of the time (and mostly with just one other for the remainder), compared with 42 per cent in the three ‘campus’ houses, 33 per cent in ordinary hospital wards and 27 per cent in special units.
The quality of staff performance also differed between the houses and other types of setting.
People living in hospital types of service received staff contact for, on average, 7 per cent(hospital wards) and 9 per cent (special units) of the time, compared with 13 per cent in the ‘campus’ houses and 26 per cent in the other houses.
The contact from staff included direct assistance in the houses in 11 per cent of observations, compared with 4 per cent in the ‘campus’ houses and 2 per cent in the hospitals.
ACTIVITY
Figures 1 and 2 represent graphically the overall level of participation in meaningful activity of everyone included in the study at each of the seven datapoints.
Averaging the observations in each condition, the group that moved to houses almost doubled their level of participation in meaningful activity, from 16 to 28 per cent.
All but one person (HM) show substantial increases immediately after transfer, and that person shows an increase at the second datapoint after transfer (but see below).
The one person whose placement broke down (WG) moved to a large institution and then to a small private home at the last datapoint, where her level of participation shows some decrement.
Similarly, three people in houses (MM, HM, and PH) show declining levels of participation after the initial move.
The people who had not yet moved out of hospital showed no clear trend in their level of participation in meaningful activity, strengthening the case for attributing changes in the group that moved to the community services rather than passage of time or general improvement in all services.
More detailed analysis shows that these increases consist of participation in practical housework tasks, including assisted use of relatively complex equipment like irons and microwaves, and longer mealtimes.
The individual referred to whose level of participation did not increase until the second datapoint after transfer (HM) shows marked increase in use of leisure equipment; the observers reported that this was very simple manipulation of a guitar and was possibly prompted by staff in an attempt to influence the evaluation.
Serious problem behaviour (i.e. excluding self-stimulation) showed no clear effect of transfer.
Higher levels of participation in meaningful activity were therefore achieved in spite of continuing problems.
Self-stimulation decreased immediately after transfer except for HM, where the decrease was observed at the next datapoint.
This suggests that self-stimulation     can, to some extent, be competed out by engagement in purposeful activities.
FIGURE 1.
Proportion of day spent engaged in constructive activity before and after transfer to small staffed homes
FIGURE 2 Proportion of day spent engaged in constructive activity by people who have yet to transfer from hospital
In terms of social contact, not only did clients in institutional settings receive only small amounts of contact from staff, the majority of people were never ever observed receiving contact from other clients.
Six of the eighteen people who participated in the study were recorded as being contacted by other clients for approximately 7 minutes worth in the 11 hour day observed on only one of the datapoints; one person received this level of contact on two datapoints; and one other received 26 minutes in 11 hours on one datapoint.
This reflects the degree of handicap of the people served and suggests that, for this group at least, the idea that large facilities provide important social relationships with other handicapped people is mistaken.
Figure 3 illustrates for one person (PH) what increased engagement means in terms of the pattern of the person's day.
The observations on the last datapoint before transfer and the first after were averaged over 10 minute periods throughout the day, and show engagement by the individual studied, help, and the total level of contact from staff.
In the house, interesting activities were far more likely to be spread throughout the day.
This is in sharp contrast to the pattern at the last observation in hospital, where activity levels tended to peak on only three occasions (breakfast, lunch, and tea).
In this setting, there was a small amount of help in the early morning, and sporadic contact of other kinds from staff through the day.
After moving to a staffed house the person received much higher levels of assistance from staff as well as higher levels of other contact.
Her level of engagement shows that she was involved to a greater extent over a much larger part of the day.
This can be contrasted with the experience of the person who moved but where there is no clear change in his overall level of engagement at the next datapoint (Figure 4).
Just before the move, this person lived in hospital and attended day care.
He received low levels of contact and help throughout the day and shows moderately high levels of engagement (average 32 per cent), much of which (19 per cent ) is playing with toys and other leisure activities.
After the move, the level of assistance from staff remains low but there are much higher levels of neutral contact.
Despite these, there is no change (in fact a slight decrease) in level of engagement.
Another person in the same house (ST) did not show this pattern.
The observers' interpretation of these data is that staff had understood the principle of normalization (Wolfensberger, 1980) as meaning primarily that the people served must be offered choices to do valued activities.
In practice, this was operationalized as making complex verbal requests (even though the people served had almost no receptive or expressive language), and de-emphasizing ordinary      household activities as sources of possible client involvement.
The net result with HM was that staff spent a lot of time asking and cajoling him, but he did not respond or became disturbed, and staff eventually did much of the activity themselves.
ST (who had not received day care in hospital) was less likely to become disturbed when offered assistance.
FIGURE 3 The pattern of one person's day before and after transfer: engagement, help, and other contact from staff
FIGURE 4 The pattern of another person's day before and after transfer: engagement, help, and other contact from staff
DISCUSSION
While the clients in this study may not necessarily be representative of those in other regions, they have certainly been identified by District Health Authorities as among the most difficult people with severe learning disability to serve within the South East Thames Region.
The results of this very detailed, long-term study do therefore make a significant contribution to the policy question of the relevance of different treatment approaches as hospitals are replaced by alternative services.
The results show that it has been possible to set up community-based placements which offer much richer social and material environments than the hospitals they replace.
Given the extreme nature of the problems experienced by this client group and the long history of failure by services to do more than provide custodial care this is no mean achievement.
The preliminary findings about staff ratio and staff contact are of interest.
The not inconsiderable amount of time clients spend in hospital and campus services without supervision in part reflects the option for clients to wander off into the dormitories unnoticed.
However, in group care situations, particularly in special units, individuals may be placed at some risk when left among people who also have severe problem behaviour.
That nearly a quarter of the time observed these clients had no staff present is surprising and should cause managers to re-examine ward organization and staff morale.
Although the houses show higher levels of staff contact, there is still considerable room for improvement and this has implications for management and training.
What data there is on campus based units and special treatment units suggests these are not very different from the large hospitals they were intended to replace.
In terms of client activity patterns, the overall results suggest that even for people who, in addition to their severe or profound learning disability, have very serious challenging behaviour, small staffed homes can provide improved client experience as measured by engagement in meaningful activity; but that to do so requires attention to the quality of staff performance as well as to basic material and social resources.
The simple enrichment of the social and physical environment by transfer  from institutions to staffed houses does not in itself ensure greater involvement by the person served in meaningful activity.
In line with other research on community-based residential services which has shown generally favourable but variable results, the preliminary analysis of ‘day in the life of’ data highlights the importance of staff performance as a key factor in placement success.
While community services may provide a richer material environment and wider opportunities for constructive activity than institutions, the patterns of staff behaviour which have been shown to be important in enabling active participation by people with severe or profound learning disabilities can be overlooked or ignored in the pursuit of ‘homeliness’.
Thus, these findings support the general interpretation of variable outcomes in community services which is emerging from other studies (Landesman, 1988; Felce, 1988), that it is the combination of therapeutic objectives, the opportunities created by service design and organization, and the amount and quality of staff performance which determines the outcomes for the people served.
Models for the integration of these components are beginning to be developed (Mansell et al., 1987; Felce, 1989).
Implementing these models requires much further study but these results point to the importance of ideology (in this case, possible misunderstandings of the principle of normalization) as well as skills among the staff group as factors influencing staff performance.
The results also point up the problem of maintaining the standards reached in the new services.
Some are beginning to show evidence of decay in the activity levels achieved and the associated staff performance.
Other work in progress has examined this issue in one district where it seems that the other community services are so much less well organized than the special service that managers have found it impossible to prevent that service being undermined by lack of staff, continuity, training, and good practice leadership.
In at least one other case the changes in organizational responsibilities brought about by the NHS and Community Care Act have weakened commitment to these expensive, difficult-to-serve clients and there is the prospect of return to cheaper, poorer-quality care in spite of the benefits experienced by individual clients.
These matters are the subject of a follow-up study.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the participation in this study of service users and staff and the assistance of  and the help and support of other colleagues in the Centre.
The study was funded by South East Thames Regional Health Authority.
A Model for the Comprehensive Assessment of Older People and Their Carers
BEVERLEY HUGHES
Beverley Hughes is a lecturer in social work at the University of Manchester.
Most of her research and publications in recent years have concerned residential care, quality of life, and social work developments in relation to older people and their families.
SUMMARY
Although local authorities and social service departments are in the process of developing systems of assessment in relation to care management, there has been little debate about the principles which ought to underpin assessment processes, nor about the purpose, scope, and content of comprehensive assessment with older people.
This article discusses these issues and proposes a framework for comprehensive assessment with older people and their carers, derived from development work with social workers in a number of local authorities.
Of particular importance is the need for comprehensive assessment to embody meaningful mechanisms for user and carer participation and empowerment; to acknowledge not only need and risk but strengths and resources; to regard the older person as the centre of a network of personal, familial, and social factors which together determine her or his quality of life and level of risk.
The implications for practitioners are examined.
INTRODUCTION
The National Health Service and Community Care Act (1990) has assigned to local authority social services departments the lead responsibility for the co-ordination and production of community care assessments of individual older people and the process of development of criteria, mechanisms, and models of assessment is underway in most social service departments.
The Act imposes the duty on local authorities to undertake a comprehensive, multidisciplinary assessment of any individual older person for whom the local authority is satisfied that a formalized assessment is necessary.
The White Paper, the Act itself and the preliminary draft guidance all emphasize the government's expectation that not every referral will necessitate a comprehensive assessment and that departments will need to establish criteria of eligibility for a full assessment and an initial screening mechanism (DoH, 1989b, 1990, 1991a).
However, when a full assessment of either a service user and/or the carer is deemed to be warranted, the procedures and the outcome of the assessment process must embody a number of key characteristics.
1
Firstly, the assessment should be comprehensive and needs-led.
It should constitute an
assessment of the applicant's circumstances, in the round, and his or her personal needs for support and rehabilitation, including any community service needs, together with any help or support required by carers (DoH, 1991a, p.5).
The assessment process should take into account what the individual can do to help himself; what informal care is available; particular risk factors; abilities and life style; health…and accommodation and social support needs (DoH, 1991a, p. 6).
Whilst the White Paper acknowledges that local policy objectives and resources must be a key context in planning and delivery services, the government appears to be clear that at the point of assessment, decisions must be needs-based and ‘should not focus only on the user's suitability for a particular existing scheme’(DoH, 1989b, p. 18).
Indeed, ‘it is the local authority's responsibility to ensure that all needs are considered’(DoH, 1991a, p. 9).
2
Secondly, and as a consequence of its comprehensive scope, the assessment should be multidisciplinary.
Section 47.3 of the NHS and CC Act
requires social service departments to bring apparent housing and health care needs to the attention of the appropriate authority.
[…]Assessment may also uncover such needs as help with financial affairs, leisure pursuits, employment and education.
The Local Authority is responsible for the involvement of other agencies in deciding what should be done, by whom and by when (DoH, 1991a, P 9)
Whilst guidance on suitable mechanisms for multidisciplinary collaboration has at the level of planning been published, the use of mechanisms to co-ordinate information and assessment at the level of practice has been actively discouraged.
Case conferences, the accepted  model of interdisciplinary good practice in the assessments of children and families, are regarded as too bureaucratic and costly (DoH, 1991a, p. 10).
3
Thirdly, the principle that users and carers should participate in the assessment process is a theme throughout the various government publications.
The White Paper was worrying in its apparent assumption that user and carer could be treated as a single unit.
The Draft Guidance, however, refers to the possibility that user and carer may have different views and seek different outcomes and therefore may need to be involved separately in the assessment process (DoH, 1991a).
A carer can request a separate assessment of his/her own needs if the assessment of and plans for the user are judged not to address these.
4
Fourthly, the comprehensive multidisciplinary assessments of individual older people have a key role in the overall evaluation of service provision and in planning for future development.
If individual assessments are comprehensive and needs-led, they should also provide information about unmet need which should inform the planning process of local authorities and other agencies.
Where, after exploring the available alternatives, it is not possible to meet all the needs, the nature and extent of unmet needs should be recorded and information fed into the authority's community care planning process…
Where unmet need relates to the services of another agency (for example health or housing) it is expected that similar steps will be taken to ensure that the shortfall is taken into account in that agency's planning (DoH, 1991a, p. 7).
5
Finally, the local authority must establish systems of communication at various levels with individuals and members of the community in order to enable people to have access to information about the assessment processes.
At one level, this involves publicising the criteria of eligibility for a full assessment, the various mechanisms for different forms of assessment and the procedure by which people can complain.
In relation to individual service users and carers, they should be given full and clear information about the assessment process as it will affect them, how they might be involved and a clear statement of its outcome.
It is not the intention in this paper to examine critically the rhetoric and ideology which may be behind the government's inclusion of these principles within its legislation.
It is clear that the requirements of the legislation present social service departments with some urgent questions, with little evidence of assistance from the Department of Health as to possible answers.
For example, who is going to pay for the process  of assessment and the involvement of the various practitioners — social workers; general practitioners; hospital, paramedical, and housing personnel; and so on ?
(Age Concern England, 1991).
How effectively can staff in social service departments organize the participation of, and provision of, services by the staff from other agencies, over which they have no executive control?
In the event of a lack of consensus between different professionals, or between professional and users or carers, how is the outcome of an assessment to be decided?
How can social workers balance the different roles of need-assessor, advocate, resource-allocator, and how will the boundaries between these roles be drawn?
These are important policy issues which have been examined by the author, as well as other commentators, elsewhere and which merit further critical analysis (e.g. Hudson, 1990; Phillipson, 1990; Hughes, 1991; Osborne, 1991).
However, the purpose of this paper is to examine the implications for practitioners of implementing the requirements of the White Paper and its consequent legislation, and to propose a model for the development of comprehensive assessments of older people and their carers.
The issues and ideas developed here are the result of the author's training and development work on care in the community, with the staff from a number of local authority social service departments.
CURRENT STATE OF THE ART
There is evidence that the current practice of assessment of older people is extremely variable, not only between social workers and other professionals but also between different social workers themselves.
Rowlings (1985) reported considerable difference in scope and content between the assessments of social workers, on the one hand, and those of home help organizers and occupational therapists on the other.
However, she also found wide variation in the extent to which different social workers used the referral either to assess for a specific resource or to undertake a more general assessment of need and circumstances.
Overall, whilst this variation undoubtedly includes examples of good assessment practice, there is also evidence that the general level of social services assessment of older people is restricted to the assessment of need for specific services, often requested by a carer, a general practitioner, or other third party, frequently undertaken by untrained ancillary staff (Means, 1981; Black et al., 1983; Bowl, 1986).
Thus, there does not yet exist the foundation of a professional consensus on what constitutes good assessment practice with older people.
High levels of expertise and models of good practice certainly exist, but they remain localized and undisseminated.
This contrasts starkly with the efforts at local authority, regional, and national levels to develop models of comprehensive assessment and multidisciplinary collaboration in respect of children and families (DoH, 1988; DoH, 1991b).
The relative lack of progress in developing and disseminating models of good practice, including assessment, with older people and their families is a reflection in part of their relatively low status within professional and organizational cultures, not only within social work but also in medicine, education, and academic disciplines.
This, in turn, can be traced to ageist values within society generally, which permeate social and political thinking and thereby influence the extent to which older people as a group are viewed as less important, less in need, or just less interesting than other groups of people (e.g. Hughes and Mtezuka, 1992).
The current state of the art, therefore, presents particular difficulties to the development of good practice in comprehensive assessment of older people:
a relative dearth of models of needs-led, comprehensive assessments upon which to draw;
few established models of interdisciplinary collaboration and decision-making in relation to older people;
the relatively low position of older people within the status hierarchies of medical and social services;
the lack of professional consensus and theoretical knowledge about development in old age, and consequent lack of clarity about what constitutes a good quality of life for older people (Hughes, 1990);
relatively under-developed application of the concept of risk in relation to older people and consequent low levels of ability to identify and assess risk in general, and abuse in particular .
Evidence of the difficulties in the development of multidisciplinary assessment procedures has been provided by projects in four local areas, orchestrated by the Social Services Inspectorate (DoH, 1989a).
Each of the four areas achieved a different level of success in the development of a system of multidisciplinary assessment.
In reviewing the four projects, the Social Services Inspectorate identified ten key elements which appeared to be crucial to the achievement of effective multidisciplinary assessment (DoH, 1989b).
In particular, the establishment of a multidisciplinary panel motivated to develop a practice model, with clear objectives, membership and identification of task, appeared to be particularly important factors in sustaining development work and leading to a practice  model which became established across the disciplines.
However, the assessment schedules produced by all of the four projects did not fulfil some of the essential requirements of the new legislation, particularly in relation to comprehensiveness, user and carer participation, and a needs-led approach.
THE PRINCIPLES OF GOOD PRACTICE IN COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
If the current state of practice of assessment is to accommodate the demands of the National Health Service and Community Care Act (1990) and to meet the aspirations of practitioners to improve practice in relation to older people, it is important to begin the process of development by defining the principles of good practice which comprehensive, multidisciplinary assessment should embody.
Training and development work with social workers in several social services departments identified a number of essential core principles which clustered around three different levels of practice: social work practice; interprofessional or multidisciplinary practice; management practice.
Firstly, at the level of practice of individual social workers and teams in assessing older people and their carers, five core principles were identified.
The process and procedure for assessment must:
begin from the user's and the carer's definitions of the relevant problems or issues;
be comprehensive, that is, be flexible and adaptable to enable a wide range of factors and information to be collated, as appropriate to each individual person and her/his circumstances;
provide a coherent framework for understanding and prioritizing the complex information gathered from a range of different sources;
take account of issues of confidentiality;
offer a consistent standard of good practice to users and to carers, whilst also recognizing that the process of assessment involves the exercising of judgement, whether professional judgement or subjective judgement of users and carers.
Secondly, the concept of comprehensive assessment also requires that the process embodies certain principles which recognize the conditions essential for effective interprofessional dialogue and collaboration to take place.
Two such essential principles were identified at this level, namely, that the assessment process:
must provide the mechanism for direct involvement and communication between different professionals at different levels in a range of different statutory, voluntary, and other agencies;
must allow for the possibility that different professionals will bring different perspectives which may result in different conclusions or recommendations as to what is a desirable outcome of the assessment process, and therefore must provide a mechanism by which such differences can be identified, recorded, and, if possible, reduced.
Finally, practitioners identified the need for management practices in their own agencies in relation to the development of assessment and care management systems, to be based on three key principles which are essential to the development of better practice.
In order to facilitate the development of assessment processes, management must:
provide clear guidelines, instructions, and a sound framework for the comprehensive assessment process and these should be developed with practitioners;
provide clear commitments and policy objectives both for the development of comprehensive, multidisciplinary assessments and for the kinds and levels of services which the outcome of such assessments will require;
recognize that comprehensive assessment should be part of a planned and structured approach to the development of services for older and disabled people.
DEFINING COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
It is important to begin by recognizing that assessment is a process which involves much more than the collection of information and data.
The process of assessment incorporates a number of key elements and involves the assessors (including users and carers) in bringing to bear a wide range of observational, communication, interpersonal, cognitive, and analytic skills.
‘Assessment is about understanding.
This entails listening, observing and relating to both what is being said and to the feeling with which this information is given’(Neill, 1989, p. 8).
The process of assessment, therefore, not only involves the recognition of a problem or issue, and the ability to identify and collect all the relevant information from a variety of sources.
Assessment also involves ‘making sense’ of that information, and in order to do so, the information about an individual has to be interpreted in the context of current knowledge, theory, ideas, and common practice which is relevant to the characteristics of that individual and his or her situation.
The integration of individualized information with more general knowledge and theory is a complex cognitive task, which experienced professionals perform frequently.
However, it is important to emphasize this step in the process because failure to do so results in a concept of assessment which is limited to a relatively unskilled, technical task of data collection.
In fact, the process of assessment requires of the practitioner the ability to apply a range of knowledge and theory, to formulate information in the light of knowledge and theory, to summarize, prioritize, analyse, make predictions, and to exercise the professional judgements necessary to balance competing imperatives and to assess risk.
Finally, the process of comprehensive assessment includes the ability to identify strategies to meet or minimize the need and risk which have been assessed, to set objectives, to plan, and to define desired outcomes.
Thus, an assessor has to bring to the assessment process a matrix of skills, knowledge, and experience in order to translate information into understanding.
Indeed, the quality of an assessment is largely determined by the level of skill, knowledge and experience which the practitioner brings to the process:
Skill: at the level of information-gathering, the practitioner must apply not only general and specific communication skills, but also observation skills.
In many instances, it is the skill of observation which will lead the practitioner to pursue particular lines of enquiry in more depth and to tailor the assessment process to the particular individual or carer.
Knowledge: the information gathered about a particular individual has to be evaluated in the context of prevailing knowledge, theory, ideas, and values from a range of disciplines and resources.
Knowledge about ageing, the issues facing older people, the impact of race, gender, class, disability of ageing people, family systems, networks, mental health and ill health, emotional and psychological experiences, loss — these are just a few of the areas of knowledge which may be important in any particular assessment.
Indeed, a comprehensive knowledge base is required not only to evaluate information, but also to determine what information might be important and therefore what areas of enquiry need to be explored.
Experience: the extent to which a practitioner is able to integrate her/his skills and knowledge in the assessment process, to communicate and liaise effectively with a wide range of individuals, to analyse and evaluate and reach a professional judgement about questions of need and  risk, will be partly contingent on the professional confidence and sensitivity derived from experience.
This is especially important in multidisciplinary assessments when the process may involve the negotiation of conflicting perspectives between user, carer, and different professionals.
A FRAMEWORK FOR COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
The process of assessment, then, is complex and demands a high level of professional expertise.
When the process is also multidisciplinary and has the objective of enabling the user and carer to participate in a meaningful, empowering way, the levels of complexity and expertise increase further.
It is clear that practitioners need a framework to help them manage this process, to produce a degree of consistency of purpose, scope, and content of assessment across different practitioners, whilst also enabling the assessment process to be adapted flexibly to individual people and their circumstances.
A framework does not, of itself, provide a schedule or checklist to be completed.
This would involve a further stage of development.
Rather, the framework discussed in this paper offers a model for practice based upon the principles and definition of comprehensive multidisciplinary assessment which have been identified.
A possible framework for comprehensive assessment is offered through the concepts of quality of life and risk: two related, multidimensional concepts which can be translated into statements of purpose and scope as well as broken down into the factors which constitute quality of life and risk.
The concept of quality of life of older people, particularly in residential settings but also in the community, has been the subject of considerable research and academic interest (e.g. Hughes, 1990) and has also been developed considerably for application in inspection and quality assurance procedures (e.g. Sinclair and Gibb, 1990; DoH, 1989c).
The concept of risk has been recognized as important in so far as older people have been defined as dependent or vulnerable (Stevenson, 1989) but there has been little systematic analysis of risk, risk-tolerance and risk-management in relation to older people (for a discussion of issues, see Norman, 1979).
However, together the two concepts offer a starting point for the development of an approach to assessment which is systematic, holistic, and incorporates the principle of user and carer participation.
From this starting point, the purpose of multidisciplinary assessment becomes the assessment of quality of life and risk.
The scope of assessment will vary between individuals and be dependent upon the  range of factors impinging upon the quality of life and the nature or level of risk faced by a particular user and carer.
The content of the assessment should integrate the user and carer perspectives at all stages of the process, and not simply add on their views at the end.
It is important, also, that user and carer definitions of what factors contribute to the quality of their lives and levels of risk are incorporated into the process.
The factors or aspects of life which determine quality of life and risk will vary between individuals.
However, development work with social workers produced an analysis of these concepts which suggested they could both be encompassed for most people by the following factors:
1
Personal characteristics: e.g. appearance, cultural issues, gender, race, life history, critical life events, age, expectations, satisfaction.
2
Attitude to self: e.g. self-esteem; satisfaction with autonomy, decision-making; perceptions of constraints to independence, control.
3
Health: e.g. perceptions of health; current physical and mental health; history of illness; medication; access to health resources.
4
Functioning: e.g. ability to undertake tasks of daily living; ability to undertake personal care, care of others.
5
Environment — household: e.g. satisfaction with house, personal space, warmth, comfort, adaption to personal needs/abilities, resources.
— locality, e.g. access to services, shops, security; location; safety; proximity to friends, family.
6
Finance and material circumstances: e.g. income; wealth; transport; material resource; expenditure.
7
Recreation and activities: e.g. leisure activities; activities inside and outside home; contacts with organization; attitudes, satisfaction; constraints on purposeful recreational activity.
8
Family: e.g. the family network; location of family members; level of contact; quality of relationships.
9
Community relationships: e.g. significant relationships; opportunity for emotional expression, physical contact; social contacts; sexual relationships.
10
Support network: e.g. extensive/limited nature of support network; stability of network; who provides assistance; support.
These factors encompass the concepts of quality of life and risk.
However, of themselves, they offer no more than a functional approach to assessment, and therefore must be organized into a framework which is based on the principles defined above.
In order to accommodate these principles, the framework should:
regard the older person, and carer if appropriate, as being at the centre of a network of personal, familial, and social dimensions which together determine his/her quality of life and level of risk.
provide a mechanism for identifying the perspectives and views of the user and carer, and other professionals, on each of these dimensions.
incorporates an approach which examines each dimension not only in terms of deficits, i.e. needs and risks, but also in terms of the strengths and resources which enhance quality of life and reduce risk, or which potentially can be mobilized to do so.
Figure 1 depicts this data-collection phase of the framework, and presents schematically a model which incorporates the principles identified.
This method of presentation is not intended to suggest a data collection form, with boxes to be filled.
It is rather a graphic representation of the various elements, dimensions, and perspectives which need to be incorporated into the framework and the process of data collection.
Not all areas will be examined in the same degree of detail for every individual.
However, the diversity of the range of information and its potentially extensive scope do require consideration of the methods by which the data may be collected and thereby offers an opportunity for the development of more creative ways of defining and discussing with older people these various areas of their lives.
Firstly, the imperative to examine not only disabilities, needs and risks but also abilities, strengths and resources may, of itself, create an important climate of empowerment which will influence the manner in which assessment is conducted and the methods used to collect information, particularly from older people themselves.
Secondly, the emphasis on user and carer perspectives on each dimension may lead to more participatory methods than the question and answer interview which symbolizes the professional's relative power and authority.
For example, constructing with the older person a network diagram to record information about family and support networks is a simple way of involving the user, often used with other client groups but not so much with older people (Figure 2).
Similarly, the drawing with the older person of a family tree to collect information about family composition and contacts has several advantages over the more traditional methods of information gathering.
It not only involves the user more demonstrably in the process and provides him or her with a visible record of the interview, but also begins to construct a historical picture of the older person.
This is often an essential first step in identifying the strengths and personal resources which an older person has developed during their lifetime.
Figure 1.
The assessment model: data collection
Figure 2.
Network diagram
The process of assessment, however, is not complete until the data collected has been summarized and formulated.
These essential stages in the process involve the translation of the information into understanding, and the translation of understanding into objectives and plans for action.
It is at these stages of the process that the professional judgement and experience of the assessor and her/his ability to exercise a range of analytic and negotiating skills is of fundamental importance.
The information collected will be diverse and complex, and the assessor must come to a view as to the relative importance of different pieces of information and prioritize the information into a manageable, but valid, summary.
The summary must also locate the information within a context of relevant knowledge and theory.
In addition, the assessor may well be faced with competing perspectives from users, carers and other professionals, with whom she/he must negotiate, liaise and consult.
These processes involve cognitive as well as interactive skills and, therefore, the exercising of professional expertise and judgement cannot be eradicated from the process.
Rather, it should be acknowledged and, in so doing, be open to scrutiny and accountability.
Nevertheless, the processes of summarizing and formulation are complex and therefore, initially, it may be helpful to consider the information in relation to the three dimensions — personal, family and community — around which data was collected.
Figure 3 presents a graphic conceptualization of the process of summarizing, in which the most significant information is identified and prioritized, at each of the three dimensions around which data has been collected.
Furthermore, the purposes of assessment, defined earlier in the paper as the assessment of quality of life and risk, offer a means of helping the assessment to identify a focus for managing this stage of the process, when a wide range of complex information from a variety of different sources has to be summarized.
The purposes of the assessment can be translated into two key questions which provide such a focus:
overall, what is the quality of this person's life?
overall, what is the level and nature of risk she/he faces?
Finally, the formulation stage involves using the results of the assessment process to identify objectives, plans, and strategies.
This stage draws considerably upon the knowledge, skills, and judgement of the practitioner and, as with the summary stage, may be facilitated by formulating the objectives around two key questions:
how can quality of life be maximized?
how can the level and nature of risk be minimized?
The application of the assessment process to the process of intervention and, if necessary, the development of a support network will then build upon the strength and resources identified and be designed to provide additional resources and services to minimize risk and improve the quality of life.
DISCUSSION
This paper has described in some detail a possible framework for comprehensive assessment of older people, starting from an analysis of current practice and based on principles derived with practitioners and middle managers of social service departments.
The model proposed embraces a concept of the aims and process of assessment which acknowledges its inherent complexity and the high level of skill required of practitioners.
The framework has been designed to facilitate management   of the process without reducing the task to an over-simplified and limited data collection exercise.
Thus, this paper is adopting explicitly a particular position along the spectrum of views currently being expressed about comprehensive, multidisciplinary assessment of older people, and, as well as proposing a model for practice, is also an attempt to stimulate amongst professionals and managers a debate, which is now urgent, about how the development of assessment and care management systems should proceed.
This debate must include discussion of the fundamental questions and issues identified in this paper as to the purpose, scope, and content of assessment, and any process of development must also begin by identifying the principles which those systems, procedures, and practices should embody.
This is essential if assessment is to fulfil its promise of meeting better the needs of older people and their carers.
FIGURE 3.
Summary.
The need for further discussion and debate arises from a number of issues.
Firstly, as local authorities proceed with the development of systems and procedures for comprehensive, multidisciplinary assessments, there is evidence of considerable variation in the definitions of purpose, scope, and content of assessment.
Furthermore, there is an emerging tension between professional aspirations and managerial imperatives.
Social workers and team leaders involved in the development process have been keen to seize the opportunity to develop better assessment procedures which define assessment as extensive, needs-based, and complex.
Senior managers, on the other hand, mindful of the resource implications of the assessment responsibility which has been placed on their departments, may be looking for systems which  will contain within manageable resource limits the potentially very high assessment workload for their staff.
Nevertheless, government guidance subsequent to the Act itself has endorsed the comprehensive needs-led approach to assessment and envisages a separation of assessment from care management and service provision:
the assessment of need will require a significant change in attitude and approach by most practitioners.
They will have to make a conscious effort to treat the assessment of need as a separate exercise from consideration of the service response.
As indicated by the work commissioned by the Department of Health, few practitioners currently make that distinction, nor are they encouraged to do so by the assessment procedures they are required to operate (DoH, 1991d, p. 47).
Practitioners, therefore, are in a powerful position to argue for the adoption of the kind of needs-led comprehensive approach to assessment exemplified in this paper.
However, the development of better approaches to assessment requires not only that managers facilitate such development but also that practitioners are prepared for the need to apply new skills and face new dilemmas.
This concluding discussion will focus on the issues presented to practitioners by three main aspects of the comprehensive assessment process: the needs-led and risk-led approach; the participation and empowerment of users and carers; the interpersonal and managerial elements of the task.
Practitioners should not underestimate the shift in practice required to implement a needs-led approach to assessment of older people.
A commitment ideologically and professionally to a holistic assessment of need and risk, rather than the assessment of eligibility for service, is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for effective assessment practice.
New skills, as well as attitudes, have to be developed.
Key (1989) portrays the essential shift as one from functional assessment of abilities and selective assessment of criteria for rationed services to one of ‘affirmative assessment’ through which
a unique individual profile, from which an individualised plan for the person is developed through a more equal relationship with the elder being assessed (Key, 1989, p. 69).
The practitioner is responsible for bringing to the process a wide range of knowledge and theoretical perspectives about the kinds of needs and risks which older people may face, and the ways in which these are mediated by gender, race, class, life history, and circumstances of a person's life.
The application of this knowledge involves sensitive judgement and skill.
A needs-led approach should begin from  but not be restricted to the user's definition, as this may be limited by low expectations or lack of knowledge about resources (Fisher, 1991).
The practitioner must be able to analyse the inter-connectedness of needs and identify underlying causes, beginning with the service user and carer, but also moving the focus beyond what may be their limited horizons.
This requires a sensitive, exploratory approach which validates the user/carer perspective but integrates with it the knowledge and skills of the practitioner.
The thesis propounded by Hughes and Mtezuka (1992) in their analysis of social work and older women is relevant to all older people:
Most importantly, the assessment must be conducted with the older woman.
It must incorporate her views of her situation and her needs and yet not be limited by her low expectations and internalised acceptance of the consequences of ageism and sexism (Hughes and Mtezuka, 1992, p. 236).
However, the role of the practitioner vis-a-vis the user/carer may not be easy to marry with the role of the practitioner as an employee of an agency responsible for the provision, either directly or indirectly, of services which will be rationed.
This raises two possible dilemmas which the practitioner will have to manage.
Firstly, in relation to users and carers, the practitioner may well be aware that she is identifying and discussing needs which are unlikely to be met within the current limits and range of available services.
It is important that individual assessments do identify such needs, since it is precisely this information, collated over time, which is meant to inform the overall process of forward planning by agencies.
However, this dilemma creates a potential tension in the user/carer-practitioner relationship and it may be professionally difficult for the practitioner to contemplate raising expectations which are unlikely to be met.
Secondly, the role poses a corresponding potential tension in the practitioner's relationship with her/ his service employing agency.
The needs-led approach alters the nature of the practitioner's accountability to the employing agency and to the user under new arrangements, practitioners will be expected to sustain with integrity a measure of independence from both parties, while safeguarding the interests of both (DoH, 1991c, p. 111).
This in turn implies increased autonomy for assessing practitioners resulting perhaps in a new level of autonomy and new systems of accountability.
A related issue, but one which deserves its own consideration is the centrality of user/carer participation and the way in which the assessment process can be used to empower users and carers.
Practitioners need a clear understanding of the processes by which social inequalities  of various forms are derived from prejudicial and stereotypical attitudes.
The development of this understanding and its translation into anti-discriminatory social work practice has been a subject of discussion for some time in relation to gender, race and, more recently, disability.
However, an understanding of ageism, its impact on the lives of older people and its interaction with sexism and racism is much less advanced (Hughes and Mtezuka, 1992).
The incorporation of an anti-ageist approach to practice is important not only to the definitions of quality and life and risk in older age, but also to the development of antidiscriminatory ways of communicating with, assessing, and working with older people (Hughes, 1990; Hughes and Mtezuka, 1992).
As with all attempts to develop an anti-discriminatory approach, the process raises dilemmas for the practitioner:
Some of the inherent tensions and contradictions of anti-discriminatory practice are brought into especially sharp relief during the assessment process.
For example, a commitment to acknowledging and validating personal biography must not be a justification for intruding too deeply or too early into a woman's personal history.
The commitment to assessing needs in a gender-sensitive as opposed to gender-biased way must not be a reason for ignoring the way old women define their roles.
The legitimate aim of raising the consciousness and expectations of old women must not be used to deny old women the right to determine their own future and lifestyles (Hughes and Mtezuka, 1992, p. 237).
These principles apply to work with all older people.
Participation of users and carers, a desired outcome of empowerment, will require the practitioner to be highly skilled in facilitation, negotiation, representation, and advocacy.
Meaningful participation also implies that the user and carer are well-informed (Fisher, 1991).
Effective participation involves the creation of a climate which is open and safe and within which differences of opinion, painful emotions, deep-seated fears, anxieties, or aspirations can be explored.
It is arguably the practitioner's responsibility for creating such a climate.
Finally, the achievement of a needs-led approach and user/carer participation is dependent significantly upon the interpersonal and management skills of the practitioner.
Interpersonal skills are crucial since it is largely through the medium of interpersonal communication that the assessment process is conducted.
As the co-ordinator of a process involving a wide range of different individuals and agencies, the practitioner must be able to communicate effectively with people from very different backgrounds and with different perspectives, attitudes and levels of expertise.
I have already referred to the range of skills needed to facilitate the effective participation of the user and carer.
In relation to professionals and other relevant individuals, the practitioner will  need to be able to assimilate the different professional perspectives, negotiate around those perspectives if necessary, and co-ordinate the communications received from a variety of sources.
These interpersonal skills are closely connected to the necessary management skills, especially when the assessing practitioner meets conflicting opinions, conflict of interest or simply conflict between individuals.
In these instances, the practitioner must be able to address conflict, if possible reduce it and, if not, come to a professional judgement as to how conflict can be managed.
Management also refers to the skills required to orchestrate the assessment process itself, from initiation, liaison, co-ordination, formulation, and conclusion.
In conclusion, it is clear that, as Michael Key has noted, ‘improving the practice of assessing elders is one of the challenges facing practitioners’(Key, 1989, p. 66).
The National Health Service and Community Care Act (1990) offers the possibility, but by no means the certainty, that assessment practice will be improved and developed into the comprehensive needs- and risk-led approach which, I have argued, is essential to improving the quality of life of older people.
However, such an outcome will not be achieved without active pursuit by practitioners, managers, and organizations concerned with the rights and welfare of older people, and their acceptance of the challenge, as well as the opportunities, presented by a comprehensive, needs-led approach to assessment.
Case Management and Care Management in Community Care
PETER HUXLEY
Peter Huxley is Professor of Psychiatric Social Work at the University of Manchester.
‘To be complicit in the orthodoxies of the present is to have to re-live the mistakes of the past’.
Dennis Potter
SUMMARY
This paper reviews the purpose of case management, its introduction into the UK, and its central components.
While case management has empirical referents which have been developed over many years (largely in the USA) care management has, until recently, had none.
The paper examines different models of case management in terms of organizational structure, content, and outcome assessment.
The importance of the distinction between clinical and administrative case management is emphasized, especially in work with mentally ill persons.
The review of existing evidence suggests that in order to produce effective intervention services must have clearly identified objectives, closely specified target groups, interventions which match the objectives, and employ related outcome measurements.
Some of the current issues in the implementation of care management are considered.
INTRODUCTION
Practitioners and managers of health and welfare services experience regular organizational change aimed at the ‘improvement’ of services.
Investment in the monitoring and evaluation of social policy changes made during the post-war period in the UK has been very limited, relative to the vast costs of actually making the changes.
The community care reforms in the United Kingdom have been advanced as a genuine attempt to revise existing patterns of service and produce more effective care for those in need.
The latest developments, which are part of the  transition from a state welfare model to that of a mixed economy, are likely to attract a similarly modest level of investment in monitoring and evaluation, and as a consequence we will certainly learn a great deal less from the reforms than might otherwise be the case.
One of the arguments of the present paper is that the reforms would have made more sense and been more appropriate for our purposes had we successfully translated and adapted the lessons learned from the North American experience with case management, focused on the real messages of the PSSRU experiments, and waited until the RDP case management evaluation was complete (Cooney, 1992) before contemplating the introduction of the reforms.
The fact that the UK government has done none of these things, leads one to suppose that a genuine improvement in the co-ordination of health and welfare services for the most vulnerable and disabled groups in society has not been the real objective.
It is true to say that the ‘reforms’ have been taking place along several different tracks at the same time, and it would be simplistic to suppose that the single element called ‘case management’could or should be expected to ‘make the difference’in isolation from other aspects of the reforms.
However, case management, although yet another concept ready for misinterpretation, projection, and even linguistic and semantic engineering, is a key component in the delivery of health and social care to priority client groups, and can, on the basis of research evidence in the USA, UK, and Australia, justifiably claim to be a better, more effective way of delivering services to long-term care groups (including emotionally disturbed children; see below).
Furthermore, by failing to appreciate its limitations, and by attempting to make case management responsible for solving problems of a quite different order in other dimensions of the reforms, we are in danger of losing all the benefits it might confer, as well as failing to learn from earlier mistakes by those who have implemented case management elsewhere.
Martin Knapp (1993) has summarized the dimensions along which reform is concurrently progressing as moving from supply-led to needs-led services; from an emphasis on institutions to a reduced emphasis on institutions; from a public welfare model to a mixed economy; and a movement from health service to local authority provision.
(One might add the movement to decision making increasingly supported by computerized information systems).
These themes will be explored later in this paper when considering some of the issues in the implementation of care management.
This introduction would not be complete without reference to the semantic and linguistic engineering of the term case management into care management in the UK DoH reforms.
Apart from a small number of instances all the North American experience relates to case and not  care management.
The arguments for the change — contained in a footnote in one of the SSI publications (DoH, 1991)— seem to have been one-sided, covert, and subject to no public debate whatsoever.
Onyett (1992) argues against the use of the term care management on the grounds that the term ‘care’ obscures the need to focus on needs and strengths of individual users; implies a passive relationship between users and providers; and can be equated with being banished from everyday life.
On the other hand, he argues that the term case has ‘unfortunate medical overtones’, but it emphasizes individual focus, and is widely understood internationally.
One might add that the term ‘case’ is a widely used administrative category, and if a substitute term is to be used then it should be a neutral term indicating a unit of service.
The complaints about the term ‘case’ might equally be applied to any unit of service technology: it is perhaps the way in which these terms are used by professionals and others to which the greater attention should be paid if we are to make progress which is enduring (Dominelli, 1990).
The objections to the use of the term case management has resulted in the abandonment of a term with a long history of service use, evaluation and exploration, and the substitution of one with few if any empirical referents at all.
Renshaw (1988) writing in the British Journal of Social Work and Fisher (1990), in Social Work and Social Sciences Review, both reveal an interesting consequence of this lack of empirical referents for care management.
Fisher correctly points to the need for a close specification of the practice content of care management, but in doing so becomes involved in considering the way in which care management meets the requirements for consumerism and the principles of partnership.
Renshaw considers the extent to which case management lends itself to care planning and to the principles of normalization.
Case management, as defined and practised originally, developed as a service system response to the co-ordination of care, and while judgement of its value in other terms is not entirely inappropriate, it should be assessed in terms of its purpose, goals, and effectiveness, not in terms of its capacity to meet requirements projected on to it by others.
Of course, since care management has no empirical referents the tendency to project on to it is made rather easier.
Consequently, the concept can be redefined for the purposes of the unprincipled, such as those who wish to introduce, covertly, restrictive eligibility criteria, and thereby reduce overall spending.
It is unfortunate in this last regard that the term is not unlike ‘managed care’ which is the North American concept of budget limitation in health services.
Even more unfortunate that the conceptually and semantically re-engineered case management should become the focal point of the new reforms, since it (in the form of care management), and not other components, is likely to bear the brunt of criticism  and dissatisfaction with unsatisfactory aspects of the community care reforms, and the major share of blame for their ultimate and probably inevitable ‘failure’.
MODELS OF CASE MANAGEMENT
This brief review of the theoretical, organizational, and content models will show a wide range of different approaches to the implementation of case management.
One might conclude that it is hardly surprising that the term care management is ripe for projection, if case management implementation was so confusing.
While there is some truth in this assertion, there is a broad measure of agreement about the essential components of case management and these have been summarized by a number of authors and practitioners (Challis and Davies, 1986; Kanter, 1989; Hunter, 1990; Onyett, 1992; Moxley, 1989; Thornicroft, 1991).
Moxley (1989) defines case management as:
a client-level strategy for promoting the coordination of human services, opportunities and benefits.
The major outcomes of case management are…the integration of services…and achieving continuity of care (p. 11).
Rothman (1991) sees case management as incorporating two broad functions, which are: providing individualized advice, counselling, and therapy to clients in the community, and linking clients to needed services and supports in community agencies and informal helping networks.
There is general agreement on the core pattern of case management functions which are: assessment; care planning; direct and indirect intervention; monitoring; review and evaluation.
There is agreement, certainly in the mental health field (Huxley, 1991a) that case management works best when its purpose is clearly articulated in the form of service goals; the outcome measures used actually assess progress in these target areas; the theoretical model and content of the programme are consistent with the service goals; and case management is focused on a narrowly defined target  group of those most in need.
It is also becoming clear that case management is often effected by the service context, so that, like other service components, it may work less well in poorly resourced areas, and better when it is an integral part of a well resourced network of services.
THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL MODELS
The most influential model in the UK is the production of welfare model, developed at the PSSRU, and the results from the PSSRU case  management studies influenced first the Griffiths Report (1988) and subsequently the white paper ‘Caring for People’(DoH, 1989).
The original production of the welfare question was: ‘for persons of varying need-related circumstances, what were the costs…of the most important ‘outputs’ and to what extent are costs of outputs affected by the characteristics of…community care and standard provision'.
The community care model of the PSSRU experiments relied heavily on the concept of case management, and standard provision on residential care.
An influential model in North American social work is the Strengths model (sometimes called the ‘independence from welfare’ model) developed by Charles Rapp and colleagues in Lawrence, Kansas (Rapp and Chamberlain, 1985; Rapp and Wintersteen, 1986).
This focuses attention on the client's strengths rather than problems, and accentuates attempts to produce client independence and self-determination.
The continuous relationship with the case manager is the main means of effecting change or maintaining individual's quality of life in the community.
There is a long history in the use of case management within rehabilitation services in North America and these have usually been based on psychosocial models in psychiatric rehabilitation.
Kanter (1989) points out that people with severe and persistent psychiatric disorders require a wide range of treatment and rehabilitation approaches, and Stroul (1989) that rehabilitation helps people to learn the social and vocational skills and acquire the supports needed for survival in the community.
Challis (Challis and Davies, 1986; Challis, 1993a, b) has often made the point that case management is based on a model of service which incorporates a conception of long-term rather than short-term care.
This is an important consideration since it is related to the choice of target client group, and the critical importance of monitoring and repeated assessment as part of the process.
All of the models described so far are targeted on people with most needs and engage these clients for long periods of time, sometimes indefinitely (substituting for long-term institutional care for the most needy people).
There is a growing body of literature in North America about the use of case management with emotionally disturbed children (not children with learning disability) whose care needs are identified as long-term, and whose care can be best co-ordinated by using case management (Burt and Sonenstein, 1984; Cheung, 1991; Davies, 1992; Dollard, 1991; Dunst and Trivette, 1989; Fertman, 1991; Ronnau, 1989; Saxe, 1991; Texas State, 1985; Wagner, 1987).
It is instructive that this literature appears not to be well known within UK child care services.
Developments in the reform of children's services do not appear to have  been influenced by this body of knowledge to the same extent as the reforms of ‘adult services’.
While the PSSRU can take the credit for raising awareness of the potential of case management for frail elderly people, why is awareness of case management provision for children so limited?
Are there sensible reasons for this, or is it another example of the way in which political expediency and manipulation, rather than evidence, are dictating the shape of welfare reform in the UK?
PRIMARY CONTENT MODELS
CASEWORK AS THE PRIMARY CONTENT
It is not difficult to see, as Fisher has pointed out, that the content of the case management models in the Kent schemes shared a great deal with the model of task-centred casework of the 1970s.
However, the Kent model is firmly based on a model of long-term and not short-term care.
Task-centred casework was an attempt to move away from so-called ‘traditional’ approaches in which work with clients was unfocused and open-ended.
Increasing the focus and shortening the intervention certainly would improve practice and outcome for some clients as the Reid and Shyne (1969) experiments showed, but for others it would be ineffective and irrelevant to their needs.
In the mental health field the work of mental welfare officers with long-term clients was taken over, less successfully in some respects, by CPNs.
There are remarkable similarities between the strengths model of case management, and early casework models.
The relevance of good assessment, the inclusion of many casework principles, and the central relevance of the long-term relationship between the case manager and the client as the vehicle for the successful delivery of care are all common elements.
Attention has been focused on the nature of the relationship which develops between the case manager and the client, as an attempt to understand which factors in the case manager and the client contribute to the development of a successful relationship and lead to better long-term outcome (Frank and Gunderson, 1990; Wasylenki, 1991).
It may be an appropriate time to revisit casework theory and research in order to help us to understand and isolate the variables which are important to successful outcome for long-term case management intervention, particularly the clinical model.
SOCIAL SKILLS TRAINING/ASSERTIVE OUTREACH AS THE PRIMARY CONTENT
Fisher (1990) has pointed out that the community care reforms are based upon a conception of case management which takes little account  of those people for whom services have, mandatorily, to be provided, but who refuse to accept them.
People who refuse to care for themselves, people who are a danger to themselves or others, and people who have no insight into the fact that they are seriously ill are not well catered for by a system which is focused on needs-led services where the consumer's view is taken seriously in assessment and in provision.
Psychiatric rehabilitation services have attended to the needs of people who are unmotivated and resistant to help, and various models of psychosocial rehabilitation have been developed as a consequence.
These models involve training users in skills needed for community survival, including medication management (Eckman and Liberman, 1990) and attention has focused on people with long-term needs, and in involving them more closely in assessment and the selection of goals (Liberman et al., 1987; Shepherd, 1990a).
For a core group of clients the case management services must be assertive (Bond et al., 1988).
If the goal is the maintenance of the client in the community and there is a risk through self-neglect, degree of dependence, or resistance that the person will become dependent upon institutional care, then the service must reach out to them, maintain regular contact (daily if necessary), and respond rapidly and appropriately to any early signs of problems.
Case management in rehabilitation work with these clients involves specific (sometimes called ‘intense’) components, such as skills training, medication review, assertive outreach, 24 hour coverage, etc., which may not be seen in other forms of case management.
BROKERAGE/ADVOCACY AS THE PRIMARY CONTENT
‘Intense’ case management components are not likely to figure prominently in the brokerage/advocacy models of case management.
These emphasize the protection of individual rights, working on behalf of the client for more and better services, and attempting to ensure that existing services meet client needs and provide care to agreed service specifications.
The provider role is not emphasized in the brokerage model which involves ensuring that others provide the needed services.
Chamberlin (1980) tends to see advocacy for rights and advocacy or brokerage for services as opposing forces, but others (Anthony and Blanch, 1989; Lecklitner and Greenberg, 1983; and Rappaport, 1981) see advocacy as part of a more general movement for improvement in the social conditions of mentally ill people.
A number of authors are critical of aspects of the brokerage approach (Applebaum and Austin, 1990; Challis, 1993a; Chamberlain and Rapp, 1992; Dant and Gearing, 1990; Huxley and Warner, 1992; Lamb, 1980), arguing that brokerage functions are insufficient on their own to produce effective case management.
A  number of studies support the need for case managers to possess and to exercise ‘human relations skills’(Challis, 1992; Cooney, 1992; Davies, 1992).
ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS
The advantages of the clinical model, particularly for mentally ill people has been widely supported (Anthony and Blanch, 1989; Conte and Plutchik, 1986; Davies and Missakoulis, 1988; Goering et al., 1988; Harris and Bachrach, 1988; Hogarty et al., 1979; Holloway, 1991; Huxley, 1992; Kanter, 1987, 1989; Lamb, 1980; Levine, 1979; Miller, 1983; Modrcin et al., 1988; Neligh and Kinzie, 1983; Rapp and Wintersteen, 1986; Shepherd, 1990b; Thornicroft and Breakey, 1991; Wasylenki, 1991).
The current care management model in the UK, like the managed care model in North America, is perhaps concerned more with the organization of centralized or decentralized budgetary control, and with eligibility criteria.
Some of the differences and similarities of these organizational models are now considered.
THE CLINICAL MODEL
The central feature of the clinical model of case management is that there is a recognition that the case manager is providing important aspects of care for the client.
In clinical case management there is a recognition that the worker is an important resource, and an awareness that the process of assessment and reassessment is a crucial function, to be discharged by someone who knows the client really well over a long period of time.
Two main approaches to the organization of case management services have developed in work with people with the greatest needs, these are individual and team models.
In the team model each of the practitioners knows all of the clients, and workers do not carry individual caseloads, and frequently have one shared office.
This improves communication and the co-ordination of care, since staff absences for whatever reason, and changes of staff, can occur without much disruption to the continuity of care.
In the individual model, team members do carry individual caseloads, and while they may well be involved in work with other clients of other workers on the team (in groups or meetings) the caseload of one case manager who leaves will be taken over by another.
Both models involve the need for considerable amounts of staff support, shared visions, and team building because of the effects of working long-term with the same group of needy clients.
THE ADMINISTRATIVE MODEL
The essential feature of the administrative model is that the functions of assessment and provision are separated from one another and the case manager relies heavily on linkage and brokerage.
This model has been contrasted with the clinical model by referring to the difference between them as the difference between a travel companion (clinical) and a travel agent (administrative).
There is some limited evidence that the administrative model might be more suited to the needs of people with a physical disability (Pilling, 1988) whereas people with mental illness may find the administrative model unacceptable and less effective (Huxley and Warner, 1992).
The separation of assessment from provision which I have criticized elsewhere (Huxley, 1992) is seen by many people involved in the community care reforms as the way to achieve the movement from a service-led to a needs-led approach.
If the assessor is not involved in provision, they can take a more objective look at individual client need, be able to say whether some need is unmet, and not be tempted to offer those services for which they are responsible as the sole, potentially inappropriate solution to the client's problems.
Leaving aside the difficulty of not making a provision at the same time as one is undertaking the assessment, this approach has produced two serious difficulties.
Firstly, the identification and recording of unmet need is not a finding which agencies or governments will want to be made public, especially if one object of the community care reforms is to reduce eligibility for services.
Secondly, the workforce undertaking the assessment has been expensively trained as professional providers; not only is the role of assessor without being a provider an inherently unsatisfactory one for these people, but the emphasis upon dispassionate, creative professional judgement as the arbiter of resource allocation, resource creation, and resource co-ordination, is entirely removed from the scene.
Thus one new, expensive, and unproven system is substituted for another expensive, admittedly imperfect system, which has the potential for improvement.
Improving the quality of professional training and decision making might be a more cost-effective solution to the problem of supply-led services.
DECENTRALIZED BUDGETARY CONTROL
The issue of decentralization of services to local bases in the community has inevitably brought with it questions of the decentralization of budgets.
In the community care reforms the purchaser/provider split is understood as both a macro-budgetary strategy in which both health and  social service are divided into purchasing and providing organizations, so that the latter can be more open to competition in the health and welfare ‘market’, and a micro-budgetary mechanism for decentralizing resources into the hands of front-line workers and managers in order to more effectively target these resources on those identified as most in need by the care management assessment.
The original PSSRU schemes used shadow budgets for the case management teams (up to the value of two thirds of the cost of residential care), but also gave them an allocation of money with which to purchase those services which were not readily available and which, although small, would make all the difference to keeping the client at home.
Challis and Davies (1986) describe the purpose of the budget as an ‘incentive for improved assessment’ and to ‘make possible more creative responses…taking advantage of local circumstances’(p. 9).
The advantages of being able to deploy the micro-budget came from the fact that the case manager was both the person undertaking the assessment, and the direct worker who understood local opportunities.
This potentially invaluable component of case management has become translated or obscured in the care management reforms.
OUTCOME MODELS
In an earlier paper (Huxley, 1991a) I presented the evidence available at that time which seemed to suggest that the effectiveness of case management in various contexts depends upon narrowly defined groups, focused care and relevant outcome assessments.
The extent to which the organizational model, the content model and the goals of case management are consistent with one another is another important factor in producing successful outcomes for clients of the service.
In addition, it is most important that the case management service remains faithful to its models, or at least , if changes are required these are explicitly acknowledged and change measures and performance indicators altered to reflect the new focus.
The extent to which the service actually delivered to the client is the same as the one which is stated in the service plans, care plans, and outcome measures is known as ‘programme fidelity’.
Care also needs to be exercised when choosing a particular case management approach, to examine the existing service context into which it is to be placed since this can have a major influence on the success of the service.
As Challis (1993a) says:
the effective implementation of a case management model requires a coherent logic which clarifies the relationship between structure, location.
target group, practice model and likely day to day pressures and incentives and expected outcomes (p. 21).
IMPROVED SERVICE CO-ORDINATION
The main outcomes which case management was designed to produce are not necessarily compatible with one another.
The central focus of case management as it was originally conceived in North America was certainly the better co-ordination of services.
However, not many studies have made this the specific focus of attention in outcome measurements (Bass and Windle, 1972; Goldman et al., 1992).
Other case management experiments have been intended to reduce reliance upon hospital or residential care, and some have shown that this can be achieved while others produce conflicting evidence.
Rehospitalization as a single outcome measure has too many problems to be used in isolation from other measures.
It is being widely acknowledged, in services for all client groups that to judge outcome in terms of reduced reliance on institutional care is an overly simple view of the issues, and that a whole service needs to be judged on the extent to which it uses its residential facilities appropriately, that is for those who really need it, and for an appropriate length of stay to meet their needs.
Institutional care is one part of a complex range of provision; while it is right to reduce reliance upon it because of its toxic effects (which are determined by the quality of care provided and not size alone: Huxley, 1991b) it must be wrong to remove it altogether or reduce its scale or critical mass so that it ceases to be able to perform those functions which other services cannot.
IMPROVED QUALITY OF LIFE
Another stated objective of many case management services is the improvement of the client's quality of life, and there are a great number of attempts being made to measure quality of life (QOL)(Lehman et al., 1986; Oliver, 1991).
There are conceptual and methodological problems to overcome, and the need to resist the tendency to believe that QOL can be assessed with a single quickly applied composite measure.
A major issue is the extent to which one can take account of the tendency among some people to say that all is well and that they are satisfied with their lot when, objectively, they are living in poverty and destitution.
There is evidence that client well-being is enhanced by case management services (Challis and Davies, 1986; Huxley and Warner, 1992).
IMPROVED RESOURCE DISTRIBUTION
Another objective of case management is the efficient distribution of resources.
Specific case management services can improve both vertical and horizontal target efficiency, although there is less evidence that they are more technically efficient than existing services.
One result, as yet unpublished (Gater, personal communication), of the development of a multi-disciplinary community team in a primary care setting, performing the core case management tasks, is that, compared to the standard service operating in a matched primary care setting, resources are more appropriately targeted.
In the community service, clients with more needs had more resources expended on them, whereas, in the traditional hospital based service resources were uncorrelated with the extent of needs.
Further evidence of this sort will be a useful addition to our consideration of the outcomes of case management in future.
Finally, it is important to recognize that there are very different opinions about the value of different outcomes, so that clients, providers, purchasers, carers, and advocates do not always share the same objectives.
A Californian study (Stych, personal communication) examined the rank ordering of outcome measures to be used in the state mental health programme.
Clients ranked the removal of symptoms as the number one aspect to be measured and no other group did.
Carers ranked hospitalization as more important than other groups, and advocates had a rank ordering of issues which differed from the other groups, including clients.
The item which appeared in all rankings, and upon which there was, therefore, most consensus about its importance, was social functioning.
DISCUSSION
CARE CONTEXT AND CONTENT
It is evident that case management, having originally been conceived as a way of improving the co-ordination of care for vulnerable client groups, has been included as a component in community care reforms as a process designed to achieve quite different objectives for the whole welfare system.
Earlier I made the point that the models of case management may be differentially useful in producing positive out-comes for separate client groups; so that, for instance a brokerage/advocacy model might work well for people with a physical disability and not well for mentally ill people.
So too, a model with content which emphasizes direct work and the development of a long-term relationship as a crucial part of care plan implementation, may have more to offer  people with long-term mental illness problems than someone with an acute episode of physical or mental illness.
Families of people with a learning disability might welcome a less intense form of case management than that offered to single male schizophrenia sufferers who have a long history of compulsory admission to hospital.
Similarly, the introduction of case management into a deprived service context is likely to achieve less than if it is introduced as a key component in an already well structured and resourced service.
If case management is expected to reduce reliance upon residential care then it will need components which specifically address the needs of clients who are most likely to be admitted, or those with the history of frequent admissions, or those who are likely to stay the longest.
Better coordinated aftercare services may have a greater influence on the level of psychiatric bed use than services which are supposed to provide an alternative to admission.
If case management is expected to improve the client's QOL, then the client's subjective assessment of his or her well-being is a crucial component in assessment and also in outcome measurement.
COMPULSORY CARE
As Fisher (1990) has already pointed out the community care reforms are being designed as if everyone who is to receive services feels equally happy about that fact, and can express a reliable opinion about their own need for care, and the success of the service in meeting their needs.
The truth is far more complex, and the development of ‘assertive’ models of case management reflect the reality that non-assertive models almost certainly do not meet the needs of the most reluctant clients.
The needs of the clients in these cases are not self-defined, they are defined by carers, professionals, or society.
While Fisher is right to argue that some important principles can, nevertheless, be applied, he is also right to say that the consumerist philosophy and concepts of compulsory care which involve acting in the individual's interests are basically incompatible.
The philosopher Rescher offers a useful distinction when he says that we are all the best judges of our own satisfaction and happiness, and no-one can do this for us, but that we are not always the best judges of what is in our own best interests, and that others, who are less subjectively involved are better judges.
This distinction lies at the heart of issues such as professional judgement, the need for professional supervision, the need for inspection and standards, and the need for advocacy.
It also reflects the frequently ignored reality that our ability to predict what is in our own best interests is always less successful than actuarial (or statistically-based) prediction (Meehl, 1954).
We avoid this  reality because none of us like it, and prefer to defer to our clinical impressions!
In the same way, we resist the idea that we are always dependent on others to a greater or lesser degree; we find it hard to accept total dependence, and we do not (often) choose it for ourselves or for others.
Sometimes our resistance to the idea of dependence leads us to a degree of enthusiasm which can impair our judgement about need.
INCENTIVES FOR BETTER CARE
The administrative model of case management fails to provide many incentives for the current generation of social workers.
New care management systems of assessment without provision do not rest easily with training which has equipped the worker to provide direct care, and there is some evidence that workers find the disincentives so great that they will resign from such posts (Huxley and Kerfoot, 1992).
The PSSRU model of case management was designed to improve assessment and to facilitate creativity in resource management.
On the basis of my professional acquaintance with some of the workers involved in the Kent and later Darlington projects, I can say that this appeared to be the result, and that there were real incentives for the workers to work in this way.
I can also say that morale in these teams, at the time I had contact with the projects appeared to be considerably higher than in comparable teams in more orthodox services.
The results of the PSSRU projects are a testimony to the way in which productive incentives for better care were engendered.
It seems a faint hope that an administrative model which may involve setting unattainable standards based on competence-led performance indicators, inflexibility in eligibility criteria, and limitations on the use of self as a resource, can supply the incentives to provide or even to broker services in an improved way.
To propose that the separation of assessment from provision might provide a better incentive to create a needs-led service, than professional judgement, is to show a degree of confusion about the origins of our present predicament (shortage of resource; bureaucratization, etc.) bordering on the incredible.
PROJECTION AND INTROSPECTION
The lack of clarity in the concept of care management leaves it ripe for projection.
By not considering the results of case management practice and research in greater depth and learning more about the value it has for the most needy clients of the health and welfare system, we are in danger of failing to learn the lessons which others have learned, and of having to re-live their mistakes.
Care Programming in Mental Health: assimilation and adaptation
JUSTINE SCHNEIDER
Justine Schneider was a generic social worker, community health worker and member of a multi-disciplinary Community Drug Team before training as a social researcher.
She then worked freelance for several local authorities and in 1991 joined the PSSRU as part of a team engaged on a programme of research in mental health commissioned by the Department of Health.
SUMMARY
Two years after the care programme approach in mental health was introduced there is still widespread confusion about its meaning and its relation to other changes in the arena of community care.
This paper looks at how care programmes are being implemented and at whom they are being targeted.
It also examines the relation between care management and care programming and raises some questions about future developments in the light of community care reforms.
It draws on data collected during 1992 from three contrasting health districts, all of which had made considerable progress in care programming.
Sixty practitioners were interviewed about the theory and practice of care programming.
Their experience is presented here in the context of a review of community care plans for 1992/93 which characterizes the responses of different local authorities to the approach.
WHY CARE PROGRAMMING?
The development of mental health policy, psychiatric practice, and community care all contribute to the evolution of the care programme approach.
For a generation, mental health policy in Britain has advocated locally-administered, community-based, comprehensive services for people with mental illness as described in the 1974 white paper Better services for the mentally ill (Cmnd. 6233).
During the same period, clinical practice, aided by an armoury of pharmaceuticals, has opted for short-term admissions and out-patient treatment, together with the rehabilitation of long-stay patients and the closure of huge Victorian  asylums.
To the old long-stay patients re-established in community settings and the younger chronic patients who may never have become institutionalized should be added the relatively small but significant number of mentally abnormal offenders whose discharge from special hospitals gave rise to the 1975 Report of the committee on mentally abnormal offenders (Cmnd. 6244), together with the growing number of elderly people with mental health problems, including dementia (Health Advisory Service, 1982).
All four groups have generated public concern about lack of adequate support in the community, while research efforts have repeatedly reported that survival in the community appears to be associated with the existence of structured plans for after-care, frequency of contact with professionals and access to appropriate facilities (Acres, 1975; Davis et al., 1984; Thornicroft, 1989).
Legislative solutions proved largely ineffectual.
The Mental Health Act Commission found in 1987 that the requirements of section 117 of the Mental Health Act 1983, which made after-care for those compulsorily detained the joint responsibility of health and social services, were not consistently fulfilled (Secretary of State for Social Services, 1987), while section 7 of the Disabled Persons Act 1986, which required after-care to be provided for all those who had been in hospital for more than six months, was never implemented.
Mounting evidence of relapses precipitated by social factors (Dean and Gadd, 1990) and of institutionalization and neglect in the community (Bachrach, 1984; Melzer et al., 1991) made a broadly applicable solution imperative.
Subsequent findings confirm such needs (Allen et al., 1992).
The most immediate instigator to the introduction of the care programme approach was probably the recommendations of the Spokes Inquiry (1988) into the killing by a client of hospital social worker Isabel Schwartz.
The inquiry recommended that the Secretary of State for Health clarify responsibility for after-care, that individual pre-discharge plans be specified and a register of designated patients be kept.
The latter was related to concerns about homelessness among people with mental health problems.
Following the inquiry's recommendations, in February 1989, the Secretary of State issued a Circular on the discharge of patients from hospital (HC(89)5), and in September 1990 followed this with the Circular on the care programme approach, stating that from April 1991 all patients leaving hospital should be the subjects of care programmes, and that in September 1991 regions should report back on the implementation of this policy.
The Royal College of Psychiatrists, at the recommendation of the Spokes Inquiry, published Good medical practice in the aftercare of potentially violent or vulnerable patients discharged from in-patient psychiatric treatment in October 1991, by which time it had been overtaken by the introduction of the  care programme approach.
The Royal College states that its guidelines ‘reflect the philosophy behind the care programme approach’(Royal College of Psychiatrists, 1991, p. 2).
In November 1992 the Reed commission published its Review of health and social services for mentally disordered offenders and others requiring similar services (Cm. 2088), whose recommendations also complement the care programme approach, with particular emphasis on diverting people with mental health needs from the criminal justice system.
This brief review of the origins of the care programme approach suggests that it was generated by a move to establish systems which would help to prevent individual patients from ‘falling through the net’ of services, with the risk of manifest neglect, homelessness, inappropriate use of health and criminal justice services or even more tragic outcomes.
As such, care programming can be seen as an attempt to standardize mental health service delivery and to set norms for the administration of care for people with a certain level of dependency.
The Circular also states that patients should not be discharged from hospital unless adequate alternative provision is available, which responds to fears that the large-scale closure of psychiatric hospitals could lead to unplanned discharges, leaving people with mental health problems unsupported in the community.
The rest of this paper will look at the care programme approach in practice, to judge how far it meets, or can meet, its goals.
WHAT IS THE CARE PROGRAMME APPROACH?
Care programming was given its present form by a Department of Health Circular HC(90)23/LASSL(90)11 addressed to both health and social services authorities.
It requires ‘systematic arrangements’ for assessing and reviewing both health needs and social care needs of people with mental health problems who could be treated in the community, as well as‘effective systems’for ensuring the delivery of the services needed.
This implied:
assessment of the health and social care needs for the patient with particular regard as to whether the patient has a severe and enduring (i.e. chronic) mental illness;
nomination of a key worker;
regular review and monitoring of the patient's needs and progress and of the delivery of the care programme (DoH, 1992, p. 11).
The annex to the circular also highlights four important issues related to the local arrangements for care programming: inter-professional working, involving patients and carers, keeping in touch with patients while ensuring that services are provided, and the role of key workers.
An article in the Caring for People newsletter (DoH, 1992) responded to the questions raised by participating districts and confirmed that the care programme approach applies to all people accepted by specialist psychiatric services.
It also stated that any mental health worker can be a key worker, and permitted reviews in informal settings or by telephone, provided that these are documented.
Further details of the practical application of the care programme approach are given in the Health of the Nation Handbook (DoH, 1993, pp. 109–14).
No resources were allocated for the changes in procedures necessitated by the care programme approach (Hudson, 1992), although the Mental Illness Specific Grant was identified as a potential source of funding for new initiatives in social care which could be complementary to the introduction of care programming.
The Social Services Committee's recommendation that ‘start up’ resources be allocated to implement the care programme approach was rejected (Secretary of State for Health, 1991a).
The timing of the introduction of the care programme approach coincided with the initial dates for the major reforms of health and social care brought about by the NHS and Community Care Act 1990.
The terms of the approach require close collaboration between health and social services but a great deal of latitude remains for ‘local’ responses to emerge.
When the Social Services' Committee raised concerns about basic definitions for collaborative working and about the apparent overlap between the care programme approach and care management, the Secretary of State for Health referred them to Community Care in the Next Decade and Beyond — Policy Guidance.
However, while ‘care package’ and ‘care planning’both appear in the glossary to this document, ‘care programme’is conspicuous by its absence.
This is just one example of the confusion which the introduction of care programming generated and the questions which it raises.
Some of the questions surrounding the care programme approach concern how it is being operated, what staff think about it and what impact it is having, or likely to have, on mental health services in general.
Questions about outcomes for service users and consumer opinions must await longer-term research, but here we attempt to tackle these descriptive questions, using the data available in three districts in 1992 as well as documentary sources.
The aim of this paper is to embed the detailed findings from three districts in the overall picture of care programming gained from the community care plans.
A major drawback to a satisfactory analysis of the implementation of care programming is the ‘moving target’ factor: what is being observed is a process in  flux, so that none of our conclusions can be definitive or generalizable.
However, they can still be useful for organizations in the throes of change, marker buoys in rough seas, navigational aids rather than the one and only route to take.
METHODOLOGY
We interviewed sixty people who were closely involved with the care programme approach in three contrasting health districts (nine psychiatrists, fifteen health and local authority managers and thirty-six key workers, mostly community psychiatric nurses).
The districts were chosen because they had made some progress in care programming.
These were in no way representative of the national picture, since relatively few authorities had adopted care programming at the outset of our enquiry.
The sample of staff was structured to reflect the organization of services in each district, for example, where several community mental health teams were operating, we tried to include representatives from each team, and to balance our data between people concerned with care of elderly people and those involved with younger service users.
Employing a semi-structured format, we asked interviewees about their attitudes towards the care programme approach and details of their practice — which client groups were considered, who was involved in reviews, who was the key worker and so forth.
We also analysed the mental health component of the community care plans for 1992/93 of a one-in-two sample of local authorities (20 shires, 18 metropolitan districts and 15 London boroughs).
This method is discussed in greater detail below.
FINDINGS FROM THE CASE STUDIES
The impact of care programming depends on existing practice.
Its requirements (assessments of needs, nominated key workers, regular reviews) can be met in a variety of ways at different levels of the organization, for example, in policy and in practice.
Adoption at one of
1
Avon, Bedfordshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Cleveland, Cornwall, Cumbria, Devon, Dorset, Durham, East Sussex, Essex, Gloucestershire, Humberside, Isle of Wight, Kent, Lincolnshire, Northumberland, Northamptonshire, North Yorkshire.
2
Bolton, Bradford, Bury, Calderdale, Coventry, Dudley, Gateshead, Knowsley, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, North Tyneside, Oldham, Rotherham, Salford, Sandwell, Sefton, Solihull.
3
Barnet, Bexley, Brent, Croydon, Ealing, Enfield, Greenwich, Havering, Hillingdon, Hammersmith and Fulham, Harrow, Islington, Kingston, Lambeth, Newham.
these levels does not necessarily imply commitment at the other.
First we address the question of how the care programme approach seemed to be put into practice.
Our research looked at mental health services in three areas and how they were affected by the introduction of care programming.
The areas studied all devoted extraneous resources to the introduction of care programming.
In one area, a full time district co-ordinator post was created.
In another, a regional co-ordinator was in post, while a district mental health manager took responsibility for the training required.
In the third, a part-time co-ordinator with overall responsibility for community care development had been employed.
Training programmes were at different stages of development, with the effect that staff interviewed had received on average eleven hours' training in one area, with between five and six hours in the other districts.
Training focused on topics such as the problems of identifying those who should receive the care programme approach, assessing needs without being prescriptive, and achieving inter-professional cooperation for reviews.
In each case new pro-forma were developed, piloted and introduced to meet the requirements of the care programme approach.
This raised the problem of designing a form to accommodate a needs-led assessment, with the result that more or less structured approaches were used.
Where information technology was available, care programme forms were linked to new or existing systems.
In every area the care programme approach had its partisans and its detractors, and the views of all are included here.
Staff interviewed about their experience of the care programme approach were asked to describe its advantages and disadvantages.
Since the approach was fairly new to all interviewed (none had been operating it for more than nine months) the responses may have more to do with expectations than experience, but nevertheless they serve to sketch out the potential of the care programme approach to affect every aspect of mental health care, for good or ill.
The advantages and disadvantages of the care programme approach as perceived by staff are summarized in Table 1.
Having outlined the expectations and experience of practitioners with respect to the care programme approach, the following section looks at available information about how it was actually working in the three districts concerned.
WHO RECEIVES CARE PROGRAMMES?
Although, as we have seen, care programming is closely associated with discharge planning, the circular identifies its recipients as ‘those accepted by specialist psychiatric services’(including psychologists, and  community psychiatric nurses) whether the service users are in-patients or not.
Clearly, if care programming aims to prevent people from becoming lost to services, it needs to be fairly all-inclusive.
Therefore the presence of ‘severe and enduring mental illness’ is given as the sole criterion for inclusion.
In practice, however, there appeared to be some ambivalence about whether care programming was aimed at people being discharged from hospital or at a wider range of those who use mental health services.
Our survey suggested that, in the three districts studied, people on section 117 of the Mental Health Act 1983 and those who were being discharged after at least six months in hospital were almost always included on care programmes, but for people being discharged from hospital after briefer admissions, for those who were being treated outside hospital and for elderly people with both functional and organic disorders, the decision to formulate a care programme was determined by particular considerations.
Some of these were enshrined in local guidelines, such as whether a person was deemed ‘vulnerable’, or if they lived alone or had repeated admissions to hospital.
In other cases, individual workers made their own judgements about whether a person was likely to benefit from the care programme approach.
These decisions both tend to define ‘severe and enduring’ mental illness in the local context and to allocate limited resources for care programming to those most in need.
In practice, therefore, it appears that the care programme approach, contrary to the guidelines, was being implemented selectively in the study areas and was not being applied to every new patient accepted by mental health services in these districts.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SERVICES FOR ELDERLY AND YOUNGER SERVICE USERS
We found some discrepancies between care of the elderly and of younger people under the care programme approach, which seemed to be related to different modes of organizing service delivery.
In all of the districts under study the care of people under 65 or 70 years of age was organized by community mental health teams, dispersed throughout the district.
Psychiatrists rarely visited younger patients at home unless a compulsory admission appeared necessary, but community psychiatric nurses were in close touch, often through their administration of regular depot injections.
For the elderly patients, however, psychiatrists were much more likely to make domiciliary visits, and to take a lead in service planning.
Not surprisingly, due to the higher incidence of physical illness among elderly people, nurses without specialist mental health qualification made up a high proportion of the complement of staff    
Advantages
Filling the holes in the net — Staff felt that the care programme approach helped to ensure continuity of care, and ‘tighten up’ service delivery.
This meant that people were less likely to be lost to follow-up, because reviews were more likely to take place.
Also, the monitoring role of the key worker meant that threatened relapses were dealt with, so that unnecessary readmissions could be avoided.
This also made it easier to note any harmful side effects of medication and ensure compliance with treatment.
Integrating services — Another set of advantages was the identification of key workers and clarification of their roles.
Associated with this were better teamworking, improved communication, and liaison between the professionals involved.
Multidisciplinary input to an individual case brought greater flexibility and creativity in designing care packages.
Staff said that they felt more inclined to offer services if they were not assuming sole responsibility for an individual's welfare but could ‘share the burden’.
Promoting consistency and quality of service — the care programme approach added a more rigorous recording system.
Staff recognized that the approach could supply data for planning, by identifying deficits in provision, and for auditing services or needs.
They thought that this could reduce duplication and ensure better utilization of resources as well as guaranteeing greater consistency across different branches of the same service.
Care programming should ensure better discharge planning, the provision of adequate support for people to maintain mental health at home and reduce unnecessary re-admissions to hospital.
By formalizing objectives and reviewing their attainment, the care programme approach should improve effectiveness of care.
Enabling service users and supporters — Staff noted that users tended to trust services more because of their relationship with their key worker and that service users generally had a greater say in what they required.
The emphasis placed on assessments which were needs-led was noted as another benefit to clients.
The process of individual care planning not only promoted contact with families but also with the wider social support network, including the community at large and the facilities which it had to offer in non-stigmatized settings.
One experienced key worker reported a great improvement in carers' satisfaction with services organized under the care programme approach, which he attributed to their  participation and consultation.
However, staff noted that the potential for user and carer participation was not fulfilled in every case.
Improving staff morale — Staff also felt that the care programme approach could help their morale and broaden their repertoire of interventions when the training process they received ‘valued staff’ and taught them about each other 's professional skills and local resources.
Disadvantages
Allocation of resources — Resourcing was a matter of concern, both the resources devoted to care programming and the way in which care programmes effectively allocate resources.
The lack of additional or ring-fenced central funding for the care programme approach as such was seen as a disadvantage.
The fact that the care programme ‘creates a lot more work if you're doing it properly’ was recognized almost universally, and the pressure upon staff was seen to lead to frustration and overwork.
The gatekeeping function of the care programme approach could neglect the needs of other service users, ‘Who defines needs also determines whether they are met’.
Finally, some key workers were apprehensive because they saw care programming as one step towards making them responsible for purchasing care, like budget-holding care managers in some social services authorities.
Questions of resourcing were related to concerns about efficiency and bureaucracy.
Bureaucracy — Some people were concerned that the administrative requirements of the care programme approach might take time away from face-to-face work with clients.
The way in which care programming had been introduced from the ‘top down’ was also seen as a disadvantage, ‘We were given a lot of freedom to develop services in the eighties, now we feel new systems are being imposed’.
Some people thought that the care programme approach had little to add to existing services except paperwork.
‘Why spend limited resources on management systems?’ was one complaint.
Respondents were worried that the care programme approach could lead to needless reviews and multiple meetings.
They felt that it should be targeted at those most in need and was really only useful for a small proportion of people with mental health problems.
Confidentiality — Fears were raised about the confidentiality of the data collected.
Interviewees reported that a few service users had refused to allow their names to be placed on a mental health database.
Staff also expressed anxieties about confidentiality.
It was suggested that this is more of a risk in small, rural communities where anonymity is practically impossible, and where the care programme approach might ‘label’ clients of mental health services.
Dependency —‘Clients are becoming addicted…if they haven't got a key worker they want one’.
Unnecessary dependency is usually seen as detrimental to mental health.
The care programme approach was seen to foster dependency in two ways, on the part of clients and on the part of staff.
It was felt that the emphasis on practical support might lead key workers and other staff to overlook the individual's internal resources and personal strengths: ‘the client's life can be taken over by services’.
Dependency — For staff, the approach could create reliance upon the system and lead to rigid interpretations of roles and tasks, thus inhibiting creativity in service delivery, and becoming ‘an alternative to thinking’.
caring for the elderly.
Social services were more closely involved through their provision of home care services, although this did not necessarily mean that a social worker was appointed.
For these reasons, and also because elderly patients were usually less mobile and less likely to leave the area, key workers for elderly patients were sometimes seen as redundant.
Staff caring for elderly people mostly felt that keeping in touch was not a problem and systems for co-ordinating services had already been established.
Another important difference seemed to be the availability of multidisciplinary input.
In at least one area this varied according to whether a person was seen by elderly services or others, because staffing profiles were much more biased towards medical care for elderly people with mental illness, with the result that other professions, such as social work, occupational therapy, and community psychiatric nursing, were less frequently called upon.
TABLE 1.
Care programme approach — advantages and disadvantages perceived by staff
MULTIDISCIPLINARY ASSESSMENTS AND REVIEWS
Multidisciplinary assessments are one of the principles of care programming, but staff indicated that they felt that increasing the number of meetings and the range of participants could be a disadvantage.
The individuals interviewed were asked how many people had participated in the most recent assessment and review they had attended and how long these usually took.
(‘Participate' could mean any kind of input, by telephone or face-to-face in a meeting.)
Excluding clients, but counting carers, the range of participants in assessments was from one to six, with two or three being the average number.
The total time taken was judged by interviewees to be between 40 and 60 minutes at review.
Where reviews were carried out at team meetings or ward meetings, the number of participants was higher (the overall mean was four).
This gives an indication of the scale of resources being called upon by the care programme approach.
One hospital-based consultant psychiatrist commented that she discharges about fifteen patients per week, and an hour long pre-discharge meeting for each person was not practical for reasons of time.
Other community teams dealt with all their reviews in one regular weekly meeting which had been set up to meet the requirements of the care programme approach, evidence that this is having a considerable impact on the organization of services in the places where it has been implemented.
KEY WORKERS
By far the majority of key workers appointed under the care programme approach seem to be community psychiatric nurses.
Because of the way  in which our sample of interviewees was structured, the proportions are not representative, but another more random sample of 54 service users in the same three districts gives their key workers as 61 per cent community psychiatric nurses, 15 per cent social workers, 7 per cent each hospital nurses and group-workers, 6 per cent psychiatrists and 4 per cent others (psychologist, community nurse — mental health).
ANALYSIS OF COMMUNITY CARE PLANS
Our principal method for gathering the information about care programming which we report here was direct interviews with practitioners, but this could not give any indication of the applicability of our findings to other areas.
We knew that the districts under study were fairly advanced in the adoption of the care programme approach, and we wanted to find out how representative they might be of other authorities, so we studied the mental health chapters of community care plans to supplement our information.
This approach is a risky one for several reasons.
First, it should be noted that care programming is primarily a health-led activity, with co-operation from the social services, while it is the local authority which is primarily responsible for producing the community care plan.
Care programming may come fairly low down the list of priorities for social services, especially as the 1992/93 community care plans were likely to be preoccupied with the other community care reforms to be instituted by April 1993 (National Council for Voluntary Organisations, 1992) and because the first year of the plans was experimental and so they were probably cautious in their aims.
Second it can be argued that the relationship between community care plans and local authorities' practice is not straightforward, but remains to be evaluated.
Third, community care plans are rather idiosyncratic documents and the investment of resources in the actual plans appears to vary greatly (a cursory glance at their covers and the corporate style projected by each confirms this).
Therefore it would be rash to pretend to criticize community care plans.
What we have to say here about the plans which we studied, approximately half of all those produced, could be called elucidatory rather than evaluative.
Although our findings (see Table 2) indicate that nearly two thirds of local authorities were aware of the care programme approach at the time of writing their 1992/93 community care plan, there is great variation in their interpretation of care programming and its implications for their role in the purchasing and provision of mental health services.
Treatment of care programming in the plans ranges from minimal mention of care programmes to the wholesale integration of the concept into mental health planning and service evaluation.
TABLE 2.
Whether the mental section of the community care plan made reference to care programming (Sample/total number)
To allow us to compare community care plans without appearing overly judgemental, and to structure our discussion of the part played by care programming in different authorities' policies for mental health, the rest of this section employs the biological concepts of assimilation and adaptation.
An organism assimilates another organism when it makes the latter into something like itself, as food into the body.
An organism adapts to another when it changes itself to suit the latter.
We use this metaphor to characterize local authorities' responses to care programming.
We propose that local authorities can be classified according to whether they appear to have assimilated the care programme approach or adapted to it.
The different responses to care planning can be located along a spectrum ranging from wholesale assimilation at one end to radical adaptation at the other, with different degrees of each in between.
ASSIMILATION OF THE CARE PROGRAMME APPROACH
At the assimilation end of the spectrum of representations of care programming in community care plans, local authorities appear to refer to it formally, signalling their awareness, but with little or no discussion in the care plan of the relevance of care programmes for social services, examples being Croydon and Lambeth.
Of course, this is open to interpretation: for example , it may suggest a limited awareness of care programming and the paying of lip-service to the idea, or it could be the result of thorough consideration of what care programming could offer existing services and the conclusion that it is solely a matter for health authorities' concern.
Some care plans (Dudley and Bedfordshire, for example) appear to have assimilated the approach because they state that it is already in operation, as directed by the circular, and only requires minor adjustments, if any:
This community care plan notes the Department of Health circular on the care programme approach…
This approach is being developed to ensure that in future patients treated in the community receive the health and social care they need…
The department will continue to refine with the health authorities the local care programme approach adopted from April 1991 (Bedfordshire).
For some local authorities, care programming is taken to apply only to people in hospital:
The Care Programme Approach…means that a formal discharge plan must be agreed for every patient to be discharged from psychiatric hospital.
The Social Services department is committed to good discharge planning for all people discharged from hospital and will work with representatives to improve good practice (Berkshire).
The Care Programme Approach is used for those detained under the Mental Health Act.
This formalizes the responsibilities of the multi-disciplinary team, provides for user participation, and clarifies standards of monitoring and review (Kensington and Chelsea).
Moving towards the adaptation end of the spectrum, a few authorities (North Tyneside, Avon, Lincolnshire) draw attention to the need for collaboration between health and social services.
This indicates that they are aware of some of the implications of care programming for social services.
The assessment of unmet needs is seen by others to be a potential source of valuable information:
There is no single pattern of assessment of people's needs.
This will be addressed by the care programme approach which is being introduced (Rotherham).
North Yorkshire (Scarborough and Ryedale) and Oldham also refer to the benefits of care programming in relation to information-gathering.
ADAPTATION TO THE CARE PROGRAMME APPROACH
The local authorities cited so far can be described as having assimilated the care programme approach, they take it into account and perceive opportunities to be gained, but they do not appear to have changed themselves in any significant way to accommodate it.
Those authorities which are classed here as adapting to the care programme approach either spend some of their Mental Illness Specific Grant to satisfy its requirements or present the elements of the approach (assessment, key working and review) as an integral part of their plans for the year in question.
The use of the Mental Illness Specific Grant (MISG) and Supplementary Credit Approvals was linked to care programmes in seven of the  community care plans.
In Dorset 20,000 was allocated to ‘monitor the impact of and develop the Care Programme Approach’.
In Ealing, approval was given for an administrative officer (sum not specified) to be appointed under MISG ‘to co-ordinate the multi-agency work required by the care programme approach’.
Additional social workers were employed using the MISG in Barnet ‘to assist the introduction of the care programme approach for people leaving hospital’ as well as to provide other services.
In the Isle of Wight, the development of care programme systems and the need for monitoring were seen to require an increase in ‘IT and support staff input’, although it is not clear whether this represented additional resources, and if so whether they could be met from the MISG or elsewhere.
In Central District of Manchester, MISG was earmarked to appoint a care programme co-ordinator and in Havering 20,100 of MISG financed a Community Care Organiser, associated in the plan with the Care Programme Team, ‘to develop some services to support people in their own homes’.
Kent stated that:
Health Authorities…are implementing the Care Programme Approach and we intend, wherever possible to develop care management services which complement and support the Care Programme Approach.
A large proportion of our Mental Illness Specific Grant allocation will be used to support the development of these services during 1992/93.
In Rotherham, ‘[t]he specific grant has been successfully obtained for a list of improvements which includes: implementing a joint care programme approach to planning and providing services to users’, while in Bradford the demands of care programming and care management led to considerable investment in Information Technology:
The implementation and assessment that is needed to implement the Care Programme Approach has moved on to allow the introduction of a comprehensive care management system.
A sum of 150,000 Supplementary Credit Approval (Specific Grant) will aid the introduction of a computerised joint]care management system (Bradford).
In addition to those authorities which present their spending plans, nine others (Bolton, Brent, Coventry, Gloucestershire, Bury, Hillingdon, Northamptonshire, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Cornwall) show explicit action plans of some kind in connection with the care programme approach, such as:
[t]o introduce the Care Programme Approach to people who are referred to the specialist psychiatric services.
Systematic arrangements will be made to assess, provide for and review the health and social care needs of people with a mental illness who would benefit from support and treatment in the community (Coventry)
These plans represent a thoroughgoing adaptation of local authority services to meet the requirements of the care programme approach.
This does not necessarily imply great changes, however, and could be achieved in large part through a reformulation of existing practice, such as job titles and review systems.
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FROM COMMUNITY CARE PLANS
Of course, the data presented in the community care plans are limited and, as pointed out in the introduction to the methodology, it could be argued that their relation to real change is tenuous.
Bearing in mind these caveats, of the 34 local authorities in our sample of 52 which mentioned care programming in their 1992/93 community care plans (63 per cent), about half (30 per cent ) appear, at the time of writing their 1992/93 community care plans, to have been actively developing care programming, devoting to it resources new and old, and in many cases using the extension of care programmes to all those eligible as one measure of success in the provision of mental health services.
Our classification of references to the care programme approach along a hypothetical assimilation-adaptation continuum suggests that roughly half of local authorities which mention the care programme approach in their plans seemed to have assimilated it, and half were adapting to it at the time of composing the community care plan.
IMPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPING COMMUNITY CARE
The care programme approach has certain similarities to care management.
The core elements of accountability, planning, evaluation, and documentation of interventions are common to both systems (Onyett, 1991; Ryan et al., 1991, p. 34), but there are several important differences.
Care management is local authority-led, while care programming is health authority-led, in collaboration with the local authority, especially over the expenditure of the Mental Illness Specific Grant.
Secondly, case managers and key workers in mental health may have different professional profiles, with different working practices.
For example, in at least some authorities, ‘care manager’ is a new job with enhanced responsibilities (and remuneration) compared to, say, a social worker post, while key workers were not expected to alter significantly their job content.
Care managers generally act as brokers but key workers will usually have some responsibility for service delivery (DoH, 1993, p. 103).
Third, the key worker under the care programme  approach does not have any responsibility for financial management, as do some care managers.
It may also be expected that the two systems will differ in other respects, such as the length of time each operates or the intensity of intervention, with care management being more concentrated and longer-term.
How care management and care programming are integrated remains to be seen, and it seemed reasonable to look to the community care plans for local authority policies on the question.
Only five authorities in our sample (10 per cent) even acknowledged a need to integrate care management and care programming in their 1992/ 93 plans.
Of these, three did not clearly differentiate between the two systems.
This may be because definitions were unclear or because criteria for targeting the two systems had not yet been formulated.
In any case it did not deter such aims as:
The development of a care programming, care management and joint assessment service that straddles inpatient and community services, and provides a continuity of care for the individual and their carers, particularly before discharge from hospital (East Sussex).
Newcastle and Sandwell also failed to distinguish between care management and care programmes.
Two other authorities, however, did indicate how they intend to reconcile the two systems.
In Kingston they will operate ‘in tandem’, although the meaning of this is not dealt with in the plan:
[T]he mental health sector will be working in collaboration with the health service in developing a ‘Care Programme Approach’ to the provision of services to people who have been diagnosed as having a serious mental illness.
The principles of this approach are similar to that of ‘Case Assessment’ and ‘Care Management’and will operate in tandem.
In Bexley, by comparison, the community care plan anticipates no change at all in existing systems of working to accommodate care programming:
[T]he existing system of professional decision making for people with mental health problems is one which already incorporates many of the best principles of care management.
Although some aspects of it are under review, under the ‘care programme’ initiative, it is not proposed to incorporate the mental health services in the first wave of changes planned in the home care delivered by the authorities.
The existing care management system, now described, will continue for the duration of these plans (Bexley).
This seems to imply that care programming has been considered and dismissed as redundant in view of prevailing systems of mental health care.
The community care plans were therefore disappointingly brief on the question of care management and care programming.
The manner of integration remains to be seen in practice when the two modes of working are operating fully but there seem to be at least three possible strategies.
In one model, illustrated by Bexley above and discussed in Onyett (1991) care management and care programming are functionally interchangeable and care programming becomes the mental health version of care management.
However, this ignores their organizational differences already described.
In another model, that preferred by the Department of Health (1992), care programming is the pathway to care management, which provides similar input but with additional intensity and possibly with additional resources.
This could be represented by Figure 1.
A third model, that favoured in The Health of the Nation Key Area Handbook: Mental Illness (DoH, 1993) could be represented by Figure 2, where some people receive both care programmes and care management, but others receive only one type of service.
At present, further discussion of this question is largely speculative.
If, as we have already shown, the targeting of care programming is unclear, there is even less guidance about allocating service users to care management in mental health and whether this should be instead of, or in addition to , care programming.
Nevertheless, this raises questions about resourcing, the possibility of duplication of services and of perverse incentives.
Will admission to care management be the only way to access social services' resources?
Will local authority employees on community mental health teams operate care management while their colleagues operate care programming?
In the conclusion we highlight these and other important issues.
ORGANIZATIONAL IMPLICATIONS
The evidence from our analysis of advantages and disadvantages shows that, when implemented, the care programme approach has far-reaching impact for mental health services both at the level of the organization and of the individual service user.
The data suggest that the care programme approach is being applied more at the level of higher dependency, despite the fact that it is ‘prescribed’ for all people accepted by the psychiatric services.
The reasons for this discrepancy probably lie in the different modes of service organization and in practitioners' rationing of their own services, given scarcity of time, but other unexplored factors (related to diagnosis or accommodation for example) may also enter here.
This issue is discussed by North and Ritchie (1993).
A majority of local authorities had taken care programming into account in writing their 1992/93 community care plans, but only about    half of these planned any significant changes to accommodate its requirements.
A number planned to use the Mental Illness Specific Grant to help to operationalize care programming.
Very few had considered what to do about the care management-care programming interface but then this is at least partly a problem for health authorities.
FIGURES 1 and 2: models for explaining the relationship between care programming and care management in mental health.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CONSUMERS
If this picture gleaned from our case studies and analysis of community care plans reflects the state of development of care programming, it is clear that there is still a great deal of scope for progress.
Along what lines should further steps be made?
This depends largely upon whose perspective we adopt: purchaser, provider, or consumer.
If the care programme approach is adopted by user and carer interests it could be used to articulate the needs of consumers with mental health problems and express these to commissioners or planners.
From the perspective of service users and carers, the care programme approach, and in particular its assessment of needs at an aggregate level, can be seen as a means towards participation in mental health services (Hogman, 1992).
IMPLICATIONS FOR PROVIDERS AND PURCHASERS
The potential of the care programme approach to shape the future of mental health services is reflected in the guidelines for GP fund-holders, which specify that any mental health services purchased must be operating the care programme approach.
Not only is this an incentive towards its implementation, but it suggests that care programmes might supply versatile units of care to be negotiated in the market-place.
They have the characteristic of being cross-disciplinary, which reminds us that the future of mental health planning and commissioning will need to be a joint effort.
The questions already raised about the possibility of conflicts of interest between health and social services (for example, will people on care programmes have access to local authority resources for residential care?) illustrate the even greater complexity of distinguishing between health and social care in mental health and the desirability of finding a global way of dealing with the details of packaging multidisciplinary care.
Evidence so far is that for providers, the care programme approach does not assist in clarifying the roles of different staff in different agencies, but it may offer a global package of mental health care, comprising both social and health care services.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PLANNING AND EVALUATION
The Health of the Nation consultative document (Secretary of State for Health, 1991b) identifies a need to develop ‘assessable parameters related to the provision of appropriate district-based hospital and community services and to their performance’, and to find ‘measures of structure and process which, taken as a whole, would act as reliable unambiguous monitors of progress’.
The care programme approach is one such indicator.
In this limited way care programming can be used to set targets and measure progress in developing mental health services.
Of course, its effect on service users' welfare is not yet established.
Although the close resemblance to care management suggests that this is likely to be favourable, there are many other factors which influence outcomes in mental health care.
The assessment of needs on a large scale could provide planners with valuable information about local conditions and increase the responsiveness of services.
We are compelled to weigh against this the evidence from our case studies, from the professionals interviewed and from the community care plans, that care programming makes clear demands on limited resources.
Therefore, in a time of radical change in systems of community care, care programming will inevitably have to wait its turn, and may even have to prove its worth before it is adopted fully by health and social services.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Grateful acknowledgements are due to, who commented constructively on earlier drafts of this article.
However, opinions, omissions and errors are the author's alone.
The research reported here was carried out in 1992/93 as part of a programme of mental health research funded by the Department of Health at the PSSRU.
Abstracts
PSYCHIATRY AND CHILD PSYCHIATRY (Nick Hervey)
, ‘The influence of ethnicity and family structure on relapse in first-episode schizophrenia — a comparison of Asian, Afro-Caribbean and White patients’, British Journal of Psychiatry, 1992, 161, pp. 7–90.
There is now overwhelming evidence that outcome for people with schizophrenia in Western industrialized countries is markedly inferior to that of those living in the Third World.
The difficulties of achieving comparability of sampling, measurement, and outcome criteria across cultures are enormous but have been addressed in the WHO's transcultural schizophrenia research programme, where in one study a cross-sectional sample covering eight countries was followed up over two years.
On all measures a greater proportion of patients in India, Colombia, and Nigeria had better outcomes than their counterparts in Denmark, London, Prague, and Washington DC.
A number of hypotheses have been put forward in explanation: greater opportunities for socially valued productive roles and more cohesive extended family structures, to diffuse the burden of caring and increase tolerance, being the most popular.
Other studies have also found a lower prevalence of high EE (High Expressed Emotion in families is considered to be a factor in relapse of schizophrenia) in Third World countries.
It is unclear though whether cross-cultural differences in outcome are mainly the result of different family structures or of a more complicated cluster of culturally related variables.
This retrospective casenote study looked at the early course of schizophrenia in Asians, Afro-Caribbeans, and Whites presenting for admission with a first psychotic episode, to All Saints Hospital, Birmingham (n= 137) over a 24 month period.
A clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia was applied to 45 per cent of those classified within the broad ‘S’ CATEGO class, and although fewer Asians received the diagnosis of schizophrenia, the authors suggest that there was no significant relationship between ethnicity and diagnosis.
After one year 26 per cent of patients had ceased contact with services and were not known to be resident in the area.
A greater proportion of Afro-Caribbean patients were referred to the hospital's centralized maintenance clinic.
The results suggest that both Afro-Caribbeans and Asians were less compliant with medication regimes than Whites.
Afro-Caribbeans were statistically more likely to be re-admitted.
On 12 month follow-up 16 per cent of Asians, as compared with 30 per cent Whites and 49 per cent Afro-Caribbeans had relapsed.
However when patients returning to the family were considered separately, the difference between ethnic groups was not statistically significant.
Duration of onset was recorded in a sub-group, and showed Asians had a shorter duration than both other groups, but particularly when compared with Afro-Caribbeans.
The latter also experienced longer admissions.
COMMENT
The authors wanted to test the hypothesis that important aspects of Asian culture, such as extended family networks and a high frequency of stable marriages, had ‘migrated’, and might reduce vulnerability to relapse.
There was a marked difference in family structures; nearly 90 per cent of Asian patients remained with their close family, as compared with 70 per cent of whites and 31 per cent of Afro-Caribbeans.
Nevertheless it is still of concern that studies such as this treat Asians and Afro-Caribbeans as if they were a homogenous group.
Levels of employment were also markedly different, being particularly low amongst the latter.
One weakness of this study is that being retrospective, although the authors could control for inter-rater reliability in defining cases of schizophrenia, they were relying on diagnoses made by clinicians at an earlier period.
Also, as the authors point out, the small cohort eventually identified from this large catchment area over 24 months suggests a leakage of as many as 100 patients.
The use of readmission as a criterion of relapse is also problematical, as it may well overlook a higher threshold for containing mentally ill behaviour amongst supportive communities.
Another difficulty is that a third of Asian patients disappeared from contact with services, and although this was not considered statistically significant, in percentage terms they had the highest attrition rate of the three groups.
One explanation given was that the least vulnerable may return to employment, and it is possible that Asians may be more likely to find employment through family networks.
On the other hand, they are probably less likely to join the transient homeless moving out of the area, and a number may well have returned to the sub-continent for a period, thus masking levels of continuing illness.
One factor not mentioned as significant for outcome in the discussion section of this paper, was the large proportion of senior psychiatrists at All Saints who are of Asian background.
One might at the very least postulate that this would be influential in the more positive outcomes recorded for Asian patients.
Another criticism of this study is that the authors only differentiated very generally between first and second generation Asian and Afro-Caribbeans without discussing the implications of mixing them together in the study, potentially masking important differences in the rates of schizophrenia between the two, and leaving an unclear picture as to whether second generation Asians, who were in the minority, benefited in the same way from the postulated protective factors.
Further studies making this differentiation would be useful.
The Northwick Park study drew attention to a relationship between duration of untreated illness before first admissions and the probability of relapse (Macmillan et al., 1986).
This paper suggests that the closeness of Asian family networks means disturbed behaviour is more visible and that treatment is therefore started earlier.
Conversely it argues that Afro-Caribbeans tend to have weaker links with primary care, come to treatment later, are admitted more often via the statutory authorities, and have less effective family networks to return to.
This contention is problematical, though, as it does not address the way in which mental health services fail to engage Afro-Caribbean families in culturally appropriate services.
, ‘The strange story of clozapine’, British Journal of Psychiatry, 1993, 162, pp. 32–8.
, ‘Clozapine rechallenge after an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome’, British Journal of Psychiatry, 1992, 161, pp. 855–6.
, ‘The effect of clozapine on cognition and psychiatric symptoms in patients with schizophrenia’, British Journal of Psychiatry, 1993, 162, pp. 43–9.
Three papers are treated together here.
They are considered important, as the use of clozapine is increasingly being promoted, despite its high cost, on the grounds of its supposed efficacy in neuroleptic resistant schizophrenia.
The first article is a review of the introduction of clozapine to clinical practice.
Clozapine is not the first treatment for schizophrenia to be hailed as a significant advance, nor is it the first to raise ethical dilemmas.
Insulin coma received widespread backing from the psychiatric profession, but after decades of use was exposed as worthless.
Clozapine was first synthesized in 1958 as one of over 1900 tricyclic compounds with a structural similarity to imipramine.
In animals it had marked effects on autonomic function, reduced motor activity and had marked anticholinergic properties.
The first clinical trial in 1961 with low doses was ineffective, but a further trial in 1962 on mainly chronic schizophrenics elicited good responses.
Subsequent studies confirmed this, and the drug was licensed in Switzerland, followed by 34 other countries.
By 1972, 2900 patients had received it, of whom four developed agranulocytosis (dangerously low white blood cell count), one of whom died.
In 1975, after it was launched in Finland, sixteen  cases of agranulocytosis occurred, eight being fatal, and the drug was withdrawn in some countries.
In those countries where it continued in use regular blood testing was introduced.
Already there was widespread agreement that clozapine had exceptional properties, with some spectacular remissions even in long-term patients.
In the 1970s a series of controlled trials compared the drug with other neuroleptics, and whereas no other drug has ever been shown to be more effective than chlorpromazine (Largactil), clozapine was found to be so in six out of thirteen studies.
Clozapine entered further trials just as other neuroleptics were found to produce catalepsy and the reversal of amphetamine effects in animals.
Later clozapine was found to be devoid of cataleptognic activity and to antagonize amphetamine.
Analogous atypical results were soon found with patients.
The drug produced little or no Parkinsonism (tremor), acute dystonia (abnormal face and body movements) or akathisia (restlessness).
It also mitigated many of the negative effects of schizophrenia.
After its withdrawal the Federal Drug Administration in the USA asked for data to substantiate its effectiveness in treatment-resistant patients.
Kane et al.(1988) conducted a multi-centre trial selecting subjects who fulfilled the following prospective, cross-sectional, and retrospective criteria for treatment resistance.
Before entering the trial patients had to show no more than minimal improvement after up to six weeks treatment with haloperidol, in high doses.
Cross-sectionally they had to show high scores for schizophrenic symptomatology on standard psychiatric ratings, and retrospective measurement of treatment resistance was carried out using case histories to look at past failure on different neuroleptic regimes.
From 16 centres, 268 patients were treated under double-blind conditions for six weeks with either clozapine (up to 900mg a day) or chlorpromazine (up to 1800mg a day).
Those on clozapine did much better.
Healy (1993) has criticized this study on the grounds that as those selected had previous histories of poor response to neuroleptics, this unfairly weighted the trial against chlorpromazine.
It is also true that such high doses have no place in ordinary maintenance drug regimes.
The pharmacology of clozapine has been closely scrutinized for some time because of the drug's atypical effects.
What is now becoming clear is that clozapine produces a build up of dopamine in different receptors from other neuroleptics, and this gives a strong indication that another neurochemical abnormality underlies at least some symptoms of the disorder.
This may well lead to the development of more effective drugs for schizophrenia.
The second study identified nine patients with episodes of neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) in a total of 4044 patients admitted to the University Department of Psychiatry, Wurzburg, Germany.
NMS is a serious complication of neuroleptic drug treatment, with clouding of consciousness, autonomic dysregulation, notably hyperthermia, severe extrapyramidal symptoms such as akinesia (functional loss of movement) and rigidity, and pathological laboratory findings, including raised white blood cell count.
Persistence with neuroleptics for psychotic patients with NMS has always been controversial.
Neuroleptic rechallenge using clozapine was tolerated by eight patients.
Before starting on clozapine, patients were taken off existing drug regimes.
The therapeutic results were variable.
Three schizophrenics had good remission.
However most of the other patients, including three with affective disorders, still needed further therapy with treatments traditionally used in cases of NMS, i.e. carbamazepine, lithium, ECT and low potency neuroleptics.
This study indicates that despite recent cases linking NMS-like syndromes with clozapine therapy, clozapine monotherapy with careful monitoring for NMS will become the treatment regime of choice for patients with a history of NMS, especially in view of the drug's unique lack of extrapyramidal effects.
The third paper assessed cognition and psychiatric symptoms in fifteen patients given a trial of clozapine (thirteen had schizophrenia, one a schizoaffective illness and one an unspecified psychosis).
Patients were initially assessed while receiving a typical neuroleptic, and additional medications.
Thirteen were in-patients on the same unit and two out-patients.
A battery of nine neuropsychological tests were administered, whilst they were on conventional neuroleptics, and again after 15 months on clozapine.
Among the tests were the WAIS-R, Wechsler Memory Scale, Wechsler Digit symbol, Wisconsin card sorting and facial recognition.
Also information about vocational functioning and living arrangements was gathered by interview.
Psychiatric symptoms were rated on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) and the Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale.
The results showed that on no measure of cognitive performance was there significant improvement during the clozapine phase, and on one measure, visual reproduction, performance worsened.
Against this was a marked reduction in psychiatric symptoms, scores declining on average by 40 per cent.
In the case of thought disorder, anergia and paranoia these were statistically significant.
The other significant finding was that when the eleven patients receiving clozapine and extra psychotropic medication were compared with those on clozapine alone, the latter showed deterioration in logical memory (the ability to memorize a passage, and repeat it in logical order).
The introduction of clozapine made no impact on living arrangements or vocational status.
The authors' purpose in this paper was to attempt to dissect psychiatric symptoms and cognition in schizophrenia.
If symptoms and cognitive function were not dissociable then clozapine, noted for improving symptoms, should also lead to improvements in cognitive function.
The complete lack of cognitive improvements leads them to suggest that cognitive impairment is intrinsically associated with long-term morbidity in schizophrenia.
COMMENT
The importance of these articles is that they remind us forcibly of the false dawn which often surrounds new treatments.
Devotees remain blind to elementary pitfalls of research design in their enthusiasm to prove the treatment's efficacy.
Clozapine, for example, appears to be associated with reduced risk of relapse.
However the fact that patients are receiving what is billed a revolutionary treatment, combined with the close medical supervision entailed, and weekly  monitoring of blood samples, may well disguise a ‘Hawthorne’ effect, in which patients are responding to the process, rather than the drug (Healy, 1993).
For Approved Social Workers who may well be consulted under the s.58 (consent to treatment) provision of the Mental Health Act, clozapine presents a number of ethical issues, including, most importantly, the forcible treatment of patients with the drug, some of whom may also be forced to give blood against their will, in a stretching of common law interpretations relating to non psychiatric medical interventions.
Another major issue is the cost implications of clozapine.
The hidden costs include regular blood testing and insurance against possible fatalities, to which must be added Sandoz's sizeable profit margins.
Healy talks of ‘budget busters’ equating clozapine with drugs such as Interleukin-2 and Centoxin, but Bosanquet and Zajdler (1993) and Davies and Drummond (1993) take a more positive approach.
The latter's research suggests that patients receiving clozapine may well cost services less over time by producing more positive clinical outcomes.
With the imminent implementation of community care, the care management system may well prove a fruitful means of distilling a core group of patients who will benefit from clozapine therapy.
One positive aspect of the close monitoring of clozapine may be a reduced incidence of the mortality highlighted recently, resulting from inadequately supervised high dosage neuroleptic regimes.
Unlike many ‘new’ advances clozapine has had a slow acceptance and appears to represent a real improvement.
Even if its efficacy proves to be confined to symptomatic behaviour, and not cognitive improvements, this may well provide knock-on benefits in other treatment areas.
Its real efficacy can only be tested over time and it remains to be seen if clozapine is a major advance, or whether the wide spectrum of response originally found with chlorpromazine, from full recovery to no response, is merely replicated, with a general shift a bit further in the desired direction.
, ‘Causal Attributions and Post-Traumatic Stress in Adolescents’, Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 1993,34,2, pp. 247–53.
This is the latest in a series of papers on the reaction of children and adolescents to the stress of major disasters (see Abstracts, BJSW, 19912,21,419–25).
There  are often substantial, unexplained individual differences in the chronicity and severity of symptoms reported by survivors, and attention is now being focused on factors which may mediate between disaster and subsequent outcome.
The authors explore the idea that causal attributions made by survivors about their experience are an important mediating variable.
Most commentators agree that the major aetiological factor in the development of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is the intensity of the event.
It is not always clear, though, what it is about some events that leads to severe and prolonged distress.
According to attribution theory people have an in-built need to explain events that happen to them, so they can integrate and master them.
Previous studies have suggested that more internal and personally controllable causal attributions are associated with greater psychiatric symptomatology, as against attributions associated with external and uncontrollable causes (Joseph et al., 1991).
Weiner's (1986) cognitive theory of emotions provides a theoretical framework for the above.
Weiner stated that guilt is strongly related in adults to internal and controllable attributions for negative events.
There is also evidence that adults who wish to be seen in a good light by others tend to make internal attributions, and vice versa they present external explanations for negative outcomes.
In 1988 the cruise ship Jupiter sank off the coast of Athens, with a party of schoolchildren aboard.
One pupil, one teacher and two seamen died.
Solicitors acting for the pupils and their families asked for all 334 children to be screened for psychological sequelae to the disaster.
They completed a battery of tests.
Symptom measures used were the Birleson Depression Inventory, Revised Children's Manifest Anxiety Scale, and the Impact of Events Scale (IES).
The IES yields two subscores for intrusively experienced thoughts, images and feelings; and the avoidance of these.
It is the most widely used measured to PTSD in adults.
Sixteen children thought to be at high risk had a further individual assessment.
A coding system was used for studying attributions, in which the rater was blind to outcome status, and rated the attributions from written material spontaneously generated by pupils after the disaster.
Only those negative outcomes that directly involved the pupil were included.
The sixteen pupils scored significantly higher on all scales than their peers, and indeed all were subsequently given diagnoses of PTSD.
They had a greater number of internal attributions for negative disaster related events.
Correlations were computed between internality and symptom measures, but did not sustain the idea that attributions predicted symptom variance.
COMMENT
One strength of the technique used in this study is that it can be applied retrospectively to material produced for other purposes.
Accounts written by the sixteen pupils were studied for causal attributions, without any further intrusion from the researchers.
One possible cause for increased symptom scores in the core group was that  they were all involved in seeking compensation.
The authors acknowledged this, but stated that the survivors of Buffalo Creek disaster seeking compensation reported less post-traumatic distress than those seeking redress.
Nevertheless this is a major weakness of the paper, as it is notoriously difficult for those seeking compensation to resolve their internal conflicts whilst litigation is still in progress.
Further papers should control for this.
Future research in this field should also attempt to assess attributions before the more chronic and severe symptoms set in.
In this case depression resulting from the symptoms, may well have led to an increased focus on the self, and therefore to an increased identification of internal causal attributions.
This is an important area of work, and is increasing our knowledge of how to screen disaster survivors more effectively for indications of future psychiatric morbidity.
, ‘Can we measure need in the homeless mentally ill?
Using the MRC Needs for Care Assessment in hostels for the homeless’, Psychological Medicine, 1992, 22, pp. 1027–34.
Most British hostels for the homeless care for mentally ill individuals.
Their presence in such accommodation is destructive to staff morale, as there is no provision on site for rehabilitation.
This research screened the residents of two such hostels in Oxford, and identified that a third (n = 46 out of 148) were mentally ill.
Of these, half had disabilities equivalent to those of long-stay in-patients.
In Lewisham an attempt at large scale multi-disciplinary intervention to rehabilitate residents of such a hostel had only been able to move on a fifth of their treatment group after a year (Timms, 1990).
The study reported here decided to use the MRC Needs for Care Assessment (MRC-NCS) to measure the needs of residents in a standardized way, with the idea of using the information as a basis for planning interventions.
It also wanted to determine if the schedule could be used effectively with this client group and whether the pattern of need identified merely reflected conditions in the hostels.
Of the 46, 39 were diagnosed as having schizophrenia.
All had been continuously resident for two months, had shown persistent disability, and were thought not to be able to look after themselves.
The MRC-NCS was used to assess need.
The schedule defines 20 main areas of functioning, split into two groups: symptoms/behavioural problems and skills/ abilities.
There are rating levels for each area of functioning, and each is linked to an approved list of care interventions.
In each area, where the level of  functioning was rated ‘unacceptable’ items of care from the approved list were offered to the client.
Unmet need was said to exist where there was a care option which had not been given a recent trial and had not been recently refused by the client.
Each client was rated for the twenty ‘primary need states’.
Use of this schedule was first described in the Camberwell High Contact study (Brewin et al., 1988) when a variety of other instruments were employed including the PSE.
These were avoided, as the homeless mentally ill tend to have a low toleration for lengthy interviews.
However the REHAB behavioural scale was used, being filled in by hostel staff.
The most common problems were in the areas of occupation, socially embarrassing behaviour, use of public amenities, managing own affairs and psychotic symptoms.
Some of these areas were impossible to assess accurately as staff shopped, cooked, and managed finances for many residents, therefore estimates of their skills were unclear — e.g. because food was provided there was no reflection of the need for cooking skills.
As a result cooking skills were not registered as an unmet need.
It was not felt that the information produced was of sufficient quality to assist in planning services.
COMMENT
With the imminent arrival of care management, the use of assessment schedules and their efficacy is a central issue.
If as this paper suggests milieu is crucial to the outcome of assessments this study raises important issues for the care management system being introduced by Community Care legislation.
It would suggest the need for assessment in a variety of settings, and that an attempt should be made to be aware of milieu bias.
A major weakness of the MRC-NCS is that it does not engage clients and carers sufficiently in the assessment of need.
It makes no attempt to elicit whether clients are interested in receiving particular items of care.
This in itself suggests that it has been overtaken by other schedules currently being piloted, which directly involve service users.
PHILOSOPHY (Steven Shardlow)
M. Payne, ‘Psychodynamic theory within the politics of social work theory’, Journal of Social Work Practice, 1992, 6, 2, pp. 141–9.
In this article Malcolm Payne maps, with considerable skill and brevity, the elements of a history of psychodynamic theory in social work; a review of the current importance of such theory; and finally outlines not quite a manifesto but at least several strategies to further the influence of psychodynamic theory.
He locates his analysis in an understanding of a relationship between psychodynamic theory and social work which is grounded within a political context.
He explicitly recognizes that adherence to any given theoretical orientation is not solely a matter of intellectual conviction or persuasion: it also represents a political position bounded by the terrain of social work theory.
Proponents of all theoretical positions in social work are therefore engaged in a discourse with each other: a discourse conducted not only in the terms of academic theorizing but also in the hurly-burly of its own politics.
In tracing the influence of psychodynamic theory, Payne offers a three part periodic table consisting of the following elements: prior to 1920 when these theories had little influence (pre-influence); a period of dominance between the 1930s and 1960s; from the 1960s to the present when they form one of many alternatives.
For the purpose of this paper he ignores what he terms the pre-influence stage.
During the period of dominance he identifies three distinct ways through which psychodynamic theories had a major influence on social work.
First, many theoretical conceptualizations of social work incorporated substantial aspects of ‘psychoanalytic thinking’.
Second, some of the basic values and assumptions of social work are derived from psychodynamic origins — inter alia, emphasis on: the process of relationships; listening to the expression of feelings; a focus upon early childhood experience; and the use of ideas such as ‘insight, conflict, and anxiety’.
Third, other theoretical approaches to social work, during this period of dominance, were derived from psychodynamic approaches: Perlman's ‘problem solving’ approach is used as an example to support the argument.
From the 1960s until the present, Payne asserts that the political position of psychodynamic theories has become more complex.
These theories have continued to exert an influence, because the very ideology and conceptual map of social work is so steeped in ideas and systems of thinking that might loosely be called psychodynamic.
Sadly, this remains a tentative part of Payne's argument, it is neither elaborated or supported by example.
More explicitly he sees psychodynamic theories as the orthodoxy against which others have railed, either from a positivist and empirical critique (leading to the development of behavioural social work); or a radical analysis (based upon a rejection of the individualization of problems and the location of disadvantage at the societal level and the consequent development of radical social work).
Three other strands are also identified during this period: first the accommodation of psychodynamic theory within other models of practice, e.g. systems or unitary approaches; second, the continued incorporation of some relevant ideas from psychodynamic theory into new approaches to social work; finally the development of specialist agencies which use these approaches.
After the historical analysis Payne briefly reviews current themes which detrimentally affect the political position of these theories: he argues that psychodynamic approaches appear more embattled and wounded due to the voraciousness of the attack against them.
Other strong factors such as the nature of UK social work, which places little premium upon therapeutic work, or the nature of social work education in the UK, which Payne characterizes as being restricted and narrow in scope, act to hamper the practitioner's attainment of competence in psychodynamic methods.
Finally there is the lack of novelty of psychoanalysis methods, which may appear tired in comparison to newer forms of social work discourse, according to Payne.
Payne suggests several different avenues of action for proponents of psychodynamic social work.
First, that the routinized nature of practice affects all theoretical standpoints, therefore psychodynamic social work is not necessarily disadvantaged.
Quite the reverse, in such a scrum its historical dominance secures advantages.
Second, support can be drawn from related disciplines where psychodynamic methods enjoy considerable influence, e.g. psychiatry.
Third, in the light of Payne's view that basic level professional qualification courses fail to address psychodynamic theory adequately, he suggests there is ample opportunity to create new courses utilizing CCETSW's proposed framework for post qualifying studies (CCETSW, 1992).
Fourth, the very adaptability of psychodynamic theory — the ability to incorporate developments from different sources — provides considerable strength and resilience.
In conclusion Payne hopes that he has illustrated some of the factors that come to bear upon theoretical struggles by looking at one example — psychodynamic social work.
COMMENT
This valuable short paper does considerable service in illuminating the political nature of theory in social work.
Adherence to any given theory, or eclecticism, or to no particular theory is as much a political statement as it is a matter of theoretical conviction.
Theories are constructed by human beings and are one modality of social interaction.
It is a salutary lesson to recognize that neither validity, reliability, or even high quality empirical evidence may be sufficient for any given theory to achieve dominance.
Rather, dominance of any given theory may relate to a series of factors in the discourse with other theories.
Malcolm  Payne offers us psychodynamic social work as an example, and clearly this is his chosen theory.
His paper is, therefore, partisan — it does not pretend to be other and it is itself part of the discourse in support of psychodynamic theory.
The paper is ambitious and given its scope, inevitably, some interesting assertions are not fully developed, inter alia that using psychodynamic theory at different times will have different meanings for practitioners; and that in the UK a preoccupation with anti-discriminatory perspectives has slowed down theory building.
Other problems deriving from the sweep of the paper are to be found in the difficulty of managing the diversity and commonality of psychodynamic theories.
What gives this paper its particular importance in a philosophical sense is that it implicitly raises questions about the nature of knowledge in social work — or what we take to be knowledge about social work.
There needs to be a greater recognition of the way in which theoretical knowledge is constructed through dominance of certain discourses.
, ‘The construction and deconstruction of self in Alzheimer's Disease’, Ageing and Society, 1992, 12, 4, pp. 443–1.
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is particularly pernicious in apparently gradually destroying the very essence of personality.
The authors of this paper seek to investigate, by a combination of philosophical analysis, psychological theory, and empirical investigation, the persistence of the ‘self’ through the progress of AD.
Two central conceptual tools are employed in the analysis: the constructionist theory of the self and positioning theory — both helpfully defined (this is one example where the jargon is useful and worth struggling with!).
The idea of the ‘self’ is philosophically contested.
In constructionist theory the ‘self’ is the sense of personal identity derived from being a ‘continuity of one's point of view in the world of space and time’, linked with being an agent capable of action ‘in that one takes oneself as acting from that very same point’.
This ‘self’ is presumed to be separate and distinct (and in some way more fundamental) from the ‘selves’or personae that are constructed through interaction with others, e.g. the parent, the employee and political activist may be ‘selves’which present different facets to the world.
Constructionist theory also asserts that the existence of the ‘self’ is demonstrated through discursive actions: performing competently certain types of speech acts, such as making statements in which the speaker reports on how the world appears from the speaker's viewpoint (declarations), or where the speaker describes him/herself or others in a ‘storyline’(narrations).
A ‘storyline’ is just as it sounds — a shorthand way to  refer to the content of what someone says, where this has the elements of being a story — a comprehensible account of something.
The second conceptual tool is ‘positioning theory’ which has some similarity with theories of ‘labelling’.
The behaviour of an individual can be interpreted in a variety of ways by another individual.
According to‘positioning theory’ this understanding of behaviour is a mutual creation through the interaction of the parties depending upon which of the many possible selves has been confirmed in the ‘storyline’that is accepted.
An example may help to clarify: a person with AD who avoids communal games may be ‘positioned’ as anti-social, confirming the stereotype of AD sufferers.
Yet that person with AD may be ‘positioned’ differently, both by themselves and others, if they avoid the games because they perceive them as a mindless waste of time and prefer to go for a walk instead.
The hypothesis that Sabat and Harré advance is that although AD can lead to disruption in memory recall, impairment of linguistic performance, and deficiencies of information processing, it does not result in the loss of ‘self’ and only contributes to the possible loss of ‘selves’.
To test this hypothesis they interviewed three AD sufferers regularly, looking at the content of their speech for evidence of the persistence of ‘self’.
In one case, a man was interviewed twice weekly for an hour, over a period of eight months, until only a few months before his death.
They found throughout the interviews that this man displayed the same discursive skills: using a number of key indicators such as the pronoun ‘I’ and its other forms ‘me’and ‘my’as indicators.
Despite the growing turmoil in the fragments of interviews reported, they conclude that he retained complete command of the conventions in the use of such terms.
In another case example they compare the performance of personal and social care skills by a female AD sufferer, who communicated by gesture, at home and in a day centre.
At the centre she could feed herself, took pride in her appearance, and was ‘positioned’ as a helper for staff and other sufferers.
By contrast she was ‘positioned’ by her partner as being incapable of doing much of what she regularly performed at the centre.
Her ‘storyline’ was that she nurtured her partner by allowing him to help her.
She helped him to feel needed by defining her inadequacy.
Looking simplistically at her behaviour at home it might have been assumed that she conformed to a typical stereotype of an AD sufferer.
Yet, the loss of one of her ‘selves’ in the home as competent carer was only indirectly caused by the disease.
The authors conclude that the ‘self’(personal identity) remains intact despite severe deterioration in other functions and, importantly, this ‘self’ is manifest in late stages of the disease; further, that the loss of any of an individual's ‘selves’‘is not directly linked to the progress of the disease’.
COMMENT
The idea of the ‘self’— what gives an individual a sense of personal identity, and how others recognize this self — has been at the heart of a philosophical debate since David Hume claimed to repudiate the existence of the ‘self’ as a separate entity in the eighteenth century (Hume, 1739).
To many this might seem a dry  and rather dusty concern; but those who have watched the progress of AD can hardly fail to ask if the person they once knew is still somehow trapped within the body and mind of the sufferer.
Or does the disease destroy the very person?
These are emotive questions.
How can we begin to frame answers when so much seems closed and shut off?
Sabat and Harré have recognized these problems and begun to construct a meaningful way of generating answers.
The fascination of this paper is that they bring together philosophy and psychology empirically in a way that has value for the busy social work practitioner.
The authors recognize that there is a need for further research to replicate the findings, or complementary research which examines the persistence of the ‘self’ using other techniques.
The paper offers glimmers of hope in the fight against the disease, through the promotion of better understanding.
Practitioners would be well advised to consider the value of ‘social constructionism’ and ‘positioning theory’as general theories of social interaction.
Likewise the case examples, though few in number, offer much that is rich and rewarding for practice.
E. Lewis, ‘social change and citizen action: a philosophical exploration for modern social group work’, Social Work with Groups, 1991, 14, 3–4, pp. 24–34.
Elizabeth Lewis reviews the existing philosophical underpinnings of social group work in the USA and finds these deficient, because they constrain rather than liberate individuals.
She reviews the philosophies that have shaped the acquisition of knowledge and skill development in social group work practice.
Social group work originated in the 1920s, and can be seen as a ‘social movement’ where group members, often new immigrants, were socialized into traditions of democratic participation through living in settlements.
The incorporation of social group work into social work led to close identification with social work methods grounded in empirical, positivist methodologies.
Social group work is presented as tired and exhausted.
Lewis is looking for a catalyst to recapture some of its original vigour and purpose.
As a first stage in this process, she catalogues a range of critiques of positivist approaches to knowledge and suggests alternatives.
Specifically she develops two areas, feminist theory and liberation theology, as potential candidates to regenerate the social group work movement.
These are selected because they have characteristics close to early social group work practice: the operationalization of values; and a detailed method of enquiry.
The contribution of feminist theory could be an egalitarian methodology where participation by all is respected and each person's life experience is valued and validated.
Moreover, feminist approaches recognize both the value of knowledge gained through practice and inability to abstract the knower from what is known — a direct challenge to positivist methodologies.
Liberation theology is taken to offer a radical critique of society and current ideology; a critique of the church from the perspective of those living in poverty; and a reinterpretation and redefinition of Christianity.
Through the incorporation of these two strands of thinking Lewis believes social group work can be re-nourished.
COMMENT
The call offered by Lewis for a revaluation of the fundamental principles of one element of social work practice finds echoes in other areas.
How many other aspects of social work practice could benefit from a fundamental reappraisal of guiding philosophies?
D. McKerlie, ‘Equality between age groups’, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1992,12,3, PP.274–93.
The author explores, in this paper, some philosophical arguments for equal distribution of scarce goods between people of different age groups living in the same society.
Perhaps this doesn't sound overly problematic; surely, intuitively, all people should be treated equally whatever their age.
As Dennis McKerlie reveals, this is by no means as straightforward as might be imagined.
He accepts as uncontentious that inequalities of disposable income, of resources devoted to different ages, and of access and power characterize different generations.
Four different approaches to equality between age groups are examined.
First, ‘complete lives egalitarianism’: this approach suggests that to decide if the allocation of resources between people is fair, we should compare the allocation of resources over the complete life.
So if, at some stages of a life, the individual is poorer than at others, this may not matter because everybody will experience the same relative shifts in affluence as they move through stages of life.
Adherents of this principle could argue that any level of inequality across age groups could be tolerated as long as this was corrected over ‘complete lives’.
Second, Daniels ‘prudential choice’ egalitarianism (Daniels, 1988).
This postulates the distribution of resources according to how individual agents acting prudentially (under certain conditions of limitation) would distribute resources for a hypothetical life span.
This should then be taken as an acceptable distribution across society.
A serious problem with this approach is that prudential agents may assume that the oldest group in society is relatively small in number, and further that there is very little chance of living to that age — so may devote scant resources to the oldest group.
Third, ‘theories that attach moral significance to difference’: these approaches regard inequality as morally important, whenever in a person's life it occurs.
According to Rawls' seminal work (Rawls, 1972), inequality should only be tolerated if the least well off are advantaged.
Fourth, ‘theories which assert that all inequality is morally wrong’: resources are allocated by comparison across individual lives at any given moment; for example most people would unequivocally give priority for treatment to those in the most pain.
Hence similar judgements can be made about welfare.
Taking this  kind of argument it might be more desirable to improve the lot of someone who has had a considerable amount of resources, but now in old age has very little.
There cold be very great inequalities between individuals when measured over a whole life.
After considering the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches, McKerlie concludes that three and four offer the most morally desirable principles for distributing resources between age groups.
COMMENT
Societies distribute scarce resources according to various principles; some may be in line with rational plans, others ad hoc.
Some groups consistently face discrimination: age is one mode of socially structured disadvantage.
Individuals may at various points in their lives experience discrimination in the allocation of resources either on the ground of being too old or too young.
It is easy to say that all should be treated equally, but as the paper by McKerlie well illustrates ‘equally’ may carry a variety of different interpretations and outcomes for different individuals.
McKerlie helps in the consideration of these different approaches.
Although abstract in conception, the paper addresses questions that resource managers in the personal social service must address — how much should be spent on older people as compared to children, and what rational principles underlie the decision.
If the principles of justice and equality are not appreciated and understood the allocation will be random and discriminatory.
As we confront a world where resources are clearly limited — sometimes declining — and needs ever expanding, there is an imperative to think very carefully about how we might wish to allocate resources.
Book Reviews
The Welfare State in Britain since 1945, Rodney Lowe, London, Macmillan, 1992, x + 382 pp.
ISBN 0-333-44256-3, £10.99.
Welfare and Citizenship: Beyond the Crisis of the Welfare State, Ian Culpitt, London, Sage, 1992, x + 222 pp.
ISBN 0 8039-8618-1.
Although the development of the modern welfare state has captured the interest of scholars in the fields of both Economic and Social History and Social Policy and Administration the degree of cross-disciplinary dialogue has been rather disappointing (Lowe, 1992).
This shortcoming can be explained in part by the alleged deficiencies of the respective approaches (social administrators have been criticized for their less than rigorous historical investigations (Thane, 1992) whilst historians have been taken to task for their reluctance to engage in broad theoretical debate).
Rodney Lowe is keen to build bridges between these approaches as this volume, which provides an invaluable guide to the post-1945 welfare state, amply demonstrates.
The book is divided into three sections.
In part one (Theoretical Perspectives) Lowe looks, by way of introduction, at some of the definitional issues relating to the welfare state before embarking on a discussion of a number of ‘pragmatic’ welfare strategies (reluctant collectivism, democratic socialism and the new right); ‘general’theories of welfare (pluralism, elitism and corporatism; feminism and marxism); and the policy-making process (the contributions from both political science and economics are highlighted here).
The main substance of the book is contained in part two which provides an excellent overview of the British welfare state during its ‘classic’ period (1945–75).
The chapters on historical developments, employment policy and social security are particularly noteworthy, providing as they do exemplars of Lowe's sure-footed command of his subject matter.
The only minor disappointment is the rather short chapter on the personal social services which suffers somewhat from a rather overambitious attempt to cover too much ground (i.e. the role of the statutory sector as well as the contribution of both the informal and voluntary sectors).
In the final chapter of this section Lowe turns his attention to the achievements of the welfare state in this ‘golden age’.
He suggests that state welfare activity not only produced general efficiency gains for the nation but also helped to modify power and status differentials — a somewhat questionable assertion.
He acknowledges, though, that the performance of the welfare state was much less impressive in terms of combating inequalities of income and wealth.
Finally, in part three, Lowe concludes his study by offering a brief interim assessment of developments in the welfare state since 1976.
Despite the abandonment of the commitment to full employment and the demise of corporatism, Lowe contends that the welfare state has not been weakened to any significant extent during the recent past — an assessment which underestimates the way in which the less visible strengths of this institution (the promotion of collectivism and solidarity) have been undermined.
Welfare and Citizenship may disappoint those seeking a comprehensive exploration of these two important concepts.
This is because Culpitt endeavours not only to provide some useful insights into such thorny issues as welfare rights and obligations as well as the concept of need (which should be read in conjunction with Doyal and Gough's (1991) recent analysis) but also to chart the way in which the management of welfare has been transformed as a result of the drift towards privatization and the emerging emphasis on the purchase rather than the provision of welfare in the public sphere.
The fact that Culpitt's attempt to link these somewhat disparate themes is rather unsuccessful should not, however, dissuade potential readers from consulting this book, which contains a wide range of relevant and topical material which many social work practitioners will find invaluable in the current climate of ‘managerialism’.
The need to acknowledge the declining relevance of the classic welfare state and some of its associated values (particularly the notion of rights) is one of the issues emphasized by Culpitt.
Believing that old certainties are ill suited to new times, Culpitt appears, like a number of other influential commentators — Klein and O'Higgins (1985); Goodin (1985)— to favour the development of more reflexive, less ‘ideological’ approaches to social policy (‘unprincipled', pragmatic forms of welfare pluralism seem to be the favoured option in this regard).
However, Culpitt's assertion that the post-war collectivist welfare state and its value premisses are now obsolete is clearly open to question.
For all its faults the classic welfare state, modified where needed, remains one of the most effective ways of ensuring that the essential needs of citizens are met.
Crucially, it would be premature to conclude, on the basis of the lack of vociferous support for the welfare state in recent years, that it is now time to jettison what Pinker (1993) has termed the unitarist approach to welfare.
Power in Caring Professions, Richard Hugman, Macmillan, 1991, 224 pp.
ISBN 0-333-49854-2 £35 hdbk., ISBN 0-333-49855-0 £9.99 pbk.
In this extended discussion the author defines the caring professions as those whose members have both a commitment to caring and a task to care.
Nurses, social workers, and remedial therapists care about people in the same way as doctors, lawyers, and architects but in addition they care for people; a task which may involve the performance of unpleasant work connected with bodily functioning.
The distinction works only in part, at least so far as social work is concerned, but it allows the author to develop and use as a thread through the discussion, the historically gendered nature of the division between the so-called caring professions and professions such as medicine, law, and architecture.
The essential difference, the author claims, is that ‘caring work involves a degree of intimacy, of closeness socially (emotionally and/or physically) between the carer and the cared-for and a recognition of the individuality of the person receiving the service’.
The established professions are said to be based upon an underlying logic which is essentially instrumental; the individual is seen as an instance of a general category.
Again these statements are open at least to qualification but they link back to concepts of interpersonal work as women's tasks and therefore as work which suffers along with those who do it from the lower status of women in a patriarchal society.
Having defined his subject, the author goes on to consider the relationship between caring professions and the state in a useful discussion of the varying positions of authors whose analysis derives from a neo-Marxist or neo-Weberian concept of the economic and political structure of society.
What they offer is an explanation of the controlling aspects of the caring professional's work which Hugman suggests are a contradiction with caring.
He goes on to consider the work of writers who have explored the nature of the relationship between professions, clients, and the state.
This discussion in the opening chapter lays the groundwork for a consideration of the key questions the author has set himself to address, about the way power relationships historically and in the present structure the caring professions and shape their interactions with service users and other professional groups.
He does this by considering what he calls aspects of power.
Power is not an isolated element and is interwoven, through the occupational and organizational structure, into the action of the caring professionals.
To examine power one must examine hierarchy, occupation, clients, race, and gender and recognize that these aspects of power are related to each other.
This of course poses a problem in writing which the author recognizes while deciding on separate chapters for each aspect.
The chapters which follow provide an up to date discussion of the relevant literature and research into each aspect as they impinge upon social workers, nurses, and remedial therapists.
It is my impression that social workers receive the most attention, followed closely by nurses.
I did not learn much about remedial therapists but this may reflect the state of knowledge rather than any criticism of the author.
The final chapter, called ‘Power in Focus’, attempts to look at the way the  caring professions are continuing to develop.
Hugman outlines and rejects the possibility of a shift towards greater autonomous control by the workers of their occupation, a movement towards professionalization, and he considers the alternative of proletarianization.
This solution depends upon practitioners in health and welfare work defining their position as that of employed labour.
Instead he proposes a more democratic form of professionalism in which there is a more equal exercise of power between individuals and groups within the caring professions and between them and others.
Unfortunately the author comes up with this approach only eight pages before the end and gives himself insufficient space to spell out his solution, so in the end he fails to satisfy our hopes.
Maybe he will write another book taking off where this one stops.
The Costs of Informal Care: Looking inside the household, Caroline Glendinning, London, HMSO, 1992, 119 pp.
ISBN 011 701660 8. £11.95.
Carers: Research and Practice, Julia Twigg (ed.),
London, HMSO, 1992, 153 pp.
ISBN 011 701693 4, £11.50.
With this Body: Caring and Disability in Marriage, Gillian Parker, Buckingham, Open University Press, 1993, 145 pp.
ISBN 0-335-09946-7.
Literature about informal carers and the experience of caring has been growing ever since the pioneering work of Abrams (e.g. 1980).
Moreover, the establishment of the right of carers to separate assessment under the NHS and Community Care Act 1990 has formalized what was already becoming an increasing emphasis in social work practice.
Examination of the role and reality of informal care within the community care network is thus particularly pertinent at the present time, and represents an important illustration of the interdependence of research and practice.
It is, however, important that any new work should not simply rehearse those aspects and issues about which we now have considerable data, but should contribute to ongoing debates and to development of the interface between professional practice and informal carers.
These three publications are different in both character and (one imagines) specific purposes.
Glendinning's study of the financial and economic implications for carers of assuming the caring role is a meticulous presentation of detailed data from interviews with thirty carers.
The sample was drawn from carers providing substantial amounts of help to a disabled adult living in the same household, excluding spouse carers and caring arising from a son or daughter born disabled.
Although the overall picture which emerges in this essentially exploratory study will not feel new to Social Services practitioners — that is, that the financial costs of caring are considerable even in the better off three-adult households, and the majority of two-adult households are living in poverty — the detail of the data adds both emphasis and new angles.
For example, evidence of the implications  of directly providing, or retaining responsibility for round the clock care, hammers home the reality of the phrase ‘needing a break’; evidence that it is not so much low income which is costly for the carer but the precariousness of a present and a future which depends, at least in part .
on income belonging to the disabled person, provides a new angle.
Glendinning sets her analysis into the context of wider socio-economic and demographic trends, concluding that the central issue for policy makers is the provision of an independent income for carers.
This is, of course, only one of the needs identified by the Carers National Association in their 10-point plan.
Social workers need to weigh up its importance alongside other issues where they may have a greater contribution.
Glendinning does not spell out the implications of her findings for service provision but they can be deduced: the importance of flexible day and domiciliary care; good transport back-up.
as an essential; proper welfare rights information and advice, particularly on hospital discharge; the overwhelming importance of assistance with capital and lump sum outlays.
In contrast, the collection of chapters edited by Twigg aims to provide an overview of research on carers and pull out the implications for service planning and practice developments.
It addresses both health and social services but is disappointing in treating both in traditionally separate fashion (see Twigg's section on mainstream services) rather than grappling with the emerging picture of multi-disciplinary support teams and the strengths and dilemmas of interagency working.
This is despite the acknowledgement that carers' issues transcend health and social care boundaries.
Parker's chapter on the numbers and types of informal carers provides an excellent and up-to-date analysis of Britain's carers and their need for, receipt of, and ability to access support services.
Service providers would do well to reflect on the evidence presented that common patterns of targeting resources actually discriminate against some of the most heavily involved carers in respect of certain services, and certainly do not lead to higher levels of support for them overall.
Leat offers a useful, if descriptive, survey of more innovative projects, and backs her assertions about the importance of evaluation by summarizing the main implications for successful and well managed schemes.
However, the remainder of the book loses, perhaps in its attempt to provide an overview, the sharpness of analysis which is needed to shape good practice.
The specific focus on care management, for example, is brief and could have been more penetrating had it related back to specific points about services made earlier.
Moreover, recent studies such as Alison and Wright (1990), looking at older carers, McCalman (1990), on ethnic minority carers, and Hicks (1988) are not given the attention they deserve, though more dated sources are considered.
Nevertheless, this is a very accessible book for the practitioner, especially one who is not already familiar with the research and debates of the past decade.
Diagrams presenting data and clear summaries are used to good effect.
Parker's study of caring within marriage has wider significance for understanding of both the experience of caring and the realities of being disabled than its title might suggest.
It represents an important contribution to the ongoing debate between non-disabled feminists and the disabled people's movement about the construction of community care.
Parker's own evolving perspective, stemming from both personal experience and a professional history which were forced together, no doubt contributes to the subtlety with which she untangles some of the issues.
In analysing the ways in which informal care in the context of an existing familial relationship is both more than and less than personal assistance, she opens up the rather sterile debate about ‘burden’, ‘dependency’ and residential care.
The significance and the complexities of the relationship which gives rise to the caring, and the importance of understanding what both parties wish for in the relationship, have always been emphasized by carers' organizations.
It is when positions become polarized between non-disabled feminists and disabled activists that it is seemingly lost.
The findings are interpreted in vigorous fashion (e.g. ‘At its baldest, men's needs came before women's regardless of who was the disabled person and who the carer’, p. 57).
This, combined with the richness of the data, makes the material eminently readable even for the non-researcher.
A minor criticism of the use made of the data is that, of the 21 couples participating, the same handful are quoted over and over.
The chapter entitled ‘Help from formal services’ makes sobering reading for service providers, though the aim of the research was not to promote particular policy or practice developments but rather to illuminate a previously neglected field.
Evidence of this kind is, however, essential if community care practitioners in the world of purchasing and providing, assessment and care management are not to lose sight of the fact that the consumer may award the quality kitemark as much for the professional who has time to listen, as for the streamlined meals service.
At Home in the Community, Alison Petch, Aldershot, Avebury, 1992, xi + 217 pp.
ISBN 185628 316 X. £32.50.
The wisdom of closing mental hospitals over recent decades has been a topic for increased debate, not only because of the impact that such closures have on the people who have lived in those hospitals for many years, but also because of the loss of such resources to younger people with long-term mental health problems.
A small but increasing number of commentators would like to stop or turn back the clock and, in the absence of hard data, the debate has been perhaps more about political models of social care than about what works in practice.
Increasing  talk of Community Supervision Orders make a travesty of community care unless such orders are made in the context of good quality accommodation and a properly funded benefits system.
Into this arena then a book like Petch's comes as a tremendous boost to the debate, in that not only does it provide an excellent summary of this area of community care policy (including Scottish policy), but it also goes into the microcosms of eleven supported accommodation projects and looks at how such policy works in practice.
The result is a fascinating study.
The idea that life in the community is better than life in a hospital has, for decades, been an article of faith for mental health workers.
Cohorts of social workers whose training expounded the evils of institutionalization have placed thousands of people with mental health problems in supported accommodation.
Now, rather late in the day, we have come to the question of whether the resulting quality of life is really better.
The question is, of course, more easily asked than answered and finding a research methodology which would be valid and practical was the first of Petch's problems.
It would have been all too easy for the residents' views to weigh lightly compared to the supposedly more objective professional assessments but, avoiding this pitfall, the author looked for ways of tapping the experiences of the residents themselves and sought to complement these with staff assessments of social and psychiatric functioning.
The study is longitudinal and takes the reader through the process of moving in, living as a group, getting support, and looking to the future.
It is heartening to find that the various research tools bear out intuitive impressions in that, for the great majority of people with a history of mental health problems, quality of life is better in supported accommodation.
The quantity of information gathered in the course of this study is considerable, and it is presented in detail; perhaps too much detail.
Certainly the tabular method of presenting results does not show them in the best light and the use of graphs would have made them much more accessible.
Presenting less raw data might have allowed more scope to look at certain issues in more depth.
For example, a number of women's issues arose as statistically significant differences, but instead of finding a discussion of these results the reader is swept along into the next batch of data.
Balanced against this, the comprehensiveness of the information (with the curious exception of the absence of any discussion of race or culture) and the lucid writing style serve to convey the sheer complexity of the endeavour.
It is a measure of the author's skill that she obtained the trust of so many residents and elicited such honest responses about personal and emotionally laden parts of their lives.
The book's great strength is its combination of hard data and illustrative quotations from residents.
Residential workers and social workers alike will find much food for thought in, for example: the feelings of new residents, the loneliness of group living, and the aspects of staff support which proved most helpful.
Not content to stay with these positive outcomes, the study also looks at the experiences of the minority of residents who are unhappy with their accommodation and explores the problems behind this discontent.
This is a book then to be recommended to a wide range of mental health professionals.
It is an excellent example of the way in which thorough research methodology can be applied to complex human experience and provide useful  and thought-provoking results.
Above all, as the preface points out, it is a study that gives first and last voice to the users of the mental health services themselves.
Families and Retirement,(eds.),
London, SAGE Focus Edition, 1992, xv + 299 pp.
ISBN 0803941951. £17.50.
Earlier analyses of retirement concentrate on men's experiences, reflecting the view that both employment and the lack of it are central to men's lives.
Indeed, the editors of this book argue that men in retirement are often viewed as potential social problems while women's experiences are either ignored or given less significance.
This they generously explain by reference to limited research which focused on unique historical periods, was limited to middle class life, and was directed at individual experiences.
The editors' underlying theme is that retirement needs to be viewed holistically; that it is not simply an individual transition but that it is linked to a person's past or context and, equally importantly, to their social networks, especially family relationships.
A person's retirement will affect the family functioning and network but this is not unidirectional.
Clearly, as the editors acknowledge, conceptual approaches such as life course theories, exchange theory, systems theory and role theory have much to offer in illuminating such pictures.
Theories may also in the US be more rigorously tested by the wealth of longitudinal studies and demographic statistics.
Social work practice in the UK needs to become more familiar with such theories, which relate to older people as much or as little as any other family members.
To some extent, such compilations of American research as this volume are relevant in placing the interests and problems of older people in broad debates about family functioning and the abilities of welfare services to impact on this.
One key strand, reflected in a number of the separately authored chapters, warns that relative poverty among women in the US is being re-fuelled by increasing numbers of older women without adequate pensions living alone through divorce or separation.
In one chapter, Russell et al.explain this by looking at the political reasons why many women do not receive the pensions that would raise them economically; that is, they are excluded from key decision-making structures.
Rather than focus on women as part-time workers to explain their lack of pensions as we often do in the UK, Russell's approach adopts a structural explanation.
Gender, as an aspect of the experience of old age, is a matter which in the UK has recently focused on informal care for the production of substantial data and new theoretical formulations.
This American volume includes Brubaker and  Brubaker's consideration of the stress of giving care in old age as well as the frequent stress of receiving it.
They point out that services need to be aware of carers' histories and their responses to stress, and that retirement may not necessarily increase a person's ability or willingness to become an informal carer.
A companion volume (Kosberg, 1992) extends the social and cultural constructions of family care.
There are, of course, many other aspects to gender and retirement and this volume covers them comprehensively.
Despite rising rates of divorce, it recognizes that marital relationships are influenced by and influence retirement especially when the majority of women, in the US and UK, are in employment.
American data shows couples commonly choose to retire together but there is also considerable diversity.
What people do in retirement is equally important, yet we know comparatively little about this potentially lengthy and possibly isolated experience.
Again, this volume offers some insights into people who are motivated to move in retirement and how couples, both of whom were in employment, support each other emotionally after retirement in much the same way as they did before.
This volume therefore will provide comprehensive data about retirement in the US for researchers.
It is less easy to see its immediate relevance to those in social work practice who are managing services or directly working with older people.
However, those with an interest in ‘seeing the future’ may wish to examine such a volume as it reflects a current diverse pattern of ageing and retirement in the US that is beginning to be appreciated in social gerontology within the UK.
Such diversity emphasizes that gender, class, economic, and cultural arrangements are important family characteristics that need to be reflected in policies affecting the ten million family members in the UK who are retired.
For the minority who receive social care, the characteristics are significant reminders of their individuality and diversity.
Despite Mental Handicap: learning to cope with adult daily life, H. C. Gunzburg (ed.),
Stratford upon Avon, British Society for Developmental Disabilities, 1992, 138 pp.
ISBN 0951894412. £9.00.
This monograph is based on a lengthy case study of a privately owned residential ‘Sixth Form College’, Wentwood Education, which specializes in developing the personal and social competence of young ‘severely mentally handicapped adult people’(sic) to tackle ‘normal life situations’.
The authors demonstrate that  by means of rigorous and consistent aim-directed assessment and training the sixty-three young adults who underwent the ‘Wentwood Experience’ were enabled to be relatively less dependent on others in the basic skills of daily living.
The authors use the Wentwood case study as evidence to support their contention that scientific assessment of competence and consistent reinforcement of training by everyone charged with the welfare of the student can result in remarkable achievements in the skills of daily living.
Certainly some of the examples quoted make impressive reading.
Wentwood's Principal, Henrietta Reynolds, made it an aim to give students the necessary skills to master complex journeys by public transport.
This involved not only training the student, but also persuading often nervous parents to permit their offspring to travel to and from the college, in a small Wiltshire town, independently.
I feel certain that many non-disabled adults would find some of the journeys the students learnt to undertake quite a challenge with only rural public transport to depend on.
Notwithstanding such notable achievements I share some of the reservations the authors express about Wentwood Education.
They describe it as being akin to an English boarding school of the mid-twentieth century.
Students' days are meticulously planned.
They have no choice about when to get up, they go to bed early, men and women are not allowed to visit one another 's rooms, chips are forbidden, exercise and healthy diet are mandatory, and students have no say in their assessments or the training programmes designed for them.
Much of the book is devoted to demonstrating scientifically the progress of students using the Progress Chart of Social and Personal Development (PAC) which Gunzburg pioneered and which was meticulously used at Wentwood.
I found this scientific proof unnecessarily detailed and would have much preferred to see the space devoted to a discussion of how Wentwood's philosophy compares to other recent approaches to assessment and competence development.
The book is strangely timeless in this respect.
There is no discussion of the label ‘mental handicap’, indeed the authors occasionally resort to using the demeaning shorthand ‘m. h. people’, and nowhere is there any reference to self advocacy, to assertiveness, to shared record keeping and assessment, all of which have been areas of considerable interest recently to people with learning disability and those who work with them (for example, Williams and Scheutz, 1982; Brechin and Swain, 1987).
Above all, the voices of the students are absent from this monograph.
We hear about them, we do not hear from them.
Readers of this journal will find some of the sections useful if they have responsibility for people with learning disability living in group homes.
Section II, in particular, makes a strong case for seeing the home as offering opportunities for personal development if management practices encourage the learning of skills, rather than a mini-institution where people are efficiently cared for.
There are some useful checklists (entitled LOCO!) which would be very useful in evaluating group homes in this respect.
The Wentwood experience as described in this monograph has much to commend it as a means of enabling people with quite severe learning disabilities to take their part in ‘normal’ middle class life; but as the authors themselves say, ‘We will not succeed in this (developing potential for growing as a person) by  concentrating on making people better functioning conglomerates of various skills only’(p. 28).
From reading this book I was not convinced that Wentwood actually aspires to more than that.
Women and Mental Health: Challenging the Stereotypes, Marian Barnes and Norma Maple, Birmingham, Venture Press, 1992, 186 pp.
ISBN 0 900102 85 3. $9.95.
This excellent book will be a welcome addition to the library of many a clinician, student, and teacher.
Barnes and Maple have tackled the job of recording the mental health problems experienced by western society women across the lifespan in a positive and clear fashion.
Their basic argument is that gender is all important when trying to understand the experience of women who become mentally distressed and go on to develop a more progressive and long-lasting mental disorder.
As committed feminists they feel that feminism can greatly assist the professional mental health worker.
Firstly, a feminist awareness can raise the visibility of gender and challenge the stereotype of a mentally ill woman, and secondly such raised consciousness can lead to a pro-woman practice by mental health workers.
The authors argue that activists should not be discouraged by the length of time necessary to change both clinical practice and policy as steady and consistent work will be effective and reap the desired rewards.
Using research as a basis, the Barnes and Maple monograph analyses the importance of sex stereotypes in the development and maintenance of mental illness.
They trace and explain why it is, that the ratio of women to men diagnosed with a mental disorder is 2:1.
I especially like the way they have used clinical interviews and illustrative case studies from other researchers, to ground their theory.
They do suggest that professional mental health workers will need to draw heavily on feminist frameworks in the future, as they try to understand and treat women who need to access the mental health system in a major way, as well as those who experience transitory difficulties in lifestages such as childhood, adolescence, childbearing, adult crises, and old age.
Gender factors are seen to be an integral part of mental illness in women and a woman's limited resources are often a significant factor in her ability to extricate herself from oppressive, unsupportive environments.
Even when distressed women attempt to control  their lives, they often do not escape the stereotypes perpetuated by the assumptions implicit in unfriendly health policies.
Women and Mental Health, in addition to being widely informative and interesting, also has the potential to form the basis of lively academic and clinical debate within the health care system.
Elderly People: Choice, Participation and Satisfaction,, London, Policy Studies Institute, 1992, 362 pp.
ISBN 0853 745102. £19.95.
Allen, Hogg, and Peace undertook empirical research in three authorities where the care experiences of 100 old people living in the community but ‘at risk’ of residential care were compared with a similar number of old people living in residential care (52 in private homes and 51 in Local Authority homes).
The sort of questions they were interested in were: What do old people and their carers have to say about the help they receive?
Do they have any choice in what actually happens?
Can they participate in decision-making?
How effectively can they complain if services are not satisfactory?
What views do professionals have about the services they are offering and the choices they give clients?
Before going on to consider the results of this survey, it is important to look at a number of methodological limitations which may well compromise some of its findings.
Firstly, clients suffering from senile dementia, and their carers, are deliberately excluded from investigation, the argument being that ‘Issues of choice and participation may be of limited relevance to elderly people with mental impairment’.
But given that the authors themselves say that 20 per cent of those over 80 suffer from senile dementia (p. 297) an important group of clients and their carers seem to have been dis-enfranchised.
The authors suggest that what is learnt from lucid elderly people should have direct relevance for those who are confused (p. 4) but this theme is not developed in any way.
Interviewing confused old people does take longer, and may well require more imaginative ways of gaining information than through a standard questionnaire (see for example Willcocks (1984)), but surely an attempt should have been made?
Secondly, at a time when social workers are particularly concerned to understand how race should influence their practice, it is unfortunate that the study is based on respondents all of whom were of ‘white British origin, reflecting the populations from which they were sampled’.
As matters of race and social work are so frequently dealt with through rhetoric, a valuable opportunity to gain some ‘facts’ in this area was missed.
Thirdly, although some data is collected in relation to gender, it would be helpful to see some interpretation of statements like these: Although ‘women were more likely to be living alone than men, there were a number of very  elderly men living on their own and some of them caused their carers great concern’.
‘Male carers were more likely than female carers to think that something would be done if they complained’.
There was a ‘certain bias towards supporting men with home helps’.
What of the general conclusions?
The authors provide a ‘snapshot’ of care arrangements as experienced by clients, their carers, and professionals.
Insofar as the experiences of those in community and residential care compare, they were seen as not dissimilar.
In both settings the concept of ‘informed consumer’ seemed poorly developed, and this was particularly true in relation to the provision of services.
For those living in the community, information about what was available was largely gained from other people around them, the social worker providing very little useful knowledge even after a visit (p. 79).
For those living in residential care, more than half did not know the difference between private and public homes (p. 187), whilst two-thirds of residents said they had had no choice as to which home they might enter.
For those still living in the community, the delivery of community care was not surprisingly problematical.
Bearing in mind that these clients were ‘at risk of residential care’, most received only one or at the most two services, and then only for certain days in the week (p. 299).
When asked what further services clients and their carers would wish, more home help was always given as their first priority.
Professionals for their part were very sceptical as to whether impending community care changes would bring any real benefits, but they anticipated that their role of prioritizing and rationing services would become more explicit.
So far most of the conclusions are broadly in line with other studies, but there is a brief, but interesting, discussion about carers' groups, where the authors state that, contrary to the present emphasis professionals give to self-help, ‘the last thing (carers) wanted to do with the little free time they had was to talk about elderly people’.
Because the Wagner (1988) and Griffiths (1988) Reports, and subsequent Community Care legislation all appeared during the book's preparation, many of the formal policies and structures described in it have since been modified.
Nevertheless the book does provide a detailed description of present practice and consumer views, against which those at the vanguard of community care developments could usefully compare their practice.