

Mission Fresh Talent — WHS promotes paperback originals
The W H Smith-led initiative to publish promising first-timers straight into paperback and launch ‘an exciting new generation of writers’ got under way on Wednesday.
The promotion, with the banner ‘Fresh Talent’, will run from 20th January to 10th March and will be backed by a major nationwide author tour, and p.o.s., front-of-shop and window displays in nearly 500 branches of the WHS chain.
WHS has also published 20,000 50-page anthologies or ‘samplers’, chapters from each of the seven featured novels, which will be given away free to customers.
The participating publishers have each contributed £2,000 a book towards the cost of the seven-week promotion.
The seven novels are Dora's Room (Hodder) by Joanna Hines;Life of her Own (Penguin) by Jane Stanton Hitchcock;Ruins of Time (Transworld) by Ben Woolfendon;Suckers (Pan Macmillan) by Anne Billson (one of the Best of Young British);The Stainless Angel (Arrow) by Elizabeth Palmer;Guppies for Tea (Transworld) by Marika Cobbold; and Telling Stories (Sinclair-Stevenson) by Valerie Windsor.
They are published in either mass market A or B format paperback at around £4.99, and are available generally throughout the trade.
Martin Lee, W H Smith product group manager for adult hardback and paperback books, said that he hoped the promotion would become an annual event.
‘There is an element of mission about what we are doing.
Of course we want to generate a lot of sales and to broaden the market for fiction with our customers, but the whole point of the promotion is to widen the market for authors who haven't previously broken through.
Our level of ambition has risen with the success of ‘Thumping Good Read’, and we want this campaign to be trendsetting and generate the kind of sales that would prompt publishers to alter their practices.’
Pan Macmillan marketing director Vivienne Wordley said the promotion boldly tackled a major problem.
‘Publishers are concerned about dwindling hardback sales; but the real problem is that the price of most hardbacks deters people from buying them.
The blue chip authors are holding their own, but it is the new authors who are really struggling in the current climate.
We would usually expect a book such as Suckers to sell around 1,500 copies, but we now expect it so sell substantially more than that.’
Larry Finlay, advertising and promotions director of Transworld, said that publishers should consider publishing more paperback originals.
‘It is a far more profitable and sensible approach to publishing and although, of course, we shall continue to bring out new fiction in hardback we hope this is a start of a new trend.
In future it may be possible to bring out a first novel in paperback, and then once an author is established we could bring out his or her second and third novels in hardback.
It is important to think imaginatively about this issue and WHS have done just that.’
Hodder publicity director Beth Macdougall was equally supportive.
‘This is a real opportunity to promote the idea of publishing first novels as paperback originals.
At present hardbacks are just too expensive at around £15.99 a time; these prices do not encourage experimental or sample reading.
Dora's Room is accessible, middle-brow, a little like Daphne du Maurier.
By bringing it out as an A-format, £4.99, mass-market paperback we hope to attract a much wider readership.
We only hope other publishers will follow suit.’
Encouraged by the response from publishers Martin Lee commented: ‘We are not talking about the death of the hardback but we do want publishers to find the appropriate format in which to promote their author.
The media is interested when books are new, and so we should create a situation in which we can maximise sales when the marketing opportunity is at its peak.
Currently, an author may go on a major promotional tour only to have sold 800 books when it is over.
That can't go on.’
Revamp likely as NBS disappoints
Book Marketing Ltd is preparing to reduce the cost of the licence fee for booksellers taking part in the summer National Book Sale in an attempt to encourage more active participation in the biannual event.
The 1993 winter sale, which ends on 30th January, has so far been a major disappointment: fewer than 290 booksellers have taken part, significantly down on previous years.
Several members of the NBS Committee have also said that the rules and regulations which govern the sale should be changed.
BML has for some time been concerned about the declining popularity of the NBS, which began in a blaze of publicity in 1955.
Last August BML called on publishers to submit a smaller, more selective number of titles, and it announced that it was compiling a ‘top title’ list for the winter sale.
Selected titles were featured as part of a p.o.s. promotion that was supplied to participating retailers.
‘Publishers should no longer see the sale as a way of trying to sell the unsaleable,’ said BML.
However, the ‘top title’ promotion failed to excite booksellers.
Peter Chambers of the Hessle Bookshop, Humberside, and a member of the NBS Committee, said the sale should now be completely revamped.
‘The winter sale has been a big disappointment.
I'm afraid the ‘top title’ selection just hasn't worked.
The NBS was good idea when first introduced, but gradually it has had less an less interest shown in it.
The number of booksellers taking part has dropped considerably, and as consequence fewer publishers are participating and the quality of books has deteriorated.
It's a downward spiral: fewer booksellers taking part, fewer publishers and fewer good quality books in the sale.’
Mr Chambers said that more should be done to encourage bookseller participation.
‘There are several ways in which we can do this.
First we must reduce the bookseller licence fee from around £40 to £10.
Secondly, the sale has to be marketed better, it has to be sold to booksellers and publishers.
People must be made aware that there is a national book sale on at the moment; that it is the highlight of the bookselling year; that it is a time when bargains can be had; and that most of the titles return to full price in February.
The message is not getting across.’
Clare Middleton of BML conceded that changes were required to revitalise the sale.
‘The winter sale has been a disappointment, and before the next one in the summer we have to increase the number of independent bookshops taking part.
We must encourage more of the Booksellers Association's core membership.
Publishers frequently cite this as a reason for not really getting behind the sale, and putting better titles into it.
Publishers want proof of a growth in retailer support before they will really support the NBS.’
Corinne Gotch, Booksellers Association marketing executive and NBS committee member, commented: ‘Fewer booksellers are taking part, and so clearly the sale needs to be re-examined from both a bookselling and publishing point of view to see what can be cone to encourage greater participation.’
NEWS
LIBF '93 — a sell out
The London International Book Fair, which runs from 21st to 23rd March, looks set to be the largest in the fair's 22 year history.
LIBF director Brian Bradford said this week that demand for stands had been considerable and the fair was already close to being a sell-out.
‘The reasons for this are two-fold.
First, the ‘European bookseller Year’ link with the meeting of the EC bookseller associations has drawn a great deal of attention, leading we hope to the largest ever London get-together of European booksellers.
Secondly, in times of recession, publishers and booksellers are looking for every marketing opportunity to find new business and the LIBF is the trade's largest gathering.’
With just over two months still to go before the opening of the fair, 517 of the 540 stands available have been sold, and the remaining 23 are expected to be taken up shortly.
The remainder and promotional floor has only two stands left, and the small press area is full.
The multimedia pavilion on the ground floor has only three of the 15 stands available.
The remaining unbooked stands are spread across the general book floors.
Booksellers back Faber
Faber has been delighted by the response from booksellers to its £100,000 ‘How to become a millionaire’ spring promotion.
Over 1,000 bookshops, including 450 branches of W H Smith, Dillons Bookstores, Waterstones, Books Etc and Blackwells have agreed to support the promotion, which is being underwritten by Ladbrokes.
Faber publicity director Joanna Mackle said that she had been overwhelmed by the response.
‘The major chains have taken up the promotion in a big way, but so have many independents, which is terrific because the promotion wasn't designed just for the chains; we wanted everyone to get involved.’
The promotion, which will run from 15th February to 15th April, will give anyone buying a Faber title the opportunity to enter a competition which carries a cash prize of £10,000, and the chance to turn that amount into £1m.
That chance will come in the late spring when the winner will be invited to select a book from a range of 100 Faber titles (99 books will contain cheques for £10,000 and one book will contain a cheque for £1m).
Should the winner strike lucky Faber will not be dramatically out of pocket: a covering bet has been placed with Ladbrokes on the likelihood of the winning book being chosen.
Data protection warning
The Booksellers Association has warned that the implementation of a draft EC directive on data protection would result in ‘immeasurable’ costs to the book business.
The BA's trade practice executive Sydney Davies, in a letter to the Home Office, reiterated concern that the directive could damage the free flow of information and add ‘an intolerable and costly administrative burden to the book industry’.
The directive requires,inter alia , that compilers of personal data require the consent of the data subject for inclusion.
In the case of bibliographic data, for example, a strict interpretation of the EC directive would put intolerable burdens on compilers and users.
Mr Davies expressed relief at an increase in the number and scope of exemptions to the directive.
‘We note that exceptions are allowed ‘for protecting the vital interests of the data subject’ and ‘in pursuit of the general interest or the interests of the controller or a third party to whom data are disclosed’’.
Holding and transferring bibliographic information is presumably in the interests of the data subject (the author) and is vital for the efficient running of the book industry.’
He also urged similar exemptions in the case of mailing lists, company payrolls and pensions data.
Mr Davies' letter concluded: ‘You have asked us to notify you of the potential implications in relation to costs.
It is not possible to give any general estimate as we believe they would be immeasurable and would severely damage the viability of the whole book industry.
BOOKSELLER NEXT WEEK
The moving spirit
Have sales of religious books matched the growth in ethnic minority groups in the UK over the last 10 years and the related interest in the religions of the Middle and Far East?
Sidney Swann investigates, and Hazel Wray of Dillons/Mowbray selects new titles.
The Norrie guide to…
Ian Norrie began visiting the regions of Britain in the late '60s for the revised Mumby's.
This year he is revisiting those parts, and visiting some for the first time, for a series of regional bookselling reports for The Bookseller .
In the first of the series, he looks at Cambridge.
Biography and travel highlights
Over the rainbow with John McCarthy and Jill Morrell, sliding down the greasy pole with Alison Halford and fighting all the way with Barbara Castle.
Plus a ‘definitive’ account of Marilyn Monroe's life and death, a portrait of the inner turmoil concealed by the apparent uneventfulness of Philip Larkin's life, and a revelation of the private world of another writer, Daphne du Maurier.
And journeys in Indonesia, India, America and Hell — or rather the Costa del Sol.
Coming Soon
Where in the world?
A whistle-stop worldwide tour of markets for British ELT publishers — those that have fulfilled their promise and those that haven't; plus John Walsh's selection of new course material — coming on 5th February.
The Big Number
Spring Books , with 650 pages of titles due for publication to August 1993 — the most comprehensive and informative guide to publishers' plans — coming on 12th February.
Christmas retail trade lower than estimates
Despite the brisk sales reported in the last few days before Christmas, December saw a small decline in retail trade compared with the previous year, according to the Confederation of British Industry's distributive trades panel, said on Tuesday that many retailers had reported a disappointing Christmas, although the results were an improvement on recent months and sales in January were expected to be up on a year ago.
The 29 booksellers and stationers responding to the CBI survey were among the disappointed retailers, with 59% reporting sales volume down on a year ago and 57% describing the volume of sales as poor for the time of year.
These comments are slightly at variance with the rather more positive reports from the specialist booksellers in The Bookseller 's Christmas roundup (8th January), although the latter were evidently expressing a degree of relief that Christmas hadn't been worse while the CBI survey respondents were, at least, somewhat less pessimistic than a year previously.
Bloomsbury book accuses ministers
Bloomsbury publishes this Monday, 25th January,Betrayed: The Real Story of the Matrix Churchill Trial , which it says ‘discloses fresh evidence implicating three government ministers in a cover-up over the arms for Iraq scandal’.
The author, investigative journalist David Leigh, has had access to unpublished trial records and secret Whitehall files, and says that ‘Ministers have been getting away with murder.
They have been misleading the public.’
Betrayed if published as a £5.99, B format paperback; Bloomsbury says that most if its first print run of 15,000 copies has been subscribed.
SYP a.g.m.
The annual general meeting of the Society of Young Publishers will be held on Thursday 28th January, at the Publishers Association,, London WC1, from 6.30 p.m.
BA sidelines directory
Who can give you advice on forged notes, rent reviews or PR?
Where can you get a smoke detector, a bar code verifier, information on Welsh books?
The Booksellers Association has a new publication,Directory of Book Trade Sidelines and Services , aimed at helping booksellers in the day-to-day running of their businesses and in finding suppliers of products to complement their books stock.
The directory offers over 500 entries ranging from art and craft suppliers, social stationery producers, magazine, music and video distributors to bibliographical services, shop security and carriers.
‘We believe the directory will save booksellers hours of time,’ said the BA's membership executive Kevin Ramage.
The BA hopes to produce the directory annually and would welcome suggestions for new entries, corrections or additions by 28th February, with the incentive of a draw for a bottle of champagne.
Directory of Book Trade Sidelines and Services 1993 is available from the BA publications department () at £7.95.
Bailey leaves Hatchards
Geoffrey Bailey, customer relations manager at Hatchards in Piccadilly, has been made redundant after almost 23 years with the bookshop.
Mr Bailey has been very much a front of house man at Hatchards and well known to many of the bookshop's most distinguished customers, but Dillons is understood to be reorganising the store's management structure under its new general manager, Roger Katz, and, with the recent appointment of Duncan Goldie-Scot, looks to be putting greater emphasis on direct marketing.
Mr Bailey can be contacted at  ().
Literacy — the way forward
The Children's Book Foundation will hold a conference, ‘The Way Forward’, in Birmingham on 27th February to look at pre-school literacy initiatives at a possible national direction.
More details are available from Wendy Cooling on .
Armed raid in Oxford
An armed raider got away with £500 from Blackwells' Paperback Shop in Broad Street, Oxford, on Saturday evening, after threatening a part-time shop assistant with a gun.
However, only £290 of the haul was in cash and the young woman was able to give a very full description of the thief.
David Cordery, operations manager for Oxford, told The Bookseller that the robbery happened at about 5.30 p.m. when two staff were cashing up at one of the shop's three tills.
‘One member of staff left for a moment and a man in his mid-30s appeared out of nowhere with what appeared to be a gun and pushed it into the other assistant's ribs and asked for the money.
She handed it over — in line with company policy — and was able to give a clear description to police from which they issued an artist's impression.
She is a very level-headed member of staff and handled the situation very coolly.’
As a result of the robbery Blackwells has reissued its standard instructions to shop staff that a minimum amount of money be kept in tills at any time and that if approached there should be ‘no heroics’, the money should be handed over.
The police, added Mr Cordery, said that, with banks and building societies spending more money on security, other outlets were becoming more of a target for robbery.
In an ugly incident in November, armed raiders forced staff at the Athena/Claude Gill Bargain Bookshop on Oxford Street, London, to hand over at gunpoint around £4,500 from the safe and left them locked in the basement with tape over their mouths.
At the end of 1991 staff at the Pan Bookshop in Fulham Road, London resisted an armed raid.
Share a BT school mailing
Books Tokens is planning a mailing to primary schools in the UK and Ireland in April, and would be interested to hear from any publisher or organisation wishing to reach this market with a view to sharing costs.
Details can be had from John Brushfield, Books Tokens,().
Bouncing with health, Michele Wilburn far right demonstrated the benefits of her fitness programme, Starbound, in Covent Garden last week.
The programme introduces bounding, or ‘rebounding’, as a means to better physical and mental health for both young and old alike.
Starbound is published by Orion (£9.99).
Far left is Andrea Holmes, world synchronised trampoline champion.
COMPANY NEWS CHEAPSIDE
Bidders gather for sale of Macmillan Inc
K-III, the publishing arm of buyout specialists Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, has emerged as a leading bidder for Macmillan Inc in what looks set to be a keenly fought bid battle, according to last week's Independent on Sunday .
The paper said that a close contest could push the price up to over $1bn (£610m).
K-III is headed by two former directors of Macmillan Inc, Bill Reilly, who left the company only months after the Robert Maxwell takeover in 1989, and Harry McQuillen, who succeeded Mr Reilly but was poached by K-III shortly before the collapse of Maxwell Communication Corporation in 1991.
Price Waterhouse, the administrators of MCC, put Macmillan Inc up for sale last week, reversing earlier plans for a flotation.
Other groups understood to be interested in buying the company include Simon & Schuster, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, and the Macmillan Inc management.
Meanwhile, the process of selling Official Airline Guides is now into the second round, with Reed Elsevier as the leading contender.
Diana shows an Achilles heel
Late last year Cheapside gave a glowing account of Bloomsbury's 1991 results, but added the proviso that the company had not yet released its full set of accounts.
The annual report has now become available, and tends to take some of the sheen off the initial interpretation.
This interpretation was based on an abbreviated version provided by Bloomsbury of the profit and loss account, with no reference to the balance sheet or the statement of source and application of funds.
Sales and profit growth (up by 17% and 34% respectively) remain perfectly respectable on a second and more detailed viewing — indeed, the increase in sales was commendable in a very tough year for trade publishers — even if the operating margin of 6.8% and pretax margin of 1.9% were well below the promise of 10% held out when the company was launched in the optimistic mid-80s.
However, the company's real problem (hardly unique to it in general publishing) was not profitability, but cash flow.
Bloomsbury was five years old in 1991, and might have been expected to have outgrown the cash-hungry habits of the start-up.
Instead, as the statement of source and application of funds reveals, it was still a net customer rather than generator of cash, since an apparent increase of £162,000 in the company's cash balances was only made possible by a loan of £350,000.
The actual position was, therefore, a net cash outflow of £188,000 — an improvement on the year before, when the cash outflow amounted to £693,000, but still worrying.
The balance sheet provides some explanation of this negative cash position in that it shows debtors of £5.8m, or 74% of Bloomsbury's turnover of £7.8m at 31st December 1991.
M.d.
Nigel Newton explains this figure as a reflection of the ‘very strong final quarter which Bloomsbury had that year, and in particular the strong December’; and it is indeed true that trade publishers, whose sales are usually loaded towards the last quarter, generally have high debtors at year end.
Phaidon to publish in US
Phaidon has signed an agreement with Chronicle of San Francisco for the exclusive distribution of Phaidon titles in the US.
Sales director Simon Littlewood commented that Chronicle (part of the San Francisco Chronicle newspaper group) has been chosen from among a number of contenders because of its innovative nature.
‘Chronicle is an up-and-coming house, and is seen to be different, which is good for us,’ he said.
Mr Littlewood said that the move into the huge US market, where Phaidon titles will appear under the Phaidon imprint, was part of an attempt to make maximum use of the Phaidon ‘brand’(like the Faber logo, designed by Pentagram).
‘We have made very consistent efforts to brand Phaidon books over the last few years, putting the Phaidon name on the front and back of all our books as a brand image of quality,’ he said.
‘To make full use of it we should be publishing our books in the world's biggest English language market.’
Phaidon's first 40 titles for the US, for which it has produced its own catalogue, will appear in the spring.
The company has also set up a distribution arrangement with Penguin in Canada.
Askews represents Chivers to libraries
Askews, Britain's largest library supplier has reached an agreement with Chivers Press, publisher of large print and audio books, which both parties believe will provide an enhanced service to libraries throughout the UK.
The agreement follows Chivers decision last year to sell its publications directly to libraries rather than through the wholesale market, and the consequent closure of its own wholesale library supply business.
It will now be using the services of Askews, formerly one of its main competitors.
As from 1st March, all Chivers titles will be on display in a dedicated area at Askews in Preston, to make selection easier for librarians from the north of England and Scotland.
In addition, three Askews' reps will combine forces with Chivers' force of two, to represent Chivers to libraries.
Bob Wilde is responsible for Chivers publications in Wales and the south of England.
Richard Knowles for the Midlands, East Anglia and north of England; and Peter Gibson for Scotland, Northern Ireland and north-east England.
All will be backed by Stuart Elliott in Preston.
Chivers publications will continue to be available from Chivers, and Mary Finch at the Chivers sales office in Bath will continue to advise libraries and to take telephone orders.
Chivers is also planning new showroom facilities in Bath.
Book Bargains in liquidation
Book Bargains Ltd, the specialist remainder chain founded by Philip Weatherburn 14 years ago and put up for sale earlier this month, is in liquidation.
The move followed the withdrawal of the company's overdraft facility by the National Westminster Bank on 5th January.
Begbie Norton & Partners, which is acting as liquidators, reports ‘considerable interest’ in the sale of both the company as a whole and of individual shops.
A creditors' meeting will be held on 27th January at the Begbie Norton offices at Cromwell House, Fulwood Place, Gray's Inn, London WC1V 6HE.
NEWS
Birthday breakfast start to BA's Torquay conference
Registration forms for the Bookseller's Association Conference 1993 will be going out on 1st February, and the BA is aiming to make Torquay, Monday 26th to Wednesday 28th April, one of its best and most cost effective events.
A full programme under the general title of ‘Investing in the Future’ has now been produced and will investigate current issues such as direct supply to schools, educational book provision, property management, electronic communication and book marketing.
In addition to events previously announced, there will be a Virago Birthday Breakfast to get the conference off to a positive start on the Monday, and four more workshops have been firmed up for the afternoon: ‘Goodbye to Gutenberg’(speakers Tony Feldman, Japp Buchli of Scheltma Hokema Vermuelen, Paul Ayscough of Columbia TriStar and Michael Kemp of Franklin Electronic); ‘Targeting the Book Market’— The Role of Research’(Peter Mouncey of the AA, Sue Morris of W H Smith and Leslie Henry of BML); ‘Financial Management for Booksellers’(Ian Newman, Waterstones); and ‘Take Four Walls—Shop Design on a Budget’(Barry Steadham, Insight Design).
The two workshops previously announced are ‘As Easy as EDI’ and ‘Property Management’, which with those above will be repeated on the Tuesday morning.
On Monday evening booksellers can meet author Nigel Williams (Faber), and afterwards any delegate not otherwise engaged is invited to join BA president John Hitchin for a conference first, a President's Personal Spring Supper at Cockington Court, before going on to the David & Charles Disco.
Tuesday kicks off with a champagne breakfast hosted by Dorling Kindersley.
Authors at the conference, in social and business sessions include Shirley Hughes and Aidan Chambers, who round off conference at the Random House Breakfast on Wednesday, Anthony Sampson, Terence Blacker and Terry Pratchett, the guest of honour at the annual dinner dance.
The conference is open to everyone in the trade and registration forms will be available from 1st February from Meryl Halls or Susannah Dann at the BA on .
Mabel Constance Riley
Tommy Joy writes
Mabel Constance Riley died on 6th January, aged 89, at Hillside Nursing Home, Oxley.
Miss Riley had a long and distinguished bookselling career over 65 years.
She entered the trade with Truslove & Hanson in its Oxford Street branch in 1919, and in 1935 came as my secretary when I was managing Harrods Library, which was then, with the Times , the leading large subscription library with a staff of well over 100.
In later years Miss Riley had several senior positions in the library, and was appointed head librarian at the Army & Navy Stores when I opened a library there shortly after the way.
On retirement from the Army & Navy Stores I was appointed managing director of Hatchards, Piccadilly, and Miss Riley came as my secretary and continued there in a full or part time capacity for many years.
Miss Riley served the Booksellers Association in many ways but is particularly remembered for her painstaking work on the Education Committee.
She was made an honorary member of the BA in 1987.
I am personally indebted to her for her help in indexing my text book on bookselling.
Terence Goldsmith
Vera Frampton
Many will be sorry to hear of the death at home of Terence Goldsmith, former publishing director of Blandford Press, on 16th December.
During his 32 years with Blandford Press, what started as a small list mainly of cacti and display books, expanded rapidly in many areas.
He has close contact with a number of prominent American and European publishers and the popular Blandford Colour Series was published in conjunction with a large Scandinavian syndicate.
Among the many distinctive books that Terry was involved with was National Anthems of the World , constantly updated and now in its eighth edition.
He has a strong personal conviction about the power of the printed word and in April 1992 played a leading part in the International Communication Forum at Le Touquet.
Journal trends
Specialist journals of the ‘have to have’ variety, needed by all good universities, are holding up well in an unsympathetic environment, but journals publishers generally are having to market harder to maintain subscriptions.
These are some of the findings of Trends in Journals Subscriptions 1990 and 1991 , compiled by Priscilla Oakeshott.
The report is published by the Serial Publishers Executive and the Council of Academic and Professional Publishers and available from The Publishers Association,, at £25 to members and £50 to non-members of CAPP.
Ruth Hadden award
Four titles have been shortlisted for the Ruth Hadden Memorial Award for a first book.
They are:Saving Agnes by Rachel Cusk (Pan Macmillan);A Responsible Man by Cynthia Kee (Chatto);Grub by Martin Mooney (Blackstaff Press); and In the Place of Fallen Leaves by Tim Pears (Hamish Hamilton).
The winning book will be announced at the British Book Awards on 11th February.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Wolters Kluwer makes striking move into Scandinavia
Wolters Kluwer has made a striking first acquisition in Scandinavia.
The Dutch company announced at the end of last week that it had reached agreement to buy Liber AB in Stockholm, Sweden's second largest publishing group.
No price or other financial details of the deal have been disclosed, beyond a statement from Wolters Kluwer that ‘the acquisition will be financed by surplus cash’.
Liber's turnover in 1992 from its activities in educational, legal, professional and trade publishing, distribution, and school and office supply was SK1.3bn (about £112m).
However, the Swedish food and medical group Procordia, which is selling a 28% stake in Liber, has said that it would make a SK350m profit on the sale.
Nordic Capital, with a 20% holding, has put its capital gain at SK200m.
Until 1990 Liber was in 100% state ownership through Procordia, which then disposed of 72% of the company to a syndicate of investment companies and banks to accommodate Liber's takeover of the Esselte publishing division.
This takeover by Liber of Esselte Förlag just over two years ago redrew the landscape of Swedish publishing.
Liber was already a major schoolbook publisher and its acquisition of Almqvist & Wiksell Läromedel as part of the Esselte deal took its share of the Swedish textbook market to nearly 65%.
The leading Stockholm trade publisher Norstedts, also included in the 1990 takeover, has a significant legal publishing department.
There was serious foreign interest in Esselte's publishing division when it was first put on the market early in 1990, and Hachette is known to have been in negotiation before an agreement with Liber was finally concluded.
The Wolters Kluwer acquisition of Sweden's second largest book publishing business seems bound to renew debate over the role of indigenous Swedish companies within the international publishing market.
A spokesman for Wolters Kluwer has described the Liber deal as offering a springboard for further acquisitions in Norway, Denmark and Finland.
The purchase of the Stockholm group already means that more than 60% of Wolters Kluwer's activities are now outside the Netherlands, an objective that the company had originally set out to achieve in 1994.
Liber's present Swedish management, headed by chief executive Birgitta Johansson-Hedberg, will remain, says Wolters Kluwer.
The former vice-president of Liber and managing director of Almqvist & Wiksell Förlag, Maria Curman, left her posts suddenly a few months ago.
Much surprise was caused in the Swedish trade when it was later announced that she was to head a new educational publishing venture being set up by Sweden's biggest publishing concern, Bonniers.
HarperCollins and Twin step back from Blinky Bill showdown
The Blinky Bill case (International News, 6th November 1992) has been settled after six months of wrangling over the interpretation of Australia's trademark and copyright legislation.
HarperCollins has agreed to withdraw its objection to the import into Australia of Blinky Bill titles published by Twin Books UK.
According to a statement, ‘The parties have resolved their differences and the proceedings have been discontinued.’
As one of the terms of the settlement HarperCollins placed an announcement in Thorpe's Weekly Book Newsletter advising that there is no question of legal action being taken against anyone who deals with Twin Books' Van Gool's Blinky Bill in Australia.
At the same time Twin Books has retracted its assertion that the Collins Angus & Robertson trademark Blinky Bill should be expunged from the Australian register of trademarks.
The head of the parent Twin Books Corporation in Connecticut, Sydney L Mayer, described the outcome as a ‘victory for the integrity of copyright and trademark law’.
‘The use of the name of a character such as Blinky Bill as the title of a book and as the description of a character in the book does not constitute the use of that name as a trademark,’ he said.
Reservations about the conclusiveness of the case was apparent in comment by WBN , however: ‘As the case was settled without a judgment being handed down, the industry is still without a clear interpretation of the ramifications of the sometimes grey area in which trademark and copyright laws interact.’
More Swiss interest in English books
Another company in German-speaking Switzerland had decided to move into handling English-language books.
The distributor Azed Bücher in Basle is setting up a new English-language department, and plans its launch into this area on 1st April.
Switzerland's biggest book wholesaler, the Schweizer Buchzentrum, started carrying English titles last year.
As well as handling distribution of UK and US books to Swiss bookshops and department stores Azed will by buying direct for the Azed kiosk chain, which includes the former Kiosk AG and Schmidt-Agence outlets.
It is also ready to undertake promotional activities on behalf of the English-publishers it distributes for.
Azed's new department is headed by Thomas Egger, who will have overall responsibility for buying, marketing and sales.
Mr Egger left his job as buyer of English-language books at the Office du Livre in Fribourg (OLF) last November.
He had moved there when Daeniker Distributors in Zürich was bought from Orell Füssli by OLF in 1991 and absorbed into its own operation.
The offices of Azed Bücher are at  ().
Growth prediction for US book market
In the 1993 edition of its US Industrial Outlook , the Commerce Department in Washington is predicting that book sales will grow at a faster rate in 1993 than they did in 1992, says BP Report .
According to estimates.
sales will increase 6.5% in 1993 to over $18bn.
Growth in constant dollars will be 3.4% Estimates for 1992 put sales growth at 6% 1991 or 2.9% in constant dollars, but results were below forecasts.
The Commerce Department is looking for the book market to expand markedly up to 1997, achieving average annual growth rated of 3.5% in constant dollars throughout the period.
Rising levels of disposable income, higher educational attainment, more funds for schools and libraries and growth in educational enrolments are the primary reasons cited for the bullish outlook.
In particular, the department cites favourable demographic trends which indicate an increase of 3.7 million el-hi students in the next five years.
Foreign demand for US books is also expected to remain strong until 1997.
Favourable exchange rates, improved intellectual property rights protection and continued pressure from the federal government to remove trade barriers should all contribute to a strong export market.
Mexico, Latin America, eastern Europe, the countries of the former Soviet Union and the Far East are all cited as areas of potential growth.
Editions Spengler to launch in 1993
Franck Spengler, son of the writer and publisher Régine Deforges, and former managing director of Ramsay, is to launch a new trade house, Editions Spengler, early in 1993.
The company is being set up as a 50:50 joint venture with the French educational publisher Magnard, which has started to move into general trade publishing with its recent acquisitions of the New Age publisher Dervy and the children's and general academic imprint Vuibert.
Among the 10 titles scheduled by Editions Spengler for 1993 is the Bosnian war diary of Zlatko Dizdarevic, editor of the Sarajevo newspaper Oslobodjenje .
DIARY
National Literacy Association conference, ‘Literacy for All’: 30th January, Leeds Playhouse; speakers include Anne Taylor and Michael White; £25 including buffet lunch.
Details from Michael Sterne,().
ASLIB copyright workshop: 28th January.
Information House,.
Fee, including lunch and documentation, £175 ASLIB members, £220 non-members.
Details from Barbara Hobbs on .
Multimedia in Museums and Libraries seminar : 9th to 10th February, the British Library, London.
£200 fee includes lunch and the BL report Multimedia and the Interactive Display .
Details from Multimedia Ventures on .
Institute of Materials Management Book Fair : 30th to 31st March, Solihull Conference Centre.
IMM offers a limited number of stands to publishers specialising in aspects of materials management (logistics, stock control, warehousing etc).
Details from Steve Lytton on .
The Library and Information Research Group invites applications for the 1993 Daphne Clark Award .
The award is worth up to £400 and can be used for a project, to fund attendance at meetings or conferences relevant to a current research report or to assist with costs of disseminating research through meetings, conferences or publications.
Deadline 31st January.
Details from Sacha Shaw, LIRG, Goldsmiths' College Library, New Cross, London ().
British Isles Section of the International Map Dealers Association dinner: 20th February, Tralee Hotel, West Cliff, Bournemouth.
Non-members welcome.
Tickets at £12 from Mike Cranidge, IMDA,().
Galley Club meeting : 9th February, 6.30 p.m., English Speaking Union,, speaker Frank Delaney.
Members free, non-members £3.
Details from Morfydd Jones on  or Karyn Claridge on .
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Stanfords wires up
Stanfords map and travel bookshop in Covent Garden, London, has installed a computer system to manage its day-to-day sales and stock as well as its worldwide mail order operation and catalogue production.
The contract went to BDO Binder Hamlyn and Aries Business Systems, which specialises in computer systems for specialist retailers and distributors who combine mail order with retail sales, and has over 40 sites.
Stanfords is using Aries' specialist Book Manager package, for which map data was captured manually by Stanfords' staff and bibliographic data matched against Whitaker's Bookbank file.
The system will not be fully live until April, reports director Douglas Schatz, as there are still developments and software customisation, such as a more sophisticated link for the EFTPOS facility, to be carried out.
But he is particularly impressed by the power of the system in respect of the cataloguing operation.
Stanfords has an IBM RS6000 which drives four PCs, three PC based cash tills, 10 dumb terminals, creating a 17 site user system; it will be linked to Stanfords' at British Airways in Regent Street.
Aries is at Aries House,().
Stanfords will be exhibiting at the first BBC Holiday Live leisure and travel show at Olympia from 26th to 31st January, where it will launch its overprinted Booksellers Association Travel ‘93 catalogue .
Zwemmer acquires St George's
Zwemmer, the specialist art bookshop, has bought St George's Gallery Books, the specialist antiques and art trade bookshop in Duke Street, St James, London.
The Zwemmer group, owned by Philip Wilson Publishers, has six branches in London and one in Cardiff.
Zwemmer chairman Philip Wilson said: ‘Our six shops already have the largest stock of art books in the country, but this is the first time that Zwemmer has had a location that is suitable and at the centre of the art trade.’
A guide to London's bookshops
A guide to around 1,000 bookshops in and around London will be published on 15th February, coming from Two Heads Publishing.
The Bookshops of London is aimed primarily at the avid book buyer, reader, collector and tourist, but also makes a useful reference work for the book trade.
The Two Heads Publishing team of Charles Frewin and Derek Lubner have researched the book themselves, creating a database of London bookshops which ‘provides a unique insight into bookselling in the capital’, says Mr Frewin.
‘The structure of the retail trade in London reveals issues such as the growth of the chains, survival of independents and entertaining facts about the variety and strength of specialist booksellers.’
The listings are ‘descriptive rather than judgemental’ and aim to convey something of each shop's character as well as facts on opening hours, range of services provided and so on.
The entries are presented by main subject specialisation with indices allowing readers to locate shops in a particular district.
The guide is a large format paperback, priced £6.99.
Sales and distribution are handled by Two Heads,,().
Early bird winners
Booksellers lucky in the Early Bird Draw for December are Warsash Nautical Bookshop, Southampton; Smith's Books, Greater Manchester; and Ware Bookshop, Hertfordshire.
John Forrester
John Forrester, husband and partner of Sophie Forrester at The Bookshop, Llandrindod Wells, died last November.
He ran Moors Bookshop in Bedford Place, Southampton, from 1964 to 1984 when the Forresters ‘retired’ to mid-Wales.
Mr Forrester remained to the end a most active and enthusiastic bookseller.
Irish branch a.g.m.
The Booksellers Association Irish Branch a.g.m. and dinner dance takes place on 27th February at the Selbourne Hotel, St Stephen's Green, Dublin.
Details can be obtained from  Gemma Barry on .
Computer Bookshops this week celebrated the conclusion of its most successful promotion.
The Birmingham-based specialist wholesaler ran a competition which gave booksellers and their customers the chance to win a trip to the Grand Canyon.
More than 2,000 people entered, and last Friday sales director Delia Tracey chose the winning trade entry, Dillons, Argyle Street, Glasgow.
Marketing manager Tim Beaumont said the idea was to bring people into bookshops.
‘We promoted the competition, which was open to all booksellers, by putting coupons in trade and consumer magazines which people had to return to bookshops in order to get an entry form.’
From left are Scottish rep Alex Robinson, Delia Tracey, north-west rep Maria Lamair and Robert Horton, central London salesman.
TRADE NOTES
Moves
Mike Ward , OUP's UK sales manager, is promoted from April to head of children's books sales and marketing in the Educational Division of OUP.
This new post includes responsibility for non-trade and special sales.
Foyles Educational of Burgess Hill has appointed Chris Fernie , previously at Chivers, to the new position of sales manager.
Helena Stoward , previously with Edward Arnold, has been appointed project editor at the National Society for the Promotion of Religious Education, the educational publishing arm of the Church of England.
Following the restructuring of Reed Consumer Books' UK sales team,Michael Sender , area sales executive for Mandarin and Mammoth in the north west of England, has been made redundant.
He can be contacted at Tabby Nook,().
The office bearers of the Federation of Publishers' & Booksellers' Association in India for 1992/93 are: president —A Machwe (Wiley Eastern); vice-presidents —Mazharul Ishlam (Publishers' & Booksellers' Association of Bengal);B R Chawla (Heritage Publishers);R Seshadri (The Booksellers & Publishers Association of South India);Chandra Pal Gupta (Bombay Booksellers & Publishers Association); secretary —S C Sethi (Jaico Publishing House); treasurer —Inderjeet Singh (Panima Educational Book Agency).
Representatives
Kingfisher Books has completed its sales force with the following appointments:Linda Lewis , formerly at Simon & Schuster Young Books, covers south-west England, south England, south Wales, north London and Herts and can be contacted on ;Carol Greenhorn (), formerly at Reed Consumer Books, represents Kingfisher in Scotland on a freelance basis.
Aurum Press has appointed new representatives in the following areas: London —Dennis Segrue ,(); the south west of England, south Wales, Channel Islands —Debbie Jones ,(); Scandinavia and Italy —Clark McNeish ,().
Drake Educational Associates has appointed the following representatives: Kent, East Sussex —Pamela Teague , South Winds,(); Beds, Bucks, Berks, Oxon, Herts and Northants —Deborah Newling ,(); Staffs, Salop, Worcs, Warks, West Midlands —Fiona Boyle Wolverhampton, West Midlands, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex —Stan Carter ().
Tiger Books International has appointed Keith Bunt sales representative in the south west and south Wales.
He can be contacted at  ().
Distribution
Calder Publications is preparing to take legal steps to prevent distribution of the Black Cat press edition of Samuel Beckett's first novel,Dream of Fair to Middling Women , recently published in Ireland.
Calder Publications says it is the only authorised publisher of the title and will have its own hardcover edition available in the spring.
Heathcote Books is closed for stocktaking from 27th to 29th January.
Deadline for order that week will be 4p.m. 26th January.
There will be no subscriptions delivery for the week commencing 25th January.
Queries should go to Gill Byatt in the buying department.
New Cavendish Books and its imprints have reorganised their sales and distribution arrangements.
From February, warehousing and physical distribution will be handled by Trade Counter at Park Royal,().
Existing representation arrangements will continue, but orders will not be processed by Gollancz after 31st January.
If out of stock titles are required, booksellers should contact Chris Shelley at  ().
Invoicing and trade orders will be processed at NCB's Denbigh Road office and orders made by fax and telephone should be for the attention of Chris Shelley at the same address.
Returns will be authorised at Denbigh Road and must be returned there for credit.
Oak Tree Press and Moytura Press , both at , Republic of Ireland, are distributed in the UK (excluding Northern Ireland) by Central Books and represented by Troika.
In Ireland, including Northern Ireland, distribution is by Gill & Macmillan.
Representation is by Karen Armstrong at Professional Book Sales ().
Wisdom Books has been appointed exclusive distributor for Snow Lion Publications , US.
Wisdom is also exclusive distributor for Triple Gem Press,.
Monograph publications of the Society of Antiquaries of London and the British Institute in Eastern Africa are distributed by Oxbow Books,().
Pocketbond has been appointed exclusive importer for Squadron Signal Publications for the UK and Ireland.
Pocketbond is at  ().
Terms
Barnicoats is offering an extra 30 days' credit on orders exceeding £500 placed in January from its 1993 Travel Catalogue .
Details from Liz Pearce at Barnicoats on 
Addresses
Billy Adair , formerly sales director of Pan Macmillan, can be contacted at  ().
Corrections
HarperCollins' academic hotline will run until 26th February, not January as previously stated.
Review copies
Mike Petty ‘s monthly books spot on BBC Greater London Radio goes out weekly from the end of January.
Review copies and publicity material (including details of author events and signing sessions in London and the southeast) should be sent to  ().
He will not handle interviews, which should be arranged through regular GLR contacts.
Children's books for spring
There will be a special feature on children's books for spring in The Bookseller of 12th March.
This will include a preview of spring 1993 children's titles compiled by Jennifer Taylor, who will cover picture books, anthologies, fiction, non-fiction and information books of popular appeal.
Publishers are invited to send review copies and information on their titles for this preview to Jennifer Taylor .
The deadline for submissions is Friday 5th February.
Computer books
The Bookseller will publish a special feature on new and forthcoming computer books in its issue of 26th March.
Publishers should send reading copies or proofs of books published in or after April to David Russell at The Bookseller (), to arrive no later than Friday 19th February.
Exhibitor promotions at the LIBF
Exhibitors at this year's London International Book Fair (to be held at Olympia 2, 21st to 23rd March) are invited to send in details of special promotions and offers, author visits and signings, and book or product launches that will take place at the fair for publication in a special LIBF preview issue of The Bookseller ,(), by 3rd February at the latest.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
NBA, NBS and VAT
From Mr Peter N Chambers
Sir, I must comment on the letters from Julian Clayton and Eileen Smith (The Bookseller ,) 15th January.
First of all, the National Book Sale licence allows booksellers to dispose of their own overstock, hence to some extent reducing the need for returns.
Thus there is already some flexibility regarding the Net Book Agreement during the sale period as long as the bookseller has paid the appropriate fee.
I do not believe that the consumer resistance noted by Mr Clayton was due to the lack of good book bargains.
There were plenty to be had.
Nor do I think that a complete free for all would be in the best interests of the trade.
Certainly my bank manager would take a dim view if I were to indulge in widespread massive discounting — margins are not that generous to begin with!
Eileen Smith need not worry too much.
I understand that if a bookshop were not registered for VAT it would still be charged VAT by its suppliers but would not be able to reclaim either through Customs & Excise or by passing the charge on to its customers and therefore would face very heavy pressure on margins.
And I assume the NBA would have to apply to prices ex-VAT to accommodate unregistered businesses.
Let us hope that this situation does not arise and VAT is not imposed on books.
We should all support the Don't Tax Reading campaign.
Yours faithfully ,
Peter N Chambers
Hessle Bookshop
.
Computer book prices
From Heinz Vuillermoz
Sir, In his letter about the price of computer books (13th November), Christopher Priest seems to have completely missed the point.
Computer books (and, indeed, a vast number of other books on management) are bought not by individuals but by companies, who can declare such purchases as legitimate expenses, with all that the term implies tax-wise.
The sale price matters little in these circumstances.
So who can blame the publisher for charging the maximum he believed the market can stand?
Of course, the poor individual buyer is the one who loses out in this sort of operation.
So what is new?
Yours faithfully ,
Heinz Vuillermoz
.
Selling to schools
From Mr A K Wiltcher
Sir, A teacher from a school supplied by us recently made an urgent telephone call chasing his order.
A search of our files revealed we were up-to-date and all titles (two reprinting titles excepted) had been despatched.
‘But you must have had the order,’ he said.
‘It was sent to you with the other orders.’
We made further searches but to no avail.
We reported back to the school secretary, who after a long pause said, ‘I'm sorry, we posted that order direct to the publisher, who was offering a 50% discount.’
We couldn't resist the obvious comment.
Yours sincerely ,
A K Wiltcher
The Arcade Bookshop,
.
Editing matters
From Mr Barry Brittlebank
Sir, Penny Phillips of Bloomsbury Publishing (Letters, 8th January) takes Susan Lamb of the Orion Group to task for her misuse of apostrophes and capitalisation.
‘How may years' experience does she recommend that an editor clock (sic) up…’ chides Miss Phillips.
Shurely ‘clocks’ up?
She signs off ‘Yours sincerely’ too.
Yours faithfully ,
Barry Brittlebank
Amalgamated Book Services Ltd,
.
Paperback preview
From Mr Simon King
Sir, Sarah Broadhurst fails to do herself justice in her Paperback Preview of 1993 (The Bookseller , 1st January).
She says she was ‘wrong’ in her 1992 Preview to see Arrow as ‘the major threat to Transworld’and that the list ‘has not yet fulfilled its promise’.
We have no wish to threaten Transworld, or indeed anyone else, but if Arrow's number two position in Alex Hamilton's Guardian analysis of 1992's top paperback sellers to Corgi's number one slot is not at least a challenge to them then I can think of now other way of restoring Sarah's belief in her own foresight.
As for 1993 and the fulfilling of promise, hold your breath.
Yours sincerely ,
Simon King
Arrow, Random House
.
Just William MP
From Mr Robert Leeson
Sir, Apart from the illogicality (with all due respect to Brough Girling, 8th January) of Jennings, Tin Tin or Milly Molly Mandy, actually growing up, can one imagine anything more unlikely than Just William becoming anything as prattish as a Tory minister or an estate agent?
Yours sincerely ,
Robert Leeson
.
Black booksellers
From Mr Anthony Zurbrugg
Sir, I read recent correspondence (6th November, 18th/25th December) in The Bookseller about training grants being available for helping black would-be publishers.
I wonder if you have noticed how few African, Afro-Caribbean or Asian booksellers work in major bookshops?
Representatives from this company visit most major academic and high street bookshops.
We seldom find any non-white faces.
Something needs to be done to encourage the employment of such booksellers.
Yours faithfully ,
Anthony Zurbrugg
Africa Book Centre
.
Haves and have-nots in the world of copyright
With piracy increasingly under control in the countries of the Pacific rim, as a result of pressure from the West and as they themselves become information product originators, and with China the last major country to implement a copyright law, copyright has conquered Asia.
But the intellectual property system is still controlled by the West, and Philip Altbach sees danger in the inequality between the information-rich and information-poor
NOW THAT China has joined the two international copyright conventions, it is worth looking at how the revolution in knowledge dissemination has affected the region.
China is the last major country to implement a copyright law and adhere to international treaties.
In the past decade other Asian Nations have joined the copyright system or enforced existing laws.
‘Pirates’ such as Taiwan, Singapore and Korea have, in the main ceased to violate copyright and intellectual property regulations.
There are two main reasons that copyright has conquered Asia.
One is a realisation in Asia that in order to participate fully in international trade and to deal in high-tech goods and high-tech ideas, copyright is a useful and indeed necessary element — copyright is the main means of controlling and regulating the flow of knowledge products of all kinds.
The other is that severe pressure has been brought to bear by the US and Britain to enforce copyright, trademark and patent rules.
Trade sanctions have been threatened and copyright has been made a high-profile issue in international negotiations.
Above from The Peasants Painting in Jinshan (Today's Chinese Publisher)
As Asian countries have built up their own knowledge industries and have begun to export knowledge products, they have naturally moved to regulate this complex trade.
In an earlier period there was no great disadvantage in ‘pirating’ books, films, computer software and other products or violating patents or trademarks on pharmaceutical or consumer products.
Virtually all such products were imported, and many were expensive and beyond the reach of countries at an early stage of economic development.
There was a great need to obtain access to knowledge through books, or quick money to be made by pirating cassette tapes or Gucci bags.
Motivated by self-interest
In the 1980s, Asian economies moved from low-tech to mid-tech or even high-tech, and some countries began to export knowledge products and most were turning more to research as an underpinning of future economic growth.
India, which in the 1960s led the fight in international agencies against rigid copyright rules, was the first to realise that it needed copyright and patents to protect and regularise its own emerging knowledge-based industries.
India did not want the textbooks that it was exporting to Southeast Asia and Africa to be pirated, and it wanted to ensure a market for its own emerging computer and pharmaceutical industries.
Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia and Korea followed suit for similar reasons.
In addition, they were subjected to massive pressure by the US and Britain.
Now China has joined that club.
It is worthwhile looking at the advantages and disadvantages of copyright at a time when it has achieved worldwide acceptability.
At its base, copyright (along with patents, trademarks, and related intellectual property arrangements) protects the ‘haves’.
The underlying concept is that those who have produced a knowledge product should control its dissemination and should benefit economically from it.
Moral and economic rights are bound up in the concept of copyright.
At the same time, copyright is supposed to foster science and development by providing incentives to producers to apply ideas to create new products.
It may be significant that the most restrictive concept of copyright, that enshrined in the Berne Convention, has become the main worldwide standard.
Increasingly strict interpretations are being applied in the courts of the US and other countries.
Producer control
This means that the producers control the nature of transactions of intellectual property of all kinds as well as the prices that must be paid by the consumers.
This applies not only to books and films but also to the use of patents and licences for industrial and technological products.
The Berne Convention is, in a sense, the OPEC of knowledge  distribution.
It controls commerce and has a role in regulating prices.
Unlike OPEC, it has representation of all countries that sign the treaty but in fact it is controlled by the major knowledge producing countries.
All Asian countries, with only the partial exception of Japan, will continue to be dependent in terms of the use of knowledge products.
Most of the research is produced in the major industrialised nations, which have huge university systems, active research laboratories and which spend large amounts on research and development.
While the balance of research is slowly shifting from the US, Britain and a few other European nations and toward the Pacific rim, change in this area will come quite slowly.
Western dominance
Asian countries remain dependent not only because the intellectual property system is controlled by the West but also because most of the major knowledge infrastructures are located in the West.
For example, virtually all of the new databases which are so crucial for accessing research are Western orientated and owned.
Access is regulated and sold, and the price is often high.
The material included in the databases is largely Western in nature, and there is a systematic under-representation of non-Western science.
Scientific journals and books are published in the West, increasingly by a few high priced multi-national publishers, and the editors and decision makers are typically located at major American or British universities.
The bulk of translations are from Western languages (and predominantly English) into other languages — very little is translated from Chinese or Hindi into Western languages.
Thus, Asian countries, even large nations with significant scientific systems of their own, such as China and India, will for many years remain peripheral in the international scientific systems.
The flow of knowledge and information remains very one-sided.
International copyright arrangements institutionalise peripherality and make it more expensive to obtain access to knowledge of all kinds.
There are also some practical problems relating to copyright.
Laws and regulations are complex.
China will not find it easy to participate fully.
For example, there is very little expertise in China relating to copyright.
The concept of Western copyright, in some ways the epitome of capitalist thinking, is somewhat alien to communist ideology as well as to traditional Chinese ideas about knowledge distribution.
Finding the foreign exchange to pay for permissions may be difficult, especially as multinational publishers often change high prices for the use of material.
Negotiations are sometimes difficult, especially when styles vary and both sides are unused to such interactions.
Very often, Western copyright and patent holders are more interested in exporting a few products at high prices than in selling licences or granting permissions at prices that Third World countries can afford.
There is, basically, a class conflict in which the owners hold most of the cards.
What is to be done?
There is general agreement that copyright is a good idea.
It is, in any case, a necessity in an increasingly interdependent world.
The problem is to ensure a measure of equality in the context of inequality.
The owners of intellectual property must understand the problems of the users and not simply see their property as a source of profits.
Long term benefit
Knowledge is necessary for development.
And development will, in the long term, benefit everyone.
Asia must be aware of the nuances of the new systems and seek arrangements that will be mutually beneficial.
Western countries must take a longer term perspective.
If those who are ‘information poor’ are simply exploited, international copyright may go the way of OPEC — exploitation by the producers followed by a weakening of the international market.
Philip G Altbach is professor and director of the Comparative Education Center, State University of New York at Buffalo.
He is the author of THE KNOWLEDGE CONTEXT: COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF KNOWLEDGE .
SPECIAL FEATURE DIARIES, CALENDARS AND CARDS 
Paper product power
They aren't books but they aren't half bad for the bottom line.
Andy Swapp, manager of Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop, argues that non-book paper products are not to be sniffed at, and explains why booksellers should consider stocking diaries, calendars and cards not only for the contribution they can make to profitability but also for the dramatic way in which they support and enhance book displays and promotions
As I stand behind the till faced with a customer buying a 40p postcard with a £50 note, I wonder what I can usefully tell any bookseller about why they should consider selling things other than books.
Particularly when VATable goods are usually taken on firm sale and have tighter credit periods than bookselling.
Most of us do, of course, sell lines other than books, even if only cards for Book Tokens.
But why diversify further into greetings cards, calendars, diaries or posters?
The most attractive reason in the current economic climate can be summed up in just one word, margin.
First, a bit of background to Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop.
It was set up five years ago as a new shop to combine the Art Bookshop and the Poster Gallery, which prior to that had been part of the Paperback Bookshop.
The old Parkers Bookshop with its split-level gallery floors was the perfect location for the new shop; the lower floor became the Poster Gallery selling the non-book materials and the upper floor was devoted mainly to books, though there is some integration of both.
The shop's profile is reflected in the sales, which over any given trading year are largely 50% books and 50% non-books.
The breakdown in sales of the VATable goods we stock fluctuates much more dramatically than do sales of books; this is largely because of seasonal changes in demand, the start of an academic term for students, and the summer tourist season.
At the time of writing, 20% of non-book sales are posters, 31% are greeting cards (including Christmas cards), 39% are calendars, 7% social stationery and 3% picture frames.
Knowing your market is essential to success, but a key factor is margin, and in the non-book field there is no Net Non-book Agreement, so you can sell at whatever price you think the market can stand.
Above a sample page from Charles Rennie Mackintosh calendar published by Colin Baxter Photography (see page 29)
There are recommended retail prices, of course, and there are guidelines.
A common formula used throughout the trade is to multiply cost price by 2.35; this proved equitable to supplier and vendor alike, giving a margin of 50% while still allowing for VAT.
There are certain areas of retailing and certain up-market shops which have been known to multiply their cost by five or six times.
I would not recommend this personally unless you were extremely sure of your market.
But there are other, more creative  reasons for considering broadening the stock profile of your shop.
Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop's window displays and promotions have supported many books with posters and paper products very successfully over the years.
Last October, Bloomsbury's Returns to Normal by Glen Baxter was backed by a range of 72 greeting cards, 48 postcards and mini-prints from Santoro Graphics plus Bloomsbury's own Baxter calendar and boxed card sets.
When Glen Baxter came for a signing session, we sold 80 copies of his book — a modest number perhaps for a shop of this size, but sales of his ‘spin-off’ goods amounted to a further 40% of the shop's turnover that day and brought us some 16% over our sales target for that week.
Equally, Thames & Hudson's ‘biography’ of Keith Haring may have seemed a brave piece of publishing to the general bookseller but, supported by T-shirts, badges, posters and cards from te Neues, it pulled in customers who would not normally have stepped inside a Blackwell shop, thanks largely to the non-book items and the extraordinary point of sale from T&H.
The Art & Poster Shop's main supplier of posters, King & McGaw, has also proved highly efficient at supporting particular book promotions.
For our tie-in promotion to the Royal Academy's ‘The Fauves’ exhibition K&M built a special display rack for us; and it was able to match a range of Metropolitan Museum of Art posters to the recent Matisse retrospective form Thames & Hudson, supported by the best reproductions of his work available, ranging in price from £9.95 to £84 hand silk-screened, 12-colour prints from K&M's inhouse printing team.
King & McGaw's order and delivery department enable us to feature posters for almost any book promotion we have undertaken at very short notice, and its warehouse staff can pick, pack and despatch any quantity of posters from a large range with a speed that would make most book publishers' head spin (with a twice-weekly delivery and a next day customer order service, I think most booksellers would agree with me).
Starting from postcards
I imagine most people would want to get into this area in the smallest way and so with the smallest product, the postcard.
I have heard some booksellers call the selling of postcards or greeting cards ‘peripheral’ and ‘inconsequential’, but a small item with a low unit price should not be dismissed lightly.
Some 80,000 customers bought cards from us last year, and even with a 60p average unit price, this is turnover not to be sneered at.
Postcards are labour-intensive, difficult to maintain and staff may find them intensely irritating to serve to customers, but to be able to generate over 20% of total sales from less than 10% of floor space, gives a turnover per square foot that most of us can only dream of.
A bookshop's customer base might well change as a result of changing stock profile.
Not all postcards are bought on impulse.
Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop now has many customers who come specifically to buy cards because they cannot get what they want elsewhere.
We also have a number of collectors, one of whom I visited recently to discover a house so piled with neatly catalogued shoe boxes full of cards that I could not see how he and I might successfully get from the front door to the kitchen without a Sherpa.
Another recently asked my advice about the finer points of his own computer program so that he might catalogue more accurately his card collection, so vast had it become (if any one has a mint Drummahoe No 1, he would be most indebted).
The postcard has improved in quality as printing processes have developed, and the number of companies producing and distributing them seems to have multiplied by the hundred since I started in bookselling 15 years ago.
If the fine art area is too specialised, there is a huge range of companies to choose from for a broader appeal as the accompanying directory shows.
And as soon as you start selling cards you will be spoilt for choice as their representatives start beating a pathway to your door.
The calendar crop
The most significant growth area for Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop in the last few years has been in calendars.
We now stock upwards of 300 titles, admittedly mostly between September and December, but they can generate very significant sales at a crucial time of year — and none of us can afford to ignore a product range that has increased in sales by some 300% in the last three years.
Thames & Hudson publishes a calendar every year as a one-off and it is always good quality and of broad interest.
Random Century publishes and distributes several diaries a year, including the very successful Kew Gardens Desk and Pocket Diary , Kaffe Fassett diaries and address books, the beautiful National Portrait Gallery calendar and notelets and the Victoria & Albert Museum's social stationery.
Little Brown offers several calendars and diaries each year, including Blackwells' biggest seller, the Ansel Adams calendar, and Cambridge's Fitzwilliam Museum Flower Diary .
Letts, of course, has moved in the other direction, into book publishing (Blackwells' Art & Poster Shop has seen a 500% increase in turnover of sales of their books this year, John Harvey-Jones please note), but it is well worth stocking Letts' unbeatable range of the more traditional diaries for which it is so rightly famous.
Phaidon Press also produced several beautiful calendars each year with titles such as Japanese Screens ,British Impressionism and the bestseller,Art in Bloom .
One should also think about approaching the specialist supplier.
They may have a minimum order and offer only firm sales, but they are all likely to have a range of titles that will fit the profile of your shop.
The publisher te Neues, for example, has a range of cards, stationery and folios that include the work of the graffiti-inspired art of Keith Haring and the work of photographers Annie Liebovitz and Robert Mapplethorpe.
It also has calendar titles such as Country House Gardens ,Farbergé Eggs ,Monet ,Matisse ,Edward Hopper , and the Collection of Impressionists .
Web International has a wonderfully eclectic  range of calendars, featuring not only Botticelli, Renoir, Leonardo, Michelangelo, the Impressionists and the Uffizi Gallery Collection, but also Medicinal Herbs and Plants ,Volcanos ,Victorian Shop ,The Village Coachman , and Madonna in Art ,(no, not that Madonna).
The largest of all Blackwells Art & Poster Shop's calendar suppliers is Pomegranate, which offers a magnificent range of subject matter — not just Monet, Hopper, Escher, Klimt and Impressionists, but calendars of the work of Piranesi, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, William Blake, Childe Hassam, Maxfield Parrish and Redoute, and perhaps of more interest to the general bookshop, a range of other subjects that includes astronomy with a calendar of The Maps of the Heavens , feminist history in Women Who Dared ,Classic Jazz and Classic Blues Musicians ,Shakespeare's World , archaeology with Sacred Stone Sites ,The History of Medicine and an array of natural history subjects, including The Mountain Gorilla ,Harp Seal Pups ,Penguins ,Cats ,Birds ,Endangered Species ,Cows and the bestseller of the last two years Pigs .
Negotiated discounts
Retail prices vary enormously, from the Medici Society's excellent value for money range of floral, landscape, animal and bird study calendars starting at £2 or £3 to the large format, single artist calendars from centurion and te Neues for £20 plus at the top end of the market.
For the most part, calendars will have a lower mark-up than posters, card or other paper products, but this will largely depend on your buying power.
Both discount and terms can be negotiated, and again, if a recommended retail price realises a margin of 40% or under, you can sell higher if you are sure that the market can stand it and that local competition is not seriously under-cutting you.
Setting up
If this has whetted your appetite, how should you get started?
As with any business, analysing the market, selecting appropriate stock for your site, and knowing the local competition as well as your customer base are essential.
All the paper goods mentioned are ‘repped’ in much the same way as books, but there is a major difference: the business is much more aggressive than bookselling, goods are generally firm sale only and the representative has a stronger reason to get you to buy ‘units’.
Having said that, you are both in the same business, and as in bookselling, if the rep wants to continue business with you, it is still about getting the stock levels right and that means buying to sell out.
I would caution care in buying though, and cannot stress this strongly enough.
Tread carefully when first contacting and deciding which companies to deal with.
Once you have decided what type of range you are going to stock, open accounts, discuss terms, discounts, and payment periods with the utmost care.
Payment terms, for example, are generally much shorter than those of book publishers, usually only up to 30 days credit, and this needs to be taken on board as it  affects cashflow, stock turn, and ultimately, profitability.
Many of the publishers I have mentioned sell a wide range of social stationery; not all of them are specialists in the fine art field.
King & McGaw is a specialist poster publisher and distributor, as is Motif Editions, which I would strongly recommend for academic bookshops in university towns, since demand amongst first year students for Motif's Escher posters and Salvador Dali prints never ceases to amaze me.
Not for the faint-hearted
There are plenty of non-book publishers with ranges very well suited to a general bookshop, and by far the best way to discover just what is available is to go to the gift trade's International Spring Fair at the NEC, Birmingham from 7th to 11th February and find out for yourselves.
Not for the faint-hearted, the fair could reduce even the most hardened Frankfurt Book Fair stalwart to a whimpering wreck with its miles of cut-glass, Capo di Monte and leathergoods and scarcely a book in sight.
But somewhere in the middle of it all is the right postcard, the right poster, the right greetings card and the right calendar for your bookshop.
Selling diaries and calendars
Gerald Brisch, managing director of te Neues UK, explains calendar and diary supply
There cannot be many general booksellers who do not broaden their product range beyond books at certain times of the year.
And most quality stationery manufacturers consider the book trade an important market for them.
So much modern merchandise is themed with bestselling books that it makes a logical extension to the stock profile.
Better margins on such items and a less Luddite approach to VAT have helped, but fundamentally it is the trend to one-stop leisure shopping that has spurred the modern book retailer to stock not just stationery, but T-shirts, videos, CDs, cassettes and games and a host of other merchandise.
But one of the earliest non-book product categories into the traditional bookshop was greetings, wrap and social stationery.
Calendars and diaries have always been popular in good bookshops, many of these products spinning off from familiar sources (Tolkien, Beatrix Potter) and sold in by book publishers with the autumn lists.
Over the last five years, however, the range of calendars and fine diaries on offer has increased immeasurably.
In the past, the relatively unsophisticated consumer market and a dependence on cheap office giveaways at Christmas tended to hold back the market in the UK (as opposed to more sophisticated markets in the US and Europe).
As a result of good product design, developments in colour printing, trading up, increased marketing by museums and galleries and perhaps above all the ‘image’ culture promulgated by television and the media more generally, calendars have come out of the office and potting shed and into prime sites in the home — and they need to be replaced every year.
Calendar and diary cycle
This is a wishing-your-life-away business, and getting the dates and selling cycle right is all.
1994 calendar and diary ranges will appear in the shops from May 1993 onwards.
The product development will have been carried out during summer 1992; sales material will have been ready by Christmas 1992, and subscribing begins in earnest in January, continuing into spring.
This is a pattern imposed by publishing, who need to fix print runs as soon as possible, and by stationery retailers, who traditionally like to get their seasonal buying out of the way.
How to start
Having made your decision that calendars and diaries are right for your shop, fix a budget for sales.
Conscientious publishers will advise on average order and unit values for your size of business.
Consider your potential customer base and pricepoints carefully: popular, student, tourist, upmarket and so on.
An obvious clue is to look to strong book selling sections — art, gardening, photography, natural history, science fiction, whatever — and think about matching your buying to these existing strengths.
Remember that sales can start from the summer on, especially if you are in a tourist area, and that the start of the academic year and back to school also stimulate demand.
A Keith Haring card from te Neues
Selling in
Most of the larger calendar and diary publishers should make contact in the first two to three months of the year.
Subscribing is done in a similar way to books, through representatives/freelance agents and, increasingly, direct marketing and telesales, selling from colour catalogues and perhaps sample covers with contents illustrations.
It could present some publishers with problems but a useful ordering tip is to hold back your order until you have seen several ranges.
If you are new to the business (or even experienced but pushed for time) it can be difficult to make up your mind on the spot and some manufacturers have hundreds of calendar and diary titles in their programmes.
Wholesalers will offer limited ranges later in the year but the special nature of the product can preclude choice.
If for some reason you are not contacted, telephone the suppliers in the directory in this issue and ask for a catalogue.
Trade shows
The major UK event for the stationery trade is the International Spring Fair held at the NEC, Birmingham from 7th to 11th February 19934.
It is a wonderful opportunity to see the major suppliers and decide on the lists you want to consider.
You can place orders on the spot with publishers you know, and it does not harm to ask for extra trade fair discount!
Other fairs take place throughout the year and some suppliers show at the London International Book Fair.
Your supplier should be in a position to give you information on the bigger ones.
Terms and conditions
Most publishers have minimum order levels, and carriage charges are levied in certain circumstances.
There are no net prices for calendars and diaries, so you can price as you like; most suppliers suggest guide recommended retail prices.
Trade prices or discounts depend on volume but will start at around 40%.
Sale of return is usually negotiable at lower terms, and extended credit might be available for larger orders.
You should confirm whether your discount is net VAT or not.
Delivery
Give an order reference and specify a delivery date.
You should keep a copy order and make a note of due dates so that you can plan for the arrival of the stock.
It can be a good idea to check in advance that delivery will be on time and that no titles have been cancelled or delayed since subscription.
Often calendars and diaries will be unpriced on delivery but most titles will have an ISBN or EAN for those booksellers with EPOS.
Instore display
Prepare your instore display well in advance of delivery.
It cannot be stressed enough that calendars need a little extra display thought if they are to sell out well.
It's no use simply putting them in a box on a table.
Most specialist bookshop fitters have flexible units in their range that can be adapted to calendars for the seasonal periods.
Many publishers too will be able to provide help with point of sale — stands, covers and so on.
Obviously, calendars and diaries should be included in any seasonal promotional plans — windows and catalogues — and suppliers might help with competitions and other marketing ideas.
Repeat orders
Dated-product manufacturers will try and sell out by year-end, so repeat orders before Christmas can be a problem.
A flexible approach to suitable substitutes can help make last minute sales, and most publishers operate hot-line services.
Special events
Keep an eye out for special events such as exhibitions.
It is worth noting that larger museums and galleries and fine art publishers produce tie-ins for these.
Selling cards
Sebastian Watt, sales manager of the Medici Society, explains greetings card supply
The high margins that can be had from greetings card sales — 50% plus is not unusual — make carrying these lines an attractive addition to books.
Detail from a Medici Society card
Card publishers are keen to supply a wider range of outlets other than their traditional markets.
Fine art publishers, such as the Medici Society, recognize that there is a strong similarity in the customer profile and would like to take advantage of this.
Cards are typically sold in via a representative selling from a brochure and samples.
Because variety is important most reputable companies issue several new brochures during the year in addition to the two main seasonal catalogues, Christmas and spring.
Some companies will help with display facilities and point of sale material, particularly for special promotions.
Ordering replenishment and display may be looked after by the publisher and this can lift a lot of the administrative burden of stock control from the shop, although they are normally offered only where sales justify it.
Free delivery is usually offered on orders above £100 to £150, but unlike most book publishers all sales are firm.
Terms and conditions are broadly similar to those of book publishers with two major differences, cards have VAT levied on them and card publishers only recommend a retail price.
Most suppliers will offer early settlement discounts of around 2.5% and quantity discounts for larger orders, which can make a substantial difference to the margin.
Many card suppliers also produce other lines, giftwrap stationery items, postcards; some even produce books which can help to give a co-ordinated display, attracting customers and achieving that all important element of any retailing concern, increased sales and margin.
From Ansel Adams to Art Nouveau, Monet to Mickey Mouse, penguins to pigs, Leman to Larson, there is a range of social stationery to suit every bookshop profile
Diaries, calendars and cards — a directory of suppliers
Artist's Cards
()
Contact:Emily Coats, Jake Bell, Andrew Jones
Large variety of quality fine art greetings cards (plus boxed sets); notecards; postcards; gift cards; calendars; fine art prints and portfolios
Colin Baxter Photography
()
Contact:Mike Rensner
Quality colour photography featuring land and cityscape, natural history and some art and design.
Calendars, diaries, postcards, greetings cards.
Over 600 postcards covering Scotland, Yorkshire, Bath, the Lake District, the Cotswolds, Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Iceland.
Greetings cards range includes puffins, landscapes, Edinburgh and wildflowers. 1994 Scotland Diary , 1994 calendars are Colin Baxter's Scotland ,Scottish Lochs ,Scotland Appointment Calendar ,Edinburgh ,Charles Rennie Mackintosh 
Biblios
()
Contact:Louise Mallard, sales manager
Distributor for Harmsworth Magazines and Cedco, US Harmsworth publishes a low priced, quality range of calendars featuring well known, popular characters and subjects:Fred Basset ,Love Is ,Shooting Times ,The Field ,Ski .
Cedco produces quality colour reproduction datebooks and calendars: Art, Nature, Rock Stars, Destinations, Religious, Animals.
Boots Print
()
Contact:David Corthorn, sales manager
Boots Print offers a design and manufacturing service of own brand diaries, calendars and social stationery.
British Library
() Orders to BL Publications
Contact:Anne Young on 
1994 diaries include Medieval Romances and Legends featuring scenes from medieval manuscripts in the British Library collections
Chronicle Books
Details from Hi Marketing
()
Range of out-of the ordinary calendars based on Chronicle titles.
Also Book Cards, a cross between a card and a book in the same price range as a card
College Designs
()
Foil and paper giftwrap, bows, ribbons, tags, gift boxes, bags
Duns Tew Publishing
()
Contact:Christopher Woodhead
Greetings cards and postcards adapted from successful book illustrations.
Illustrators include E H Shepard's drawings from The Wind in the Willows ; John Tenniels' illustrations from Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass ; Martin Leman's Cat and Teddy Bear pictures from his books; Tolkien's drawings from The Lord of the Rings 
East-West Publications
()
Contact:Brad Thompson
High quality address books, birthday books, notebooks, baby's diaries and photographic albums.
Most titles feature artwork of Henriette Willebeek le Mair.
Range includes Golden Days: An Album for Family Photographs (£19.95, inc VAT),Cottage Flowers (£17.99, inc VAT);Baby's Album: A Diary in Words and Photographs (£19.95, inc VAT)
Ebury Press
Random House  () Orders to Tiptree Book Services ()
Contact:Jo Carpenter
Diaries, address and telephone books, record books and journals.
Highly illustrated range, many items linked to institutions such as the Royal Academy of Arts, Kew Gardens, Victoria & Albert Museum, or featuring artists such as Lesley Anne Ivory and  Penny Black, as well as Monet and Matisse.
Books feature puzzles from Pentagram, pictures from Country Living magazine and Good Housekeeping , and lots of nostalgia with old fishing and golfing images and Victorian scraps
Fitzwilliam Museum Enterprises
()
Contacts:Judith Sanders, marketing manager; Richard Maddicott, general manager
Fine Art images, flower paintings, William Morris designs and embroidery sampler pictures on greetings cards, notecards and card packs; calendars, diaries and address books inspired by and designed from collections in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.
Alan Hutchison
()
Contact:Julia Raymond, sales manager
Fine art illustrated record books, diaries (including Cats in Art, see picture), address books, notebooks, carrier bags, giftwrap, photograph frames and albums, desk and home accessories NEC International Spring Fair: hall 6, stand H1
Images
()
Contact:Gerry Bolt ()
Calendars, mini cards (folding with envelope), over 500 quality photographic postcards; all images the work of photographer Simon McBride (Spirit of England ,Spirit of Scotland Postcard subjects include English gardens, dried flowers, animals, England; 1994 calendars include London and West Country Appointment Calendars 
Images & Editions
()
Contact:Bridget Palmer or Sandra Orme
Photographic cards including gardens and landscape, floral arrangements, cats and other animals, and a range featuring antique teddy bears.
Greetings cards, postcards, notelets and notecards, writing sets, note and address books, personalised pictures and gift stationery; ‘names-in-a-frame’, personalised pictures for children by Margaret Stevens; Steve Lovi collection of butterfly prints and the Anne Mortimer Collection of greetings cards featuring cats, flowers and teddy bears is launched in February.
NEC International Spring Fair: hall 3, Stand J11
Ink Group
()
Contact:Terry Andrews
Mainly humorous greetings cars, mugs, T-shirts; all categories of calendars, date books, diaries.
Card, mug and T-shirt ranges includes The Far Side, Boynton, The Dales, Mango Chutney; Ken Done popular art; fine art;A Year in Provence calendar;The Far Side calendar, diary and cards
Jarrold Publishing
()
Contact:Maureen Kerton
Quality calendars at competitive prices
Range includes Magic of Scotland ,Seasons ;The Royal Collection ;Classics and Sportscar ;Steam Railway ;Wayne Ford's British Birds 
King & McGaw
()
Contact:Dick Shone or Tracey Gilmour
Large range of fine art and decorative posters.
Retail support service, including range selection and p.o.s. design and product presentation.
Orders received before 4 p.m. delivered next day.
Posters and prints for framing including hand-printed silk screens.
Subjects include biographies, landscape, photography, children's, animal, sports, still life, American  
Charles Letts
()
Commercial, social and specialist diaries, address books, note books, visitors book, autograph books; large range of solid brass desk accessories including paperweights, ink pots and pens, blotters, photoframes
Gardeners Diary ,Motorists Diary ,Wine Diary 
Lime Tree Publications
()
Contact:June Couch
High quality, reasonably priced (£6.95) calendars, designed for British market
Range includes book tie-ins such as Great Housewives of Art ,Victorian Cats ; charity tie-ins with Amnesty International and Survival International; latest textile designs of Kaffe Fassett; classic productions of the Royal Shakespeare Company
Frances Lincoln
()
Contact:Paula Saunders, Frances Lincoln UK sales and marketing manager
Diaries and address books with high quality reproductions of garden photography and botanical prints with emphasis on original material
Royal Horticultural Society 1994 Diary (£9.99 inc VAT),RHS Address Book (£9.99 in VAT) and The Country Garden: A Book of Days (£10.99)
Henry Ling
()
Contact:sales office
Fine art cards, notecards, Christmas cards, slim pocket diaries and calendars
Little, Brown
()
Contact:Kathy Law, sales administration department
Photographic, fine art, cartoon and sports calendars
Ansel Adams engagement and wall calendars, featuring his photographs of the North American landscape;Cape Light Calendar , photography by Joel Meyerowitz;Artist's Birthday Calendar , featuring Old and Modern Masters;Thomas McKnight Wall Calendar ;The Art of Mickey Mouse Calendar ;Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Calendar and Desk Calendar 
Manchester City Art Galleries
()
Contact:Motif Editions on  for everyday range and Publications Department, City Art Gallery on  for Eric Gill cards
Greetings cards, images drawn from Manchester City's art collection.
Christmas cards by the sculptor and artist Eric Gill
Medici Society
()
Contact:Sebastian Watt, sales manager
Extensive range of quality greetings and Christmas cards, stationery, wrapping paper, postcards, calendars (including Advent calendars), art and children's books and large pictures.
Card series contains works by the Great Masters as well as those by contemporary artists and subjects produced especially for children
Motif Editions
()
Contact:Tim Black
Distributor of Tate Gallery range of cards, postcards, diaries and calendars together with Escher Cards and other inexpensive, quality fine art cards and posters
Museum Quilts
()
Contact:Ljiljana Baird or Edward Harbour
Quilt related project books and social stationery:1994 Quilts Diary ;Quilt Book of Days ;Quilt Address Book ;Album Quilt Visitors Book ;Quilt Blank Books ;Antique Quilts Engagement Calendar 1994 
Pomegranate Europe
()
Contact:Chris Custance
Range of calendars (five different sizes, £8.95 to £16.95), diaries, cards and postcards sourced from museums, art galleries and photographic collections from all over the world, including Fine Art, Animals, Children, Design, Environment, Ethnic and Third World, Film, Gardens, Literature, Music, Photography and Sport
Ragged Bears
()
Contact:Ragged Bears representative or Charles Shirley at Ragged Bears office
‘Popular upmarket’ advent calendars, address books, birthday books and books of days
Advent calendars include Advent Theatre ,Christmas House ,Santas in Snow ,Victorian Christmas ; other titles include Teddy's Book of Days ,My Penguin Pete Address Book and Birthday Book ,Little Polar Bear Address and Birthday Book 
Random House Illustrators' Art
()
Contact:Stuart Biles, sales director
Range of stationery featuring the artwork of some of Random House Children's Books most successful children's illustrators Jane Hissey's Old Bear print portfolio, calendar, diary, address book, bookplates, bookmark, height chart; Alice diary, address book; postcard books including artwork by Posy Simmonds, Reg Cartwright and Deborah King;Shirley Hughes Baby Record Book ,Birthday Book and Alfie and Annie Rose Height Chart 
Redstone Press
()
Contact:Julian Rothenstein
Annual diary/notebook, each year with a different theme connected with art.
The 1994 diary will be called The Redstone Diary and has colour plates of printed ephemera collected by artists who have visited India
Rizzoli
()
Contact:John Rule
Diaries and calendars range of fine and popular art, often drawn from major collections and the archives of institutions such as the Metropolitan Opera House NYC, and children's paper products in the Universe Children's Paper Products range Frank Lloyd Wright Journal and Desk Set ;Joy to the World Christmas Song Book; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Wedding Planner and Guest Book ; children's cut out paper theatres, masks
Royle Publications
()
Calendars featuring fine art to contemporary art, wildlife, cute cats, floral, and photographic scenes; postcard books (r.r.p. £3.99) featuring artists such as Vernon Ward, James Noble, Hubert Squires, Ann Graham Johnstone, Gillian Roberts.
1994 calendars include humorous Keep Fit calendar,Waterway Wildlife photographic calendar, exclusive Thelwell calendar
Shepheard-Walwyn
()
Contact:Georgina Melville
Distributor to the book trade of Four Seasons range of full colour photographic diaries and social stationery
Country Diary ;The English Garden Diary ;World Wildlife Diary ; mid-year College Diary ;Hedgerow Diary ;Address Book ;Birthday Book ,Notebooks ;Our Son and Our Daughter baby books;Visitors Book ;Gardener's Planner & Logbook 
SP Publishing
()
Contact:Sue Hammond, sales and marketing director
Specialises in the design, production and packaging of quality stationery and related gifts: cards, calendars, diaries, notebooks, writing sets, address books, gift bags and boxes, paperweights, pens and pencils, photograph albums and frames.
SP Publishing was W H Smith's ‘Stationery Supplier of the Year’ for 1992 Ranges include Marmaduke the ginger cat, an extension of the Sanderson Collection of classic English floral designs; contemporary floral imagery; William Morris designs, Mabel Lucie Attwell's artwork for Peter Pan , traditional samplers fine art
Stewart, Tabori & Chang
Distributed by Melia Publishing Services,()
Watercolour and photographic quality calendars:I Dream a World (£9.99),Gardens (£11.99),Bird ,Egg ,Feather ,Nest (£9.99)
Studio Designs
()
Contact:Duncan Crole
Quality illustrated gift and social stationery with information on artist or theme.
Design portfolio includes fine art, floral classics and ethnic prints; product ranges cover notelets and address books, photo albums and day books.
Classic Print portfolios; Indian Travel Collection (designed by stonemason Tom Clark while in India); The Art Nouveau Range (illustrated with works from the Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague) and the Feasts and Festivals Book (compiled by Tom Jaine, editor of the Good Food Guide )
Tate Gallery Publications
Distributed by Motif Editions,()
Contact:Tim Black
Tate Gallery Desk Diary and calendar ; Greetings cards and colour postcards
te Neues
()
Contact:Gerald Brisch
Publisher and distributor of contemporary, fine art and photographic calendars, diaries, social and greetings stationery.
Specialist in exhibition related merchandise.
Over 300 titles in 1994 calendar and diary range, including Jean-Michel Basquiat, Keith Haring, Annie Leibovitz, Robert Mapplethorpe, René Magritte, Henri Matisse and Andy Warhol (see Mickey Mouse above) NEC International Spring Fair: hall 3, stand L13
Times Supplements
()
Contact:Christopher Shakespeare
Times Literary Supplement Calendar (£5.95) including quotations and cartoons;Times Higher Education Supplement Pocket Diary (£4.99) giving addresses and phone numbers of universities, polytechnics and colleges, research councils, trade unions and government, local authority and employers' organisations, runs from July ‘93 to December ‘94,Times Educational Supplement Desk Diary (£5.99), July ‘93 to December ‘94
Universe Graphics
() distributed by Windsor Books International
Contact:Geoff Cowen
Wide range of fine art calendars, diaries and special record books in association with major art galleries and museums and organizations such as Amnesty International and the United Nations National Gallery of Art Diary ,The Subject is Women Art Diary ,Impressionism calendar,Frank Lloyd Wright calendar,Modern Landscapes calendar and African Canvas calendar
Virgin Publishing
()
Contact:Ray Mudie, sales director
A new range of stationery linked to 20th century popular culture launched with the publication of 1994 Marvel Calendar (£6.99 inc VAT), a spin-off from Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics 
Viz
John Brown Publishing
()
Viz diary and calendar; Fortean Times Diary of Strange Phenomena 
Woodmansterne Publications
()
Contact:Stephen Smith, sales manager
Details from fine and decorative art.
Blank and  greeting cards, Christmas cards, notecard wallets, bookmarks, address books, notebooks, gift wrap, tags, fine art prints.
BOOK NEWS
The first of three previews, based on the selection of leading titles to be published during the coming season which appears in the Spring Books issue on 12th February.
This week, the highlights in hardback fiction published between now and August
Spring highlights
The Man Who Made Husbands Jealous Jilly Cooper (Bantam Press, May, £14.99).
Follows Polo , the best selling hardback novel of 1991.
River God Wilbur Smith (Macmillan, March, £15.99).
A departure for him: a story of gold, greed and corruption in Ancient Egypt.
The Night Manager John le Carré (Hodder, July, £14.99).
Former soldier in Northern Ireland is recruited as a British agent investigating arms and cocaine trafficking.
Finn's Hotel James Joyce (Viking, June, £12.99).
Collection of stories said to be the missing prototype for Finnegans Wake .
A Suitable Boy Vikram Seth (Phoenix House, March, £20).
Epic saga of post-Independence India.
No Exit Julie Burchill (Sinclair-Stevenson, February, £14.99).
Outspoken journalist with her second novel, a story of sex and Semtex in post-Communist Prague.
Angel Barbara Taylor Bradford (Harper-Collins, June, £14.99).
Four orphans vow to be a family, but come to break their promises.
Asta's Book Barbara Vine (Viking, March, £15.99).
A family notebook has clues to a notorious Edwardian murder.
Hotel Pastis Peter Mayle (Hamish Hamilton, June, £15.99).
His first novel, set, predictably in Provence.
American Star Jackie Collins (Heinemann, April, £14.99).
The rise of a superstar from boyhood poverty.
Memories of the Ford Administration John Updike (Hamish Hamilton, March, £15.99).
A historian remembers the mid-'70s, as well as his struggles to  complete a biography of President James Buchanan.
Cleopatra's Sister Penelope Lively (Viking, April, £14.99).
A palaeontologist and a journalist find themselves in Callimba, where Cleopatra's sister Berenice once reigned.
Gai-Jin James Clavell (Hodder, May, £18).
He returns to familiar territory.
Song of Enchantment Ben Okri (Cape, March, £14.99).
Sequel to the Booker Prize winning The Famished Road .
A Dead Man in Deptford Anthony Burgess (Hutchinson, May, £14.99).
Fictional exploration (one of three due this spring) of the life and death of Christopher Marlowe.
A Family Romance Anita Brookner (Cape, June, £14.99).
A family attempts to cope with the eruption into their lives of an unruly aunt.
Forward the Foundation Isaac Asimov (Doubleday, May, £14.99).
The culmination of the series, completed just before his death.
The Year of the Virgins Catherine Cookson (Bantam Press, March, £14.99).
Family conflicts in 1960s Tyneside.
Thunder Point Jack Higgins (Michael Joseph, May, £14.99).
£100,000 campaign for this and his new paperback.
A Spanish Lover Joanna Trollope (Bloomsbury, May, £14.99).
Lizzie is married with four children and a thriving small business; her single twin Frances discovers a new life when she goes to Spain on a business trip.
Operation Shylock Philip Roth (Cape, March, £15.99).
The author encounters his double, whose self-appointed task is to lead the Jews out of Israel.
No Other Life Brian Moore (Bloomsbury, February, £15.99).
A priest tells the story of a boy he rescued from poverty who grows up to become a revolutionary leader.
The Final Martyrs Shusaku Endo (Peter Owen, April, £14.99).
Short stories.
Maybe the Moon Armistead Maupin (Bantam Press, February, £14.99).
His first novel since ending the Tales of the City series.
Author promotional tour.
The Waters of Thirst Adam Mars-Jones (Faber, June, £14.99).
First novel by one of the Best of Young British Novelists of 1983 who has been selected again in 1993.
Mayle encore
Peter Mayle Hotel Pastis (Hamish Hamilton, 3rd June, £15.99)
‘I had moved to France with the very firm intention of trying to write a novel; the other books [including the bestselling A Year in Provence and Toujours Provence ]got in the way.
Also, I didn't have an idea, which is always rather a serious drawback.
Then, about two or three years ago, I did get an idea, and Hotel Pastis is based on that.
‘It's about an advertising man who gets disillusioned with the business, and who with the co-operation of his incredibly efficient and wonderful butler escapes to Provence.
There he meets a French woman, to whom he's very attracted and who's very attracted to him.
The two of them decide to buy a disused police station and turn it into a hotel.
This story runs parallel with that of a bank robbery which is being planned for 14th July by a group of petty criminals, some of whom are employed on the building site for the new hotel.
We follow the building of the hotel, we follow the bank robbers’ plans, and at the end of the book there are what I hope are some not too implausible twists and turns.’
Mayle is an ex-advertising executive living in Provence; but there, he says, the resemblance to his hero ends.
‘I never, ever had any desire to run a hotel or a bar or a restaurant.
I'm a terrific customer, but I'd be a really dreadful proprietor.’
Bashing Mayle the populariser is a favourite sport in some quarters.
Is he nervous about the critical reaction to his first work of fiction?
‘It's difficult to say that you don't take notice of criticism, because you can't avoid taking notice of it.
But what I really want is for the book to be read and enjoyed by the people who read the other books.
They're the people I write for: the people who actually buy books.
All the novel is intended to be is a bit of fun — something that you might pick up at an airport and that takes you through the journey in a pleasant fashion.
If I've achieved that, then I'll be happy.’
Adrift in Prague
Julie Burchill Last Exit (Sinclair-Stevenson, 25th February, £14.99)
Julie Burchill's new novel, originally commissioned by the BBC as a screenplay, is a thriller set in Prague.
The central character is a young BBC World Service journalist who, in search of a big story, finds himself adrift in a world of moral deprivation as his investigations lead him deep into the rotten heart of the city.
The plot is energetic and breathless, and Burchill's distinctive, journalistic voice can be heard in a series of neat one-liners.
‘I would describe Last Exit as being a fairly successful spy thriller.
The jacket describes the book as being a cross between 9½ Weeks and The Third Man , which I think is about right.
After the success of Ambition it would have been easy to write a follow-up; but the idea of writing Susan Street's further adventures was horrific.
Blockbusters are going through a terrible time, and I had no desire to add to the misery.
‘Why?
I think most of the plots have been written, and it a genre that has been written out in the way that the Western was written out.
There seems to have been too many people writing blockbusters, and too few plots stretched much too far.
‘However, for some reason, probably because of the changing situation in central and eastern Europe, there still appears to be a lot of life in the Cold War spy genre.
I had always thought the spy thriller was a very masculine genre — not many women have written that kind of novel — but it was a challenge.
I admire several of John le Carré's novels, particularly The Spy Who Came in From the Cold and The Perfect Spy , and I like the tension and clever plotting upon which the spy novel depends.
‘I enjoy writing fiction.
The approach work is always quite nasty, but once you get into it the experience is very pleasurable.
However, my biggest problem is thinking up plots: I can write anything but I haven't got a plot in my head.
I really enjoy writing dialogue; I tend to talk to myself a lot anyway so I suppose I'm used to it.
My next book was due to have been a literary novel but that's been put back in the top  drawer .
Instead, I shall be working on a novella and some short stories…that's my kind of thing.’
James Joyce's missing link
James Joyce Finn's Hotel (Viking, June, £12.99)
Dublin-born textual scholar Danis Rose discovered James Joyce's ‘lost novel’ while he was working on a critical edition of Finnegans Wake .
Joyce began work on the book — which was to have been a series of short stories based on Irish history and mythology — in 1923, but the project never reached fruition and was abandoned a year later.
However, Joyce did return to the work, and in 1938 he ‘cannibalised’ the text, incorporating parts of it in Finnegans Wake .
Enough documentation has survived to enable Rose to reconstruct the earlier work and to establish its title.
‘This is an exciting textual discovery.
For too long Joyce has been misunderstood, and only now is a complete reassessment of his life and work beginning to take shape.
The existence of Finn's Hotel helps to make an understanding of Finnegans Wake possible; for too long those critic's and scholar's that have tried to make an assessment of the Wake have begun from the wrong premise.
Finn's Hotel will enable us for the first time to approach the encyclopedic Finnegans Wake with a true and not misleading knowledge of its origins and of the prototypes of its protagonists.
‘Joyce did not move from the day book of Ulysses to the night book of the Wake , and that has for too long been one of the fundamental mistakes that people have been making.
Finn's Hotel now provides the link between the two novels.
‘This has to be one of the most exciting textual discoveries since the Second World War.
The text is so extremely accessible and the language is very beautiful.’
Not having it all
Joanna Trollope A Spanish Lover (Bloomsbury, 28th May, £14.99)
In 1992, Joanna Trollope made the transition into the super league of British authors.
The Men and the Girls sold over 40,000 copies in hardback;The Rector's Wife was the 24th bestselling paperback of the year (The Bookseller , 15th January).
She has been hailed as the pioneer of a literary genre for the '90s: the ‘Aga Saga’.
‘I shall wring Terence Blacker's neck [he is credited with coining the term].
I think he's wonderful, and very funny, but he's also very naughty.
Like most labels, it's amusing and it's slick and it tells about a hundredth part of the story.
I don't see the books like that.
Of course they're middle class, but then almost everybody in England is middle class — whether they like it or not.
‘All I'm doing is being part of the quiet revival of the traditional novel, in which the commonplace doings and feelings of ordinary people are charted: the kind of novel that, with all the noise made in the past 25 years about the blockbuster and the literary novel, has been shouted down.
I'm not starting anything new.’
‘Trollope's novels hinge on dilemmas in the lives of her ordinary people: a lesbian affair that shocks a small community in A Village Affair , or relationships across an age gap in The Men and the Girls .
In A Spanish Lover , the theme is domesticity versus independence.
Lizzie is married with four children and a small business; Frances, her twin sister, is an independent spirit who, one Christmas, goes off to Spain and falls in love with a married Spanish man.
‘Having twins as characters was a device for looking at the very silly phrase ‘having it all’: it was a way of signalling this division within us.
I had very strong domestic and maternal instincts; there was no way of tramping those down.
But I was at university in the early '60s, and I could see that even my sister's generation, 10 years later, was much bolder about this eternal exhausting, juggling compromise of home and work.’
Neither sister in the book is able to realise her ideals, and the one who is apparently most secure, Lizzie, finds her security evaporating.
‘Lizzie is just the sort of excellent middle-class high achiever that gives the middle class a bad name.
PTAs up and down the country are stuffed with people like her.
I didn't think she was ever going to be as appealing as Frances, but I hoped that by the end of the book she would be a little more appealing than she had been at the beginning.’
FIRST REPORT
Competing quests for le Carré
Controversy simmers after the sale by Giles Gordon to Little, Brown of erstwhile thriller-writer and lit ed Graham Lord 's biography of John le Carré, given that Hutchinson commissioned a life of le Carré from Robert Harris (journalist and author of Fatherland some 18 months ago.
Lord declares that he was unaware that a contract had actually been signed with Harris — though he knew Harris was keen to write the biography — at the point when he wrote his own outline.
But as soon as the fact came to light, Lord's agent Giles Gordon made it known to all the nine publishers to whom an outline had been submitted, some of whom did consequently withdraw bids.
‘Robert and I have talked about this, and sorted it out between us,’ says Lord.
Hilary Hale, who bought the book, provisionally called The Quest for le Carré , says she was quite aware of the existence and status of the rival biography, and that Little Brown was not deterred by it.
‘Although Graham is only just starting research, the book promises to be highly readable, judging by his Jeffrey Bernard biography.’
Carol O'Brien at Simon & Schuster was the underbidder.
Meanwhile, le Carré declares himself uninterested in any such project and declines to co-operate with either biographer.
Lord's book is scheduled for publication in autumn 1994.
Coinciding with Jeffrey Archer and James Herbert's defections to HarperCollins from Hodder (each for two-book deals, worth over £2m and £1.7 respectively), former Hodder author Anthony Sampson (The Anatomy of Britain ) has also taken his next book to HarperCollins.
On the basis of a synopsis of Company Man , an account of ‘the evolution of the social phenomenon of the 20th century’, Michael Sissons received three bids at the same level, from HarperCollins, Heinemann and Random House.
Agent and author chose HC.
The book will examine the industrial changes that influenced the separate development of ‘company men’ in America, Europe and Asia — men who now find themselves in competition with each other.
Sampson's editor is Richard Johnson, and delivery will be in August 1994 for publication in 1995.
HarperCollins has also secured a further two-book contract with American romantic novelist La Vyrle Spencer , described by Jonathan Lloyd as ‘the new Danielle Steel — a major Putnam author already very successful in the US’.
The two new books will be published in early 1994 (Family Blessings ) and 1995.
Meanwhile, Spencer is coming to England for a tour in May to promote two earlier books,November of the Heart (hardback) and the paperback of Bygones .
Her editor is Imogen Taylor, and her agent Caradoc King at A P Watt.
Lloyd describes her books as ‘wonderful, moving stuff: she is one of the few authors to have made John Booth cry.’
What do you do after you've written a biography of Christ?
A N Wilson is settling for the Royal Family.
Christopher Sinclair-Stevenson commissioned the project.
Giles Gordon has sold two thrillers by ex- Mirror editor Mike Malloy to Caroline Upcher at Sinclair-Stevenson, who has already published Sweet Sixteen and is about to publish his Cat's Paw .
The new books feature the same detective, Sarah Keane, and are set in a newspaper office ‘not a million miles away from the Mirror ’, according to Gordon.
The first of the new novels,Home Before Dark , will appear in May 1994.
And Gordon has done his first deal with his wife Maggie McKernan.
The young Irish writer Colum McCann won last year's Hennessy award, and now Maggie McKernan has bought his first book of short stories for Orion's Phoenix House imprint for publication in the autumn.
Finally, some overseas deals.
Mary Clemmey has sold American rights excluding Canada in Ray Shell ‘s Diary of a Crack Addict (published here by HarperCollins) to Random House US, and German rights to Droemer for DM100,000.
Carole Blake reports that ‘Best of Young British’ author Lawrence Norfolk ‘s Lemprière's Dictionary has now sold to 16 countries, is in the bestseller lists in Austria, and has sold over 100,000 hardback copies in Germany — where, I read in the papers, rival translators have misguidedly complained that the (intentionally) quirky use of language is not translated into good German.
And fresh from selling Scott Turow ‘s Pleading Guilty to Viking/Penguin, Bill Hamilton of A M Heath was busy before Christmas with several big American deals.
He sold intelligence specialist Christopher Andrew ‘s book on American Presidents and secret intelligence (published here by HarperCollins) to HarperCollins in the US for six figures, and Anne McClintock ‘s Woman and the Sex Industry (published here by Cape), also for six figures, to Little, Brown US.
And, for a lesser sum,Richard Davenport Hines ‘s biography of W H Auden (bought by Heinemann here) went at auction to Pantheon.
Nicolette Jones 
CRITICS CROWNER
How to shoot the young idea
It may not be strictly within my remit, but I am fascinated by the amount of space that is being lavished, particularly by the Sunday Times , on the new list of ‘The Best of Young British Novelists’.
The ST started off with a rubbishing piece by the paper's acting literary editor, Harry Ritchie, which was followed by protesting letters and the main feature in last week's Books supplement.
The first piece has been countered, in the Independent on Sunday , by a defensive piece written by Salman Rushdie, one of the selectors of the list, and a rather world-weary essay in the Observer by Andrew Motion.
Ten years is a long time in the world of books, but I do remember there was not nearly such a fuss over the original 1983 list: a rather uncomfortable party in some medical establishment, a few diary paragraphs and that was it.
And it produced nothing like the furore that the almost contemporary list of ‘Great British Novelists’ did.
But then that managed to omit the names of Anthony Powell and Angus Wilson.
Not enough young young
As I understand it, the Sunday Times is not objecting, primarily, to the fact that people have been left out, but that there were not sufficient young (meaning under 40) novelists to include and that there was too much emphasis on the rather elderly young like Ben Okri, Kazuo Ishiguro and Iain Banks, who are well enough established.
And, of course, the fact that Jeanette Winterson had picked her own novel as her ‘Book of the Year’ had to be dragged up again.
I wonder if this fundamentally unimportant fact will linger as long in any mention of her as did the pillorying of Anthony Burgess as ‘The Man Who Reviewed His Own Book’ some 30 years ago.
Nick Hornby (‘Mine is the generation that was terrified of the Daleks and fell in love with Valerie Singleton’) carried on the Sunday Times sniping last week: ‘It could well be that my generation is about to burst into spectacular, awe-inspiring literary life; perhaps this year we will be reading scores of novels as dazzling as London Fields or A History of the World in 10½ Chapters , all written by men and women born after Elvis’ first number one.
At the moment, though, one has to say this looks unlikely…
Maybe we just aren't as clever as people used to be; maybe the Nintendo Gameboy and daytime television (both, significantly, introduced in the past six or seven years) have ruined thousands of careers, not just my own.’
No danger from Gameboys
All that is verging on the silly: as one who can remember Andy Pandy and the ravishing girl who read ‘Picture Book’, the fact that daytime television arrived in the last six or seven years seems rather  insignificant .
And how many potentially great novelists, over the age of 12, fumble with Gameboys?
(Perhaps I should re-phrase that.)
Anyway, it was the sort of remark that provoked Salman Rushdie's wrath in the Independent on Sunday : ‘To see so diverse a list dumped on people who simply haven't read the books is to make one feel a kind of despair about the culture of denigration in which we live.
Can't we be fair-minded enough to give these books, these writers a chance?
Can't we even lit them have their 15 minutes in the spotlight before we start thrashing them?’
Well, not too high-candle power spotlight, if we are to believe Andrew Morton (Observer ): ‘The organisers will pretend to be exasperated by belly-achings, but they'll be pleased.
Any debate will persuade them they're whipping up interest in fiction.
Yet if newspapers are anything to go by, not much seems to have happened since the list was announced.’
Obviously Mr Morton does not read the Sunday Times .
Perhaps the last word should be left to the acerbic ‘DS’ in the TLS : ‘The desperation of this roster — some of the writers have yet to publish their first novels — is self-evident.
The list might tactfully have been reduced by five or the age-limit raised to 60.’
Scars of war
Much of last week's fiction space was given to a novelist who, to judge by his picture, certainly will not see 40 again, Louis Begley.
His second novel is The Man Who Was Late (Macmillan).
Penny Perrick (Sunday Times ) told us: ‘In Louis Begley's second novel, as in his first,Wartime Lies , the protagonist is a man convinced that his life can be made bearable only by willing away his terrible past.
Ben…is a brilliant merchant banker, whose childhood in occupied Europe has scarred him with the legacy of an ‘existential tardiness’; he recoils from everything in life that demands a heady recklessness, and is doomed to live ‘without hope in desire’.’
That was fair enough, though I am doubtful of being ‘scarred’ by a ‘legacy’.
By the end, Miss Perrick was at her squeakiest: ‘Begley writes with an acute, mocking humour and nudges the English language, which is not his mother tongue, into unexpected shapes and entrancing flips, such as the ‘creamy fog in orderly rolls like barbed wire’.’
Well, whatever turns you on.
I suppose almost anything can when you have been ‘nudged’ into an ‘entrancing flip’.
Somebody called John Hawley reviewed the novel for the Times , and he was rather sniffy: ‘Begley is clearly after something more than entertainment here: he wants to write The Great Gatsby .
Unfortunately, that has already been done and more simply.
The novel itself, and not just its protagonist, is late.
 Worldly-wise and diverting in its tendency to offer a recipe for faijoada completa and the protocol for French deer hunting within a few paragraphs, the novel poses the same difficulty that plagues the protagonist: as we Americans put it, we miss the forest for the trees.’
Or as we English put it rather more euphoniously: the wood for the trees.
Perhaps, by the way, Americans can manage to hunt French deer within a few paragraphs; others prefer a rather larger area.
The English, or perhaps Welsh, David Hughes told Mail on Sunday readers: ‘Like his hero, Begley is a man who fears his breed is dead.
In mesmerising prose, he has composed a appreciative, but depressing elegy to the civilised life.’
Extraordinary omission
Paul Bailey may have enjoyed the novel, but he never got around to saying so.
In half a column in the Daily Telegraph he examined the plot and decorated his review with a reference to a Victorian poem but, although he called Mr Begley's first novel ‘extraordinary’(which could mean almost anything: one hopes that both the best and the worst books in the world are ‘extraordinary’), he made no comment on the worth of the later one.
If this omission was not the fault of some over-zealous sub-editor, them Mr Bailey ought to be ashamed of himself.
There should be an agreement among literary editors, not to employ Kingsley Amis to review any book dealing with humour.
His old ‘misery-guts’ routine is becoming very boring.
Mistakenly, the Mail on Sunday gave the old buffer The Penguin Book of British Comic Writing edited by Patricia Craig (Viking).
Snobs and sneers
‘All the contributions,’ he told us, ‘come from the present century, starting with Max Beerbohm.
Which is a pity, according to me, never having found Max's prose works funny…
One of the longest pieces is taken from The Thirties , Malcolm Muggeridge's over-rated chronicle, short on detail, long on a relentlessly ironical sense of superiority.
Evelyn Waugh is at his most snobbish worst.
Claud Cockburn sneers at the forgotten bestselling novelist W J Locke.
Arthur Marshall facetiously reviews dozens of schoolgirls books.’
And so on.
But then it is all explained in the last paragraph, where Sir Kingsley gives his highest praise to Clive James, for heaven's sake.
Clearly, there is hope for the man.
Quentin Oates 
BENT'S NOTES
A new breed of Who
Alex Hamilton's paperback bestseller list of 1992, published last week in these pages and in the Guardian , showed Transworld as the leading publisher of the top 100 titles, with 19 titles on the list.
HarperCollins came next, with 18.
(Last year, the HarperCollins imprints Fontana and Grafton accounted for 19 titles in the top 100; Transworld had 16).
Next came Random Century (Arrow/Vintage/Rowan) with 15, followed by Pan with 13, Penguin with 8, Hodder with 7, Headline and Warner with 6 each and Reed with 5.
I am grateful to Transworld for the following, fascinating figures, which the company in its moment of triumph was no doubt eager to compile.
Transworld has added up the units on the list for home and export sales.
In the home market, it led the field by a long way, with 4,337,487 units sold; Pan came next, with 2,181,514.
As a percentage of the total units, Transworld sold an impressive 29.14%; Pan sold 14.79%.
In export sales, Collins led with 1,609,788 units, or 20.75% of the market; Pan was next, with 1,576,640 (20.32%); Transworld was third, with 1,530,269 (19.73%).
Part of the background to these figures is Transworld's huge successes with Jilly Cooper, Catherine Cookson and Joanna Trollope, authors who are much stronger in the home market than overseas (though Jilly Cooper's export sales are increasing).
The company had more titles at higher levels than did other publishers.
Scoring 100 points for number one on the list, 99 for number two and so on, Transworld got 1,199 points; Pan, in second place, got 893.
An enchanting list emanates from the publisher of WHO'S WHO to promote the 1993 edition.
The usual recreations to be found tacked onto entries make for such tedious reading: walking, Wagner and golf.
Now a new breed of Who seems to be breaking through.
Under recreation Noel Ernest Ackroyd Moore lists ‘pricing books for the local Oxfam shop’; Natalie Wheen ‘windsurfing, women's issues, whisky, laughter, anarchy’; Joanna Trollope ‘very long baths’; Anthony Wright ‘attempting to make coffee that tastes as good as it smells’.
The list helpfully annotates entries with relevant information in square brackets.
For example Sir Anthony Gray ‘planchette, trampoline [Sir Anthony was born in 1917]’, by which I assume that trampolining at 75 is something of an achievement; likewise Ivor Ottervein Smith ‘aerobics [Mr Smith was born in 1907]’.
What, I wonder, should I make of Brian Hitchen ‘thinking about writing the Great British Novel [Mr Hitchen is editor of the DAILY STAR]’?
Perhaps the Publishers Publicity Circle should introduce a new category of award: most publicity for least accessible title.
No on in 1993 is likely to top the achievement of Alistair Layzell, who last week got widespread press and radio coverage for the Biblia Pauperum (Pauper's Bible), a facsimile retailing at £2,600 — a price that makes one wonder what the rich person's version would cost.
The original Biblia Pauperum is an illuminated manuscript of Old and New Testament scenes produced in the 14th century for the Dutch court and now held in the British Library.
Faksimile Verlag of Lucerne, which published the facsimile of the Book of Kells , has reproduced the ms in 11 colours, even printing the backs of pages to recreate the showthrough on the original vellum.
It does not sound like an essential buy for every reader of the Evening Standard , which last Thursday devoted a full page to the facsimile.
Nevertheless, Alistair tells me that Faksimile Verlag is confident that its 980 copies will be bought soon.
It must be rare for a publishing house to be sent a manuscript twice after an interval of 62 years.
In July 1931 the then chairman of A & C Black, Adam Black, turned down an English translation of The Quatrain of Omar Khayyam by a retired Colonel of the Indian Army as he did not feel it was a commercial proposition.
Sixty-two years later Charles Black, Adam's grandson and current chairman, has been sent the same manuscript (which incidentally has survived a direct hit by a flying bomb in the Second World War) by a descendant of the colonel who has taken up the search for a publisher.
Let's hope the ms strikes lucky this time, otherwise this could go on for generations.
Horace Bent 