

Heavenly Father,
We pray for Your world and particularly for those places where Your will is being ignored.
Lord, your will is for peace — we pray for peoples and nations which try to use force; we pray for the Gulf, for Liberia, for South Africa, for Northern Ireland.
We pray for your guidance on leaders, and your hand of comfort on the innocent people caught up in conflict.
Lord, your will is for truth; we pray for the forces of justice who work to eliminate lying and corruption from this land and the world.
Lord, your will is that the world's resources should be shared by all men; we pray against greed and selfishness in the use of resources, and especially pray for your guiding hand on relief efforts along the Iraqi-Jordanian border.
Lord, we are called by your Son's name.
Help us to pray, ‘your will be done’ in the world this week.
In Jesus' name, Amen.
Let us pray for the church and for the world, and let us thank God for His goodness.
In addition to the normal responses, we will use the response ‘Alleluia’ when I say ‘We thank you heavenly Father’.
Father, we thank you for those who lead the church throughout the world, as its shepherds and pastors.
We thank you especially for the witness of Archbishop Runcie and pray for him and for Bishop Carey as they transfer responsibility under your guiding hand.
We thank you for those who have ministered your word to the church of St Leonard's during the weeks when we have been meeting in the School for the Deaf; so we thank you for John, Alan and Emily, for the readers and for those chaplains and ministers who worship with us.
‘We thank you heavenly Father’‘Alleluia’.
We pray for the next generation of ministers in the church and ask that you will be raising up men and women who are prepared to take pastoral responsibility for your people, as missionaries and as ministers.
Especially we pray for Lakshmi and for John Fisher as they prepare for their ACCM selection conferences.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer.
Father, we thank you for those you have placed in posts of responsibility in the governments of the world and of our nation.
We thank you for those in Exeter who have granted permission for the work that has been done on this church building, and for the help that has been given towards the planning of the new building.
‘We thank you heavenly Father’‘Alleluia’.
We are very conscious, Lord, of the tensions in your world between the nations and within the nations.
So we pray for peace; we pray for peace in the Gulf War, and ask that your guiding hand may direct the actions of all those involved.
We name President Saddam Hussain before you, Senor Peres de Quelyia, President George Bush and Prime Minister John Major.
We also pray for peace in the Baltic states and in Northern Ireland.
And we pray for the refugees of our world, asking that those who have the power and ability to help may have the resources and will to provide food, clothing, shelter and a permanent home.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer.
Father, we are thankful for the work that has been completed on the church building and we rejoice at the skills and abilities that have made it possible.
We praise you for the way that you have assigned these to the craftsmen of all kinds who have been involved.
We thank you for those who were involved in the preservation of the church, and for our fellow Christians who have given so generously of themselves and their resources to make the work possible.
‘We thank you heavenly Father’‘Alleluia’.
We remember that the church is not a building, but a family, a body of redeemed men and women who follow Jesus.
We pray that you will strengthen your church in this parish and throughout the world to be more faithful in its witness.
Help us to understand and appreciate more deeply all that the resurrection of our Saviour means, and may we show in our lives the joy which belief in Jesus' promise means; help us to live so that we draw others to meet Jesus for themselves.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer.
Father, we thank you that you continue to work in the lives of our fellow believers, restoring health and strength to the sick, comforting those who are sad, supporting those who are lonely.
Thank you for the everyday experience that Jesus is alive in us today.
‘We thank you heavenly Father’‘Alleluia’.
We pray for those from the church family who have been unable to join in the services of thanksgiving today.
We pray for those who are unwell; for those who have sick relatives and have been caring for them; for those who are housebound, or are reluctant to come out of their homes; for those who have had to work today; for students away on courses; for those who are away from Exeter today.
We thank you that they
Heavenly Father,
We pray for Your world and particularly for those places where Your will is being ignored.
Lord, your will is for peace — we pray for peoples and nations which try to use force; we pray for Yugoslavia, for South Africa, for Northern Ireland.
We pray for your guidance on leaders, and your hand of comfort on the innocent people caught up in conflict.
Lord, your will is for truth; we pray for the forces of justice who work to eliminate lying and corruption from this land and the world.
Lord, your will is that the world's resources should be shared by all men; we pray against greed and selfishness in the use of resources, and especially pray for your guiding hand on relief efforts in the famine areas of Africa.
Lord, we are called by your Son's name.
Help us to pray, ‘your will be done’ in the world this week.
In Jesus' name, Amen .
Father, you know that we have many links with your people in other lands through those that you have called from this congregation to serve you overseas.
we pray for those who are working in other churches in other parts of the world today.
For Chris and Alison Hawksbee, in Argentina, ministering through agricultural training;
For Roger and Jos Sharland, serving the independent churches in Africa.
For David Sharland in Zaire, and for wisdom for the mission as there is so much tension in that country.
For Robert and Clarysly Deller in Malaysia.
For Pedro and Linda Garcia, preparing for their church's Christmas witness in France.
Lord, we know that you guide the ways of all your servants, but we want especially to commend these people to you, that they may experience a special measure of your support and may know that the Holy Spirit is building the unity of the church in the places to which you have called them.
We ask that your name may glorified and Your kingdom extended through the work of these witnesses.
In the name of Jesus
Amen
Almighty God, in the name of Jesus your son, who healed the sick and consoled the sad, we pray for all who suffer
through sickness of body or mind,
through fear or depression,
through loneliness or bereavement, and we ask that according to your will they may be healed and comforted, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen
Heavenly Father, we pray for the talks about peace in the Middle East.
We pray for the representatives of each nation present in Madrid, and especially for those who lead and speak in the meetings.
May each one have clarity of mind, honesty of speech and a willingness to rise above stereotyped ideas and seek a lasting peace.
We pray for those who are caught up in the human side of the conflict; for those in camps, held as hostage, deprived of their homes, taken away from their work.
Father, we cry to You, the Just Lord, for justice for those denied justice.
In the name of the prince of peace
Amen
Father, You are lord of the church and we acknowledge that you are lord of St Leonard's.
We pray for our unity as a church.
Make us more of a church family, Lord, binding us closer to you and to one another.
Help us to become more aware of the needs, the joys and the sorrows of our brothers here.
Make us more of a church body, Lord, using the gifts that you have given us in service for you and for one another, and learning form one another in humility.
Make us more of a church of soldiers, Lord, equipped by the Holy Spirit for Christian service and daily battle.
We pray for those in the church who face particularly demanding work and support our fellow-soldiers in prayer.
Finally, Lord, we pray that we may be transformed more and more into the likeness and nature of the bride of Christ; cleanse us from all that is not pure, and help us all to walk in ways that are holy.
For your glory's sake Amen
Let us pray for the church and for the world and let us thank God for His goodness
Almighty God, our heavenly father, you promised through your Son Jesus Christ to hear us when we pray in faith
We thank you, Lord, for those that You have gifted to be teachers of your Word and ministers in Your church.
Thank you for those who serve in this congregation and parish; the clergy, the lay readers, the teachers of the young people in the church family, the leaders of home groups.
Thank you too, for the work of theological colleges and their staff, and for those who arrange training events and courses in Exeter.
We pray, Lord, for those whose calling is to be servants of Your people as shepherds, pastors and teachers.
We ask, Lord, that they may have the grace and humility which their work requires, and that they may be able to walk closely with you, day by day.
We would pray for those who are in training and especially for those who will be ordained in your church this summer.
As you equip such men and women, Lord, we pray that the Holy Spirit may be  channelled through then to equip the whole church in the service of Christ; that those who confess your name may be united in your truth, live together in your love and reveal your glory in the world.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
Thank You, Lord, that You are Lord of Lords and King of Kings.
We rejoice that the affairs of the nations are secure in your keeping; that the Holy Spirit is directing the ways of leaders of governments, leaders of commerce, the professions, industry and the unions.
Thank you, Lord, that you control the work of public and private industry as it affects us day by day, in our homes, in our neighbourhoods, at work.
We pray for Your world and think of the news items that have been headlines in the last few days.
We pray for the leaders of our nation, that you will give them wisdom in providing for all, particularly those who are homeless or unemployed.
We pray that the economic affairs of our land may be directed towards justice for all.
We pray for the work of the relief agencies and United Nations as they seek to relieve the famines of Africa.
We go on praying for the release of hostages and prisoners held without a cause; and we pray for peace, and especially for the peace of Jerusalem.
We pray that throughout the world, men may honour one another and seek the common good.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
We thank you, Lord, that you are in control of our households; that Jesus knew the joys and sadnesses of living in a family and in a community of people and families in the same street and town.
So we come to you with confidence that You understand the pressures and delights of daily living with people of all ages.
Help us Lord, to live a hundred percent for you; fill us with the Holy Spirit, and help us to make Jesus the centre of our life and work every day, wherever You have called us to be.
Help us to draw closer to others, in friendship and fellowship, so that as ambassadors for you we may convey Your message to the world today.
We pray especially for those that You have placed in close proximity to us; our relatives; our neighbours; those we meet day by day.
May they see You in us.
Help us to serve Christ in one another, and love as he loves us.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
Thank you, Lord, that You are the great healer of those who suffer in body, mind or spirit.
Than k you that we can bring our concerns for others to you in the confidence that you will hear and act.
So we pray for those we know in the church or parish who mourn the death of a loved one; for those who are ill, or are convalescing after sickness or an operation; for those who have to live with constant weakness or pain; for those who are anxious about the health of a loved one, particularly mothers anxious about children.
We ask for wisdom of action
Lord God, you want the well-being of men
and not their destruction.
Take all violence from our midst
and extinguish hatred in our hearts.
Curb the passion in us
that makes us seek to destroy life.
Give peace on earth,
to us and to all mankind.
We ask this through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen
Father and King,
We pray to you for the quiet mind,
Which, in the midst of hurry and turmoil,
Can at any time turn directly to You,
And be immediately at peace.
We pray to you for the enlightened imagination,
Which gazes through form and delusion to reality,
Perceiving unerringly, with Your insight,
Those eternal truths of the spirit
That lie beyond the temporary scenery of the world.
We pray to you for the mastered will,
Which attunes us spontaneously to Your will,
We pray to you for the life which is hid in You,
The life which demands nothing for itself,
But is wholly content with showing You to others.
We pray to you for the stalwart faith,
Which gives to us, while we live in Your created world,
The facts and substance of eternal life
In a reality far beyond all other reality
And in a knowledge far beyond that of our senses.
We pray for ourselves and one another,
In the name of Jesus,
Amen
We praise you, O God, that the light of Christ shines amidst the darkness of our world and that the darkness has not overcome it; and we pray that his light may shine more and more into our own lives, illuminating our minds with the knowledge of the truth and enabling us to walk in the way of holiness and love; through the same Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen
Let us pray for all who suffer as a result of war:
for the injured and disabled,
for the mentally distressed,
and for those whose faith in God and in man has been weakened or destroyed…
for the homeless and refugees,
for those who are hungry,
and for all those who have lost their livelihood and security…
for those who mourn their dead,
for those who have lost husband or wife, children or parents,
and especially those who have no faith in God to sustain them in their grief…
Almighty God, our heavenly Father, infinite in wisdom, love and power: have compassion on those for whom we pray; and help us to use all suffering in the cause of your kingdom, through him who gave himself for us on the cross, Jesus Christ, Your Son and our Lord,
Amen
O God our father, we pray for those who are serving our country and the United Nations as soldiers, sailors and airmen.
Grant that meeting danger with courage, and all occasions with discipline and loyalty, they may truly serve the cause of justice and of peace, for the honour of your name,
Amen
Eternal God, we rejoice in your promise that as our day is, so shall our strength be; and we ask for your help for all who are old and wearied with the burden of life.
In your strength may they find courage and peace; and in their advancing years, may they learn more of your love; through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen
We pray for the church, for all who are followers of Christ; O God, we pray for the work of the province of Jerusalem and the Middle East, and for this Diocese; for Samir Kafity, our Bishop, for the Cathedral, for St George's College, and for the many parishes throughout this province.
And we pray for our home parishes.
We ask that You will be with the many who hear Your call to serve, to heal and to witness.
Open our eyes to see Your glory, open our hearts to receive Your love, open our minds to discern Your purposes, quicken our feet to go for You, loosen our tongues to speak for You, open our hands to give for You, and so take care of us Your people who embrace the cross of Your son and desire to move forward in faith in the power of Your Spirit and to the glory of Your name;
Lord, in Your mercy, Hear our prayer.
We pray for the nations of the world; O God, help us to lessen the tensions between nations, so that our many resources and gifts may be diverted to the alleviation of human suffering and injustice, and that we may be better stewards of Your many gifts to us.
We pray for the governments and peoples of eastern Europe as they enter a new era; for Africa, that its peoples may be delivered from fear, oppression and famine, especially in Ethiopia and Sudan; for the Israeli and Palestinian people that they may honour each other and seek the common good;
Lord, in Your mercy, Hear our prayer.
We pray for our brothers and sisters in Judaism and Islam, with whom we live in this land, and with whom we share a common heritage; help us to grow in understanding and appreciation of each other;
Lord, in Your mercy, Hear our prayer.
We pray for those who suffer as prisoners without trial; for hostages, for deported people, for all victims of violence in this land and in the countries from which we come; may they be comforted and delivered;
Lord, in Your mercy, Hear our prayer.
We pray for those known to us who are poor, homeless, in prison, those who are hungry, those who are sick, those who we name in our thoughts at this time; O God, be with those for whom we pray at this time; comfort and deliver them from their suffering; strengthen them and be with them;
Lord, in Your mercy, Hear our prayer.
We pray for pilgrims, those who are here, those who are with us through radio transmission, for all who in life's pilgrimage seek to follow Jesus; help us to follow Jesus, and with Your help be triumphant; grant us the wisdom to know and the courage to do Your will.
Amen
Let us pray for the church and for the world and let us thank God for His goodness
Almighty God, our heavenly father, you promised through your Son Jesus Christ to hear us when we pray in faith
We thank You for Your word, the Bible, and for its relevance to our life today.
Thank you for those who help our understanding of Your word, through preaching, through writing and through sharing in the fellowship of Your church.
We pray for the witness of the church in this decade, the decade of evangelism.
We pray that each member of the church in our land may know the love of God the Father, the strength of God the Holy Spirit and the friendship of God the Son, and be willing to share their faith with those who are not yet followers of our Saviour.
We pray for clear guidance for the leaders of the church, and in particular we pray for archbishops and bishops, as their words are reported by the media.
We pray for the general synod as it meets shortly, for wise decisions and clear leadership.
And we pray for Your servants who have heard your call to serve you in other countries, to help the church to grow across the world.
Strengthen us, Lord, to confess your name, to live together in fellowship, and to show your glory in the world.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
We thank you, Lord, for the daily provision that you make for the world.
We use the words ‘give us this day our daily bread’, and seldom say ‘thank you’ for the ways that we see answers to the prayer.
So we thank you for food, for clothing, for our homes, and for the government that you have set over the world.
We pray for the leaders of the world, in government, in trade and in industry, as they control the sources of employment and guide in decisions about the lives of individuals.
Help them to seek justice and fairness for all, without favouring any group in society.
We pray for peace in your world, Lord.
We have heard in the past week of places where there is no peace; in Iraq, in South Africa, in our own country with sectarian killings in Ulster, and on the borders of Israel and the Lebanon.
We long to see peace; so we pray that you will strengthen those who work for peace, and restrain those who believe that the only solution to violence is more violence.
Father, send the Holy Spirit into the hearts of all leaders, that they may honour one another and seek the common good.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
Thank you, Father, for the fellowship that you want us to enjoy in the church.
Thank you that this is part of the plan for your new creation, and that Jesus is feeding and taking care of the church.
Thank you for the home groups which help us to grow in fellowship.
We pray for the communities in which you have placed us.
Our thoughts are with the circles of family and friends that you have given us, and we pray for those we meet, our neighbours, the people we work with, those we encounter in shops and businesses.
Help us to show your love by our words and actions, each day this week, and help us to be sensitive to their joys and sorrows.
Give us grace to show and to share Jesus with individuals this week, and help us to serve Him in one another, and to love as he loves us.
Lord in your mercy — hear our prayer
Thank you Lord, for hearing our prayers for those who have been ill and are now recovering; thank you for the skills of hospital staff in caring for members of St Leonard's over the past few weeks.
Now we pray for those who are not able to enjoy life to the full, through sickness, and we remember Winifred Andrews, Rob Dellar, Jack Bennett and Louis Muggleton…and keep silence as we bring other friends and relatives to your throne.
We pray for those who mourn, and for those who are sad for any reason.
Lord, may each one know the gentle touch of your restoring hand.
We pray for those who are hurt because they  ar 
We pray for those with examinations:
Lord, we pray for those who face examinations soon, that they may have Your help.
They need a calm mind — Lord grant them Your peace;
They need a clear head — Lord grant them Your wisdom;
They need to write carefully and think carefully — Lord grant them Your patience;
They need to be inspired — Lord grant them Your enthusiasm;
Keep them from all panic as they put their trust in your power to keep.
Amen.
Lord Jesus, Lord of creation, we pray for our world and its leaders.
We pray first for our own country, and ask your blessing on those who lead us; we pray for Elizabeth our queen, that You will bless and guide her in all her responsibilities in this land and in the Commonwealth; we pray for the Prime Minister and all his cabinet, that they may have your wisdom in the government of the country; we pray for the leaders of the nations, and especially for areas where there is strife.
So we commit to you the divided land of Yugoslavia, the territories occupied by Israel and the troubled province of Northern Ireland.
Lord Jesus, we cry to You that You will bring peace to those who use force to try to gain their selfish way; use Your people to be peacemakers; help us to work and pray for a world where You will be King.
For Your Name's sake,
Amen
Saviour Christ, You died and rose for us; help us as individuals and as a church to be channels for the gospel in our families, among our friends and acquaintances and with those that You bring into our lives.
Give us the words to share the good news over all the earth, today and in the coming weeks; change our lives so that other people can see that You are Lord of our lives, and may be attracted to You.
We pray for those who have been called to serve you full-time, and in particular we pray for the Christian workers in the city of Exeter.
So we commit our clergy, John and Alan to you, along with Tim and Margaret in their responsibilities.
We pray for the clergy associated with us; for Ian at St Aubyn's School, for Gill, ministering to the deaf community; for Bill at the Prison; for David at Mercer House; for Richard and Phillip, chaplains to the university; for Howard as he prepares to come to be curate here.
Fill each one with Your Holy Spirit, O Saviour, that their teaching and life may lead others to know You for themselves.
For the sake of Your Kingdom,
Amen.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the help of the helpless and companion of the lonely; we ask You to bless all those from our family who are unable to leave their homes or to join in public worship.
Grant that they may always be confident of your presence with them and of their oneness with the whole family of Your church; and grant that with one mind and one voice we may all worship You, O Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, reigns for evermore.
Amen
We pray for those who are involved with the plans for our new church building:
Heavenly father, we praise you as the living God and thank you that you have called us to look to the growth of your church in this parish; we thank you for those who have worked to help plan the proposed church building; we especially pray for John Taylor, our architect, and the city council planners and planning committee.
Father, we ask that Your will be done, both in the building plans and in the teaching programme of St Leonard's so that the church family may grow in grace and knowledge of You.
For Jesus' sake
Amen
We pray for those who are involved with drug-taking in Exeter;
Lord Jesus Christ, you have promised perfect liberty to those who trust you; we cry to you for those who are at this moment enslaved by their need to take drugs.
We pray that you will raise up men and women with the skills to assist them, and give them the care that they need.
Turn back those young people who have already begun the drift towards addiction;
Support the families of addicts, that they may find peace in You;
And for those for whom treatment has come too late, grant your mercy, the awareness of sin, the awareness of yourself, and peace at the last.
In Your name we pray.
Amen
Lord, we thank you for the hospice movement, and especially for the work of Hospiscare in Exeter and the surrounding area.
We pray for your blessing on the work of the hospices; we ask you to guide all those who administer them; to give wisdom to those who work as  counsellors of patients and their families; to encourage the volunteers who support families; to grant patience and gentleness to those who nurse the sick and dying.
May all be ready to bring quietness, peace and preparation for the life to come to those in their care.
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen
The world is in turmoil with civil strife and stress; as Christ's followers, we have been called to be peacemakers, and so we pray for peace in God's world.
Lord of the world, we pray for peace in Your world.
Our minds turn to those areas which the media presents to us. day by day, and we pray for peace there.
So we pray for peace between the factions in what used to be Yugoslavia.
We ask that You, Lord, will stay the hands of those who use violence against their fellows, in fighting, amongst the prisoners, and in camps.
We ask Lord, that You will restrain the leaders, President Milosevic, President Tudjman and President Izetbegovic in their desire for power.
We pray for the efforts to bring peace, and ask for wisdom for Lord Carrington and Dr Boutros-Gahli.
We pray for an end to strife in Somalia, and for You to help the food and medicine to be brought to those who need it.
Guide those who have the responsibility of transport.
And where the love of man has failed, we pray that Your Divine compassion may bring relief.
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen
Father we pray for Alan and Gaynor Stevens, and their family as they are prepared by You to serve in Rugby.
We ask that through Your wisdom, Alan may be to his new church:
a true shepherd;
a man of God;
a teacher of Your word;
and a minister of Jesus Christ.
We pray that Gaynor may be free to minister to neighbours and to others in the congregation, and we pray that the children may make friends quickly and settle to their new surroundings.
And we pray that You will prepare the Christians there for Alan's induction, making it a body which is joyful in worship, and united in witness, working, caring, praising and loving, to the glory of Your Name.
We pray this for the sake of Your Kingdom.
Amen
We pray for Rob and Wendy Wilkinson, O Lord, as You prepare them to move to Oxford to train for ministry in Your church.
We ask that You will help them to face the changes in their home, their way of life, and their surroundings.
We ask that they may know of your daily provision of all kinds of needs, and especially for Rob's studies, that he may be able to learn and think with Your mind at all times.
For Jesus' sake
Amen
Our prayers this morning concentrated on this part of God's church.
Tonight, we look outwards, and pray for God's work in other parts of the world.
First, it is our duty and our joy to pray for our queen and the government of this country.
Lord of the nations, we pray for our Queen and all her family.
We ask that You will guide her in all her work as a leader of our nation and the Commonwealth, and that you will bless her in the life of her home and family.
We pray for those who follow a political calling in our land, in parliament and in local government.
Strengthen them in the burden of the responsibility that we have placed upon them.
Guide those who shape the decisions of government that they may plan for the good of all society, and not set neighbour against neighbour, class against class, region against region.
Encourage all those who act as advocates for the oppressed within our society and who seek to channel political power into the cause of justice for everyone.
And support us as we live as responsible citizens of this city and nation.
In Jesus' Name, Amen
We pray for peace in the world.
Lord, you are the source of peace; we cry to You for peace in our world; daily we see and hear of strife within nations, of tensions between states, of violence being done by men against men; we are sad Lord, and know that You are sad too.
So we pray for the leaders of the nations, and especially those whose words influence and incite strife.
We ask that they may have the wisdom to know and the courage to do what is right.
We pray for men and women in lands where there is hatred of one group for another, that their hearts may be turned to yourself in the search for righteousness and truth.
We pray for those who are seeking to bring peace, in Yugoslavia, in the Middle East, in South Africa, in Northern Ireland, that they may find a way to true and lasting reconciliation.
And we pray for ourselves, that we may be peacemakers in the world that Jesus came to save, in whose name we pray, Amen
We pray for the people of the United States of America, as they elect a president.
Father, You know the power and influence that the leaders of the United States carry in the world.
So we pray particularly for the forthcoming election, that the man of your choosing may be elected, and that the government of that nation may seek justice, peace and righteousness.
We ask that you will guide the electors in their voting, not just for the president, but in all the other elections which happen at the same time, that Your will may be done there.
For Jesus' sake, Amen
We pray for the church throughout the world.
Lord of the church, we remember that we are members of a worldwide family, Your church.
We pray for those of our brothers who are denied freedom of worship, and for those who suffer imprisonment because they have committed their lives to follow Jesus.
We pray for our brothers in other parts of the family who struggle against injustice, and who serve you in societies where there is violence and oppression; may they be filled with your wisdom in the battle against inhumanity.
We pray for our brothers in the developing world, those for whom hunger and disease are daily realities, those who feel powerless to change the ways of nature or the ways of nations; bring nearer, O Lord, the day of their deliverance.
We pray for ourselves, that You will never allow us to be complacent and forget our brothers, as we pray in the name of their Saviour and ours, Amen
We pray for the growth of the church, for evangelists and missionaries, and we remember those who have gone from our church to serve overseas.
Father, we pray for all whose calling is to preach the gospel.
Thank you for all who work to build up you r church through their words, through their lives of holiness, and their radiant living.
Help those who seek to communicate the gospel, in words, in pictures, in books, on radio, television and films; give them the help of your Holy Spirit, so that they may convey the message of hope and new life to the hearts and the minds of those who hear, who read, who watch.
And Father, we have that same calling.
Take our lips and speak through them, take our lives and purify them, so that we too may be faithful witnesses to the truth which has set us free.
In our Saviour's Name, Amen
We pledge ourselves to God for His work at St Leonard's
Lord God, as we set about this work, we ask that you will lead us step by step.
Help us to see with your eyes.
Help us to listen with your ears.
Help us to think about what we are doing in the world.
Guide us to recognise how great are your resources, and inspire us to put your plans into action.
Lord, for your sake, and not for the sake of those around us, may we not falter nor make empty plans but work to share your love and grace.
Amen
At the start of a New Year, many national and political leaders have expressed their desire for peace throughout the world in 1993.
As Christians, we have the privilege of serving the Prince of Peace, and we have the responsibility to be peacemakers.
Our prayers will centre around the privilege, and the responsibility.
Father God, thank You that You are the God of Peace.
Thank You that the United States and Russia have signed a further peace treaty today, and thank you that there are continuing efforts by the United Nations and European Community to bring peace to the Yugoslav territories.
We pray for these and other peace efforts.
Father, we long that there may be peace in every nation, and between every nation.
So we pray that you will guide the efforts of the United Nations, and of national leaders, to work for peace.
We pray that you will restrain those who stir up hatred within nations, whether for reasons of colour, or class, or creed, or tribe.
We long for peace:
in Northern Ireland,
in the Middle East.
in Yugoslavia,
in Somalia and the Sudan,
within India and Sri Lanka,
in South Africa.
God of Peace, we pray that the coming year may be a year of increasing peace throughout your world.
In the name of the Prince of Peace.
Amen.
Father God, We are conscious of many tensions within our own society, particularly at this time of recession and high unemployment.
We pray that in the coming year, this nation may know increasingly, your peace in economic and social affairs.
We pray for those who are angry or bitter because they feel unwanted or marginalised in our society.
Lord, may they know your peace.
We pray for those who are frustrated in their search for work and employment.
Lord, may they know your peaceful guidance and your calming touch.
We pray for those who have work, but find it a pressure and a source of stress.
Lord, fill them with your peace.
And we pray for those who have the responsibility of leadership in society and industry, that through knowledge of your will and your peace, they may find a just and fair way forward from the current economic gloom.
God of peace, we pray for our nation, in the name of the Prince of Peace.
Amen.
Father God, We pray for Peace within Your church throughout the world.
We know that you are sad to see so many disputes between different parts of your family and we cry to you for unity and harmony between brothers and sisters.
We pray that you will protect your people from squabbles, over matters which are not relevant to your commission of preaching and teaching the gospel throughout the world, so that in this decade of evangelism, your church may be united and strengthened, and not divided and weakened.
Yet we are aware that in the family there are differences of emphasis and interpretation, and that these can harm the fellowship.
So we pray for those who are battered and bruised because of such differences, and we ask that each one may know your touch of peace.
We pray that your body on earth may be a healing body, praying and working so that the church is united in your service.
God of peace, we pray for the church, in the name of the Prince of Peace.
Amen.
Father God, We pray for those who are sick or sad, especially at this holiday period when there is so much stress on celebration and jubilation.
We pray for those who are ill, or are recovering from illness, especially for Jim Jackson and Doreen Parris.
We pray for those who are confined to their homes for long periods.
We pray for those who are sad because it has been the first Christmas without a loved one, and who grieve with their memories.
Lord, our thoughts turn to our friends who have burdens of sadness or sickness, and we pray that you will bring them your peace.
We pray too for the homeless of our nation, and pray for a way out from the spiral of poverty and deprivation that confronts many today.
Guide those who are working to bring practical care in our city and our land, and we pray that you will bring peace to those who cannot find it in our society.
God of peace, we pray for those who are sad, lonely or unloved, in the name of the Prince of Peace.
Amen.
Father God, Your son Jesus called us to be peacemakers.
Forgive us when we fail in that calling.
Help us to work and pray for peace in your world.
We feel helpless when we see television or newspaper stories about wars, knowing that we cannot influence any of those involved.
Remind us again Lord, that we can pray, and that your sovereignty is greater than any earthly power.
So teach us Lord, in the coming year, to turn our helplessness into prayer, so that we learn to react to the news by seeking your throne.
We feel sad when people we know are not at peace with one another.
We see relationships breaking down between partners in marriage, between the generations of a family, between neighbours and between colleagues at work.
Guide us Lord, to know when to speak and what to say, and fill us with your love that we may be able to act as the bringers of peace to those in desperate need of peace and reconciliation.
Forgive us Lord, when our lives do not display your peace.
Help us to want your peace more and more, and then may we know that your Holy Spirit is bringing peace which overflows to others.
God of peace, we pray for ourselves, in the name of the Prince of Peace.
Amen.