

corporate strategy
Goals
To establish LASMO as the most effective global pure exploration and production company.
To invest in a balanced portfolio of assets with the requirement to maintain total shareholder returns.
To add value to each ordinary share by increasing reserves and cashflow.
Our strategy for achieving these goals is clear:
To maximise the economic return from assets through effective asset management, and by exploiting our strong position in the North Sea and Indonesia — two core businesses in areas of demand growth.
To maintain a high quality exploration portfolio focusing on core business areas and under-explored prospective basins.
To grow our reserves base through exploration and acquisition.
To achieve steady production growth.
To maximise efficiency as an operator.
To maintain a sound financial position.
In implementing our strategy, we aim to:
Operate in an environmentally conscious manner while ensuring safe and secure working conditions for our employees worldwide.
Act with fairness and integrity wherever we do business.
our business
Profile
LASMO is one of the largest independent international oil and gas exploration and production companies in the world.
The acquisition of Ultramar in late 1991 fulfilled a strategic aim to strengthen LASMO1s extensive interests in the North Sea and Indonesia, creating two core businesses to contribute strongly to production and cashflow.
Prior to the Ultramar acquisition, the Company had already assembled an extensive international land portfolio.
With numerous exploration and development opportunities, spread across the globe, LASMO will actively manage its portfolio to concentrate investment in high quality projects with the potential to add significant value.
The enlarged Group provides enhanced opportunities for portfolio rationalisation through sales and asset swaps.
Production, established in nine countries (UK, Indonesia, Gabon, Colombia, Canada, USA, Australia, Italy and Syria), was at 184,200 boepd during the first half of 1992, compared with an average rate of 85,200 boepd for 1991.
The Group's oil and gas reserves position more than doubled through the Ultramar acquisition, reaching over 1.1 billion boe of commercial reserves at the end of 1991.
LASMO directly employs over 1,500 staff worldwide in four regional business units: UK/Netherlands, Indonesia, Asia Pacific/Western and Central.
Its Head Office is in London, UK and there are subsidiary offices in Aberdeen and 13 overseas locations.
Bontang, Indonesia
Pakistan
LASMO as an operator
LASMO is the operator of exploration and development projects in 12 countries around the world.
This enables the Company to manage and control activity levels, to attract and retain top quality staff and to use experience gained in one area in other parts of the world.
LASMO believes that as operator it must take responsibility for the care and protection of the environment and it must ensure that every aspect of its work is carried out in a safe and effective way.
In safety and environmental matters LASMO has established a Group-wide policy and, with support from Head Office, requires a consistent worldwide application of its policies by employees, contractors and sub-contractors.
Successful environmental protection in Indonesian forest areas and in marine conservation areas offshore Australia have received Government commendations.
Management responsibilities are structured to ensure the effective delegation of authority, enabling decisions to be made promptly and efficiently.
Career development is fostered and enhanced by offering assignments to and from overseas locations.
LASMO's policy is to recruit and promote without discrimination, and today employees from seven countries are undertaking foreign assignments within the Group.
With an enthusiastic and dedicated workforce, LASMO has the skills to meet the challenge of exploring for, developing and producing oil, gas and natural gas liquids anywhere in the world.
Our production philosophy requires all operations to be safe, and we apply innovative techniques alongside proven technology.
Operating areas range from the hostile waters of the UK North Sea to the deserts of Pakistan.
By promoting the exchange of ideas and experiences, the lessons learned and technologies applied can be adapted by LASMO engineers to be reapplied and to add value to new ventures.
For instance, floating production and storage techniques employed in Indonesia have been modified and adapted for use offshore Halifax, Nova Scotia where LASMO has achieved Canada's first offshore production.
LASMO's managers and staff are committed to working closely with the Governments of the countries in which it operates.
In many areas, the Company acts as a contractor on behalf of the host Government and has a duty to support and respect this trust.
LASMO aims to conduct its business to the highest possible professional standards.
It is a condition of employment for all staff to sign and strictly adhere to a Code of Business Ethics.
Indonesia
significant milestones
71
Formed by leading London stockbrokers Cazenove & Co.
Initial capital £1.7 million.
74
Shared in the discovery of the Ninian oil field, the third largest in the UK North Sea.
77
Shares listed on London Stock Exchange.
79
Gained initial overseas licence interests in USA and Netherlands through merger with Oil Exploration (Holdings) Limited.
82
Major overseas expansion began with the purchase of international interests of Hudson's Bay Oil and Gas Company from Dome Petroleum.
86
Acquired 29.9 per cent of Enterprise Oil from RTZ in exchange for LASMO shares.
88
Sold Enterprise shareholding for £368 million, a profit of some £200 million.
Doubled interest in the Ninian and Columba oil fields and acquired other UK oil and gas assets.
Assisted RTZ to place their major LASMO shareholding into the market.
89
Acquired Thomson North Sea for £358 million.
90
Assumed sole operatorship of Malacca Strait concession in Indonesia.
91
Acquired Ultramar PLC and its subsidiaries for £1 billion.
Commenced withdrawal from USA.
92
Shares listed on the Toronto and Montreal Stock Exchanges.
Disposal of Ultramar's refining and marketing businesses through IPO of Ultramar Corporation.
operating areas active across the globe
uk/netherlands
OUTLOOK
LASMO is one of the leading North Sea oil producers.
The addition of Ultramar's interests in the UK and Netherlands has contributed towards a 60 per cent increase in net commercial reserves and a 35 per cent increase in net acreage.
The Group now holds interests in 20 fields in production.
A further 13 fields are under development or close to a development decision.
Production from these new projects should lead to an increasing production profile from the North Sea by the mid 1990's.
LASMO is one of the largest holders of gross acreage in the UK North Sea.
Key assets have been identified within this portfolio that are material to the enlarged company and management is dedicated to ensuring that their value is maximised.
There is a concentration of major assets in three areas: Piper and Claymore, Markham and Caister, and the Irish Sea.
The portfolio also contains a number of low equity interests that are peripheral to LASMO's main areas of activity and which are not material to the fortunes of the enlarged Group.
A programme to trade and dispose of these interests in order to concentrate on major projects and significant new opportunities has already commenced.
In May 1992 LASMO agreed to sell all its onshore UK interests.
A number of small offshore interests in the UK and Netherlands have also been sold.
A large exchange of acreage has been agreed with BP which gives LASMO acreage containing gas discoveries adjacent to the Caister and Markham fields.
Staff, LASMO's first North Sea operated offshore development, is producing approximately 10,000 bopd from two subsea wells.
Although it is modest compared with the major producing fields, it has great significance as one of the first of a new generation of small fields to use the processing facilities offered by another field operator.
A second successful appraisal well was drilled on the South Birch field, block 16/12a.
This continued success will help progress the accumulations towards commercial development.
The first well to be drilled on block 44/16, a highly prized award in the 11th Round of UKCS licensing, tested gas at significant flow rates.
Further exploration and appraisal drilling will be necessary to confirm the commercial potential for this discovery.
In April 1992, the UK Department of Energy approved the development of the Caister and Murdoch gas fields in the southern North Sea along with the Caister/Murdoch System (CMS), a new gas gathering and transportation system.
First gas is planned for the end of 1993.
LASMO is now active in The Netherlands where it operates the Markham field which straddles the border between the UK and The Netherlands.
Construction of facilities is nearing completion in readiness to commence production before the end of 1992.
The main platform for the field is located in block J6 in The Netherlands.
In a later phase of development it is planned to install additional production facilities in UK block 49/5a and these will be tied-in to the Markham platform.
To bring the field into production has required the completion of a Treaty between the UK and Dutch governments which was signed in May 1992.
Production from the field will mark the first export of gas from the UK.
indonesia
OUTLOOK
One of the strategic goals of the Ultramar acquisition was to expand the Indonesian operation and gain a presence in the Far East LNG market which LASMO believes offers significant potential.
Indonesia is regarded as a core area, with a key place in the Group's business portfolio.
Through the acquisition, net acreage almost doubled and two PSCs were added; one producing (Sanga-Sanga), the other in the early phase of exploration (Runtu).
LASMO now directly operates threes PSCs (Malacca Strait, Cumi-Cumi and Runtu).
With the addition of Sanga-Sanga, net production increased significantly from 25,200 boepd to 106,400 boepd.
Malacca Strait:Two discoveries in the Selatan field were brought on stream in the second half of 1991.
Production from the PSC is currently just above 40,000 bopd (9,600 bopd net to LASMO).
The natural decline in the Kurau and Melibur fields has been temporarily arrested by successful infill drilling programmes which will be extended into late 1992.
A potentially large structure will be tested by a deep well at Mengkapan in late 1992.
Cumi-Cumi:LASMO's first exploratory well provided useful information to rank other prospects in the area.
Once a review has been completed, the location for another well in 1993 will be chosen.
Kakap:Successful exploration at KRA has established significant commercial quantities of oil and demonstrated the existence of a new play which has considerable potential.
Plans for the development of KRA and the previously discovered KG are under review.
First oil would be produced in late 1994.
Production from the two existing fields, KH and KF, has been stabilised by a combination of workovers, facilities optimisation and a gas injection programme and is currently at 21,000 bopd (4,100 bopd net to LASMO).
South East Sumatra:Production is currently at 180,000 bopd (6,500 net to LASMO), with the major contribution coming from the Widuri field which is producing 100,000 bopd.
A successful programme of infill drilling is being conducted in the older fields.
A new discovery at Adella is being appraised.
Madura Strait:A ‘Declaration of Commerciality’ relating to the MDA and MBD gas fields was submitted to Pertamina in June 1992.
A development plan will be considered once agreement is reached with Pertamina on supply and prices.
Should the development proceed, first gas is expected in early 1996.
Runtu:LASMO acquired the PSC covering this large block as part of the Ultramar acquisition and the area offers exciting exploration possibilities.
Covering nearly 13,000 sq kms, Runtu is almost twice the size of its neighbour, the prolific Sanga-Sanga block and shares a number of similar geological features.
An extensive seismic programme will begin in the second half of 1992 with a view to drilling the first exploration well in late 1993.
Sanga-Sanga:The PSC, awarded in 1968 for a 30 year period, was subsequently extended to the year 2018.
Since the discovery of significant gas reserves, this PSC has been a major source of gas for the LNG export business from the Bontang LNG plant.
Net production averaged 422 mmcfd of gas and 15,900 boepd during the first half of 1992.
The gas is processed at the Badak plant and sent via pipelines 35 miles north to the Bontang LNG plant.
An independent re-certification by DeGolyer & MacNaughton of the gas reserves for all East Kalimantan PSCs was recently completed.
The review resulted in an upward revision of the Sanga-Sanga field's gross initial proved wet gas reserves by over 800 bcf to 12,460 bcf.
Withdrawal from the Fifi Zaitun, Tangerang and Lahat blocks is anticipated once commitments have been fulfilled by the end of 1993.
BONTANG LNG PLANT
The demand for LNG in the Pacific Rim markets is growing strongly and industry commentators predict that by 1999, demand will exceed planned supply capacity.
Indonesia occupies a central role in this market, supplying approximately 50 per cent of Pacific LNG needs.
The Sanga-Sanga PSC currently supplies approximately 60 per cent of all gas to the Bontang LNG plant which in turn supplies 60 per cent of Indonesian LNG exports.
With significant interests in both Sanga-Sanga and Runtu, LASMO is geographically well placed to benefit from the continued exploration of these two areas and to participate in the development of the LNG business in one of the most robust gas markets in the world.
Natural gas produced from the Sanga-Sanga fields is transported to the Bontang plant.
The plant, owned by Pertamina, the Indonesian State Company, is operated by a non-profit making subsidiary, PT Badak, in which the Joint Venture owns 20 per cent.
The LNG plant currently consists of five processing units (trains) having a combined unit capacity of approximately 2.0 billion cubic feet of natural gas per operating day and an output capacity of approximately 338,500 barrels or 79,000 cubic metres of LNG and 17,000 barrels of condensate per day.
Gas production is tied directly to the plant's operating rate which in turn is governed by deliveries to buyers.
During 1991, Bontang exported 197 contracted standard cargoes.
As a result of the impressive production performance of Train E, which commenced operations in 1990, modifications to four other trains are being undertaken.
When this debottlenecking project is completed by year end 1993, production capacity is expected to increase by 12 per cent or 22 cargoes in total.
A sixth train is currently being constructed to produce the LNG required for a contract signed in October 1990 for the sale of 2,020 trillion BTUs over a 20 year period commencing in 1994.
Upon completion of the sixth train, Bontang will be the largest operational LNG plant in the world, with a capacity of 272 cargoes per annum.
LNG produced by the plant is primarily sold under long-term sales contracts to buyers in Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
The sales contracts which are divided into ‘packages’, are executed between Pertamina and the buyers for the sale and delivery of a fixed quantity of LNG at a price that is tied to a basket of crude oil prices.
The Joint Venture and other gas producers in this area have the opportunity to participate in each package of contracts.
The Joint Venture's equity interest in a sales package is based on its share of gas reserves available for commitment to the package.
As a result of a recent upgrade in Sanga-Sanga's reserves, LASMO's share in the Package IV sales agreements will increase from the current 25 per cent.
As a result of the sales agreements entered into by Pertamina in 1991, the capacity of the LNG plant is expected to be fully committed in 1992 and 1993.
500 KMS
200 KMS
australia and vietnam
OUTLOOK
Australia
Talisman (WA-8-L):Production from the Talisman field to date has been approximately 7.5 million barrels of oil.
The field is nearing its economic limit and will be abandoned in the second half of 1992.
Muiron (EP342 and TP/9):A detailed seismic survey was completed and interpreted in the past year.
A potentially significant structure will be tested with the Loggerhead-1 well set for drilling in late 1992.
Tamar (WA-224-P):Following interpretation of recent seismic data, a well is scheduled for early 1993.
Vietnam
LASMO, as operator, in equal partnership with the C.Itoh Exploration Company of Japan, has executed a Heads of Agreement with PetroVietnam over Block 04–2, a 2,540 sq km area offshore Southern Vietnam.
The block lies within the Con Son Basin and is located 15 kms north of the 500 million barrel Dai Hung oilfield for which PetroVietnam is currently evaluating international bids to bring on production.
Block 04–2 is one of five blocks offered in the 2nd Round of Offshore Licensing which cover the former Vietsovpetro Reserve Area.
LASMO considers the area to be underexplored and to have significant reserve potential.
LASMO has relinquished its 25 per cent interest in the offshore licence in the Gulf of Tonkin after failing to find commercial reserves.
colombia and usa
OUTLOOK
Colombia
In the Llanos Basin the addition of the Juncal, El Palmar and Los Trompillos satellite fields and enhanced production techniques employed in the main Santiago field will combine to increase gross daily production for the Upia B block to over 12,500 bopd.
A run of operated exploration successes has made LASMO one of the largest operators in Colombia and increased the significance of the country to LASMO's international portfolio.
Two important oil discoveries in the Espinal block, Purificacion and Venganza, will be appraised in 1992.
The discoveries confirm a significant new productive fairway in the Upper Magdalena Basin.
First production from Purification, through temporary facilities, is forecast to begin contributing to cash flow early in 1993.
In May 1992, LASMO tested gas in the Guepaje-1 well in the Magangue block in the Magdalena area in northwest Colombia.
The presence of gas in this area, served by existing infrastructure, is encouraging in light of Colombia's increasing demand for gas fired power generation.
The reserve potential of the discovery is being evaluated.
In 1993 a possible extension of the Cusiana field is to be drilled in the Upia A block in the Llanos Basin.
USA
LASMO has confirmed its strategy of disengagement from the US and has sold most of the assets of LASMO Enery Corporation in the US for cash totalling nearly $74 million.
The initial sale excluded LASMO's interests in the Bright Star Gas Gathering System in East Texas and the gas discovery at Willow Bayou (formerly Miami Fee) in Louisiana, which will be further appraised with the drilling of two wells in mid 1992.
These interests, together with producing properties and other assets concentrated primarily in Texas and Louisiana gained through the Ultramar acquisition, will be sold.
300 KMS
500 KMS
canada offshore
100 KMS
OUTLOOK
Canada Offshore
In June 1992, Canada's first offshore production commenced from Cohasset development project 250 kms offshore Halifax, Nova Scotia.
LASMO is the operator for the Cohasset project.
The development comprises two offshore fields, Cohasset and Panuke,.
Initial production has commenced from the Panuke field and oil is being processed on the jack-up rig Rowan Gorilla III, a combined drilling and production unit.
Production flows through a CALM buoy into a storage tanker, the Nordic Apollo, before delivery to refineries by the shuttle tanker, Nordic Challenger.
During the 1992 producing season, the four wells on the Panuke development are expected to produce over 3.5 million barrels of high quality 55° API oil (Scotian Light) which attracts a premium price over Brent in the world market.
At the end of 1992, the Rowan Gorilla III will move to the Cohasset field, where six production wells will be drilled.
Production from both fields will be sustained at approximately 40,000 bopd from mid-1993.
A previously identified satellite field, Balmoral, located 3 kms north east of Cohasset will be tied into existing facilities to maintain and extend the production.
Western Canada
In keeping with LASMO's global strategy of focusing on areas of long term significance to the enlarged Group and disengagement from onshore North America, LASMO sold 50 per cent of its holding in LCI in May 1992 for C$8.25 per share.
Also included with every share sold was a share purchase warrant entitling the holders to acquire another share at C$8.75 at any time up to 15 December 1993.
Aggregate proceeds realised in the first half of 1992 from the sale amounted to C$83.2 million, yielding a profit of C$38 million.
Upon exercise of all the warrants LASMO would realise a further profit of C$42 million and would have no remaining interest in LCI.
gabon and pakistan
OUTLOOK
Gabon
The Obando development consists of three wellhead platforms on the Pelican, Octopus and Obando fields, tied to a central production facility at Pelican.
Mandji crude oil from the Obando development is exported to the Cap Lopez Terminal near Port Gentil where it is stored before loading onto ocean-going tankers.
LASMO continues to examine the remaining potential of the Obando block following the successful completion of an additional well in the fourth quarter of 1991.
Our interests in two other blocks (Massanga and Alombie) will be relinquished in 1992.
Pakistan
In the Kadanwari field in the Tajjal block, four wells have been successfully drilled and tested at average rages in excess of 30 mmcfd.
A declaration of commerciality has been approved by the Government of Pakistan.
Geophysical and geological interpretation, conceptual engineering design, reservoir simulation and environmental screening studies have been completed on the field.
Current efforts are aimed at finalising the gas price and sales contracts and gaining approval for the field's development plan.
First gas is scheduled for 1994 with a planned plateau production rate of between 150 and 170 mmcfd.
Following seismic operations and geological field work an exploration well will be drilled on Block 36.
15 KMS
200 KMS
italy
OUTLOOK
During 1991 LASMO completed the acquisition of four licence interests in Southern Italy including operatorship of Torrente Sauro.
A major extension of the Tempa Rossa oil accumulation was successfully proved in Torrente Sauro when well Tempa Rossa 2 was tested in October 1991.
This significant discover is being further evaluated during 1992 and 1993, by an extended well test of Tempa Rossa 2 which is currently underway, a new seismic survey and by further drilling including a re-entry and deepening of the original discovery well in the Laurenzana permit.
Terms have been agreed for the sale within Italy of the limited production from the extended well test.
200 KMS
algeria and libya
300 KMS
300 KMS
OUTLOOK
Algeria
Seismic operations have been underway since late 1990 with more than 4,000 km recorded so far.
Seismic acquisition is likely to continue throughout 1992 and drilling activities are expected to recommence early in 1993.
During 1992, LASMO and its co-venturers obtained a ‘Contrat de Prospection’ over block 223.
The potential of this block complements our existing holdings and work on the area will be done in concert with our efforts on adjacent blocks 211 and 245.
Libya
In 1992 LASMO acquired interests in a further three licences in Libya (NC 154, 155, 156), located in the onshore portion of the prolific Sirte basin.
NC 174:Seismic is currently under way and is expected to continue throughout 1992.
The block is located in the Murzuk basin between proven oil discoveries and first drilling is expected in 1993.
NC 154, 155 and 156:One well has already been drilled in NC 154, which resulted in a non-commercial oil discovery.
The potential for further plays is being evaluated for future drilling.
NC 173:This licence situated in the offshore Sirte basin, is adjacent to recent discoveries.
Initial work will concentrate on seismic activities.
yemen, syria and other areas
OUTLOOK
Yemen
The Hood block, which lies close to recent discoveries, was awarded to a group operated by LASMO in the first quarter of 1992.
An office has been opened in Sana's and seismic acquisition has already begun.
The commitment seismic programme is expected to be completed during 1993.
Exploration drilling will commence later that year.
Syria
LASMO's interest in Syria is now confined to the Al Bishri block.
A long term production test on the Wadi Aabeid discovery commenced in June 1992.
No further exploration drilling is planned for this year.
Other areas
New ventures:LASMO is investigating new venture possibilities in a number of countries where the Company already has a presence, as well as countries in which LASMO is not presently represented, included the CIS.
Egypt:Well Disuq-1 drilled in the first half of 1992 tested only sub-commercial quantities of gas.
The Nile Delta permit will be relinquished in the second half of 1992.
France:Ultramar held interests in five onshore permits.
LASMO has reassessed the prospect for further exploration and is unlikely to continue to be involved onshore France beyond mid 1993.
Seychelles:Following completion of the initial seismic survey in 1991, a 50 per cent reduction of acreage is scheduled for August 1992.
Work commitments will be fulfilled in 1993.
200 KMS
250 KMS
trading and oil price performance
LASMO Trading Limited is responsible for optimising the Group's price realisations in the most cost effective manner from offices in London, Singapore and Houston.
The London office determines strategy and co-ordinates its implementation and also has responsibility for marketing North Sea crude oil and production from within the Central region.
The Singapore office is primarily concerned with the provision of marketing intelligence and an understanding of markets in the Asia Pacific region.
The Houston office provides coverage of the American markets and helps ensure the Group's commercial interests are best served in this highly important area.
Oil prices for the past 20 years have been determined by a tight supply/demand balance.
Currently supply exceeds demand — hence the $18–23.00 per barrel price band.
Following OPEC's positive stance on production quotas, which is connected to the ecotax debate, prices have steadily risen from the lows of March.
With OECD stocks at their lowest level since 1989 and political uncertainty prevailing in many oil producing regions, prices are expected to remain firm for the remainder of 1992.
Emphasis is once again being focused on security of supply and with the high utilisation of existing production capacity and world economies anticipated to slowly recover by early 1993, the outlook for stronger prices is cautiously optimistic.
Additionally, there is also an economically driven swing towards higher quality crudes, which will benefit LASMO because of the composition of its portfolio.
shareholder information
Stock Exchange listings
The shares of LASMO plc are listed on The International Stock Exchange, London.
They may be followed on Topic (page number 45339), Oracle and Ceefax.
LASMO plc shares trade in the US in American Depositary Receipt form (symbol 3LSMOY on the electronic OTC Bulletin Board).
Shares are quoted on the SEAQ International System and prices may be accessed on the Reuters Equities 2000 service under the symbol LSMR.L, and on Quotron under the symbol LSMRU.EU.
Each ADR is equivalent to three ordinary shares.
In Canada, LASMO's shares are listed for trading on The Toronto Stock Exchange and the Montreal Exchange under the trading symbol LSO.
Calendar Announcement of Group results
Group results for the year to 31 December are announced in March.
The Annual General Meeting of LASMO plc is held in London in May: Half year results to 30 June are announced at the end of July.
Dividends
Ordinary shares:
Final announced in March and paid in May.
Interim announced in July and paid in October.
Oil Production Stock:
Payments are made half yearly on 30 April and 30 October, based upon production from the Ninian field during the six months ending 31 December and 30 June respectively.
UK Capital Gains Tax
The following were the prices of LASMO listed securities at 31 March 1982:
Ordinary shares of 25p: 201.7p
OPS units: 725p 
financial highlights
* Including £103.1 million cash element of the Ultramar bid.
The financial information presented above is based on the Group's audited consolidated accounts for LASMO alone, restated for the changes in accounting policy adopted in 1991.
Earnings and dividends per share have been restated to reflect the bonus element in the 1989 rights issue and the capitalisation issue in 1990 but not shares issued in connection with the acquisition of Ultramar.
The financial information contained in this document does not constitute the Company's statutory accounts but has been extracted from the statutory accounts of LASMO for the five years ended 31 December 1991 and also includes certain other information.
The auditors of the Company Ernst & Young, Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors, of Becket House  have made a report under what is now Section 235 of the Companies Act 1985 on each set of statutory consolidated accounts for the five years ended 31 December 1991.
Each such report was unqualified and did not contain a statement under Section 237 (2) or (3) of the Companies Act 1985.
Statutory accounts relating to each financial year to which the financial information relates have been delivered to the Registrar of Companies.
glossary of terms
The following are the main abbreviations and technical terms used in this document:
Corporate
The Company LASMO plc
LASMO the Company and its subsidiaries
Technical
bcf billion (thousand million) cubic feet
bcpd barrels of condensate per day
boe barrels of oil equivalent
boepd barrels of oil equivalent per day
bopd barrels of oil per day
BTU British Thermal Unit
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
mboepd thousand barrels of oil equivalent per day
mcf thousand cubic feet
mcfd thousand cubic feet of gas per day
mmboe million barrels of oil equivalent
mmcfd million cubic feet of gas per day
Reserves
Proven and probable reserves are the estimated quantities of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids which geological, geophysical and engineering data demonstrate with a specified degree if certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs and which are considered commercially producible.
There should be a 50 per cent statistical probability that the actual quantity of recoverable reserves will be more than the amount estimated as proven and probable and a 50 per cent statistical probability that it will be less.
The equivalent statistical probabilities for the proven component of proven and probable reserves are 90 per cent and 10 per cent respectively.
Commercial proven and probable reserves are those quantities of petroleum which are considered, on the basis of information currently available and current economic forecasts, to be commercially recoverable from fields currently in production, fields under development, fields for which a development plan is under active preparation and fields whose proximity to established infrastructure assures their future development.
Potentially commercial proven and probable reserves comprise quantities of petroleum which are considered, on the basis of the information currently available and current economic forecasts, to be commercially recoverable from fields that have been discovered but which require further appraisal prior to commerciality being established.
Oil equivalent figures referred to in this document are based on 6,000 cubic feet of gas equalling one barrel of oil equivalent.
Other
OPS Oil Production Stock
PSC Production Sharing Contract