

Exciting future — if we keep firm grip on costs
The last few weeks have seen LASMO North Sea's Markham field produce its first gas, while gas price negotiations have been concluded in Pakistan, allowing LASMO Oil Pakistan to proceed with development plans for the Kadanwari field.
Chief executive Chris Greentree welcomed these most recent announcements as further evidence of LASMO's successes around the world and proof that the company's exploration and development programme continues to strengthen.
‘These two ventures, along with the expected announcement of first gas from one of our recent discoveries in Colombia, are just the first of many exciting projects we expect to see come to fruition over the next year or so,’ Chris told Pipeline .
‘These will all contribute to our long-term prosperity.’
However, despite these encouraging signs, LASMO — in common with all companies in the oil industry — continues to suffer from low oil prices and the world recession, and as a result has announced economies to help safeguard its long-term position.
One in ten jobs in LASMO's UK operations has been cut, affecting nearly 50 employees in the London-based regional offices, the North Sea operation and some head office departments.
‘These moves, regrettable as they are, form part of our continuing drive to reduce overheads and operating costs, as we rationalise our very large exploration and development portfolio following the acquisition of Ultramar last year,’ Chris explained.
He also emphasised that future spending must be reduced below current levels if the company is to remain profitable at low oil prices: ‘We must also preserve cash so that we can fund further ventures for the company,’ he added.
All categories of expenditure are under review and include a critical examination of the company's business plan, a study of the best opportunities for the company, and associated staffing levels.
Decisions
The key to the current difficulties in the world economy linked to a record low oil price.
Chris explained: ‘The length of this recession hasn't been accurately predicted by anyone — for example, American economists were forecasting that the US would pull out of recession in 1992, but here we are at the end of the year and nothing much has changed.
‘In addition, the world oil prices haven't increased as predicted, even as recently as two years ago, and that has also had a negative impact on the decisions taken by the world's oil producers.
‘In LASMO, we are facing a period of consolidation.
We have been expanding continuously since the mid-80s and we now have to look at what we can afford,’ he went on.
‘This means that we must concentrate on our most worthwhile projects to make sure that the things we do in the future are profitable at $19 a barrel.
‘This isn't a sudden change of course— we've been working on this for a long time and over the last five years have moved our portfolio towards lower cost exploration areas.
‘We are less dependent upon the North Sea than we were five years ago and have, in other areas, more onshore than offshore interests because development costs — and in many cases drilling and operating costs — are lower on each barrel found and produced.’
Nevertheless, Chris is convinced that, with an improvement in the world economy, LASMO will be in a strong position to build an exciting future: ‘We are involved in exploration and development on a worldwide scale and have an abundance of riches available to us.
We are not short of opportunities and will ultimately reap the rewards,’ he said.
On Page 3, Chris Greentree describes his goal for LASMO in a special message to all employees.
Top marks for Markham debut
Early reports from the newly-producing Markham field show that gas is flowing well above initial expectations.
Some of the individual wells are capable of flowing more than 90 million cubic feet a day, and total production should be up to 245 million cubic feet a day by the time the field hits its peak next summer.
With Markham, LASMO has achieved two milestones in the British oil industry — the field is the first offshore development lying across the UK/Netherlands median line, and it is producing the first gas to be exported from the UK into the Continent.
T
The field is estimated to have reserves of 700 billion cubic feet of gas and will have a life of about 20 years.
First gas started flowing from the field early in November, just a few weeks on from the original target of October.
‘This was a major achievement,’ commented David Wootton, managing director of LASMO Nederland.
‘It is just 21 months since we received approval to go ahead with the project, and we are delighted that we have started up production within a few weeks of a date that many thought was unrealistic!’
In addition, the project was completed within budget.
LASMO and its contractors worked to a very fast schedule, which meant that costs were kept well controlled.
‘However, we faced additional difficulties in view of the fact that Markham is a transmedian field,’ David continued.
This, along with the fact that two governments and three groups of licensees, consisting of 12 parties, are involved, has meant that a host of legal and commercial agreements have had to be drawn up.
‘Bringing all this together has required a great deal of planning, co-operation between numerous organisations and many long hours of work,’ he added.
Even on the day that the final agreements were due to be signed by both governments and all the Markham partners, there were delays.
‘Our aim was to start signing the agreements at 11 o'clock on the morning of 5 November,’ said David McManus, commercial manager in LASMO North Sea, ‘but we were held up because a director of one partner company was delayed at Milan airport by fog, while another was the victim of air traffic control problems in Oslo.
‘We were eventually able to start signing at 4pm, getting the agreements hand-delivered to both governments for final approval the following morning.
There was considerable relief as well as jubilation when we finally received consent from the governments that afternoon.’
Gas started flowing three hours later.
Everyone had been waiting on tenterhooks on the platform, as they had been technically ready for more than a day.
The next step is the development project is the installation of a satellite platform planned for summer 1994, followed by a compression platform, scheduled to be in service in 1998.
EDITORIAL
and for my next production
As I oversee the finishing touches of this Christmas issue of Pipeline , I am also preparing for a special production of my own!
I shall be on maternity leave from the end of December and plan to return to the editor's chair in the summer.
In the meantime,Pipeline will continue to be published regularly, although with a reduced frequency — the current budget constraints have meant that the paper will be produced six times a year from now on.
However, I am delighted to report that, despite these hard time, the management has shown its commitment to Pipeline as the main means of communication for LASMO employees around the world.
During my absence, Clare Longley, our group press officer, will be your contact for Pipeline and is looking forward to hearing from you.
She can be contacted at head office.
Wishing you all a merry Christmas and a happy new year — and please keep the news, as well as the oil and gas, flowing in 1993!
Oil output gushes to new peak at prolific Panuke
OIL production from LASMO Nova Scotia's Panuke field has reached a rate of 35,000 barrels a day — its highest since production started in June this year and the maximum amount that can be produced with the jack-up unit located at the field.
To date, some 3,300,000 barrels of Panuke oil have been produced and sold to markets in Canada and the US.
Production operations at Panuke will continue until 22 December, depending on weather and sea conditions, when the unit will be disconnected from the wellhead platform and transferred to the nearby Cohasset field.
The production unit is scheduled to be ready to start drilling at Cohasset next March.
Algeria crews set to reap peace dividend
With the arrival of a second seismic crew and an exploration well which spudded in mid-November, things are hotting up in LASMO's Algerian contract areas.
Following a 12 month break, mainly caused by considerable disruption in the aftermath of the Gulf War, LASMO and its partners Anadarko, the operator, and Maersk have restarted their drilling programme — and have every reason to feel encouraged.
In particular, the Anadarko/LASMO/Maersk joint venture is excited about a recent adjacent discovery in the northern Ghadames basin.
‘Other companies have made good discoveries near our northern concession,’ said Stephen Cooper, exploration supervisor in Central Region, ‘and Cepsa, the Spanish company, is planning to drill a couple of appraisal wells in the near future.’
The joint venture has five blocks under licence, covering two sedimentary basins, both of which are proven hydrocarbon provinces.
the second basin, the Illizi, is in the south of the country.
The seismic teams are faced with some challenges in gathering data, as the concessions are in the Saharan sand sea and contain some of the largest dunes in the world.
Despite the break in exploration drilling, the Algerian project team has been busy — 30,000 kms of existing seismic data, predominantly acquired by the Algerian state oil company, Sonatrach, have been processed at Anadarko's Algiers centre, while a further 4,500 kms of data have been acquired more recently by the joint venture.
‘The new seismic has shown up a lot of interesting fault trends in our northern block, which is a continuation of those successfully explored in other companies’ areas,’Stephen said.
‘This massive geophysical effort will continue for the rest of this year and well into 1993, and for the next four months, we will be using two seismic crews to enable us to push ahead.
‘Under our contract, we are obliged to drill a further eight exploration wells, and we are confident that we will have enough prospects to ensure a continuous drilling programme through 1993 and 1994,’ he added.
LASMO, which has a 25 per cent share in the project, is a very active participant.
‘This is Anadarko's first venture in the international scene and we have been working very closely with them,’ Stephen commented.
‘We have been closely monitoring the project as it progresses and introducing the operator's staff to a number of techniques we use to evaluate the potential of the blocks.’
He is being ably assisted by John Daniel and Laurie Weston in this work.
Apart from the seismic work in the licence blocks, the joint venture is also involved in a wider geophysical evaluation — essentially to review every sedimentary basin in Algeria and, using experience gained by LASMO in Libya, Egypt and Algeria, to look at the palaeozoic basins of North Africa.
Anadarko, which is a US company, has a 50 per cent share in the blocks, while Maersk, which is based in Denmark, holds the remaining 25 per cent.
City types get lowdown on LNG prospects
PROFESSIONAL LASMO watchers — analysts from stockbrokers and institutional shareholders, along with bankers — recently spent a day learning about the company's involvement in a new area, the Indonesian liquefied natural gas [LNG]business.
The seminar, held in London in November, was a new departure in LASMO's investor relations programme and was held to enable the investment community to get to grips with all aspects of the LNG trade — an industry which is very different from the oil and gas business in which LASMO has always been involved.
The opportunity to move into the LNG market was one of the principal reasons behind LASMO's acquisition of Ultramar at the end of 1991.
Within a year, the LNG operation has become a major contributor to the company's production and cash flow and can be regarded as the jewel in LASMO's crown.
However, the LNG business is very complex and can confuse even the most experienced analysts, many of whom welcomed the opportunity to spend a day learning about this important asset in LASMO's portfolio.
The seminar was designed to explain the significance of LNG to LASMO and its potential for growth.
Among the speakers was Malcolm Peebles, an industry authority, who opened the event with a talk on the basics of LNG and its position in the world markets.
He was followed by presenters from LASMO, including Bob Bland Paul Murray, John Henriksen and Joe Darby.
Bob, who is director of the Indonesian joint venture, brought more than 25 years' experience to his session on the development of LNG in Indonesia, while Paul, manager of strategic planning, and John, finance manager for the Indonesian Region, gave comprehensive presentations of the key financial issues.
They were followed by chief operating officer Joe Darby who reviewed the geology of the Sanga Sanga and Runtu production sharing contracts, and the prospects for adding reserves.
Reaction from the guests has been very encouraging.
‘One of the best company seminars I have ever attended,’ said one, while another commented that the seminar ‘helped fill a large gap in understanding of LASMO's business’.
Reviewing the seminar, Paul Murray said: ‘Given the change in our portfolio, this important step in LASMO's investor relations programme was both essential and effective and was just the first of such events — we will certainly be continuing this communications process in the future.’
Success depends on the resolution we all show in the new year
LASMO's excellence will shine through, says chief executive Chris Greentree.
Over the past five years, LASMO has expanded dramatically.
This was due, in part, to the commitment of a first class team of employees around the world.
Everyone in the company has contributed skills in geology, land management, geophysics, engineering and construction, as well as all the support services which keep these activities going.
The result has been the creation of a vast land base, ever-increasing production and exploration, and development prospects that are, in my opinion, second to none.
In short, we now have a wealth of riches of which we can be proud.
During the same time, the size and the shape of the company has changed to such a point that some of our assets are no longer meaningful to us as one of the world's leading independent exploration and production companies.
The Western Canadian operation is an example — although it is successful in the context of its own marketplace, its contribution to the group picture was no longer significant.
Consequently, an active programme of asset disposals has been under way over the last year in order to reduce the group's high level of debt, which was the result of decisions to develop new oil and gas fields over the last few years, as well as the additional debt burden inherited following the acquisition of Ultramar.
LASMO has had to pursue its business objectives, including the asset management programme, against a background of world recession and low oil prices — factors which have had an adverse impact on the company's short term position.
Put simply, the use of energy resources is tied to the level of world economic activity, and the severity of the current recession is well known.
Without economic growth the demand for oil and gas is inevitably weak, leading to soft prices which are currently running at the lowest level for 20 years in real terms.
When the influence of politics is added to the supply and demand equation, it is evident that the oil price on which we depend is far beyond the control of the oil producers.
At the moment the price for North Sea oil is just over $18, $4 less than average industry forecasts made during the last few years when we were building our portfolio.
With LASMO producing around 185,000 barrels of oil equivalent every day of the year, our current revenues for the year are certainly lower than those anticipated just a few years ago.
Although we cannot control some of the key factors which determine our success, neither can we sit by and hope for a turn of fortune.
Like every other company in the oil industry, we can't operate in isolation from the factors that control the world oil business and we have to respond in a positive way by managing the business in line with the economic circumstances in which we must function.
Within this climate, the management has had to make some difficult decisions.
We have faced particularly traumatic times over the last few weeks as the economic situation has forced us to reduce our staff numbers in the UK.
I don't want to have fewer people for fewer people's sake, but we simply can't afford to continue as we were.
The majority of oil companies are now basing their future plans on the assumption that oil prices will remain flat over the next five years in real terms.
This will lead to revenue short-falls for the period and consequently less cash flow than the industry would have wished.
The impact on our business prospects clearly goes beyond the difficult measures we have had to take this year and has demanded a thorough review of all our activities in the longer term.
We had to look at what we can afford to do in the future, and make sure that we had the right number of quality staff in the right places to carry out our programme.
This restructuring has seen a redistribution of talents as well as a reduction in numbers and many people have transferred from central functions to the regions.
In the past we maintained a central pool of expertise — a flying squad — available to help out on regionally based projects; now the regions have that expertise permanently assigned to them.
We are also focusing on exploration projects which will give us the opportunity to find larger oil and gas deposits at lower costs.
Even the oilfields which have been discovered and appraised need to be looked at again to determine whether they are still profitable at low oil prices.
Development costs must be reduced — we simply cannot proceed with marginal projects, and must select the projects which offer the greatest return.
The budget for worldwide expenditure on exploration and development activities for 1993 will be considerably less than the £450 million spent in 1992.
The low oil price means that LASMO cannot afford to develop all the projects within our extensive portfolio but must prioritise.
These measures are regrettable but necessary if we are to reap the benefits of our portfolio in the future and improve our profitability.
However, we should not lose sight of the fact that there is some light at the end of the runnel.
We are looking forward to ever-increasing production from our huge investments in the past few years and therefore, even if the oil price remains flat, to ever-increasing cash flow.
And it's the cash flow that pays for our salaries, our dividends, reduces our debts, and supports our ongoing exploration programme.
We are excited about our new discoveries and about the opportunity to give our shareholders a significant return on their investments — and we want to convey our sense of excitement to our shareholders.
The management, with your help, intends to strike a balance between financial prudence and excitement for the future.
As we face a rough passage in the short term, we should all recognise the need to enter a period of consolidation.
But even within the current constraints which we must work in, our success stories will still emerge as we redefine the areas of our future growth.
I have a goal for LASMO — I want this company to continue to grow and to be more profitable.
And I want to maintain a level of efficiency in everything we do so that we can hold our heads high in the sure and certain knowledge that we are as good as anyone — and better than most — at what we do.
Every single person in LASMO can contribute to this challenge by helping to ensure in every way you can that each pound, dollar, peso, rupee, lire or rupia is wisely spent.
There is a new year's resolution which I hope you will all share with me — that we will not be discouraged by influences, such as the low oil price, which are outside our control.
We must prove to the world that not only have we grown rapidly, but that we are now a mature company and an industry leader.
I believe the excellence of our people and our projects will shine through.
LASMO going well with Shell as partners in Pakistan
In a deal signed at Pakistan's Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources last month, LASMO Oil Pakistan [LOPL]assigned half of its working interest in its block 36 licence to Shell, marking the oil giant's return to the country after nearly 10 years.
LASMO, which continues as operator, and Shell each have a 47.5 per cent interest, while the Oil and Gas Development Corporation of Pakistan is the third partner with a five per cent holding.
LASMO acquired the concession in December 1990 for an initial period of three years.
Block 36, in North West Frontier Province, contains the Ramak prospect which has been developed by LASMO's exploration department in Karachi.
To date, LASMO has acquired and interpreted more than 530 kms of high quality seismic data and completed some four months of geological field work.
The first well in the licence will spud towards the end of this year.
Shell, having last explored in Pakistan during the early 80s, was attracted by the development and its large reserves potential.
LASMO, in turn, is pleased that Shell has joined the partnership.
‘We are delighted that Shell has joined forces with us for this exciting project, which we feel holds a great deal of promise,’ said Rupert Kidd, LOPL's general manager.
More to come yet from record offshore field
Oil production from Gabon's Obando field has been breaking records recently.
It hit a peak on 20 October with 16,188 barrels, the highest daily figure recorded since production started in 1987.
This figure was achieved despite the fact that not all the wells in the field were producing.
Since this high point, a figure of 14–15,000 barrels a day has been maintained.
The recent increases in Obando production are due to the success of the well stimulation programme, and there is scope for further production to be obtained over the coming months.
Obando, which is offshore Gabon, is operated by British Gas, which has a 50 per cent share.
LASMO, which holds the other 50 per cent, has been involved in the project since its start-up in 1982.
Laurenzana licence bid
Flow rates from the recently sidetracked Tempa Rossa-1 ST well, in which LASMO has a significant interest, are extremely encouraging, reports from Fina, the operator, confirm.
The original Tempa Rossa-1 discovery well, which is in the Laurenzana permit, was drilled by Fina in 1989 but could not be properly tested at that time due to technical problems.
But on the basis of these latest extremely encouraging results, the joint venture has decided to apply for an exploitation licence in the Laurenzana permit area.
The Tempa Rossa field lies across both the Laurenzana and Torrente Sauro permits — LASMO is operator of Torrente Sauro and has a 20 per cent interest in Laurenzana.
Celebrating the signing of the new partnership agreement
Success in Siberia draws nearer steppe by steppe
Six in a bed! it's hospitality Russian style for our man in the backwoods
LASMO's CIS group has moved closer to completing its feasibility study in Russia following two recent trips to the republic.
A visit by a group of engineers, whose main aim was to look at drilling operations, study environmental issues and research the infrastructure, was closely followed by a team who were investigating the commercial aspects of producing and marketing Russian oil.
Environmental engineer Andrew Olleveant, who was one of the members of the first group, had a number of key issues to cover during his trip to Russia.
‘My prime concern was to get an overview of the main environmental concerns we would face if we set up operations in the area,’ he explained.
‘In particular, I was looking at the environmental regulations and how [or even if ]they are enforced.
Issues to be considered include the use of water, water disposal and atmospheric emissions — in fact anything which could impinge on how a field may be developed.’
Water is a major issue in the area of Western Siberia which LASMO is interested in; it is a huge area of fragile wetlands and home to a large variety of wildlife.
Even temporary roads constructed from compacted snow can damage the habitat, so naturally there are many restrictions on projects like drilling wells.
Andrew was also looking at strategic issues, such as how the Russians are managing the environment themselves, what restrictions and demands the authorities will place on western companies, and what sort of help they require with rectifying the damage caused by earlier drilling and production operations.
A particularly important element of his study relates to the indigenous population of the region, who have land rights.
This means that their permission must be gained before any company can either go through their land or start up operations on it.
A local drilling operation, which is in negotiations with a number of families in the area, invited Andrew to join a trip to visit the homelands, giving him the chance to see the local population's lifestyle at first hand.
Along with a representative from the drilling company and an interpreter, he spent some time with Sergei, a hunter, and his two wives in their autumn home.
This trip included an overnight stop with a dinner of bear meat, dried fish, bread and forest berries, followed by all six people sharing one enormous bed!
Andrew was the first Englishman that Sergei had ever met.
The hunter marked the occasion by carving a plaque over the doorway of his home.
‘The family was very welcoming and friendly,’ said Andrew, ‘and are very concerned about the effects oil operations will have on their hunting grounds.
Having said that, they are also very keen to improve their standard of living and understand that the oil industry may help them to achieve this.’
The rest of the LASMO team felt that the entire trip was equally successful.
‘We learnt a lot about operations and costs,’ said exploration manager Ron Pattinson.
‘We discovered that the Russians are certainly cost conscious and try to optimise profits.
We also found that some of their drilling equipment is as advanced as anything we are using’.
A few weeks after the technical group returned, a group of commercial and legal experts flew out to Russia.
‘The main purpose of our visit was to look at licensing regulations, the economics of the project and the commercial, taxation and transportation issues,’ explained Alan Melville, manager of supply and trading in LASMO's trading department.
‘In particular, we were looking at how we could export oil — if we found it — to the marketplace,’ he continued.
‘We needed to ascertain what sort of pipeline infrastructure is in place and how it operates, which ports the oil could be transported to and what export facilities would be available.’
Much of this group's time was spent in discussion and negotiation with Russian authorities in Moscow and Siberia, but one day was spent at a 30-year-old pumping station near Tyumen.
‘This was a most interesting visit,’ said Alan.
‘Two of the main Siberian pipelines pass through this station which has storage facilities on site for more than a million barrels of crude oil.
‘One of these stations is located about every 70 kms to boost pressure as the oil goes down the pipeline, en route to the export terminals on the Black Sea and the Baltic — a distance of at least 2,000 kilometres from Western Siberia.’
These two visits are important steps in LASMO's feasibility study.
‘We are working towards completing the study early next year,’ said Ron Pattinson, ‘which rounds off the first part of our overall survey into the Russian oil business.
From then on, we will be working on producing our recommendations for the future.’
North Sea: Oil price gloom helps put Columba on hold
After a series of discussions, LASMO North Sea and its partners have decided to defer the development of the Columba field.
John Hogan, managing director of LASMO North Sea, cited low oil prices, coupled with the marginal economic yield from the project, as the principal reasons for not continuing with the project at the moment.
Columba, a neighbour of the giant Ninian field, is located some 105 miles east of the Shetland Islands.
It was the subject of an innovative agreement with the Department of Energy in 1991, when a deal was signed entitling LASMO and its partners to royalty refunds at a rate linked to production levels on Columba.
The Department had long seen the field as part of Ninian for taxation purposes until this break-through.
‘Naturally, we are very disappointed that this project has been deferred, which is a reflection on the current economic situation,’ said Russell Harvey, director of operations at LASMO North Sea.
‘Our thanks go to everybody who has worked so hard on this project since 1988.’
Syria: More wells planned following ‘excellent’ results
DEVELOPMENT continues apace in Syria as the Wadi Aabeid field — in which LASMO has an interest — has been declared commercial.
The field has already produced 650,000 barrels of oil and production is continuing at some 5,000 barrels a day — an excellent result, says Central Region production manager Mike Sigsworth.
As a result, Al Bishri Petroleum Company [ABPC], the Syrian joint operating company set up to oversee exploration and production in Wadi Aabeid, is planning to drill a further two development wells and to construct some further facilities at the well site.
In addition, two or three exploration wells are scheduled to be drilled early next year.
ABPC has been formed to take over from the project's original partners, Total, Petrofina, LASMO, Inpex and the Syrian Petroleum Company — all of whom are shareholders in the new organisation.
Based in Damascus, ABPC is only the third such joint operating company to be set up in the oil industry in Syria.
Mike Sigsworth is LASMO's representative on the board, which had its inaugural meeting at the end of October.
Canada greets new name with bags of enthusiasm
LASMO Canada's shareholders have approved a change in the company's name at a meeting held at the end of October.
The new name — Elan Energy — was chosen from over 450 suggestions submitted in an employee contest.
Elan means enthusiasm, liveliness and spirit — characteristics which the company believes signify its nature, its employees and its management.
The name change has come about as a result of LASMO plc's reduction in its interest in the Canadian company.
In May this year, LASMO plc sold half of its 55 per cent interest in LASMO Canada through a secondary public offering.
As part of that transaction, the parent company pledged that its remaining shares would be issued to holders of warrants who have the right to acquire the shares for $8.75 each, anytime before 15 December 1993.
Members of LASMO's CIS group visiting an oilfield in Western Siberia
Blueprint for a safer tomorrow
Experts jet in from across the world to attend vital conference in Indonesia
Delegates unite in shaping HSE strategy towards 2000
LASMO Indonesia played host to the company's second health, safety and environment conference.
HSE professionals from LASMO's worldwide operations — up to 30 delegates at any one time — took part in the three-day conference.
Delegates were welcomed to Jakarta by John Dobson, LASMO HSE group manager, and by Indonesia's environment and loss control manager, Captain Gatot Wisono.
The conference programme comprised a half-day of presentations, a day and a half of workshop sessions, and a further day to map out and agree 1993 HSE strategy.
Key presentations were made by senior drilling engineer Alex Gill, who gave a paper on the HSE control of the Tempa Rossa well test in Italy, and by drilling engineer Tim Clay, who described how Indonesia's drilling group minimised environmental disturbance and disruption.
The decision to put greater emphasis on workshops at this year's conference proved a winner.
Delegates could contribute valuable insight and comment based on their own experiences and expertise, and this went a long way towards creating LASMO's HSE blueprint for 1993 and beyond.
On the evening of the second day delegates were treated to an authentic Indonesian dinner and traditional dance performances.
But a trip to the field had to be cancelled after the LASMO Riau, a modified tanker used for storage, developed problems at its moorings in the Malacca Strait.
Regions have say on audits policy
EVERY LASMO site around the world will soon be armed with a new and better way of carrying out vital safety checks.
By mid-1993 one location — still to be named — will be acting as testbed for the improved HSE audit procedures.
After further fine tuning the new programme, which covers all aspects of health, safety and environmental protection, will be applied throughout LASMO.
‘This represents an important step in the evolution of LASMO's HSE systems,’ comments John Dobson, HSE group manager.
‘Maybe just as significant, this isn't a case of the corporate centre devising a policy and then imposing it on the regions — far from it.
The regions themselves wanted to upgrade the safety audit procedures, and the current proposals are substantially based on their input.’
He went on: ‘From our first corporate audit, we have been aware of the need to reflect adequately the particular constraints and practical day-to-day problems that many regions experience in the fields of HSE compliance.
This awareness has driven us to evolve new systems that can be tailored to local needs and which reflect current advances in auditing techniques.’
The new audit process now under development will cover every sector of the company, from top-level management systems to safety on the drill floor.
Future HSE audits will generally be conducted in an even more formal and structured way and there will be extra checks and balances to eliminate any unwitting subjectivity on the part of the auditor.
Says John: ‘We hope that this approach will take the personality element out of the audit process and will ensure that we shall all be using the same measurement criteria.
‘Hitherto, when auditors changed, the standards of auditing could also have changed.
In future this should not be the case.’
London bids to boost global emergency plan
Response teams in action as 100ft wave hits rig
In future, environment clean up specialists and other disaster experts from across the globe will help fellow LASMO workers in the event of a major emergency.
Under a new plan, LASMO in London is compiling a database of which skills and specialised equipment are available at every location.
First steps were taken at the HSE conference in Jakarta.
The aim is to allow emergency expertise to be summoned from other regions or countries at a moment's notice to help combat any natural or man-made disasters, such as oil spills or fires.
Says HSE group manager John Dobson.
‘Previously, we were a relatively small company — everyone knew everybody else and how they could probably assist in the event of an emergency.
‘Since we have expanded and now operate in so many areas, there isn't the same level of informal networking between individuals.
Hence the need to develop this centralised co-ordination and control in order best to utilise these valuable and potentially life saving resources of ours.’
Pursestrings need to be in safe hands
HSE experts in LASMO need to be just as skilful at managing money as in managing health, safety and environmental issues the conference heard.
Delegates in Jakarta were urged to get full value out of every penny spent, especially in the current economic climate.
Each region needs to measure more accurately how cost-effective its own HSE programmes are proving.
At the same time managers should monitor the true losses arising from accidents and other incidents more carefully.
‘Nobody from the chief executive down begrudges a single penny spent on health, safety and the environment,’ said HSE group manager John Dobson.
‘However, because their access to scarce funds is more open than other disciplines, this places an extra responsibility on HSE managers to allocate their budgets wisely and to make this cash really work for them.’
The conference also underlined the need for greater net-working and sharing of best practices between HSE professionals in LASMO.
Delegates also called for increased formal training to help achieve higher and more consistent standards.
The corporate HSE group is planning to address their needs in the coming year.
Students can count on company help to gain qualifications
Tidy the desk, flick off the lights, and leave the building.
For many, that routine signals the end of another busy stint at LASMO.
But for some of those employees heading off down the road, their day's work is barely half over.
For ahead of them lies several more hours of hard study and concentration, either at home or at night school.
It's all part of their efforts to build a better and more rewarding career for themselves.
And LASMO plays an invaluable part in this drive towards self-improvement by providing financial and other much needed support.
At least 30 UK employees currently receive support from the company under the educational assistance policy.
Ten more receive similar help in Colombia and three in Pakistan, while a member of the Rome office successfully applied and studied for an MBA in industrial management.
In LASMO Nova Scotia the guidelines of educational assistance were broadcast only in October.
But as Valerie Bransfield, personnel adviser, reports: ‘The initial response has been very positive.’
LASMO's attitude towards providing assistance to employees who wish to undertake studies out of hours is very simple and straightforward.
Broadly speaking help is there when such studies and qualifications will clearly and demonstrably benefit the individual careers and the needs of the company.
It is hoped that employees will as a result develop their abilities and enhance their opportunities for advancement within LASMO.
So while a degree in geology or BTec in computer sciences might be deemed useful and relevant, a diploma in, say, Greek cookery would probably not qualify!
‘People who show the drive and the energy to put in a great deal of their own personal time in pursuit of professional qualifications quite frankly deserve all the company support they can get,’ says Jill Fulton, senior personnel officer, recruitment and training.
‘They are obviously highly committed and highly motivated people.
Evening and weekend study, writing reports and taking exams can all prove quite stressful.
So, where appropriate, we are pleased to be able to relieve some of that burden by paying tuition and examination fees, and helping towards books and maybe any special materials.
‘Overall, I'd say the level of support we offer is as good as most other companies in our industry, and a good deal better than some.’
LASMO's policy is to pay 50 per cent of the likely costs up front, and the balance upon successful completion of the course.
‘We also offer study leave to enable employees to prepare for exams without eating into their own normal leave entitlement,’ Jill adds.
Educational assistance not only benefits the individual — it also makes sound business sense.
Says Jill: ‘We do hope to see a return on our investment in gaining a better qualified, more capable and more enthusiastic performer, someone who perhaps returns to us armed with new ways of looking at and tackling problems, or an ability to analyse situations and develop concepts.
Their new found skills can help give LASMO an extra competitive edge — that's the payback for us.’
Anyone interested in seeking educational assistance to help further their career should contact their line manager or personnel department in the first instance.
Geologist will benefit from year in London
WHEN LASMO Pakistan's Mujadid Ali arrived in London in September 1991 to take up a place at London University, his first priority was concerned with degrees Fahrenheit rather than degrees academic.
As a student on Imperial College's petroleum geology MSc course, Mujadid had to go on a number of field trips during his year in the UK, but had not been able to buy suitable clothes for the British climate back home in Karachi.
So it was off to the department stores of central London with a LASMO cheque to kit himself out with warm and waterproof clothes as a matter of some urgency.
This was just one of the many ways in which LASMO helped Mujadid while he was in London.
Apart from helping with his wardrobe, LASMO also covered the costs of his tuition, accommodation and books, and provided him with a living allowance.
Practical support, too, was given in a number of ways — for example, the drawing office helped produce Mujadid's maps and charts, while Roger Tucker's exploration team in LASMO North Sea helped out with data logs, a base map and technical guidance for a project he was preparing on the Inner Moray firth.
With this project, he won the top prize in a course competition.
An assistant geologist in the Karachi office and the first employee from LASMO Pakistan to attend a full-time degree course in the UK, he graduated at the end of October.
Explaining why Mujadid, was sent to London to further his education, group chief geologist Tim Burnhill said: ‘We are committed to enhancing and improving the technical skills of our employees, and the Imperial College course is deemed to be one of the best of its type anywhere in the world.
‘Course work is very practical and more industry related than similar courses in Pakistan, an aspect which Mujadid found very helpful.’
Following graduation, Mujadid returned home to Karachi at the end of October, having taken some time out to visit Spain and Italy for a well earned holiday.
He also took the chance to visit the US during one of his vacations, and commented that, apart from benefiting from the opportunity to learn at one of the top colleges, he had also enjoyed experiencing a different culture during his time in London.
This course is deemed to be one of the best of its type 
It's time for everyone to have a super time!
Pipeline looks at how LASMO employees and their families will be celebrating the festive season
Chestnuts roasting on an open fire, Jack Frost nipping at your nose.
The pre-dawn squeals of delight as kiddies unwrap their gifts.
Turkey with all the trimmings, the Queen's speech ‘on the box’, and perhaps the odd drink or mince pie too many.
They're all a familiar part of Christmas in the U.K. And, here, it's fascinating to read how other countries will enjoy the same great occasion.
NETHERLANDS
Lucky Dutch have double celebration in December
Unlike most other Western countries the focal point of the festivities in December is not Christmas but Saint Nicolas, or ‘Sinterklaas’ as the Dutch call it.
In mid-November Sinterklaas sails in his steamer from Spain [where he lives during the rest of the year]to Holland.
He is accompanied by his servant Black Peter [Zwarte Piet].
Sinterklaas rides on a white horse on the roofs of the houses and throws presents down the chimneys to those children who have behaved well.
To please Sinterklaas the children sing special songs and lay down carrots and other food for his horse.
They may also write letters to Sinterklaas setting out what gifts they would like to receive, or do a drawing or give him a small present.
However those youngsters who have been naughty could find themselves in a spot of trouble.
They might receive only one or two small gifts, or even none, or — worst of all — could find themselves carried off to Spain for a whole year!
Luckily, Dutch children are generally well behaved and that doesn't happen too often…
The great day in the calendar is actually 5 December.
Smaller children open their presents, and older children and grown-ups spend the evening together.
Everyone has made gifts for all others present, and these normally come with a little poem from ‘Sinterklaas’ himself.
In the poem the writer can say much more than would normally be allowed!
Christmas Day and Boxing Day used to be a quieter family occasion, with family dinner and perhaps a visit to church.
In recent years, however, the holiday has become more and more commercial.
Turnover in the shops for Sinterklaas and Christmas is now roughly the same.
As in many other lands, fireworks and champagne will fizz and pop as the old year ebbs away in the Netherlands.
After midnight neighbours go outside and wish everyone a Happy New Year.
COLOMBIA
Revellers pick grapes as way of seeing out old year
At this special time families in Colombia get together for the celebrations.
In most homes a pesebre — a representation of the Nativity — is made by parents and children.
Christmas trees decorated by lights and ornaments are also to be found in many homes.
The Novena, a prayer that is said daily for nine days as Christmas draws near, is part of the religious side.
A Colombian family will gather in the homes of its members during this period, and prayer is followed by dining and dancing.
The big celebration usually takes place on Christmas Eve.
The last day of the Novena is completed, then fireworks are let off, and presents distributed.
This is also the time for everyone to enjoy an extra special dinner.
Santa Claus, also called Papa Noel, is also very welcome at this time of year.
New Year is celebrated with a big party, once again with dining, dancing and fireworks.
At midnight the church bells are sounded all over the city and the sky is full of all varieties of fireworks.
At midnight, too, some high-spirited folk take part in all sorts of capers.
Some of the fitter ones run round the block carrying a suitcase.
This is supposed to mean that they will travel a lot the following year.
Others swallow 12 grapes, one with each clang of the bell at midnight.
This is said to bring good luck.
PAKISTAN
Birth of nation's founder is trigger for festivities
MUSLIMS do not celebrate any religious festival during December.
However 25 December — a public holiday — has a festive touch for Pakistanis as this day is the birthday of the nation's founder, Mr M A Jinnah, popularly known as Quaid-e-Asam.
Pakistan's flag flies on all government buildings as well as offices of private companies, and even in most houses.
For the Christian community [roughly one per cent of Pakistan's population]the day holds significance, and TV broadcasts special programmes for their benefit.
Muslim festivals are timed according to local sightings of phases of the moon, and fall about 11 days earlier each year.
The birthday of the Prophet Mohammad is known as Eid-e-Milad-un-Nabi and is a public holiday.
Unlike the birthday of Jesus Christ, Prophet Mohammad's birthday is celebrated more in religious fervour than in gaiety.
NOVA SCOTIA
That was a great holiday — and I can't wait for next year to come
CHRISTMAS is a joyful occasion for children the world over.
Here, Barbara  LASMO Nova Scotia public relations manager, views the festive event through the eyes of a typical 12-year-old Canadian girl.
The dateline is January 4th, 1993.
‘Some people think the Christmas holiday is the 10 days we just had off from school, but I think it's more than that.
It began this year when Dad made those wooden cut-out figures, the snowman and the presents.
We all helped him to paint them.
The snowman was as tall as Dad.
We put the coloured lights on the outside of the house and turned the floodlight onto the figures on the lawn, and they looked neat.
Or maybe the holidays began when Mom bought all the fruit and nuts for the fruit cake she made in November.
I asked her why she had to make it so early.
She said it has to ‘ripen’.
I guess it did, because it sure was good.
But you really know it's the Christmas holiday when the school Christmas concert comes.
This year I was in the choir and the whole family came to watch.
One of the best parts of the holiday is getting the tree and putting it up.
On Christmas Eve we also remembered to put out the cookies and milk for Santa.
The turkey, dressing and cranberry sauce were particularly yummy this year.
It didn't help that Mom had candy and nuts in dishes all over the house.
We had turkey sandwiches for supper as everyone was so full.
On Boxing Day, lots of people came over to visit.
You know the holidays are almost over when New Year arrives.
Everybody stays out late to party.
At midnight I could hear cars honk their horns.
Somebody even set off firecrackers down the street!
Well, Christmas was great but now it's gone for another year.
Never mind — there are only 310 shopping days left till next Christmas!’.
AUSTRALIA
Sizzling occasion that calls for cool drinks and suntan lotion
CHRISTMAS Day in Perth is usually a pleasant, warm sunny day with temperatures nudging towards 30° C.
The traditional turkey lunch [or dinner]is a favourite far and wide, and is usually enjoyed in the company of family and friends.
The tradition was introduced into the country by British settlers in the late 18th century.
In spite of the midsummer heat, many families choose to cook their Christmas dinner in the conventional way rather than attempt to barbecue the turkey!
Most people in the city are either lucky enough to have a swimming pool in their backyard, know someone with a pool, or maybe live fairly close to the beach.
So a swim and a cool down in the afternoon is the order of the day.
In the weeks leading up to Christmas, festivities abound.
The many service companies, professional associations and various other firms and organisations host the traditional sausage sizzles, barbecues and Christmas drinks/cocktail parties, and all this corporate hospitality helps to set the Christmas mood.
On Boxing Day most families set off for their main summer holiday, heading either for campsites in the bush or at the beach.
LASMO Australia holds an annual Christmas dinner for staff and their partners.
This takes place either in a restaurant or hotel, and is enjoyed by one and all.
During pre-dinner drinks, the staff exchange presents, a small gift to the value of $5 and given anonymously.
Needless to say, a number of people receive the strangest gifts…
Usually one of the male members of staff kindly volunteers to don a red suit and act as Santa Claus for the giving of gifts.
Because of the time differences across the globe, Australians are among the first people on Earth to herald the New Year.
In fact, because of the immense size of the country, those in Melbourne can celebrate two hours earlier than everyone in Perth.
ITALY
eat, drink and be merry — they're pasta masters!
IN ITALY Christmas is the greatest feast of the year.
In December all Italian towns are decorated with Christmas lights.
In Rome, central areas such as the Piazza di Spagna, Via Condotti and Via Veneto are particularly well decorated, while in Piazza San Pietro [St. Peter's Square]crowds flock to see a big Christmas tree — a gift from Austria — together with a Nativity scene.
At Christmas time the stores are besieged by shoppers, which adds to the everyday chaos.
But, away from the materialism, it remains for Italians a true family occasion.
Within this period, the most significant day is Christmas Eve.
This is the time everyone gathers for a special dinner, which is based on fish, and in keeping with Italian tradition eel is cooked and served in many homes.
As midnight draws near, many people make their way to church.
Then comes Christmas morning, which explodes joyfully as children rush to the Christmas tree to see what Santa has brought for them during the night.
Christmas dinner is built around hors d'oeuvres, various kinds of pasta, capon and turkey.
The feasting, fun and laughter continue well into the evening, by which time just about everyone is so full that they often prefer something lighter to eat!
A popular custom during the holiday season is to invite friends round to play traditional games such as tombola, or bingo, and card games such as mercante in fiera.
At the same time everyone can tuck into dried fruit and nuts, torrone [a type of chocolate or vanilla sweet with nuts], panettone [a type of cake with raisins], or pandoro, which is softer than panettone and does not contain raisins.
As Italians and many others would agree, fortunately for the figure Christmas comes but once a year!
SCOTLAND
Young and old let their hair down at Hogmanay
FEW nations takes their New Year revelries as seriously as the Scots.
Indeed Hogmanay is a bigger celebration than Christmas.
Whereas Christmas is viewed as a more sedate family occasion, Hogmanay is quite the opposite, and young and old see out the old year in style and ring in the new at the top of their voice.
In many towns and villages the local population gathers round the main square, or church.
Everyone links arms in a circle and, as they sing Auld Lang Syne very badly [since nobody actually appears to know the correct words!]they all rush forward together then back out again.
All this to-ing and fro-ing is accompanied by a great deal of hugging and kissing.
And, as a bonus, the pubs stay open so revellers can drink themselves merrily into the new year.
After midnight people go ‘first footing’.
This means heading off into the night to visit friends, relatives and neighbours bearing gifts of whisky and ‘black bun and shorty [shortcake]’.
After a wee dram or two to ward off the winter chill, hardier types venture forth carrying lumps of coal to pass on to others as good luck tokens.
Torchlight processions are a feature in towns such as Comrie and Biggar.
A spectacular fireball ceremony marks the celebrations in Stonehaven, while large crowds traditionally gather in George Square in Glasgow and on Edinburgh's Royal Mile.
LIBYA
Explorers talk turkey in the middle of the desert
LASMO's exploration crew try to make Christmas as traditional as possible, even though they are in the middle of rugged desert terrain and seasonal symbols such as sleighbells and snowmen seem a million miles away!
Night-time temperatures, though, are a reminder of the winter season.
From a daytime 70–75F the mercury drops to below freezing.
Turkey is flown in with the weekly food supplies, while in Tripoli some enterprising expats even breed turkeys specifically for the festive table.
The crew also make home-brew beer.
This is regarded favourably even though Libya is a Muslim country.
Christmas Day is a holiday.
After traditional lunch, the crew play the usual games such as charades.
A number of Christian churches are located in the capital, where ex-pats can celebrate midnight mass.
LOPL ready to step on the gas at Kadanwari
Straight talking finally ensures the price is right for all sides in big fuel debate.
PAKISTAN will be more self-sufficient in gas supplies from 1995 as a result of a decision by LASMO Oil Pakistan [LOPL]and its partners to proceed with the development of the Kadanwari gas field.
Located in the Thar desert region of the Sindh province, the field was first discovered by the company in 1989, with the drilling of the exploration well Kadanwari-1.
A further three wells were drilled and successfully tested to appraise the field — the last being completed in 1991.
Following detailed studies to evaluate the feasibility of developing the field, a plan was compiled by LOPL which included drilling up to 11 more wells in the central area of the field.
This plan was approved in April 1992, subject to achieving a satisfactory gas price for LASMO and its partners, and has now been submitted to the Pakistan government for approval.
Recent efforts have focused on concluding gas sales and gas pricing agreements.
Pakistan is unique in that the sale of gas has to be negotiated with a transmission company, while the price is negotiated with the government.
‘This makes for interesting discussions, since the normal matters which attract a higher gas price in the North Sea, such as high deliverability, are of no interest,’ said Lewis Affleck, LOPL's chief petroleum engineer.
The gas sales agreement was finally agreed in principle with the transmission company after protracted negotiations, involving many of LOPL's finance and operations staff, supported by LASMO plc's manager of natural gas, Martin White, and Central Region's commercial and legal manager, Jeanne-Marie de Larrazabal.
The critical aspect still to be agreed was the gas price.
This was a mammoth task since the last deal in Pakistan — by another company — was based on a formula which resulted in a price that was half of what was required to make the project economically attractive.
A team led by LOPL's general manager, Rupert Kidd, and consisting of Lewis Affleck and Martin White was set up to tackle the problem.
‘The biggest challenge was convincing the government that a change in policy was necessary — and that it would be in everyone's best interest,’ commented Rupert Kidd.
‘Not only did we have to show that economically our project needed a reasonable gas price, but we also had to demonstrate that this new policy did not result in huge changes in Pakistan's domestic consumer price.’
To achieve this major policy change required intensive lobbying with the government in Islamabad, the country's capital.
LASMO's government relations in Pakistan are in the hands of Zahid Muzzafar, who is based in Islamabad, supplemented by efforts from the Karachi and London offices.
Long days of across-the-table negotiations ensued, supported by detailed economic justifications.
Eventually, the authorities were convinced that the special circumstances of the Kadanwari field, coupled with the need to provide demonstrable incentives for future exploration, properly justified a new price regime.
‘Pakistan's indigenous gas effectively displaces large quantities of imported oil and thus development of local gas supplies has significant foreign exchange benefits as well as providing a greener fuel,’ explained Martin Scott, Central Region's managing director.
‘The wisdom of pricing gas at parity with imported oil has thus been officially recognised for the first time in Pakistan, despite being electorally unpopular.
‘Correctly pricing the gas at its fully competitive worth ensures that what is after all a scarce and valuable natural resource is rightly conserved by end users.
Lastly, it was necessary to demonstrate to our partners in the venture, the state oil companies of Kuwait and Pakistan and Idemitsu of Japan, as well as to the LASMO board, that the proposed investment was economically viable when compared with other investment opportunities open to them.’
Following the signing of the gas sales contract, the first contracts for detailed plant design and for procurement services have been agreed and LASMO's Karachi office is now gearing up to get Kadanwari gas on stream at the beginning of 1995.
‘The Kadanwari story so far is one of marked success for LASMO's international diversification programme since the signing of the original concession agreement in 1986,’ Martin commented.
‘This success has been achieved as a result of the hard work by LASMO's staff and its partners over a long time.
‘As a result, important gas reserves will now be produced into the next century, benefiting the local population and completing an investment for LASMO which — Inshallah!— has every prospect of providing well-earned profits in due course.’
Satisfaction for president on Colombia visit
A RECENT VIP visit to Colombia gave LASMO's chairman and chief executive a chance to inspect the company's projects in the republic at first hand and to meet key members of the government.
It was chairman Lord Rees's first visit to LASMO Colombia, while chief executive Chris Greentree had not been to Bogota for five years.
the main purpose of the four-day tour was to review the Colombian budget for 1993 and to introduce LASMO plc executives to members of the government and local oil industry representatives.
Among the highlights of the visit were a meeting with the president of the republic, a trip to one of LASMO Colombia's field installations and an evening of entertainment put on by staff.
Rock of a different variety from the oil industry norm was a feature of the LASMO group's half-hour meeting with Dr Cesar Gaviria, the president of the republic.
The president was well informed on both the oil industry in Colombia and LASMO's involvement in it, but it was rock and roll which provided a high point at the end of the meeting when Lord Rees presented him with a specially acquired gold disc of his favourite group, the Rolling Stones.
A full day, which also included a significant meeting with the president of Ecopetrol, the Colombian state oil company, and the Minister for Mines and Energy, was rounded off with an evening of entertainment produced and performed by LASMO Colombia staff.
The final act of the evening was a sketch based on a management committee meeting of a fictitious oil company called SALMO.
Graeme Stephens, John Moreland, Chris Bellis, Gordon Headley and Mike Travis played fictitious characters named Chris, Joe, Raimo, Norman and Tom, and, said Graeme, who is managing director of LASMO Colombia; ‘Our VIP group showed they had a fine sense of humour by entering into the fun, and no libel suits have surfaced yet!’
The following day, the visitors headed for the field and toured LASMO's Santiago field gathering and pumping facility.
This trip included a review of the company's community aid programme by public relations manager Maria Teresa de Angel, as well as the presentation of long service awards to 12 members of LASMO's field staff [see story on page 11].
The final evening saw more than 300 guests attend an industry reception, hosted by LASMO.
Commenting on the tour, Graeme Stephens said: ‘This visit was a huge success.
The management and staff of LASMO Colombia were honoured by the visit, which reinforces the widely held belief within head office and in Bogota that Colombia could well become LASMO's third core area in the near future.’
Amazon team takes a walk on the wild side
LASMO-backed expedition tracks down animals in peril.
A GROUP of British students has recently returned from a trip to South America, where they have been researching into the flora and fauna of the Colombian Amazon basin.
Their trip was sponsored by a number of organisations, including LASMO, which was particularly keen to support the trip, as it places considerable emphasis on supporting environmental initiatives.
The expedition team, which comprised five Britons and three Colombians, spent nine weeks in the field, carrying out work at two sites on the Serrania de Naquen, a mountainous region in eastern Columbia.
This region of unusual geological features is home to a number of endangered species, including ocelot and jaguar.
The field work, which was part of an investigation to see whether the area should be the subject of a conservation programme, including obtaining preliminary species lists for bats, large mammals, plants and some groups of invertebrates, such as butterflies and beetles.
The team had to reach both sites by foot from Mahimachi, a village at the foot of the Serrania — the first was a miners' camp, while the expedition members built a camp at the second site.
On their arrival back in Bogota, the team started on initial analysis of the data they had collected, prior to their return to the UK where they completed a full report.
‘The main purpose of the trip was to see whether this environmentally-sensitive area needed special protection,’ explained Kate Barlow, the expedition's co-ordinator, ‘and we were hoping to put forward recommendations that it should be conserved.
‘However, we weren't able to make that recommendation — although the geology is unusual and the forests have been opened up by gold miners, it isn't under desperate threat and we didn't feel that the area was of particular conservation value.’
Overall, however, the expedition was a great success: ‘Most of our aims were achieved, as — among other objectives — we confirmed the presence of five threatened species of mammal, we carried out the first study of bats in the area, and we gathered valuable information on the flora of the area, including the discovery of a new species,’ she continued.
The team's report will be presented to the Colombian government, as well as both the British and Colombian universities involved in the expedition and UK-based organisations which may be able to put the information to further use.
‘An expedition such as this is very good experience for students,’ Kate added, ‘Most zoology students don't get such a great chance to visit an area as remote as the Serrania.’
In addition, the contributions made by LASMO and other supporters meant that local students, who find it very difficult to get funding, were able to take part in a project in their own country.
Students are proud to receive scholarships
SIXTY four Indonesian students were in the spotlight recently when they were presented with scholarships by LASMO.
The students, who attend junior high and senior high school as well as university, won their awards through LASMO's Hajadi-Solomon scholarship programme, now in its fourth year.
Sixteen of this year's scholars are children of company employees while the rest live in the area where LASMO has its field operations.
The programme was set up in 1987 and named in memory of two employees — Ben Hajadi, an engineer who died in a car accident, and Solomon, who lost his life in a helicopter crash.
This year's awards were made at two ceremonies — one of which was in Bengkalis Regency for the students who live in LASMO's field operations area.
This event also marked the formal opening of a sports and culture week for primary school pupils, as well as an annual town trade exhibition in which LASMO took part.
John Lofthouse, regional managing director, Indonesia, and the Regent of Bengkalis made the presentations of scholarships and special T-shirts, which the proud students immediately put on over their school uniforms.
A week later, Ken Winckle, vice president of operations, led the scholarship presentation for employees' children.
Philip gets top marks for his top-class talks
PHILIP CROOKALL, a geologist with LASMO North Sea, went back to school recently — but this time it was as a lecturer.
Over the space of seven days at the end of November, Philip gave talks to geology A-level students at two schools, one in Solihull, West Midlands, and the other in Malden Manor, South London.
His first talk — to a class of 16–18 year-olds — was about general exploration and exploitation and the geologist's role within the area.
He was delighted to report a good response from the students: ‘They were very attentive and asked some informed and thoughtful questions,’ he commented.
A few days afterwards, Philip received a letter of thanks from the school's headmaster, who said that the presentations were very successful and enabled students to gain valuable first hand knowledge and understanding of the economic and industrial aspects of their studies in geology.
The school was also very grateful for a gift of text books which Philip presented on behalf of LASMO North Sea.
A few days later, he was off to south London, where he concentrated on the subject of deserts — his speciality.
‘The response was again very good and a lively question and answer session told me that the students found the talk helpful,’ he said.
Both talks came about as a result of requests from friends who attended the same BSc course as Philip and are now teachers.
David Evans, head of geology at the Heart of England School in Solihull, said that he feels it is vital to develop good links between industry and education.
Idea now catching on at the double
THE paper recycling pilot scheme at LASMO's Broadgate office has now been running for six months — and the amount of paper being collected each week has doubled.
As a result, the scheme is now to be permanent and there are plans to extend it to the Appold Street and Moorgate offices.
‘There are still occasional reports of green recycling bags going for disposal with the rest of the office refuse, and we are certainly not catching anywhere near all the potentially recyclable paper that is being thrown out,’ commented environmental engineer Andrew Ollevant, ‘but there haven't been any serious hiccups in getting the scheme established.’
At a rough estimate, staff are currently recycling less than a quarter of the paper LASMO buys.
‘But we should not despair.
The situation continues to improve and we are now recycling 200 kilos of paper each week — equivalent to almost four trees, compared to only 100 kilos a week when the scheme was first introduced,’ Andrew added.
Heliport close-up makes quite an impression on visitors
MEMBERS of LASMO Nova Scotia's relative response team recently checked in for a flying visit around the Halifax international heliport.
The trip was part of the team's continuing training programme and enabled the members to get a better understanding of how the heliport's safety services operate in the event of an emergency.
As well as attending a safety briefing, they were able to view a helicopter which was kitted out for a medical evacuation operation and to see LASMO's own computerised offshore personnel tracking system in action.
Highlight of the day was a 20 minute flight in one of the rescue helicopters.
The tracking system stores relevant details [such as home address, employer and next of kin]for all personnel travelling offshore and means that the relative response team will always have all the necessary information immediately to hand.
Airport staff put the information into LASMO's computer system at check-in, and this is kept up-to-date throughout the duration of any offshore visit.
Movements are tracked with each individual's location being constantly logged and updated as they transfer from helicopter to platform, supply vessel, or other destination.
‘Apart from being very enjoyable, the day was very educational too,’ said relative response team leader Pat McGlone.
Superpup is haring after glory on track
EVERY dog has his day…and for one young greyhound, fame and fortune could be just around the next bend.
Experts say it won't be long before Shabra Gold can lick most other dogs on the track.
For the time being, however, he's happy to save all his licks — mostly big, wet, squelchy ones — for his devoted owner, Sharon Tucler.
Shabra Gold — PJ to his friends — has the right credentials to be top dog.
Mum and dad are both noted stayers, while a few seasons ago his grandad, I'm Slippy, roared to victory in the sport's blue riband event, the Greyhound Derby.
Though one of the youngest dogs in training at Romford — he is still officially classified as a puppy — PJ has already demonstrated a fine turn of paw, winning over 400 metres earlier this month and cracking the 25-second barrier for the first.
His 10 brothers and sisters, all from the same illustrious litter, have also won races, though at lesser meetings.
PJ, however, is lining up with the very best.
Top Romford trainer Kenny Linzell says the fawn-and-white greyhound can only improve, especially when he learns to break from the traps a bit smarter than at present.
‘We might have to get him an alarm clock,’ says Sharon, secretary to David Racher, exploration manager for Asia Pacific and Western Division.
‘As a pup he was always asleep, so one day we put him in a pair of pyjamas and started calling him PJ.
Unfortunately he's still a bit dozy when it comes to starting.’
PJ, who cost £350 at three months, is already worth upwards of five times that amount.
But his value could rocket when he starts winning big races and, later, at stud.
Like any finely-tuned athlete, there must be as few distractions as possible taking PJ's mind off the serious business of racing and winning.
Hence Sharon and partner Martin can only get to be with their pedigree chum for a few precious hours on Sunday mornings at kennels in Wickford.
That's when PJ goes wild with delight and smothers his owners in doggy kisses.
On race nights Sharon and Martin spectate as PJ is videoed in action…but maybe someone ought to turn the lens on the LASMO lass herself.
‘When I see him racing I yell and scream with the best of them,’ Sharon confesses.
‘I get so excited I'm oblivious to everything and everyone around me.
‘And when the race is over, I'm don't mind where he's finished just as long as he's not been hurt.
I feel so proud of him.’
When his racing days are over, probably around the ripe old age of four, PJ will take his well-earned retirement with fellow pets Jessie the golden retriever and Bobby the cat at the family home in Hornchurch…and maybe catch up on some of that lost sleep!
Jakarta sends in the clowns
CLOWNS, games and children — 400 of them — were the main ingredients of a special day for LASMO employees in Jakarta.
This year's children's party — to which parents were also invited — was a great success.
With the assistance of 15 clowns, the party got off to a resounding start with a sing-along, with most of the children joining in.
All the same, a few were quite alarmed by the clowns, shrieking in fright and clinging to their mothers!
With so many children [plus their parents]present, things got rather hectic — particularly during the party games.
Everyone wanted to join in and have a chance of winning a prize.
Fortunately, as each child received a present at some stage of the proceedings, everyone went home happy.
Alongside the children's activities, a bazaar, organised by the Dharma Wanita women's group, offered tempting goodies such as food and drinks, children's clothes, books and toys.
Rounding off the attractions was a show featuring a clown, acrobats and a doll performance.
the end of the day saw children and parents — tired but happy — set off for home, already looking forward to the next party.
Forty reach the five-year mark
A GROUP of 40 employees were in the spotlight at a recent service awards ceremony in Bogota.
They were the first national employees to receive service awards in Colombia, as it is five years since LASMO set up business in the country.
LASMO chairman Lord Rees made the presentations during his recent tour of the company's operations.
In addition to the 40 five year awards, two expatriate employees — exploration manager Bill Porteous and logistics manager Warren Rhone — received their 10 year awards.
To be franc this idea made lots of cents
Thanks to the generosity of staff in LASMO's London offices, bags full of loose foreign coins — worth about £500 — have been sent off to two children's charities.
Expenses cashier Fiona Smith has been collecting the small change when people have returned from overseas business trips and holidays over the last six months.
Coins from all over the world — from Australia to Zimbabwe — have helped to boost the fund.
The total raised is being divided between the Young People's Trust for the Environment and Nature Conservation and the Children's Liver Disease Foundation.
Fiona is planning to continue raising funds for charity in this way next year, so all overseas travellers are asked to carry on donating those small coins that the banks don't want!
Bowman hits silver in national title bid
On target for a silver medal in archery is LASMO's Claudio Cruciani.
Claudio, who is a draughtsman in the Rome office, won second place in the barebow category of the recent Italian Archery championships.
It was his first medal in the competition, which he has been entering for five years — his previous best placing was ninth in 1990.
He took up archery just eight years ago and in that time has become a national instructor, teaching people of all ages, as well as reaching the championships.
‘I enjoy archery because it is a simple country sport,’ he said, ‘and I must admit it continues to bring out the child in me — I always enjoyed playing with bows and arrows when I was young!’
Barebow, which does not have the aiming and balancing mechanisms found on modern compound bows, looks more like a traditional bow — but Claudio says that that is as far as the connection with Robin Hood or William Tell goes.
Archery these days is a sport like any other, and he considers himself to be an athlete.
In any case, William Tell would have shot with a cross-bow, not a barebow!
To reach the final of this year's championships, Claudio had to compete over three days.
the first part of the competition consisted of 24 targets at known distances, while the second day featured another 24 targets but this time the competitors did not know the distances.
The third day saw the top four archers from the previous rounds compete in a final round of six targets, half at known distances, half at unknown distances.
Caroline's first show is right on the button
NELLY dancing their way to £1,000 were members of the North East Belly dance Group — including Caroline Hall, a secretary at LASMO North Sea's offices in Aberdeen.
Caroline and the rest of the group, who were raising funds for the BBC's annual children in Need appeal, stopped off at a Turkish restaurant during their tour of four restaurants in Aberdeen.
It was the first public appearance for Caroline, who has been learning to belly dance for about eight months.
She personally raised £250, thanks to the generosity of her colleagues in Aberdeen and London.
‘Several people didn't think I was seriously going to take part, but it was really good fun,’ she laughed.
We seem to have gone down rather well at the venues we performed in, and have already received requests to do a repeat performance for Children in Need next year — perhaps I could get LASMO emblazoned on the front of my costume then!’
Three wheels on his ‘wagon’— but Al's still rolling along!
THRILLS and spills were the order of the day for four of LASMO's Aberdeen employees when they took part in a raider racing tournament recently.
All novices at this form of stock car racing, they managed to provide the competition's winner in Dave Brittan, a drilling engineer, who beat 15 other contestants.
The tournament, which was organised by drilling services company Sperrysun, produced some daredevil driving, not least by Alan Aitcheson, who lost one of his front wheels and somersaulted off the track.
He recovered sufficiently to carry on racing — although the car required rewelding!
The other LASMO drivers — Dave Fowler and Matt Whitelaw — also managed to keep up a blistering pace, but this did not deter Dave Brittan who finished well ahead of the field.
His prize was an engraved tankard and a bottle of bubbly which, in true motor racing fashion, he sprayed over competitors and spectators alike.
Sailors have a ball and skittle home side
A TEN pin bowling competition between a LASMO Pakistan team and a group from HMS Chatham provided an opportunity for contestants to display some unusual techniques.
The bowling alley, which is part of a Karachi fairground, is very old — perhaps dating from the 1950s — and seems to have been imported from the US, commented Faye Ashton who organised the event during HMS Chatham's recent goodwill visit.
‘None of the electronic or automatic systems work, so each time you bowl, a man jumps down from a shelf behind the pins at the end of your lane, switches the light off, resets the pins, jumps back onto his shelf and switches the light back on!’ she said.
Furthermore, none of the alleys are straight, so it is difficult for bowlers to be accurate.
Both teams performed well in the face of such a challenge.
‘But I'm sorry to say that whichever way you work it out, the ship's team beat us,’ Faye added.
‘They had the highest scorer and won more games — but everyone seemed to enjoy the evening.
‘We hope to organise another contest when the next ship comes in — but plan to get a bit of practice in first.’
Just aching to please — that's so-fit Phillis
EXHAUSTING — but well worth it!
That was Phillis Harley's verdict on an aerobics marathon which raised funds for children's homes in Aberdeen.
Phillis, a technical assistant with LASMO North Sea at Aberdeen, was one of 30 oil industry employees to take part in a three-hour workout.
She raised £110, out of a total of £1,800, to help three homes for mentally and physically handicapped children.
‘It was a very worthwhile event,’ she said, ‘but I must admit that I was aching for days afterwards!’