

Dave points the way to Royal Scottish coup
Dave Chinchen (left) and John Buckland
REDUNDANT railway workers at Eastleigh near Southampton have invested hundreds of thousands of pounds with Royal Scottish after being counselled by a team of financial experts led by the company's UK Corporate Development Manager, Danny Hackett.
The workers, who used to be employed by British Rail Maintenance, have also deposited redundancy payments, running into six figures, with the Royal Bank.
However, both Royal Scottish and the Bank, might have missed out on the business had it not been for quick-thinking Dave Chinchen, a Bank Officer at Southampton High Street Branch.
Dave happened to take a telephone call from a British Rail official who wanted to know if the Bank could provide a counselling service for workers facing redundancy.
He promptly referred the caller to Southampton based Royal Scottish Consultant John Buckland who called in Danny to help set the wheels in motion.
British Rail Maintenance explained that 140 men and women had volunteered for redundancy.
Danny decided, therefore, to hold three group counselling sessions, one after the other, on the same day.
The other counsellors would be Ron Chudleigh, Resource Manager at the Regional Manager's Office Southern, Alan Williams, Business Development Manager with Private Trust and Taxation, London, and Alan Laney from the Department of Social Security, Southampton.
Said Danny, ‘After I and a BR Personnel Manager had welcomed the men and women, Alan took over to talk about National Insurance contributions and benefits.
Ron then spoke about debt management and Bank deposits, after which I took the platform to talk about investment and pensions.
Alan followed with a talk on tax and wills.’
The result, from the Royal Scottish and Royal Bank point of view, was most encouraging with almost 50 members of the audience requesting follow-up one-to-one consultations with John Buckland and another Royal Scottish Consultant, Mike Spencer-Phillips.
The Works Manager at British Rail Maintenance was also delighted, and wrote in a letter to Danny, ‘All emerging comments have been favourable and your services have been greatly appreciated by all concerned.
Dave Chinchen was not forgotten either.
Royal Scottish Chief Executive Ian Offor wrote thanking him for his prompt action and sent him a Fortnum and Mason luxury hamper as a token of appreciation.
Danny also arranged a successful group counselling session at Swindon for 25 British Rail Maintenance staff.
He was joined by Sarah Measham from Swindon Branch, Michael Jones of Trust and Taxation, London and Karen Bridge of the Department of Social Security, Swindon.
British Rail Maintenance said the session had been ‘extremely useful’.
Contest winners to lunch with Queen
STAFF at Drummond House are being invited to say why they would like to lunch with the Queen when she opens the building on 2 July.
And the two who come up with the best reasons will join the Royal gathering.
Chairman Lord Younger has announced that, in addition to a tour of the building, Her Majesty has accepted an invitation to join him for lunch.
The small number of guests at the lunch will include the two winning members of staff.
Lord Younger explained: ‘Throughout the planning for this important date, we have kept in mind the need to have the people who work in Drummond House centre-stage.
‘It is a huge building and clearly Her Majesty could not possibly visit every part of it.
We have, however, taken every opportunity to let colleagues whose departments are not included on the tour see Her Majesty at various points and to play a part in the visit.’
As reported earlier in Newsline,there are competitions to choose the child to present a posy to the Queen and the person to design the posy.
All staff at Drummond House will receive a memento of the occasion (an engraved paperweight) and, as a further celebration on the day, lunches will be free.
Buckingham Palace officials were at Drummond House on 14 May to inspect the route proposed by the special committee.
It met with their approval and Her Majesty will visit the branch, see the cash centre, with its new ‘green’ note disposal unit, observe a video-conference meeting and get a preview of the new treasury dealing room.
She will also be shown the staff restaurant, some of the many works of art in the building and an aerobics class in action.
FRAUD SLASHED — THANKS TO PHOTOCARDS What the Bank expected to lose!
Alex Barr of Payment Services showed the London Press the £45,000 the Bank would have expected to lose on 31,000 cards over 18 months.
The fact that its Photocards lost only £494 — eliminating 98.9 per cent of the predicted fraud — made the headlines in dozens of British newspapers.
Journalists unanimously welcomed the announcement that Highline Photocards are being offered to customers throughout the network and called on other Banks to follow suit.
So far only one Building Society — National & Provincial Bank — has seen the light.
Ovations galore as customers speak out
THE compliments have been pouring in since Branch Banking Division launched its Service Quality Award programme, Ovations.
More than 5,000 satisfied customers have nominated staff for Encore Certificates while fewer than 600 have sent in complaints under the separate ‘Let's be frank’ campaign.
Chief Executive George Mathewson is delighted with the 8 to 1 seal of approval, ‘It has been a terrific boost to know that the number of customers impressed with our service far outweighs those who have a complaint,’ he said.
Both schemes are being administered by Service Quality Development, and are set to run until the end of the year.
By then hundreds of customer-nominated staff, lucky enough to have won in a quarterly draw, will have been presented with Ovations cheques which can be exchanged for a wide range of goods in a special catalogue.
These include a Collins road atlas of Britain (10 Ovations), a Kenwood coffee-maker (50), a Fit-Pro exercise bike (100), a Canon Sureshot Telemax QD 35mm camera (150) and an Edwardian theatre break for two at London's Mountbatten Hotel (200).
Members of Branch Banking Service Circles can also win prizes.
First, however, the Leader must enter the Circle in the Applause competition detailing the type of project being worked on, and the success of its initiatives.
If the entry wins, the Local Director or Regional Manager will give each member of the Circle and Ovations cheque to ‘spend’ in the catalogue.
Said Chris Alderson, Head of Service Quality Development, ‘The two schemes were designed to give recognition to staff who provide outstanding service.
In that way we will raise standards of service and boost staff morale.’
Southport idea gets applause
MEMBERS of Southport Branch's Service Circle each won 50 Ovations when they came up with the idea to give printed appointment cards to customers.
It would, they said, project a more professional and organised appointment system.
Steve Burrows, Local Director, Liverpool presented the Ovations cheques watched by Ron Hill, Duncan Milne, Dave Allen, Steven Carruthers and Stephen Burrows;(front) Barbara Byrne, Julia Spencer
UK's best branches
LAURENCEKIRK, Turriff and East Wemyss Branches have been voted the best in Scotland — and the best in Britain — by Royal Bank customers.
In a recent survey each scored a customer satisfaction rating of 91 points out of a possible 100.
Top branch in the North of England and Midlands Region was Darley Dale with 89 points while in South of England Region the top spot went to Portsmouth with 88.
Customers at each of the Bank's 750 branches took part in the survey.
They were asked about staff efficiency and speed, problem solving, and the handling of telephone inquiries.
Researchers were also used in a ‘mystery shopper’ exercise to check how branches coped with particular problems and inquiries.
Home loan deals sell briskly
THE Bank's new fixed rate mortgages packages are proving popular with home owners — and new funds have been secured to allow the heavily subscribed three-year rate to continue.
The three-year package, for loans of up to 90 per cent of the property value or purchase price, is fixed at 6.99 per cent and is the most popular of the three fixed rate packages.
‘The five-year, fixed at 7.99 per cent for loans of up to 90 per cent, is also selling briskly,’ said mortgage consultant Ian Finlayson.
‘The public is becoming aware of the strong likelihood of an increase in interest rates and are turning to the longer fixtures.’
he said.
Bookings of the ten-year package, fixed at 8.99 per cent for those borrowing up to 90 per cent, have been steady since its launch and have picked up since it featured in Money Mail recently.
‘Four in ten of new mortgages are of the fixed rate type,’ said Ian.
The Bank has also launched a Right to Buy Mortgage Package that enables tenants to choose from a selection of Fixed Rate offers and First Time Buyer discounts.
Cashline network is Britain's busiest
THE Bank's Cashline network has been named the busiest in Britain with each of the 770 machines paying out an average £4.5 million a year.
To mark the achievement, Nigel Spencer, Manager, Network Development has been presented with the Retail Banking Research Award and a magnum of champagne.
The award was made at the European Financial Self-Service conference and exhibition in Edinburgh.
Cashline has recently been expanded into new areas of operation, including airports, shopping centres, supermarkets and petrol stations.
Nigel said, ‘We have also put enormous effort into improving availability, by investing in new machines, and by having a bank-wide commitment to providing the highest quality of service.
The result has been the Cashline availability has gone up from 92 per cent to 97 per cent in the last eighteen months.’
Nigel Spencer (left) receives a magnum of champagne from Andrew Copeman, a Consultant with Retail Banking Research.
Thousands put in for Reward
STRONG growth in the Bank's personal savings balances has continued, helped by the introduction of Royal Reward at the beginning of April.
The interest rate plus guaranteed 2 per cent bonus (provided no withdrawals are made) offered by Royal Reward has allowed the Bank to re-establish its claim to be offering a higher return than the top three building society bonus accounts.
Thousands of customers have opened Royal Reward accounts.
Substantial balances have come from new customers while the overall average balances are higher than Gold 90 balances which are themselves significant.
Royal Reward was launched following extensive research.
The relatively large bonus was preferred by the majority of longer-term savers and the idea of a substantial reward for maintaining savings untouched is clearly popular.
Interest can be paid either on an annual or monthly basis and Royal Reward has tiered rates which means the more the customer invests, the higher the rate they will attract and the faster their money will grow.
The guaranteed two per cent bonus applies on all the interest rate tiers, so small savers are rewarded with the same bonus rate as the bigger savers.
Newspapers urged to check their facts
Bob McInnes slams bad reporting
INACCURATE reporting by the media — particularly newspapers — was condemned by Bob McInnes, Branch Banking Division's Deputy Managing Director, when he spoke at an informal dinner in North Queensferry, Fife.
And he had a blunt message for the audience —‘God forfend that we should ever allow the media to tell us how to run our business.’
Bob had been invited to address the gathering by Boyd Brodie, Regional Manager, Central Scotland and South Fife, who arranged the dinner, and three others, for professional customers.
To support his criticism of the Press, Bob gave some examples of bad reporting.
On one occasion, he told the guests, ‘you might have believed that we were on the verge of adding 3,500 redundancies to the total of Scottish unemployed.
In fact, we are talking about a reduction in the number of jobs across the UK over the next two to three years — the great bulk of which will be accommodated by the normal process of retirals, voluntary resignations and so on.
More than that, Direct Line is undoubtedly creating many more jobs in Glasgow at present than the Group is shedding.
‘More recently,’ said Bob, ‘you might have believed that bonuses actually were being offered to managers who could find ways of exploiting our customers.
Several papers said so — and are still unwilling to listen to the facts which are that we are simply encouraging staff — not branch managers — to collect fees which are properly due.
‘Would there have been criticism of any other retailer doing the same?’, he asked.
‘God grant that some editor somewhere is thinking about educating his staff in the need to check stories before rushing into print — an ethic of journalism which seems to have all but disappeared these days,’ said Bob.
‘If that editor were here tonight, I would love to issue a challenge to him: if someone tells you that the Royal Bank increases any customer's charge without prior notice, he's wrong.
Check it; if someone tells you that the Royal Bank, because of the experiences of the recession, is no longer interested in lending to viable businesses — large or small — he's wrong.
Check it; and if someone tells you that the Royal Bank is now only interested in improving its bottom line, and no longer cares about people at all, he's wrong.
Check it!
And he added, ‘Please don't send along the young pseudo-philosopher who will tell us for the umpteenth time that, of course, he fully understands the Bank's attitude.
‘After all, you're just in business to make money, aren't you?’
‘I never thought that was the principal reason for being in the banking business,’ said Bob.
‘Sure, we want to make profits to give our shareholders a reasonable return on their investment, and to enable us to maintain and enhance our capital base so that we can give a steadily better service to an ever larger number of customers.
Does that make us different from any other kind of business?
‘Exploiting customers by levying higher charges than we could justify on grounds of cost or, worse, cheating them by using clandestine methods to raise interest rates on borrowing for reasons other than perceived risk would be the surest way to lose customers in what is, these days, a very competitive industry.
Many systems and many faces may have changed over the last year or two and I don't imagine you would believe me if I said that none of these changes had saddened me but, in a changing market-place, the basics haven't changed and the most basic precept of all is that there are no healthy banks where there are no health customers to sustain them.
‘I welcome the opportunity, therefore, of assuring all the customers of the Royal Bank here this evening that it is still our basic aim to do whatever we can to promote your welfare, and to deal with you fairly on every occasion.
‘We are emerging from just about as difficult a period as I can remember in over 37 years in the business, but we are emerging with capital ratios still among the strongest of any of the world's banks — ready and willing to lend for any viable purpose, and desperate for the chance to show both personal and corporate customers that the personal, flexible, friendly service which we have tried to give in the past and which I hope has given us the privilege of enjoying your company tonight — that same service is still very much on offer today.’
Speakers at the four dinners also included Iain Bell, Group Managing Director, Johnston Press; Lord Younger, Chairman of the Royal Bank; James Miller, Chairman of William Low & Co, Tony Schofield, Managing Director of Branch Banking Division, and Jim Wardrop, Manager, Business Development, International Division, Glasgow.
The three other dinners were held at Kirkcaldy, Stirling and Livingston.
Bank wins ‘What Mortgage’ award
THE Royal Bank has been voted one of the top mortgage lenders of the year by What Mortgage magazine.
And in recognition of the achievement, Rose Brownlie, Senior Accounts Manager, Personal Banking at Great Tower Street has been presented with an award.
The presentation — by Shadow Housing spokesman John Battle — took place at the prestigious Savile Club in London.
Rose, who has responsibility for the largest mortgage book in the South East of England, said she was delighted.
The overall award went to the Chesham Building Society but because the awards were based on performance over the last 10 years, the Royal Bank should soon be pitching for the top spot.
Rose Brownlie receives the award from Shadow Housing spokesman John Battle.
Straight talking…=
IT is always very difficult to identify turning points.
Norman Lamont got a lot of stick for allegedly having identified the green shoots of recovery somewhat prematurely.
His failing, if failing it proves to be, is not unique.
As an eminent American economist once remarked, ‘The Stock Market has anticipated 10 out of the last 3 recessions and 12 of the last 3 recoveries!’
Despite these  salutary precedents, I am increasingly confident that the Royal Bank Group has turned the corner.
Things seem to be moving our way both within the Group and without.
I was asked in the Straight Talking video last December — and I am still amazed at the number of people who believe that he questions on that video were stage managed, which they weren't — when morale would improve.
I replied that morale would improve as the Group's performance did.
I still believe that.
There are now lots of signs that performance has indeed improved.
The Bank has achieved very encouraging increases in interest and non-interest income in a flat economy.
We have grown our mortgage book very substantially in a stagnant housing market.
We have successfully positioned ourselves as a Bank which wants its customers' savings.
We have got our costs under far better control.
In other parts of the Group, the profits of Direct Line have taken off as we always said they would.
The company will shortly sign up its one millionth motor policy holder.
In Citizens we have that rare thing, a clean and profitable New England retail bank.
Citizens has concluded two imaginative acquisitions since the turn of the year and is set for more.
It now has a presence in three of the five New England states.
I hope we have turned the corner.
I'm increasingly confident that we have.
However, I'd be dishonest if I pretended that life would suddenly become rosy again.
It won't.
The implementation of Columbus will take time and it will involve major changes to the way in which we conduct our business.
The fact that the changes will give us a stronger, better Bank and a better place in which to work doesn't make their impact any easier to bear.
Only by making these changes can we regain the ground which we lost during the recession in our core geographic market, Scotland.
I am committed to making sure that you have the premises, the technology and the support to make these changes.
I can't deliver these resources overnight but I can say that when we talk about building the Best Banking and Financial Services Group, we don't simply mean the best for our shareholders.
We mean the best to work in and the best to buy from.
I believe that being best for employees, customers and shareholders are all inextricably linked.
Our half year results demonstrate that we're doing a lot of the right things to get there.
Quality service brings reward at Card Centre
SHARP-eyed post room worker Steve Kelly helped prevent a possible £500,000 fraud after spotting a batch of credit cards in Royal Bank window envelopes.
Instead of putting them in the Credit Card Centre's outgoing mail — they were all addressed to ‘problem’ areas — Steve called in the Fraud Section who made sure they were sent registered mail in plain envelopes.
Steve's prompt action was recalled at a special dinner in Southend when he and 13 other Credit Card staff were presented with Quality of Service Awards — a selection of crystal — by Senior Manager Bob Docherty.
Sorting mail
Bob said Steve had spotted the envelopes while sorting out mail for first class delivery.
When he saw they were addressed to areas where letters have been intercepted and stolen cards used by thieves, he decided not to send them out and got in touch with the Fraud Section.
Bob said that the average fraud committed with stolen cards amounts to between £1,500 and £1,800.
Therefore Steve's vigilance prevented a potential loss of approximately £500,000.
Another award winner, Fraud Section Supervisor Joe Gomez, helped police track a husband and wife team with previous convictions for credit card fraud.
Joe saw an opportunity to get the couple to visit a branch to pick up a ‘replacement’ card but when they arrived the police moved in and detained them.
Melanie Ling was nominated for an award ‘for the outstanding commitment she has shown since being given the task of setting up and supervising a unit to handle the recently acquired Grand Metropolitan Scheme’.
Melanie, a working mother, is contracted to work four hours a day, but, said Bob, ‘even though she has the time consuming task of caring for her baby, when the situation has arisen, she has worked full days in order to ensure the smooth running of her team.’
Jason Winyard of Company Cards noticed that a company was abusing its credit card facility by passing credits through its company account payable to itself.
This, therefore, showed the company to have a much larger credit turnover figure than was actually the case.
Their Access credit card facility has now been withdrawn.
Brett Crawley of New Accounts supervised the conversion of 3,500 Staff Business Cards into the new Gold Mastercard.
This entailed opening up new accounts for all the cardholders, sending out the new cards, and closing the old accounts.
‘Brett was responsible for the vast amount of this work,’ said Bob, ‘and was left to co-ordinate the project very much on his own.
He did this willingly and without complaint, often coming in over a complete weekend in order to have all the new cards out by the end of August which was largely achieved.’
Andy Gardner and Ian Dally were released from their normal duties in the Collections Section to assist with the installation of a Powerdialler unit — new technology — which will automate many of the collection routines.
Due to  unforeseen problems, they became so heavily involved in the project that both found it necessary to develop new skills which led to them becoming competent programmers in their own right.
Adapted well
‘They have adapted well and without complaint to an entirely alien environment and their dedication and enthusiasm to the task is to be commended,’ said Bob.
Other award winners were Steve Ling and Julie Quinn (Accounts), Mandy Woolacott, Kate McDonagh and Gavin Bennett (Cardholder Services), Adrian Simpkins (Fraud Section) and Lucy Stone (Systems Developments).
Our photograph shows (from left) Julie Quinn, Jason Winyard, Gavin Bennett, Steve Ling, Mandy Woolacott, Ian Dally, Joe Gomez, Adrian Simpkin, Lucy Stone, Steve Kelly, Brett Crawley, Kate McDonagh, Melanie Ling and Andy Gardner.
Soccer star joins Leeds line-up
Gordon Strachan (centre) with staff at Leeds Park Row Branch.
LEEDS and Scotland footballer Gordon Strachan (centre) lined up with staff from Leeds Park Row after opening a newly installed Cashline machine at the Branch.
Ian MacWilliam, a customer at Dumfries High Street, and the first person to use the facility.
was given a bottle of whisky!
The Park Row machine is one of several opened in recent weeks a various locations throughout Britain including the Rangers shop in Edmonston Drive, Glasgow, and the Scotmid supermarket in Old Edinburgh Road, Uddingston.
Royal support for travelling exhibitions…=
HUNDREDS of fascinating items from Glasgow Museums are being taken on a two year tour of Britain — thanks to a sponsorship deal with the Royal Bank.
The articles grouped into four exhibitions, include elaborate 19th century quilts made from military uniforms, some of the best (and most unusual) factory-made glass from Scotland, tools used by prehistoric man, and a collection of butterflies threatened with extinction.
A fifth exhibition —Exploitation Earth — looks at some of the ways in which natural resources are exploited, for what purpose and with what end result.
The Quilts in Uniform exhibition opened in Halifax towards the end of last year.
It moved to Bradford on 8 May and then to Dorchester, Workington, Peebles and Hawick.
Modern Scottish Glass has already been seen by scores of visitors to the Tweeddale Museum, Peebles.
It will reopen at the Pilkington Glass Museum, St Helens on 26 June for a month before moving to Kingswinford, Cumbernauld, Dundee and Aberdeen.
Visitors to the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum were the first to see Exploitation Earth .
This reopens in Dumfries on 1 September and then moves to Keighley, Droitwich Spa, Tain, Sunderland, Cumbernauld, Cheltenham and Braintree.
In Touch with the Past will be unveiled at the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum on 18 September.
It will then move to Alloa, Kirkintilloch, Ullapool, Fortrose, Portmahomack, Peebles, Cumbernauld, Bowness-on-Windermere and Ilkley.
Butterflies — who cares?also has its first showing at Kelvingrove — and will run until 20 June.
The exhibition will then move to Luton, Cumbernauld and Inverness.
According to Gordon Fenton, the Royal Bank's Community Affairs Manager, the exhibitions have something for just about everyone.
And he explained that as a result of the Bank backing the tour, a much wider audience — many in remote areas — would be able to gain an insight into what Glasgow Museums have to offer.
‘I hope that many of our customers will be among those to visit the exhibitions,’ he added.
Further details of each exhibition can be obtained from Royal Bank branches in the vicinity of the exhibition venues.
Business talk at Walsall Branch
THE advantages of two Royal Bank services — Electronic Data Interchange and Royline — were explained to a group of solicitors and accountants during an evening presentation at Walsall Branch.
Stan Durham, Senior Assistant Manager, Central Support, Electronic Banking Services, Ian Bell, EDI Business Development Manager, and Royline Consultant Andrew Foulkes were the main speakers.
Frank Muirden (Branch Manager), Tony Chapman (Senior Assistant Manager), staff members Gary Jones, Evelyn Kelly, Jason Cleveley, Diane Franklin and Carol Price, and Royal Scottish Consultant Roland Roberts were also present.
Assistant Manager Alice Read said one Royline sale was made, taking the branch's sales so far this year to seven against a target of four, and Roland gained several valuable leads.
A buffet supper was served and a lot of goodwill was generated.
Bank unveils ‘green’ policy
THE Bank has published its first Corporate Environmental Policy Statement to inform staff, customers and shareholders of its commitment to protecting the environment.
Printed on chorine free environmentally friendly paper, the document outlines the Bank's policy on recycling, pollution, energy, credit proposals and other environmental issues.
The Bank has developed a strategy which aims to reduce significantly its overall operational impact on the environment, and an Environmental Steering Group has been established under the Chairmanship of Norman McLuskie, Managing Director, Operations Division.
The Boston Five
Citizens and Boston will make a ‘good match’
Larry Fish (left Chairman of Citizens Financial Group, chats with Peter Blampied, Chairman of the Boston Five, after a meeting at Citizens' headquarters in Providence.
CITIZENS Financial Group is taking a major step towards its goal of doubling in size within a 100-mile radius of its Providence, Rhode Island headquarters.
It has reached definitive agreement to purchase Boston Five and its subsidiaries for approximately US $95 million.
Approval from Boston Five stockholders and state and federal regulators is required.
The acquisition should take six to nine months to complete.
Adding The Boston Five's $1.7 billion in assets will make Citizens a $6.4 billion bank holding company, the sixth largest in New England.
The merger of Boston Five's mortgage servicing operation with Gulf States Mortgage Co will double the size of Gulf States to $8 billion, making it the 42nd largest mortgage firm in the United States.
Citizens Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer Larry Fish told employees the two banks make a good match because of their shared philosophy about the way to treat customers and employees, and the way they conduct business.
As is the case with Citizens Bank of Massachusetts and Citizens Bank of Rhode Island, Boston Five has an ‘outstanding Community Reinvestment Act rating.
‘When it came down to it,’ Larry said, ‘they decided to give up their 167 years of independence and join us — to become a part of the franchise we want to build in Massachusetts.’
Boston Five Chairman Peter Blampied said his executives succeeded this year in returning the bank to profitability but it was clear that further rebuilding and expansion would require time and capital beyond Boston Five's present means.
Last year, the company decreased its non performing assets by 34 per cent and increased mortgage originations by 53 per cent.
The Boston Five operates 25 branch offices — 16 in Boston and its neighbourhoods; two each in Chelsea, Quincy and Revere; and one each in Arlington, East Milton and Hingham.
When the transaction is completed, the Boston Five will be merged with Citizens Bank of Massachusetts (CBM).
It will increase CBM's deposits to $2.2 billion.
The acquisition will mean other changes as well for Citizens Bank of Massachusetts.
CBM has been consolidating its headquarters operation this year in Plymouth, on the heels of last September's government-assisted acquisition of the former Plymouth Five Cents Savings Bank.
The Boston Five's main office on School Street, Boston's famed Freedom Trail, meanders past the front door.
Larry said the acquisition made good sense because the Boston Five is the best mortgage bank in New England, and is a good retail bank with tremendous growth potential through improved product marketing.
He said it also has excellent staff.
Mark Formica, President of Citizens Bank of Rhode Island, told Citizens employees that based upon his past experience with acquisitions, Citizens and the Boston Five component will do well.
‘The only losers in this transaction are the larger regional banks, because they now have another competitor of significant size.
During a visit to Plymouth, Mass., in April, Royal Bank Vice Chairman Charles Winter said the deal fits nicely with what the parent bank is looking for in its growth plan.
‘Expansion elsewhere in the USA has a very low priority for us,’ he said.
‘Expansion elsewhere in the USA has a very low priority for us,’ he said.
‘Expansion in a meaningful way in New England is a high priority for us.
We have an affinity for this region.
We feel comfortable here.’
Favourable response from newspapers
BRITISH and American newspapers gave a favourable reception to the acquisition of the Boston Five Bancorp by Citizens Financial Group.
The Financial Times said the acquisition represent a significant step towards the Royal Bank's goal of generating at least 10 per cent of its earnings from the US.
It also underlined the growing importance of the Royal's UK banking operations.
Bill Millar.
Business Correspondent of The Scotsman , pointed out that Boston is a leading financial centre ‘and a presence there is regarded as essential to long-term success.’
The Independent claimed Boston Five looks a relatively safe acquisition.
‘Its concentration on domestic mortgages makes it more like a building society than a bank and, although it has been making losses with the rest of them, it has just managed to climb back into profitability.’
However,The Times warned that the deal took Citizens into a much larger market in Massachusetts, ‘a state that has been the graveyard of more banks than the federal authorities would care to remember.’
Across the Atlantic, the Boston Herald described the price of $95 million — 1.8 times the book value on 31 January — as ‘a little expensive but worthwhile to Citizens.’
The Boston Globe quoted Citizens' Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer Larry Fish as saying, ‘We think the worst is over in New England, and it seems like the right point in the cycle to begin our growth and expansion in the region.’
Citizens Group also comprises Citizens Savings Bank, Citizens Bank of Massachusetts and the Gulf States Mortgage Company.
The Boston deal will double Gulf States' mortgage portfolio to $8 billion, making it the 42nd largest mortgage firm in the country.
It will also increase the number of Citizens branches from 60 to 85.
The Boston Five is a 167-year-old savings bank.
At the end of October last year, its loans — including mortgages — totalled $1.4 billion.
Failed bank acquired in separate deal
CITIZENS Financial Group has bought the failed New England Savings Bank for £32 million.
The deal involved the purchase of NESB assets worth almost £500 million from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the assumption of about £456 million of the Bank's deposits.
All 21 NESB branches have re-opened under the name of Citizens Bank.
Royal Bank Chief Executive Dr George Mathewson said, ‘Following hard on the heels of our announcement in April that we had agreed to acquire the Boston Five, this is another encouraging step towards our strategic aim of deriving more than 10 per cent of our earnings from the USA.
To do this we will at least double the size of Citizens, both through organic growth and by expanding into the states adjoining its Rhode Island base.
Hospital opts for Charter
CHESTER Branch fought off tough competition, not least from the existing account holders National Westminster, to win the banking contract for the new Countess of Chester Hospital NHS Trust.
Facilities provided include Royline, BACS and the Employees Loan Scheme.
Senior Corporate Manager Alan Lingard said, ‘With over 5000 employees we see this as an ideal opportunity to market the Bank's services.
Since the banking was taken on we have already seen £4 million in deposit balances and also hope to complete a financial arrangement with RoyScot which could provide £20k in commission to the Branch.’
Profits up at Royal Scottish
ROYAL Scottish Assurance doubled its profit contribution to the Royal Bank to £6.3 million during the half-year to 31 March.
More than 13,000 new policies were completed in that period with new annual premium business increasing by 19 per cent to £7 million, and single premium business almost doubling to £57 million.
Chief Executive Ian Offor described the figures as ‘very pleasing.’
Ian also said that since the company was launched in October 1990, the sales force had grown from 40 to 270 and overall, more than 420 jobs had been created.
To ensure Consultants had a first class knowledge of the industry, all were obliged to obtain the Financial Planning Certificate awarded by the Life Insurance Association and Chartered Insurance Institute.
Cashline at Asda
CUSTOMERS at the Asda superstore in Rawtenstall, Lancashire can now stock up on cash as well as groceries after the opening of the store's first Cashline machine.
The Rawtenstall store is the first of the supermarket chain's English stores to get Cashline, and to celebrate the occasion staff from the town's branch handed out carrier bags and keyrings to shoppers as well as answering account enquiries.
OPEN LINE
THE Editor welcomes contributions for publication in OPEN LINE but reserves the right to shorten or amend them.
Letters should include the writer's name and address, but on request these will not be published or disclosed.
Plucky staff beat City bombers
Dear Editor
FOR the second year in succession, St Mary Axe staff have been affected by an IRA bomb.
On this occasion, however, 12 members of staff were working in the Bury Street Office in preparation for the merger with the Great Tower Street Grouping.
Bishopsgate is locked only a few hundred yards form the Bury Street Office and the explosion blew in a skylight, narrowly missing Jon Staniforth.
It also buckled the front door of the premises.
Although initially shaken by the experience, the plucky 12 carried on working in traditional Royal Bank spirit in order to achieve the task in hand.
Naturally, the advice of the local police was taken before continuing work and they concurred that the staff were best placed in Bury Street at that time.
On duty with Jon were Wendy O'Donnell, Joannah Mellors, Jan Maslen, Rob Lee, Doug Franklin, Julie Taylor, Mark Belcher, Mark Carter, Steve Lee, Linda Good and Philippa Fenner.
It is to their credit that the office was ready for business on the Monday with a full service being provided to the customers.
Customer car care!
Dear Editor
CONTRARY to reports in certain sections of the media, the Royal Bank's customer care policy is still very much alive and jumping.
When a customer at Glasgow's Charing Cross West Branch found her car battery was flat, Tina Browne, a member of staff at the Local Operations Centre situation above the Branch, offered to give her a jump-start.
The result was a very satisfied customer was able to drive away minutes later, Tina having proved it is not necessary to work in a branch to provide good customer service.
There was an ironic footnote to the story, however.
The grateful customer sent Tina a box of chocolates but only a few days earlier she had vowed not to eat any chocolates because of Lent.
From tea maker to charity supporter
Dear Editor
I am writing to make readers aware of the registered charity.
The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust.
My finance and I have recently formed a local group with a view to organising fund raising events to increase people's awareness of the role of this charity, and to increase the numbers on the donor register.
The Anthony Nolan Research Centre manages the world's largest register of potential bone marrow donors.
The Trust was started in 1974 by Shirley Nolan whose son Anthony, died in 1979, aged 7, of an immune deficiency disease, without a matching donor being found.
I became involved when I attended a clinic, thinking I was going to assist with the tea-making!
I ended up giving a sample of blood, which has been tissue typed and partially matched to someone in need of a transplant.
I am now awaiting results to further tests.
You can help by allowing a blood sample to be taken if you are:
Between 18/40.
In excellent health.
Weigh at least 8 stone.
Prepared to suffer a little discomfort to save the life of another person.
Statistics show that only 1 in 1000 samples actually leads to a transplant.
Anyone requiring further information, should contact me at Mosley Street, Manchester (Administration Section) on Extension 23220.
Glasnost with ‘the Action Bank’
Dear Editor
SHEFFIELD Church Street Branch was recently given the opportunity to foster international relations with bankers from the former Soviet Union.
Three Ukrainian bankers from the INKO Joint Stock Bank of Kiev (motto: the Action Bank) spent a week with the Branch gaining a valuable insight into the way western financial institutions operate.
The Royal Bank's participation was the brainchild of Bill Speirs, a lecturer in management at Sheffield University who has close ties with the Branch.
Our participation was well received and much to our satisfaction all three visitors found the Royal Bank's level of co-operation and commitment far superior to that offered by our competitors within the City.
The week concluded with an informal dinner hosted at the Branch where Clive Gibbs, the Regional Manager, and members of the management team were able to cement future co-operation and friendship with Ukrainian champagne and, of course, the obligatory vodka.
The opportunity was also taken to exchange gifts — so watch out for those Royal Bank of Scotland umbrellas on the streets of Kiev during future television news reports.
The evening also gave Keith Jones, Manager, Personal Banking at Sheffield Church Street Branch, the opportunity to exhibit his Russian skills whilst conversing with the non-English speaking party member and also when rounding off the evening with a traditional toast in Russian.
Indeed, this event was the first of several that has enabled Keith to use his knowledge of Russian as he has also been asked to write a short speech for a Coopers and Lybrand partner in Sheffield and subsequently coach him with his delivery skills.
Minutes of the Meeting
Dear Editor
IRENE Boyd took the minutes when our branch held a staff meeting and typed them out in the following verse:
Ledgers
Tell everyone without delay
The Prices that we charge today
So that each branch will charge the same
Thus retaining the Bank's good name
For all the places this is not in force
You'll receive a memo in due course.
Ledgers are doing extra odds & sods
Without it appears the extra bods
But management will really strive
Where bodies permit to give you five.
Cash
No more going in a bunch
When its time for managers lunch
Twelve to one and one to two
From now on that's what they'll do.
Training
Proper training on the job
There's no one to help I hear you sob
The person who was showing me how
Isn't at this branch now!
Andrew will try to do his duty
By providing some continuity.
Processing
Processing have got some gripes
Joyce is on the warpath, cripes!
Regular batches no matter how small
We would rather than none at all.
People forget how much they've spent
We often hear their sad lament
It wasn't me who cashed that cheque
Show them the slip, ‘it was?
Oh heck!
‘I'm sorry to have made a fuss’.
‘That's all right no bother to us’.
Holiday Schedules
Could subs have copies of holiday schedules?
Course you can, you little petals
Just as soon as they're completed
Then they'll all be circulated.
Barley Corn 3
Yes, I know.
Obituaries are elsewhere in the paper.
But I must say how said it made me to hear of the death of Walter the Gardener.
Walter Grant for many years combined the role of destroyer (of dirty bank-notes) and creator (of the lovely garden at 36 St Andrew Square).
Walter was a character.
Those who met him or merely saw him on BBC's What's My Secret (he had burnt £100 million) would have seen that straight away.
Those of us privileged to have spoken to him at some length and to have seen his fascinating family albums would have known of his boyhood tea with Hitler, his Military Medal midstream in some Eastern battlefield and a host of other incidents.
Finding a Unique Selling Point for banking services is no easy matter these days.
In April, however, our colleagues on the lovely island of Arran managed to upstage their rivals who had featured in the local newspaper a few weeks previously.
Following the recently installed Cashline machine, we were able to claim to be the only bank which offered tourists an engraving of the island's most famous landmark from the cash-dispenser!
The souvenir, a view of Brodick Castle, does not come cheap, it is on the back of our £20 notes.
Talking of bank-notes and following Barleycorn's exclusive revelation of the Corporate Lada Initiative, we can reveal another brilliant money-saver.
Imagine how much it would cost to advertise on every page of every newspaper in Scotland.
Now consider that you would then still only just approach the 95 million Royal Bank notes in circulation.
For far too long we have given free publicity for such tourist spots as Edinburgh Castle.
Glamis and Balmoral.
Are there, we ask knowingly, plans to sell advertising on the backs of our bank-notes for a limited range of tasteful products such as fine textiles, whiskies, golf clubs and top  people's hotels?
Watch this space — or rather the space on the backs of those notes.
Those Lines on the Lada were taken by some as less than kind to the Bank Car Scheme.
A reader has pointed out to me: ‘It is quite unreasonable for you to criticise the scheme since it may not be generally known that any Senior Manager is able to purchase a top-of-the-range BMW K Series four-cylinder model anti-lock brakes, black paint finish, radio etc and still have funds to spare.’
What a pity the vehicle has only two wheels.
Chief Press Officer Alwyn James has, I see, won a Guardian travel prize and is off for a week in the Philippines.
Now if I were Alwyn I would not be too proud of winning a competition to see who could use more cliches than anyone else.
Seen through this end of history's telescope, the Great Depression was good for the Royal Bank.
After all we picked up Williams Deacon's, Glyn Mills (including Childs and Holts) and Drummonds Bank.
Now, as the cold winds blow in New England, our transatlantic chums in Citizens seem to be doing a repeat act, picking up the odd dime or at least two Five Cents, Plymouth Five Cents and Boston Five Cents.
I'm sure our successors will be looking back at those acquisitions as good ones!
Once upon time, a Royal Banker of elevated rank noticed as he drove to the City on the morning of the Queen Mum's birthday that the flags were not flying on the most relevant of our buildings.
As a result, directives were issued that on flag-flying days hoisting should take place at 8 am.
One branch asked for a dispensation.
It appears that access to the flagpole on the bank's building was via the bedroom of the young couple who rented the flat above.
Permission granted.
Chris and Susan spend the day with Direct Banking
DIRECT Banking rolled out the red carpet for two special guests.
Chris Law of Internal Audit, Regent's House and Susan Grieve of Leamington Spa Branch were taken on a tour of the department, given a slap-up lunch and presented with a £250 cheque by Bob McInnes, Branch Banking's Deputy Managing Director.
The two were given the VIP treatment after winning Newsline's competition to find a name for the Telephone Service Unit.
Both suggested Direct Banking and therefore shared the £500 prize.
Chris and Susan were welcomed to Drummond House by Lesley Taylor, Head of Direct Banking.
They were shown a video about the department and introduced to members of the team who are setting up the service.
After lunch they were given a detailed demonstration of how the Direct Banking system works and were so impressed that both accepted an invitation to join the service.
Direct Banking is currently being field tested among staff and customers in Dundee and staff at Regent's House.
Later this month (June) the test is to be extended to South East England.
Bob McInnes presenting framed copies of the Direct Banking logo to prizewinners Chris Law and Susan Grieve.
In the background are members of the team setting up the system.
Pensions deal seen as a huge success
Peter Bowkett, Deputy Regional Manager, Royal Scottish Assurance (standing, second from left) with (from left) Eric Grant (senior Manager's Assistant), Roland Roberts (Consultant), Doug Burns (Senior Corporate Manager, Colmore Row) and Don McCart (Area Pensions Manager).
ALMOST the entire workforce at a Birmingham engineering company has agreed to join a tailor-made group pensions plan drawn up by Royal Scottish Assurance.
One hundred and four of the 114 staff at Hills Zinc Die Casting ‘signed-up’ for the scheme after being briefed by Royal Scottish sales staff.
Dave Salisbury, Royal Scottish Regional Sales, Manager for the Midlands and South West, described the deal as ‘one of the biggest success stories for Royal Scottish to date’.
Hills were also delighted and sent Royal Scottish a letter congratulating them on their professional handling of the entire process.
There were also smiles at Colmore Row Branch which stands to earn about £15,000 commission for introducing Royal Scottish to Hills, one of its corporate customers.
Acceptance of the pension plan by the workers came 12 months after Doug Burns, Senior Corporate Manager at Colmore Row Branch, first met executives from the engineering company.
The first hint that Hills might be interested in a group pensions plan came when the company's Board asked him to arrange a formal briefing.
In stepped Peter Bowkett, Deputy Regional Manager for Royal Scottish, together with Branch Consultant Roland Roberts and Area Pensions Manager Don McCart with a presentation.
The Board members were impressed and requested similar presentations for the entire staff.
Consequently five repeat performances were staged in one day, the final one — for the night shift — finishing at 11 00pm.
Over the next five days, Roland Don and Peter held one-to-one sessions for staff seeking more information before ‘signing-up’ all but 10 of them.
Cash for Spring clean
MORE than 20,000 young folk throughout England rolled up their sleeves and pitched into an annual countryside clean-up.
For the fifth year running RBS funded the Groundwork Trust initiative and once again staff at many of the 70 branches near the projects added muscle to the money.
Darell Hitchen, Senior Manager at Carlisle, for example, joined West Cumbrian children in building a floating haven for birds at a nearby nature reserve — and enjoyed it.
‘It's good to get the chance to help Groundwork in its efforts to improve the countryside,’ he said.
Pauline Brydon who looks after the Bank's Community Fund told Newsline:‘Of course like all voluntary organisations, Groundwork came initially in search of financial support — and at over £30,000 this is a significant Community Fund investment.
But they really appreciate it when they get help and encouragement from the local branches, from Carlisle to Plymouth.
They, and I, would like to thank all RBS volunteers who joined in the clean-up operations.’
Holborn voted London's best overall branch
John Bell (centre) with (from left) Paul Kelly (Manager, Holborn), Alan Twort (Chief Manager, Pall Mall), Wilf Barton (Chief Manager, Threadneedle Street) and top student Julian Gouge.
LONDON Region staff who performed to an exceptionally high standard last year were guests of Local Director John Bell at an awards dinner at The Dorchester.
Holborn picked up the 1992 Best Overall Branch prize, Threadneedle Street were presented with a plaque for being top Branch in the Customer Satisfaction Index for 1992–93, and Pall Mall received the Cost/Income Award for 1991–92/ The top student award went to Julian Gouge who, in 1992, achieved the highest aggregate marks among all Royal Bank candidates in the Associateship examinations.
Julian works in the Local Director's Office, London.
Chris Pearson, Director, South of England and Private and Offshore Banking, was among the guests and also present were the winning teams from the 1991 and 1992 London Region Product Knowledge Quiz — Holborn and Great Tower Street.
Interims: extracts from the papers
WITH the Interim results a few weeks behind us, here are some of the interpretations of the City journalist.
The pre-tax figure was above City expectations and gave evidence that the bank is finally coming to grips with its bad-debt problem.
The Herald 
The highlight at the Royal Bank these days is Direct Line.
It is proving an amazing success.
At some point soon Direct Line could provide the Royal Bank with immensely handsome capital profits.
The Guardian 
With its shares trading at a premium of 54 per cent to net assets, RBS has little need to worry about a bid from Lloyds or any other bank for that matter.
Financial Times 
The efficiency gains that RBS wrought in the first few months of Project Columbus reflect how much fat it was carrying.
Financial Times 
Royal has many attractive points.
It has the best American subsidiary of all the clearers and a superb insurance business in Direct Line.
Financial Times 
Direct Line, if it continues its current heady growth, should easily fill the gap left by the Charterhouse Merchant banking subsidiary, whose sale should be completed by the summer.
The Scotsman 
Homely loan!
A mortgage adviser's ‘office’— shaped like a house — has been set up at Bradford Branch.
Champagne and cake as branches celebrate birthdays
Hawick staff celebrate.
From left are Mary Wilson, Alan Bell, Dorothy Anderson, Alan McKilligan and Manager George Thomson.
Grimsby's past and present managerial line-up.
From left are Brian Curson (the Branch's first Manager), Stephen Wood (present Manager), Mike Hutchins (Local Director, Leeds) and John Burrows (former Manager and now Senior Manager, Doncaster Branch).
ANNIVERSARY celebrations have been held at a number of branches in recent weeks but the biggest birthday of them all — 160 years — was at Hawick.
Staff celebrated the occasion in style, and Bank Officer Alan Bell spent all day in early 19th century period costume.
The Branch was opened by The National Bank of Scotland which was keen to get a foothold in the thriving Borders region.
Hawick was chosen because of its knitwear and tweed industries and busy auction mart which then handled some 180,000 sheep and lambs and 16,500 cattle annually.
Current Manager George Thomson said the celebrations had given staff an opportunity to reflect on the Branch's long history during which it had played an important role in providing financial services to the community.
Two branches — St Helens and Chorley — celebrated their 125th anniversary on the same day.
Among those at the St Helens party were the three present-day partners of the branch's first customers, estate agents J B & B Leach.
Each was given a bottle of Scotch whisky.
Staff dressed in period costume, and a photographic display recording the Branch's history was unveiled in the banking hall.
Manager Michael Sheridan said, ‘The Branch became an instant success with customers when it first opened its doors on 28 April 1868 and since then it has continued to build on its reputation.’
At Chorley, Manager Tony Willis said, ‘It's not every day a branch celebrates such an anniversary so we intend to make the most of it!’
Two branches — Guernsey and Grimsby — celebrated their silver jubilee.
Customers at Guernsey were served with drinks and a slice of birthday cake, and in the evening the celebrations continued with a cabaret dinner for 180 invited guests.
Music was provided by the Guernsey Youth Jazz Orchestra and a band from the mainland.
Among guests at the Grimsby celebrations was Brian Curson, the branch's first manager, and later Area Manager, who is now retired.
Regent's House sign up Save-a-Cup
The Save-a-cup scheme comes to Regent's House helped by (from left), Kevin Stapleton (General Manager, Gardner Merchant), Gerry Kane (Securities Services), Carlos Vieira (Field Supervisor, Save-a-Cup).
Elena Moriatou (Catering Manager, Gardner Merchant), Denise Cooper (Systems Development), Harry Goolab (Purchasing and Facilities), Derek Laing (Bar/Vending Operator, Gardner Merchant), Jackie Brizzell (International, London Operations) and Pauline Biddlecombe (Purchasing and Facilities).
TEA drinking staff at Regent's House have gone green!
So too have the coffee drinkers, the soup sippers and the hot chocolate slurpers!
They are the latest Royal Bank staff to join the plastic cup recycling revolution which results in the used cups being turned into coat hangers, rulers, flower pots, video cassettes and a host of other items.
According to Building Administration Officer Pauline Biddlecombe, over 30,000 cuppas are downed by Regent's House staff each week.
That means over 30,000 used cups have been thrown away.
But now staff are being asked to deposit their used cups in special bins so that they can be picked up by the non profit making Save-a-Cup Recycling Company.
Said Pauline, ‘We aim to recycle 90 per cent of the cups from Regent's House.
In addition to the obvious environmental benefits, this will also qualify us for a cash award from Save-a-Cup which will be donated to charity.’
Other multi-occupied Bank premises in London are expected to join the Save-a-Cup scheme in the near future.
Video View with Iain Harrison
IT'S been a busy couple of months in the ‘video vaults’ of Corporate Communications with three videos distributed and a few others on the production line.
The first two videos were about Branch Security with Don't be a soft target being sent to all branches and What happens now?being distributed to branches in Scotland.
The third video Changing the shape of BBD — Focus on Staff was released in the middle of May to staff in BBD.
Copies of the video were also sent to the other Divisions.
Filming took place at Chorley, Dundee High Street, Edinburgh West End, Glasgow Bath Street, Esdaile and the Columbus Department.
My thanks to the staff at all these locations for their assistance, and in particular to those staff who were interviewed on camera.
The aim of the second Columbus video was to address the main issues raised by staff following the video and briefings which made up the March cascade.
The video is already a record breaker in that it was produced in only three weeks as opposed to the normal six to eight weeks.
This has ensured that the video is up to date, as well as giving me a few more grey hairs!
Looking to the future, filming has been completed on a Service Quality Development video on telephone techniques.
The programme is called Try to Connect and features Lesley Joseph from Birds of a Feather .
The video will be distributed to locations in BBD in the next month or so.
A further Service Quality Video about counter courtesy is planned for later on in the year.
Also in the pipeline is a health and safety video which forms part of a training package to be sent to branches and departments on 21 June.
A video about IBOS will also be distributed in June.
More about these and other projects in the next issue.
As I said to start with, I've had a busy couple of months (just like everyone else in the Bank!) so I have no qualms about disappearing to Millport for a week's golfing in June — video cameras will hopefully be conspicuous by their absence!
WINNING IDEAS
Gold winner heads off to San Marino
David Smith saw what appeared to be a loophole in the standing order charging structure with regard to Royal Bank loans and highlighted the fact to Winning Ideas.
It appeared that a great deal of income was potentially being lost as procedures were not consistent throughout the network.
As a result of David's suggestion Personal Banking Services have closed the loophole with the anticipated income to the Bank in the region of £¼m.
Not only did David's suggestion earn him a Winning Ideas Gold Award and the tidy sum of £1,000 but also a luxury trip to the Imola San Marino Grand Prix.
A great time was had by all as you can read in ‘David's Diary’.
Agnes Harkin struck silver with her suggestion to rationalise the general ledger statements received south of the border.
For years they have been receiving the same information in both printout and statement form — the Bank will benefit to the tune of £10,000 in tangible savings and £71,000 in productivity savings per annum.
In March and April Bronze Awards were made to Alan Gilmour, Strathaven Branch (Royal Scottish Assurances sales letter to be issued with requests for certificates of interest), Carol Watson, Reading Branch,(space for account number/ID number to be included in ‘Title of Account’ form) Ian Haslam, Liverpool Dale Street (SDVP form reduced to one part only) and Rosemary Ridgeway, Leeds East Parade (Fillaform continuation sheets to be printed/typed in DW4).
Well over 2,400 suggestions have been submitted from a cross section of the Bank and I'm glad to say a greater number are being received from North of the Border.
We are still running our bi-monthly prize draws when the names of senders of all entries are entered.
Fifteen suggestors received Easter egg tokens in our East prize draw.
The next draw will take place at the end of July.
You will have noticed in the circulars that we have launched our first theme — Customer Service (circular AD/93/105).
We are looking for ideas to improve the level of Customer Service we offer particularly during the months of May and June.
Each suggestor will receive a small gift for submitting their idea.
In addition to the normal Winning Ideas awards Dr Matthewson will select what he considers to be the top three suggestions.
The winner will receive a luxury weekend for two and the runners up Ovations points.
Remember ideas are welcomed from groups — so start brainstorming!
If you want to chat through your idea before submitting it, give us a call on  (internal 28202).
‘An experience I will never forget’
David kept a diary of his visit.
Here are some extracts.
Arrived Bologna Airport (in Italy of all places) Thursday 22 April.
Owing to an ‘admin’ error, a problem with the car hire arrangements meant that our trip to the hotel stalled on the starting grid — not a problem.
Eventually arrived at hotel in Marinna de Ravenna, to be met by a complimentary bottle of Champagne and this set us off the next day, on a full tank!
Friday, checked out Rimini and San Marino (no sign of a race track though).
Saturday, trip to Imola for practice day.
Plenty of action, Senna spinning, Alesi crashing.
The noise at a Grand Prix is deafening (even with ear plugs in).
Go around the rest of the day using sign language.
Had to leave early to pick up some ‘After Sun’ on way back to hotel.
Sunday, early start as massive crowds are expected.
Pleasantly surprised, only half of Italian population were at gates trying to get in.
Then it dawned, other half inside trying to flog Ferrari merchandise.
Settled down to watch race in great location — opposite starting grid.
Race itself was very exciting, although it was over very quickly.
We then had to get back to the car, and after a detour that took in just about all of the countryside, we arrive back at the airport for the flight home.
All in all, an experience I will never forget — thanks to Winning Ideas.
Corporate Wardrobe: what's the answer?
MORE than 12 months after the closure of the Corporate Wardrobe and the selling off of the entire stock in a giant sale, Branch Banking's Deputy Managing Director Bob McInnes is still searching for a solution to the uniform issue.
Now he wants to hear from members of staff who think they may have the answer.
‘We thought we'd solved the problem when we introduced the Corporate Wardrobe in 1988,’ said Bob, ‘but unfortunately, it didn't work.
There were lots of reasons but obviously the main one was because some staff joined the scheme, others didn't.
In addition, perhaps the wardrobe offered too wide a choice of styles and colours which meant there were several occasions when staff didn't appear to be in uniform even though they were all very smart wearing Corporate Wardrobe outfits.’
Meanwhile, Stornoway Branch has come up with its own solution: the women have purchased identical matching blouses and cardigans and the men have bought what's been dubbed as the ‘Stornoway Corporate shirt’.
A touch of local colour has been added to the blouses and shirts by the addition of the words ‘Banca Rioghail’— Gaelic for Royal Bank.
One customer who thinks it's a good idea is the Mystery Shopper who visited the Branch for Service Quality Development.
‘Everyone appeared well dressed and tidy.’
she wrote, ‘and most seemed to have name badges.’
What do you think?
Any comments on uniforms or the Bank's corporate image in general would be welcomed by Bob McInnes.
Write to him at 42 St Andrew Square, Edinburgh.
Fourth form briefed
SUNDERLAND staff got two of the best when they went back to school to teach fourth formers how to create a business plan.
Phil Hewitt, Administration Manager at Sunderland Branch and Margaret Atkinson, Business Development Officer presented prizes of £10 — deposited in Route Seventeen Accounts — to the two top students in a business plan competition and a general knowledge quiz.
Phil and Margaret developed a slide presentation on business plans and spent two days at the St Robert of Newminster Secondary School helping students make their own plans.
Our picture shows Phil and Margaret between ‘lessons’.
Technology measure up!
Some of the Branch Services team from Customer Service Management who keep in touch with branches on the performance levels of the Back Office system.
Clockwise (from left) are Alison Leighton, Alison Blake, David Shanks, Margaret Walker, George Wallace (Manager, BBD Service, Technology) Jim Saunders and Judith Stobbie.
FOR over two years now Technology Branch Services (now part of  the Customer Service Management team) have been surveying a small number of branches each month to get input from staff on their perception of the levels of service on the 4700 Back Office system.
George Wallace, Manager, Branch Banking Division Service, Technology recalls the background to the survey.
‘In early 1991 we had particular problems in achieving the levels of service on the Back Office system which would enable branches to meet their business needs.
One of the difficulties was that we didn't have a clear and accurate measure of performance of the system.
Indeed, our own perception was that the system was performing quite well but staff in branches were telling us, in plain English, that they were unhappy.
‘Although those problems were resolved, and gradually we got the level of performance, we recognised that it was our customers' perception of the service, rather than our own, which mattered.
It was absolutely vital that we got customer feedback and the branch survey was born.’
To ensure consistency the same 20 branches and, where possible, the same staff are contacted each month.
These branches cover a good cross section of the branch network in terms of location, size and type of business.
Initially, a single measure of service was sought.
Staff were asked to rate their overall impression of the Back Office system but, as can be see from the branch perception graph, at the beginning of this year the measure was split to get a clearer understanding of branches' perception of availability and response times.
The current levels of service are perceived to be ‘good’ with response times rated a little higher than availability times.
The actual results for April were:
Adam Sutton of Derby Cornmarket Branch is one of the regular contributors.
‘I welcome the opportunity to tell Technology how well or how badly they're doing,’ he said.
‘This feedback must help Technology to monitor performance with the ultimate beneficiaries being the staff in branches and the Bank's customers’.
Measures of availability and response times at the Bank's main frame computer are also taken each month.
By getting feedback from staff at branches, Technology are able to confirm whether or not their customers' perception of service is in line with these measures.
Any significant variances are investigated.
For example, last year it became evident that terminal responses at peak times were becoming much slower.
This was confirmed by feedback from branch staff.
The opportunity was taken to get further information from customers about volumes and types of transactions being processed at these times.
The information gathered, together with Technology's own research, enabled a clear picture to emerge of what was causing the poor performance and from that, action was taken to improve matters.
The measures also assist in tracking the impact of service improvement initiatives such as the recent installation of the new main-frame computer.
The response times, as measured at the central computer, show that there were no days in April when response times exceeded 2 seconds.
This is directly attributable to this major new installation.
Customer Service Management are planning to conduct a more detailed survey in the near future as part of the implementation of Service Level Agreements.
In Branch Banking Division this will be done with the support of the BBD Service Quality Development team.
George Wallace meets with them regularly and John Murphy, Manager Service Quality Development is enthusiastic about the positive approach being taken to customer service by Technology.
‘I have worked closely with Technology on a number of service projects and I know that they are committed to providing the best possible service,’ said John.
‘Service Quality Development are happy to work with them in determining the service needs of the branch network and to encourage feedback through regular service surveys.’
Added George, ‘There is a strong desire to improve service quality and surveys are a very important part of this process’.
Back office response times
Branch perception survey
Royal retains inter-bank quiz trophy
George Craigen (second left) presenting the inter-bank quiz trophy to Alan Saunders watched by (from left) James Main, Dick Bell and Tom Kennedy.
George Craigen's first duty as President of the London Centre of the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland was to present the Centre's inter-bank quiz trophy to some colleagues from the Royal Bank!
George who is Director, International Banking Services, took over the presidency at the Centre's annual general meeting after serving for 12 months as Vice President.
The quiz was held at the end of the meeting.
Alan Saunders (Head of Administration, International Banking Services) was captain of the victorious team and other members were James Main (Senior Credit Manager, CIBD Credit Control), Dick Bell (Corporate Director, CIBD) and Tom Kennedy (Assistant to the Deputy Chief Executive).
Took an early lead
They took an early lead, held on to their advantage right to the end and, despite a keenly fought contest, had a comfortable win.
Twenty teams from the Royal Bank, the Bank of Scotland and the Clydesdale took part, the runners-up prize going to a team from of Scotland.
Last year Alan, James and Dick were also in the winning team — along with George!
Santa's back!
CHRISTMAS came early at Fleetwood Branch this year!
During a Royal Reward promotion at Easter the Branch was decked out in Christmas decorations with accompanying Christmas Tree.
Father Christmas was Nikki Gledhill and the counter staff wore Father Christmas hats.
Customer Adviser Simon Davies said, ‘We chose the Christmas theme because the bonus paid to Royal Reward account holders is the Bank's present which only comes once a year.’
Drummond reopens after major facelift
THE 276-year-old Drummonds of Charing Cross has re-opened its historic doors to customers after £3.5 million facelift.
The 126 staff moved back into the Branch on May Day Bank Holiday following the completion of an eight-month-long refurbishment.
The work was finished four months ahead of schedule.
Structural and decorative work was undertaken to create the best in modern working environment while maintaining the traditional ambience of this ‘grand old Bank’ and its numerous objects d'art.
The work included the installation of full comfort cooling, complete re-wiring to facilitate future technologies and the re-positioning of the old counter to create more space in the banking hall.
The decision to refurbish the Branch was taken at the time of the merger with Holt's Whitehall last October.
With 18,000 customers, the merged Branch is now one of the largest in the Royal Bank.
The numerous customers who have banked with Holt's or Drummonds for generations include high ranking military, aristocracy, West End clubs, institutions and societies, many of which opened accounts with Drummonds when it was founded in 1717.
The Bank's founder, Andrew Drummond, was an established goldsmith who followed the lead of other West End goldsmiths into banking and opened his first ledger in September 1717.
His earliest customers were  pre-dominantly Scottish, but he soon widened his clientele to include members of the English aristocracy, men of the arts and considerable number of army agents.
On 3 October 1745 Drummond was forced to suspend payments — allegedly because he supported the Jacobite rebellion.
However, he was soon allowed to re-open and when he died in 1769 left a thriving business for his son and nephews to manage.
The business continued to expand, and a high sport occurred when the King himself opened an account in 1800.
Other famous customers included Prime Ministers Robert Castlereagh, George Canning and Benjamin Disraeli, the poet Alexander Pope, the writer Edward Lear and painters John Zoffany and Thomas Gainsborough.
The personal banking sets as seen from the Banking Hall
The Royal Society of Musicians, The Royal Academy and the Zoological Society of London (London Zoo) are among many major societies long associated with Drummonds.
A landmark in the history of Drummonds occurred on 12 January 1924 when it was bought by the Royal Bank for £958,400.
But the association between the two Banks dates back to the founding of the Royal in 1727 when Andrew Drummond acquired stock in the new banking enterprise.
In 1928 a successful Trustee Department was established and three years later automatic telephones were introduced at the Branch.
After more than two centuries the series of account ledgers started by Andrew Drummond were discontinued in 1956 with the mechanisation of accounts.
Twelve years later computerisation of banking practices began.
The banking hall was partitioned to contain the noise of the new computers but the hall has now been restored to its original open form.
During the refurbishment programme the ledgers dating back to 1717 were taken into Archive Department's collection where they will be looked after professionally, and many objets d'art were temporarily removed from the building for safe-keeping and restoration.
The refurbishment was overseen by the Property Department in London whose brief was to ensure that Drummonds maintained its traditional character and ambiance while creating a ‘state of the art’ working environment to equip the Bank for its fourth century.
‘A great deal of time and effort has gone into ensuring that all materials and finishes co-ordinate effectively and that the work was carried out to the highest possible standards, befitting a grand old Bank,’ said Tony Caroli, Property Project Manager.
The Banking Hall and Cashiers Area.
And Bolton Branch gets new-look too!
BOLTON Branch celebrated the completion of a £1.4 million refurbishment by inviting customers to one of two cocktail parties and by staging an open day for the general public.
The Branch, which is known locally as Bolton's oldest bank, has its origins in a banking partnership formed in 1818 by five businessman — Robert Barlow, wine merchant, Thomas Hardcastle and James Ormrod, cotton spinners, and James Cross and Thomas Rushton, solicitors.
They called their venture Bolton Bank.
George Meakin, Chief Manager of the Royal Bank's Bolton Group, said, ‘We can now offer our customers a more pleasant and spacious environment in which to conduct their financial affairs.
The reception area has been given an open plan look, and located to the side of the banking are several desks which enable staff to have closer contact with their customers.
More interview rooms have been made available, and a third Cashline machine has been installed in the side entrance.
Guests at one of the two cocktail parties.
Scots pip Manchester in Royline contest
ST.
Andrew Square Office played a vital role in helping Scotland win the Team Award in the Royline Quarterly Awards.
Scotland broke Manchester's winning run when they lifted the award for the quarter ended March 31.
After a shaky start the Scottish team — reduced in number — made superb efforts and huge inroads into their target shortfall.
The Sales Team depend on branches for quality contacts and St Andrew Square Office proved an excellent source, bringing forward not only the large corporates but the smaller businesses too.
The team at St Andrew Square exceeded their annual target by two sales and are confident there are more to come before the end of the year.
They won the Scottish Region Branch Award.
The North of England Branch Award went to Nottingham Old Market Square, which also exceeded its annual target and at the end of March had 22 customers using Royline.
In the South of England, Great Tower Street Office lifted the award, having achieved their target and generated a further nine potential sales.
Our picture shows the team at Great Tower Street with their plaque (from left) Colin Pulham (Senior Corporate Manager), Graham Pither, Clare Blake, Joy Stopher (Sales Consultant, EBS), Gary Marshall and Lorna Currie (Senior Sales Consultant, EBS).
–13
Managing Director Norman Paterson (centre) in discussion with Crawford Allan, Director, Operations.
Looking on its Norman's Personal Assistant Evelyn Gordon.
Alex Graham (left), Manager, Corporate Unit with members of his team (from left) Val Burnett, Adele Gallacher, Bill Brannan and Maureen MacMillan.
John Errington (left), Scottish Regional Manager briefs (from left) Jim Donnachie, Ken McAllister and Dave MacGowan at a morning meeting.
The Businessure team headed by Manager David Miller (right).
Seated is Gillian Pook, and looking on are (from left) Jo Wilkin, Moira Anderson, Callum McPherson and Richard Cooke.
Word processor operators (from left) Elaine Bell, Ella Barbour, Yvonne MacInnes, Christine Sanderson.
Helen Richardson and Kareene Wright.
Staff enjoying lunch in the spacious restaurant in the basement of 152 West Regent Street.
Members of the Accounts Department being briefed by Charles Beattie (right).
From left are Gillian Proudfoot, Samantha McAvley, Andrew Shields, Debi McNulty and Janis Tas.
Insurance brokers face the future with confidence
ROYAL Bank Insurance Consultants Limited was formed in October 1991 when Royal Bank Insurance Services Limited was divided into two companies.
The idea was that the original company, RBIS, would carry on giving independent advice on life assurance and pensions while the new company, RBIC, would specialise in general insurance broking for personal and commercial customers.
Aims to expand
Although RBIC is concentrating on providing insurance packages for small to medium sized commercial customers, it aims to expand into the larger corporate market and compete with national brokers for this level of business.
In addition, RBIC also designs and operates schemes for personal customers such as credit insurance and payment protection schemes offering valuable security to personal loan and house purchase borrowers, as well as a travel insurance scheme, all of which are sold through the branch network.
RBIC head office was originally in Edinburgh but early last year it was relocated in a refurbished office block at 152 West Regent Street, Glasgow.
a move which was not unwelcome to Norman Paterson, the company's Managing Director, who was born and bred in Glasgow.
Norman had become a bit weary of struggling through the Edinburgh traffic jams from his home in Strathaven each day for 16 months since being asked by Peter Wood, then Managing Director of Financial Services Division, to take over the running of RBIS while a management consultancy exercise was carried out on the company by the Boston Consultancy Group.
As a result of the consultancy report, it was decided that seven of RBIS's ten local offices would be closed — with no compulsory redundancies — and that RBIS would operate out of a head office in Manchester while RBIC would operate from three regional offices in Glasgow, London and Manchester, with its head office located in Glasgow.
With this streamlined structure and a heavy investment in new technology a healthy future is envisaged for the new company.
First priority, however, was to appoint a head office team.
Crawford Allan was brought in from RBIS Head Office to be Director, Operations; David Miller moved from Aberdeen Office to become Manager, Schemes Unit; and Alex Graham and Bob Aitken left Edinburgh Centre — Alex to become Manager, Corporate Unit and Bob to set up and manage the Training Department.
Norman then appointed Managers for the three newly created regional offices.
John Errington, Glasgow Centre Manager, took charge of Scottish Region with Tom Torrance transferring from Inverness to be his Regional Sales Manager; Richard Hill left Preston Centre to become Regional Manager of Northern Region in Manchester and Gordon Neal moved from Birmingham Centre to London to head up the Southern Region.
Next came the new technology.
‘This has been a big exercise,’ said Crawford, ‘but it is all nearing completion now and the new systems should be up and running during the next six months.’
Rapid growth
Peter Wood relinquished the Chairmanship of RBIC, and RBIS, to Chris Pearson, Director of Private and Offshore Banking and Director, South of England in October 1992 when the rapid growth of Direct Line made greater demands on Peter's time; Norman, who had been due to retire at that time, was asked to stay on for two years to see the restructuring process completed.
The company is wholly owned by the Royal Bank, has a staff of just over 90 and forms part of Branch Banking Division.
In its first full financial year, RBIC made a profit of more than £4 million but even better results are promised.
‘Our recent re-organisation has positioned us to expand significantly and we aim to do just that’ said Norman.
Manchester staff (back, from left) Sue Moran, Mike Geoghegan, Vivien Hutchinson, Jill Oakland, Margaret Heaword, David Millward, Margaret Brown, Janet Williams, Jonathon Webb and Amanda Mostyn;(front) Bob Goymer, Phil Carter, Richard Hill, Peter Hoarty and Ken Sheldon.
Members of the Southern Region office.
Standing (from left) are Bernard Johnston, Chris Hammett, Ann Corbett, Sevcan Salih, Gary Bryant, Justin Hadlow, Angie Calixte, Michael Scott, and Norman Barton (seated), Ann Know-Forder, Gordon Neal and Brian Sells.
Scheme sure to please small firms
AN all-in-one insurance package — containing an interest-free monthly premium plan — is now available to small businesses through the Royal Bank.
Businessure, which has been designed by Royal Bank Insurance Consultants, offers a wide range of covers including all risks, business interruption, legal liability, loss of money, damage to goods in transit and personal accident.
Only motor trade, legal expenses and professional indemnity covers are not available.
Businessure is aimed at businesses with a turnover of up to £1m and generally involving premiums of up to £5,000 per annum.
It has been developed in response to customer demand and requests from Branch Banking Division for a more streamlined system.
According to RBIC Managing Director, Norman Paterson, Businessure doesn't claim to be the cheapest scheme on the market but it is competitive, provides wide cover, and has an efficient delivery system.
Customers also benefit from a prompt, no-nonsense quotation service.
‘All we ask them to do is to visit any Royal Bank Branch, answer a few questions — and we'll provide a quotation within three days,’ said Norman.
‘We can, of course, come up with a quotation the same day if it's required urgently, and in the not too distant future we aim to give on-the-spot quotations.’
Immediate cover is also available and, once this takes effect, customers can call upon a Businessure support team should they encounter any problems or need any advice.
‘Another piece of goods news is that claims are dealt with quickly and efficiently without any involvement of the Bank Branch being necessary,’ said Norman.
Manager of the Businessure team is David Miller, and other members are Team Leader Moira Anderson, Gillian Pook, Jo Wilkin, Richard Cooke and Calum McPherson.
Businessure is underwritten by GA Bonus plc, a wholly owned subsidiary of General Accident.
Research shows that ‘a very substantial’ market exists for the product — the first to be launched by Royal Bank Insurance Consultants since it was set up on 1 October 1991.
Drymen welcomes TV's Wee Burney
ACTOR Eric Cullen — known to his millions of TV viewers as Wee Burney — was on his best behaviour when he visited Drymen Branch to make a presentation to the winner of an art competition.
Without his bad-tempered dad, Rab C. Nesbitt, to annoy him, Wee Burney got on with the job of handing a trophy and a Cash Club Account containing £10 to young Heather Stobbs.
The competition was held among pupils at Drymen Primary School, and for the second year running was sponsored by the Royal Bank Branch in the town.
Branch Manager Leslie Chapman said, ‘Eric spent the whole morning in the school, and did a question and answer, theatre workshop, memory tests and miming skills.
He started at 9.15, finished just before 12 and when you think how much that time is worth, it says a lot.’
Irene MacLean and Karen Baird of the Rowan Gallery in Drymen judged the competition, the topic for which was the rainforest.
Our picture shows Wee Burney with prizewinner Heather Stobbs, The Rowan  Gallery's Karen Baird (centre right), Drymen Branch Manager Les Chapman and staff members (from left) Flora McCormick, Karen Wyles, Linda McKay Marlene Irwin and Elspeth Anderson.
Julie charts course
A GIANT wall chart is helping staff at Portobello Branch to achieve their Royal Scottish sales target.
It's the brainwave of Julie Spencer who is seen here updating the chart watched by Rona Allison, Tracy Fergusson and Mark McCafferty.
In the last financial year, Portobello were fourth highest Royal Scottish commission earners with over £19,000.
In the first six months of the current year the Branch earned over £11,000.
Retirements
Drew bids farewell
CUSTOMERS and friends of Drew Muir, Manager at Laurencekrik Branch, presented him with a painting by local artist David Johnston when he retired after 34 years' service.
Drew started his career at Methil Branch and moved to Laurencekirk in 1985 after spending six years at Kirkwall Branch as Assistant Manager.
Earlier in this career he was Assistant Accountant at Inverness and later Accountant at Newton Stewart.
In retirement Drew plans to continue his active interest in Montrose Operatic Society.
He is pictured (centre) with his wife Maggie discussing the painting with the artist.
Early days recalled
MANAGER Colin Galloway recalled his early days as an apprentice with The National Commercial Bank of Scotland when he retired after 34 years' service.
‘I was paid £3 10s a week, and worked on Saturday mornings,’ he said as he bowed out of Linlithgow Branch for the last time.
‘You wouldn't get kids working an hour for that.’
Another difference was ‘it was all quill pens — obviously there were no computers although there was an adding machine,’ he said.
Colin was based at Linlithgow for 10 years — the first eight as Assistant Manager and the final two as Manager — and although originally from Edinburgh, he and his wife Joy and their two sons, Martin and Douglas plan to stay in the town.
He plans to continue his involvement with Linlithgow Union Canal Society and, added, ‘I'm young enough to take on a new challenge.’
Our photograph shows Colin (centre) with his successor Colin McKeand, Manager at Callander Branch, and Elaine Blair.
Jim's colleagues see him out in style
FORTY four years on, with the last 14 spent as Business Development Manager at Head Office, Jim Byers has gone marching into retirement.
A presentation to Jim and his wife Frances was made by Charles Winter, the Bank's Vice Chairman at a ceremony in ‘42’.
Guests included a large gathering of colleagues, both present and past, and representative of Jim's earlier days in the Chief Accountant's, Securities and Ledger Department, and Drumsheugh Branch, where he was Manager for four years.
Our photograph shows Jim receiving his gift from Charles Winter watched by his wife (right), and his former secretary Jean Kerr.
Cubby blows for time after 35 years' service
DUNDEE Stobswell staff gave Manager Cubby Lorimer a party send-off when he retired from the Royal Bank after 35 years' service.
Cubby (seated centre) spent his entire career in Dundee, starting as an apprentice at Westport Branch.
He also worked at University and High Street Branches.
A life-long football enthusiast, Cubby has been associated with the Bank's Dundee Club for more than 30 years.
He has also been football representative on the Regional Committee of Staff Club (Scotland) for the past 15 years.
Away from the Bank, he is a staunch supporter of Dundee.
He is pictured with party guests.
copy and photos for the next issue must be submitted by 9 July
Paul leads race for ‘Come Together’ prize
ROYAL Scottish Consultant Paul Adams was in pole position when the 12-month-long ‘Come Together’ competition reach the half-way mark in March.
At the end of the six months, he had introduced £1,811,996 of ‘new’ money to the Royal Bank and achieved 141.25 per cent of target.
Paul, who is based in Wigan, received a £250 voucher and started the second half of the competition as favourite to win the £500 end of year prize.
Close on Paul's heels at the half-way stage was Swindon based Tom Fuller who had introduced £1,771,500.
March turned out to be the best of the six months with £5,438,860 of ‘new money’ being introduced.
Paul won the monthly £50 prize for being top Consultant in the Royal Scottish North West England/Lancashire Region and other regional winners were June Hanney (Glasgow), Grant Devine (London), Michael Malone (West Scotland), Ken Smith (East Scotland).
Paul also picked up the monthly prize for February when other winners were Peter Daly (South Home Counties), Bob Bray (Midlands and South West England), Alastair Valentine (East Scotland), Paul Melvin (Glasgow) and Marjory Simpson (North Scotland).
During the first six months of the competition, more than £21 million of ‘new’ money was attracted to the Bank, and by mid-way through May this figure had risen to £22½ million.
Said Sales Development Manager Nick Finlay, ‘I am delighted with these results which are due to excellent teamwork.
This shows that Royal Scottish Consultants understand their role as part of the Bank team.’
Paul Adams
Paul Melvin
Tom Fuller
Bob Bray
Peeps into the past
BY the end of 1940, holiday accommodation in England had become both scarce and costly.
The Blitz was at its height and beaches at the traditional seaside resorts were strewn with barbed wire and other defensive works.
In early 1941 Glyn, Mills & Co, keen to provide staff with some respite from the heavy air-raids and war-time pressures of work, purchased Moorend Park Hotel at Charlton Kings near Cheltenham.
The hotel, primarily for the use of members of Glyn's staff, was also open to the London employees of the Royal Bank of Scotland and Williams Deacon's Bank if space was available.
Room rates were heavily subsidised and many Bank employees enjoyed happy holidays at Moorend Park.
After the war, Bank use of the hotel began to diminish and in May 1949 it was sold to a member of staff who ran it for many years on his own account.
Our photograph shows a group of Glyn's staff in the grounds.
They are (from left) Tommy Tuck, Geoff Snowdon, Laurie Steib, John (Tiny) Luck, Don Byford, Mr Fermin and Peter Moffatt, along with two of the hotel waitresses, Rose and Sadie.
The photograph was presented to the Royal Bank's archives by Don Byford, formerly of Glyn's Registrars Department in Lombard Street.
If you have any old photographs which you think would be of interest to readers please contact Philip Winterbottom, Assistant Manager, Archives, at  ().
Pensions meet
GUESTS at the 22nd annual luncheon of Williams Deacon's pensioners included Daniel MacDonald and his wife Ellen who have recently celebrated their diamond wedding.
At one time both worked for the Bank.
Ken Duncombe, Director, Corporate Banking, welcomed the 78 guests, and Wilf Alen replied on their behalf.
The re-union was held in the Staff Restaurant at 67 Lombard Street and very much enjoyed by everyone.
Our picture shows (from left) pensions John Angus, John Williams and Daphne Penn.
New speed record!
CLAUDIE Garner didn't hang about when she set out to break a UK speed record.
Her aim was to scan more than 4,000 pages on an Olivetti Filnet machine over a seven hour period.
An Olivetti representative said it couldn't be done.
But Claudie — who works in Cardholder Services at the Credit Card Centre — thought otherwise, and calmly fed in 6,800 pages.
‘I knew all along I could do it,’ she said.
Olivetti have now amended their records and presented Claudie with two bottles of champagne.
Summer reunion
A GROUP of Royal Bank Fylde Coast pensions together with their husbands or wives and a number of friends enjoyed a Spring-time get-together at Ryecroft Hall, Hambleton near Blackpool in late March.
Altogether about 50 were at the reunion which included a splendid lunch.
A summer lunch will be held at the same venue on 15 June.
Bank pensions wishing to attend should contact Barbara Brindle () or Beryl Wallbank ().
Pounds come and go at Paisley
PAISLEY Chief Office staff shed several pounds during a sponsored slim — but at the same time raised many more for the town's Accord Hospice.
The slimmers themselves also chipped in with donations and in the end, Advances Manager Anne Miller was able to present a cheque for £338 to the hospice's John Herd.
John thanked the staff for their generosity and went on to explain that it costs £1.5m to run the hospice for a year.
Anne and John are seen holding the cheque watched by (from left) Donna Smith, Lisa Erentz, Joan Boggan, Mary Lamb, Therese O'Donnell and Sheila Cole.
Swimmers help heart appeal
KEEN swimmers at Manchester Longsight Branch dived into action on hearing that a customer's 11-year-old daughter required major heart surgery.
They organised a sponsored swim which raised £1,227 for the North West New Heart-New Start Appeal.
Twenty-four swimmers, including staff from Manchester's Gorton and Levenshulme Branches, took part and altogether completed 1,018 lengths, each worth at least £1.
South Manchester Group Manager Tony Roberts presented the proceeds to one of the Appeal organisers watched by (from left) Alison Kilmartin, Sharon Harrop, Richard Valentine and Lisa Harrop.
Regrettably the customer's daughter died following unsuccessful attempts to find a suitable donor for a heart-lung transplant.
Sunshine and showers at Dingwall
Staff relaxing at the end of the day.
Back (from left) are John Moffat, Arlene Watt, Rhoda MacLennan, Margaret MacKay, Jean Gordon and Ronnie Young;(front), Avril Morrison, Lynn Christie and Allison Fox.
OUTSIDE, cars and buildings were covered with frost, the temperature was well below zero, and the forecast was more threatening than promising.
Inside, members of staff were dressed in colourful beach wear, asking customers about their holiday plans and telling them about the Bank's range of travel products.
For, despite the weather, this was Dingwall Branch's travel promotion day.
Staff decorated the banking hall specially for the occasion and ‘props’ included a garden patio set, a sun umbrella and a refreshing-looking glass of fruit juice.
This didn't last long, however, as one customer thought it was there to be consumed!
No other hiccups were reported, however, and the promotion was voted a huge success.
Double the money for guide dogs
KIND-hearted staff at Newcastle Branch set out to raise £1,000 for Guide Dogs for the Blind — and ended up handing over a cheque for twice that amount.
But it took a lot of hard work spread over a year to raise the money, said Lindsay Mason, a member of the committee responsible for the fund raising.
Lynda Clifford did a sponsored aerobic session, Sue Tons and her family took part in the Great North Walk, Cycle Ride and Run, and Gary Bainbridge joined them for the Run.
There were numerous raffles, a quarterly cash draw, and various social events including quiz nights and darts and dominoes evenings.
A tuck shop was also opened.
‘The staff have been very generous with both their time and money,’ said Lindsay who was called upon to hand over the £2,000 cheque during a get-together at The Old George pub in Newcastle.
Charities share cash at Airdrie
THREE charities reaped the benefit of another year of fund raising by staff at Airdrie Branch when they shared a record amount of more than £2,500.
The Birthmark and Oral Cancer Appeal for Canniesburn Hospital, the Special Needs Unit at Kirklands Hospital, Bothwell, and Cumbernauld Branch of the Scottish Society for the Mentally Handicapped were each presented with a cheque for £835.
Staff raised the cash by staging a number of events including a baking month, a grand auction, a sponsored run, and a monthly prize draw.
Charity Organiser Margaret Cormack said they hoped to embark on the ‘charity trail’ again in the not too distant future.
Customers join the fun on Comic Relief Day
RED nosed Royal Bank staff got up to all sorts of antics to raise cash for Comic Relief '93.
At Dundee High Street Branch they decided the most profitable way forward on an exercise bike.
Each member of staff was allocated a time on the machine, and Chief Manager Roddy Reid pledged £25 provided staff reached the target of 100 miles.
‘By lunchtime we were well on our way to reaching this,’ said Newsline correspondent Stephanie Lessels, ‘and by 4.45pm we had exceeded 150 miles.’
The day ended with the exhausted staff pleased to be going home — but well satisfied with the £150 they had collected.
Staff at Ashton Branch raised about £70 by putting members of the management team in the stocks and pelting them with custard pies.
When the pies ran out, they sprayed them with foam!
Customers were invited to join in the fun for 50p a throw.
Folkestone staff dressed up as characters from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and invited customers to take part in a ‘match the baby with the member of staff’ competition.
Customer Services Manager Phillipa Orriss said they raised almost £100, and a great day was had on both sides of the counter.
Royal Bank (Isle of Man) staff raised £500 at an auction of goods donated by local businessmen.
To publicise the event, a giant red tomato which glowed in the dark, was installed on the outside of the Bank building.
Customers and staff at London Willesden Branch chipped in when Martin Deadman, Customer Services Supervisor, dressed as a clown and went round with a collection box.
Staff at branches within the London Elgin Avenue Group were also asked for donations.
Martin's efforts brought in over £200.
Tony Page, Assistant Manager, Administration, Corporate Banking, Edinburgh devised a crossword, copies of which he sold to friends and colleagues for £1 each.
Tony raised £145.
At Milngavie Branch, staff in Red Nose T-shirts, collected £94 from customers.
Staff at Milngavie Branch (back, from left) Anita Sharma, Elaine Mackenzie, Stuart MacLean, Graham McKnight, Stephen Hart, Denise McElroy and Ann-Marie Campbell (Manager);(middle) Vikki MacFadyen, Caroline Breen, Katherine McArthur, Linda Donaldson, Ann Reid and Jan Russell;(front) Jackie Mackintosh, Derek McLean, Neil McIver and Fred Finlay (Assistant Manager).
Dundee Grouping Chief Manager Roddy Reid tries out the exercise bike watched by (standing, from left), Derek Cavellini, Suzanne Mousley, Paul Denton, Linda Findlay, Russell Todd, Barrie Liddle, Joyce Cox, Alison Fraser and Leo Micaleff; kneeling, Stephanie Lessels and Lesley Ellis.
Joanne Swindells of Ashton Branch takes great pleasure in spraying foam over her Manager, Trevor Lorimer.
Staff at the Royal Bank (Isle of Man) in front of their office building.
Football league success
REGISTRARS five-a-side football league at The Pitz, Portobello, Edinburgh had its fair share of ups and downs but overall was a remarkable success.
Five teams participated.
All were involved in transferring, losing and gaining players.
The teams involved were Foolchester Utd, the Teenage Idols, Top Bananaz, Sherilyn Fenn Blues and Stenhousemuir Reserves.
In a closely contested league, Foolchester (Graham Gibson, David Hamilton, Calum Prior, George Mulholland, Paul McPhillips, Paul McNeill and Paul Blaney) were the eventual winners and the Teenage Idols collected the wooden spoon.
To complement the league a Fanzine was produced containing facts, figures, stories and jokes about the competition.
The proceeds from the sale of this were used to purchase medals and a trophy for the winners and in addition, a surplus of £83.00 was donated to the Edinburgh Breast Care Unit at the Western General Hospital.
Those who were libelled in the Fanzine may feel less aggrieved knowing it was for a good cause.
Congratulations and thanks go to Graham Gibson, George Mulholland, Neil Croan and other  contributories for their initiative and effort.
Ilford puts on special promotion
BALLOONS, ribbons and posters were used to decorate Ilford Branch during Royal Scottish Week.
Staff also wore rosettes and answered the telephone with a cheery ‘Good morning, Royal Bank of Scotland, thank you for calling during Royal Scottish Week.’
But their hard work paid dividends, said Ilford Assistance Manager Amanda Reeves.
For by the end of the week they had produced 29 warm leads — 14 more than their usual monthly target.
Also involved in the promotion were Eddie Cassels (Manager), Janet Jenkins, Fiona Taylor, Gill Fraser, Charlotte Witney,.
Mark Barnett, Helen Collins, Danna Filbert, Alan Wright, and Paul Dodd (Royal Scottish Consultant).
Race cash
CANCELLATION of the Grand National resulted in the Credit Card Centre's £47 sweep kitty being presented to Fair Havens Hospice at Westcliffe-on-Sea.
In a ‘thank-you’ letter, Finance Administrator Roy Butt said the Hospice relied on the public sector for funding and it appreciated the Centre's and support.
Follow-up course for TCMS staff
FOUR months after attending a weekend course on team building and sales training, staff from Treasury and Capital Markets, Scotland met for a day-long follow-up session in the conference room at Drummond House.
Senior Corporate Manager David Peebles said the purpose of the course was to ensure that staff ‘have the communication and human relation skills to provide a high quality of service.’
Bill McKay, Head of TCMS, thought the course had been particularly helpful to TCMS's new recruits, two of whom, Dennis Barron and Kirsty MacGregor, joined the Bank only last October.
‘They seemed to benefit from it considerably,’ he said.
Delegate, Linda Clark, said she had learned ‘the importance of good communication and the effect it has on our team objectives.’
Unusual memento
WHEN the Royal Bank's general arts sponsorship programme took the premier award at the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts' annual prizegiving.
Chief Executive George Mathewson received an appropriate if unusual memento.
The distinguished Scottish artist Emilio Coia was on hand to sketch recipients and produce something very different from the unusual trophy.
Quiz champions!
CRAWLEY Branch raced to an exciting victory in this year's South East Region general knowledge quiz.
Over 30 teams from other branches and central departments entered the competition but none could match the skill of Dave Shalliday (seated), Sandy Stevenson (left), Dave Osborne (centre) and Linda Chamberlain.
The dozen or so rounds included music, sport, history, geography, art and literature but Crawley waited for the film, TV and theatre questions before playing their joker.
Last year the quiz was won by a team from Sutton.
Wedding Albums
KATHERINE Rimmer and Ian Stott after their wedding at Newchurch Parish Church, Culcheth, Warrington.
Katherine is an Accounts Clerk at Warrington Branch, and Ian — a former member of staff at Leigh Branch — is a Police Constable with the Cheshire Constabulary.
Top pop quiz to take a break
ROTHERHAM Branch are top of the pops!
For the fourth successive year they have won the South Yorkshire Area Institute of Bankers pop quiz — and thus remain the only winner of the competition since it was launched in 1990.
This year's winning line-up — Mick Fawley, Judy Eades, Anne Mollekin and Andy Cowley — led the other 14 teams from start to finish and won the ten round event by a considerable margin.
But Rotherham won't be making it five wins in a row.
To ensure the quiz remains the most popular competition in the Institute's calendar, they have been asked to sit out next year and devise the questions instead!
Our picture shows (from left) Mick, Judy, Ann and Andy receiving the winners trophy from Institute President Martin Benson (centre).
Tips for Camden audience
CUSTOMERS at a social gathering, organised by Camden Town Branch, were given tips on how to be more relaxed about the future.
Judith Chivers, an expert in time management, told them how to lead a less stressful life, and Steve Wellard, a Royal Scottish Consultant, explained the benefits of investing in a pension scheme.
Drinks and a finger buffet were served and the winners of a quiz, based on the two talks, were each presented with a bottle of champagne and a European Summit Commemorative pound note.
The evening—‘Stress or success — the way ahead’— was a great success.
Green business award for Lesley
TWENTY-five-year-old Lesley Fitzpatrick received a £2,000 cheque from the Royal Bank after her hairdressing salon was voted the most environmentally friendly business in the Scottish finals of the 1993 Live-Wire Business Start-Up Awards.
The cheque was presented to her by Ian Sutherland, Director, Commercial Banking Services.
Lesley, who owns Joe Public Hair Workshop in Inverkeithing uses CFC free hairsprays and mousses and her shampoos are concentrated, so less packaging is required.
She employs four people and aims to have three other workshops within five years.
Lesley plans to invest the money in equipment for the business and marketing.
Regional Manager Jim Cooper visits the Western Isles
Hebridean journey
Lochboisdale staff with Ian Jack (Manager) on the extreme right.
I WAS suffering a sense of guilt as I was long overdue a visit to our Scarinish Branch in Tiree.
Access to Tiree is not easy from Inverness but there was an opportunity before Loganair adopted their Summer flight schedules in April and this enabled me to link Scarinish in with my more regular Lewis/Uist/Barra trip.
I knew before I started out that, weatherwise, the end of March is not the time to plan a journey to the Islands and my misgiving proved to be well founded as on Tuesday 23 March I found myself in the lounge at Dalcross Airport, Inverness watching gale force winds sweep snow across the runways.
First stop was Stornoway where Ewen Munro, the Manager, was on hand to relieve me of an important part of my luggage, The Crofter of the Year Cup, which I was to present in Stornoway at a Dinner on the Friday once I had returned from my more distant island travels.
A quick cup of tea with Ewen and then on to the Loganair Twin Otter which slithered up the slushy runway and took the over-sea route to avoid the worst weather en route to Barra stopping at Benbecula.
Landing on the beach at Barra is a piece of cake for Captain Bob Macleod, the experienced Loganair pilot.
Conveniently, Donald John MacDonald, Manager of Castlebay Branch, was waiting to help me fill in the hour before the Glasgow based Loganair Twin Otter was due to come in to pick up those flying on to Tiree and Glasgow.
Conversations flow easily when travelling in the Islands and there is never a need to be lonely for those willing to take part.
At Barra there was no exception to this rule.
The plane from Glasgow via Tiree duly sprayed its way in through the hail and the wind and a new set of passengers filed on.
The only one to disembark at Tiree (population 800) was me.
The moment I touched the ground I knew why — the excessive (to me — but normal to Tiree residents) wind whipped me and my heavily laden briefcase into the lounge where Peter McMillan, Manager of Scarinish Branch offered me the relative calm of his car.
The remainder of the afternoon was taken up with the routine matters of the Branch, the only Bank on the Island, and in discussions with Peter and the three ladies on the staff.
A conducted tour by Peter of this very small, very flat, but very green island with breathtaking views of the Hebrides and with windsurfers taking advantage of the persistently strong wind was greatly appreciated.
My lodgings were in the comfortable Kirkapol Guest House which fronts on to a marvellous tempting beach.
Forty minutes of temptation was as long as I could last out in the cold, biting wind but an invigorating walk in such conditions has to be good for you.
That night over dinner in the company of Peter and his wife Liz I became the possessor of an astonishing fact.
Peter is a season ticket holder at Ibrox — on Tiree!
Breakfast on Wednesday at the Kirkapol Guest House was a communal affair.
I was not unhappy to be sitting opposite an attractive lady from Coll and there was only one person I knew of who lived on Coll.
So a suitable conversation opener ‘You'll know Mairi Hederwick?’
Inevitably, that Western Isles magic of coincidence came into play.
I was informed that she was Mairi Hedderwick.
Mairi is a children's book author (Kirsty Morag stories) but my interest and knowledge of her related to a lovely, sympathetic and realistic representation of travel in this marvellous part of the world in her beautifully illustrated book,An Eye on the Hebrides.
Then back to Scarinish Branch.
Les Stewart, Senior Manager at Oban, who has responsibility for Scarinish, had perceptively anticipated that I would not be over-extended during my stay on the island.
He had therefore prevailed upon me to undertake a small portion of the Key Control Document Self Audit Procedures.
I have a feeling an attempt was being made to convey a sort of message — this in practical terms I duly received.
Soon with the sunshine totally predominating I took my leave of this attractive island and was back on the Twin Otter en route for Barra.
The beach at Barra (population 1500) was a different story from the day before — blue sky and lesser wind, so landing was a routine non-event.
Donald John was back to meet me and soon he had his limousine purring towards Castlebay along the single track roads easing smoothly into passing places all to the Island-compatible accordion music perpetually in the background on his cassette player.
I could not resist a walk around the Harbour at Castlebay in an attempt to resurrect memories of my visit in 1973 as a Business Development Officer.
As on Tiree, we have a banking monopoly on Barra So Donald John and his three members of staff have to tread that tricky path between fair play and the demands of commercialism.
Work completed, Donald John chauffeured me off to the most concerning and uncertain part of this Western Isles sojourn, the 45 minute ferry boat crossing to South Uist.
During my last visit to Bara in September 1992 Ian Jack, Manager at Lochboisdale and the Manager responsible for Castlebay, came across in this self-same partly-open-to-the elements ferry becoming totally saturated in the process and had to spend the morning drying himself at the Castlebay heater.
The intention at that time had been for Ian and myself to return to Uist by the ferry in the afternoon but the weather was so bad that the ferryman decided not to chance his luck in the storm.
Such are the joys of Island banking.
Some trepidation did exist therefore on this occasion but I was fortunate and the MV Brendan had only to negotiate a slight swell on its way past Eriskay to South Uist.
Ian Jack, my guide for the next part of the trip, was waiting for me with his new vehicle.
This is a Daihatsu Four Trak which is totally in tune with Ian's sporting pursuits of shooting and fishing but was totally at odds with his previous run-about — a BMW 352i.
I was already aware that Ian had recently lost an argument with a South Uist bend resulting in a change in vehicle and I can impart to all past and future travellers to the Uists who depend on Ian for transport that journeys are now much more sedate than they used to be.
Our dinner guest for the evening was the most respected figure in local fishing circles, John Kennedy, who is the Fishing Consultant to South Uist Estates and an expert on the sport.
John is the most interesting of companions and a convivial evening encompassing comment and opinion from some of the local worthies ensued.
Thursday dawned bright and blue and it decided to stay that way all day through.
South Uist in sunshine in March is not common but the visual beauty is hard to beat and Lochboisdale Branch situated at the waters edge looked in as good fettle as I have ever seen it.
The staff of nine, with the help of a Mobile, cover North Uist, Benbecula and South Uist (total population around 7000) albeit we are the only Bank on South Uist with the Bank of Scotland having branches on Benbecula and North Uist.
Consultations with the Lochboisdale management and staff over, it was off to Benbecula Airport to meet up with the Stornoway bound Loganair Twin Otter once again.
On this flight I renewed acquaintance with Mary MacKinnon.
Mary has been retired for eight years after 33 years' service in the Bank at Scarinish.
No doubt many Inspectors will remember Mary from their visits to Tiree when their attempts (in previous days of surprise visitations) to remain incognito were often defeated by the local spying system.
Mary, like myself, was heading for the Crofter's Conference and Dinner at Stornoway.
The flight passed in a flash and we were soon in Stornoway where Ewen Munro's organising skills took over.
For the evening Ewen had arranged a dinner to mark the retiral of the Factor of the Stornoway Trust.
The Trust is a long-standing and valued connection at the Branch and it was a pleasure to have many local dignitaries in attendance at a splendidly friendly occasion.
Friday was bright albeit the wind was somewhat stronger and it was colder.
This was a day of staying put in Stornoway and I was in the best of company as Prince Charles was also in town.
Stornoway is a very busy Branch and with its two Mobiles the staff of 34 cater for our customers among the 25,000 or so Lewis and Harris residents.
The ritual walk around the Branch confirmed the pleasurably consistent impact of the staff's own chosen localised Branch outfits with the words Banca Riohgail embroidered on the shirts/blouses.
Very smart indeed.
While the bulk of the day was taken up in full discussions with Ewen Muncro, time was also found to meet up with some important business customers.
In the evening it was off to the Scottish Crofters Union Annual Dinner.
This gives an annual opportunity for me to get up to dates with Fordyce Maxwell of The Scotsman , an old friend from my Berwick days, at the preliminaries.
The preliminaries on this occasion extended over a rather lengthy period and so the 150 or so guests were in pretty good form when we eventually sat down to one of the best ‘function type’ meals that I have ever enjoyed.
Fortunately, Ewen and myself had remembered to bring along the Trophy as well as the cheque for £500 which it was my pleasure to present to The Crofter of the year — Donald Murdo Macleod, 1 The Gress, Back, Lewis.
The reason for the full name and address?
Well, Stornoway Branch has 187 Donald Macleods on its books!
Enough said.
A miserably dull, windy and cold Saturday morning beckoned for the last of my Island days and Ewen very kindly had given up his spare time to run me around the Stornoway locality before dropping me off at the airport.
On the plane I was able to reflect on the trip.
I had found it really gratifying to hear from a variety of people of the high regard held for our staff.
This appreciation extended beyond the Islands to our officials in other crofting areas on the mainland who were the subject of very favourable comment at the Crofters Dinner.
From discussion and observation I was also delighted with the positive attitude of the staff on the Islands and the extremely conscientious and responsible way in which they carried out their work.
As the plane circled Dalcross Airport, I glanced eastwards towards Nairn Golf Club and a slight twinge of envy was cast towards the Clubhouse there in which the 8.30 am team would by then be well into their second gin and tonic.
The twinge was a fleeting one.
I'd had a good week.
Castlebray's Mary Ann Macleod, Donald John MacDonald (Manager), Christine MacKinnon (on-call) and Anne Marie MacMillan.
Alasdair Stewart was on holiday.
Scarinish Branch staff (from left) Rosemary Omand, Anne Milne, Peter McMillan (Manager) and Fiona Munn.
Sports starts with football
Glasgow's winning line-up (back, from left) Ian Hepburn (Giffnock) Stuart Storrie (St Enoch Square), Gerry Coyle (Anniesland Cross), Stuart Preston (St Enoch Square), Stephen Ross (Govan), Phil McCaherty (Shawlands), Don Henderson (Registrar's Dept);(front) Stephen McKee (International Division) Martin Mullan (Giffnock), Stephen Reilly (International Division), Gavin McPadden (Alexandra Parade), Andy McKenzie (Paisley), Erik Ostman (City Central Grouping and Chairman of the Glasgow Club).
Glasgow retain Chairman's Cup
Glasgow 3 Dundee 1
FOR the third successive year for the Scottish Easter Football tournament ended with Glasgow in possession of the Chairman's Cup.
Dundee tried hard to prevent the hat-trick but in the end the holders stormed to a 3–1 win in extra time.
Few will begrudge the Glaswegians their victory for they had to overcome two major setbacks — one before the action-packed final and the other 20 minutes before the end of normal time.
Setback number one arose the night before the game when their regular goalkeeper went down with a mystery illness.
In between the posts went Ian Hepburn who retired from football several years ago and whose previous game in that position was ‘umpteen’ years before at the age of 12.
But, as an un-named source put it, ‘he was the only one around with a pair of gloves.’
Ian was quick to shake off the dust, however, and went on to become one of Glasgow's heroes.
Setback number two came in the 70th minute when Stewart Renton (Barrhead) broke a leg in a collision with the Dundee goalkeeper.
But the accident opened the door to another hero — substitute Stephen Ross (Glasgow Govan) who put the game beyond Dundee's reach by scoring goal number three in extra time.
The final got off to explosive start when in the seventh minute Glasgow were awarded a penalty.
Peter Wright (Glasgow Parkhead) made no mistake from the spot.
Dundee worked hard for and equaliser and were eventually rewarded mid-way through the second half when Paul Barnett (Dundee Kingsway Circus) found the back of the net.
At the end of 90 minutes the score still stood at 1–1 and the game went into extra time.
Glasgow seemed better equipped to handle the additional 20 minutes and snatched victory thanks to an own goal by Donald McIntyre (Forfar) and Stephen Ross's late third.
In the Plate final — for teams knocked out in the first round of the Chairman's Cup — Fife beat Perth 4–2.
Margaret Thorburn, Assistant Secretary, Staff Club (Scotland) writes: The tournament got underway on Good Friday but because of the weather that day's matches were switched to an all-weather pitch at Strathclyde University.
However, conditions improved overnight and the two finals went ahead on grass.
Following the tournament, Erik Ostman, Senior Manager, Glasgow City Centre Grouping and Chairman of the Glasgow Football Club, hosted a dinner at Glasgow's Central Hotel.
Prizes were presented by Royal Bank Vice Chairman Charles Winter whose association with the Dundee and Edinburgh Football Clubs goes back many years.
Erik thanked referees Crawford Allan (Centralised Banking) and Stephen McKie (Glasgow International Division) for their contribution to the success of the tournament and then went on to pay tribute to Cubby Lorimer who retires from the Bank at the end of May.
Cubby has been associated with the Dundee Club for over 30 years, and for the past 15 years or so has been football representative on the Regional Committee of the Sports Association/Staff Club.
Charles Winter presented him with a Gleneagles crystal decanter and 12 glasses.
In response, Cubby said he would continue to support the Dundee Club, the Easter Tournament and football in general.
He was a big fella — says Stewart
STEWART Renton was amazed when doctors told him he had broken his leg in two places — and he could expect to be off work for three months!
‘It hurt, all right,’ he said, ‘but I didn't expect that to be the result of the accident.
It was a 50=50 ball, I  went for it, the Dundee keeper went for it — and bang, that was that.
Mind you, he was a big fella!’
Stewart, who works at Barrhead Branch, was rushed to hospital after the accident.
He's now recovering at home.
‘I hope to be back at work before the three months is up,’ he said, ‘and if all goes well, I hope to be back playing football next season.’
Marathon hopes hit by weather
JIM Buick's eighth successive London Marathon turned out to be his most difficult.
Before the race he was hoping to beat his personal best time of 2 hours 44 minutes 49 seconds which he set last year.
But the windy conditions put paid to that, and he had to be content with finishing the 26 miles 385 yards (42.195 kilometres) course in 2 hours 46 minutes 51 seconds.
The winner's time was just under 2 hours 11 minutes.
Jim, a Group Leader in Capital Operations Section, Registrars Department, Edinburgh finished in 611th place; last year he was 672nd.
Further down the field was David Taylor, Head Cashier at Macclesfield Chestergate Branch, who finished in 3 hours 43 minutes 29 seconds.
It was David's first London Marathon but he hopes to take part again next year.
Meanwhile, he is busy training for his next race — the Potteries Marathon on 19 June.
Squash title stays put for another year
Edinburgh Squash Club President Lawrence Mitchell (centre) with some of those involved in the 21st annual championships.
Back (from left) are Martin Webb, Eric Donohoe, Tom Cain (marker), Joyce Barr, Graeme Muir and Margaret Holligan;(front) George Gay, Douglas MacEwan, Stuart Dixon and Jim McCabe.
ERIC Donohoe of Services Delivery, Technology retained the Edinburgh Squash Club's championship title when he put up a fearless display to beat his boss, Martin Webb, Director of Technology.
Joyce Barr was again in commanding form as she lifted the ladies' title bearing Margaret Holligan of Economics.
In a five set thriller, the Handicap trophy was won by Stuart Dixon of Resource Management, Technology, leaving the beaten finalist, Jim McCabe of Operations Support, with mixed feelings as he was responsible for the competition handicapping.
However, Jim vowed revenge next season — if he still has anything to do with the handicapping!
Systems Development captained by Paul Anderson (need it be said — also of Technology), retained the Inter Branch/Department Shield with a narrow victory over George Gay's Oddbods team.
Also in Systems Development's team were Stuart Dixon, Derek Macgillivray and Douglas MacEwan.
In addition to George the other Oddbods were Graeme Muir, Joyce Barr and Colin Forsyth.
The championships were played at Colinton Sports Club in Edinburgh, and afterwards prizes were presented by Club President Lawrence Mitchell.
The Bank team had a successful season under Paul Anderson's captaincy and gained promotion to Division 5 of the Lothian League after several seasons in Division 6.
Whilst the team has a fairly strong pool, none of them is getting any younger (especially Derek) and new players are always welcome to give more strength in depth.
Anyone interested in playing team squash should contact Paul on .
The club is also delighted to welcome new members and their partners of any playing standard and offers, among other things, access to some 300 court hours a year for a mere £10 annual subscription.
Anyone interested should contact Douglas MacEwan on .
Bowled over by success!
SHAW Branch Manager John Powell had to pay up quicker than he expected after promising his staff an expenses-paid outing if they achieved their Royal Scottish leads target.
Not only did they hit the target of 28 for January and February combined, they went on to chalk up a total of 64!
John was delighted with the result.
‘It was a tremendous team effort and the outing — a ten-pin bowling fun day — was richly deserved.
The leads were of a good quality and that is obviously important.’
Our picture shows John with (standing, from left) Julia Middleton, Elaine Scanlon, Susan Durrant and Karen Knowles;(kneeling), Lisa Gibson, Bernadette Rumney, Fiona Hyland and Joanne Kelly.
Absent from the line-up are Susan Teinart, Kath Ronshaw and Royal Scottish Consultant Ian Barker.
Hole-in-one
PENSIONER George Geggie had a great 82nd birthday present — a hole in one!
He achieved the feat at the 15th at Goswick Golf Club near Berwick, George retired when Manager of Berwick-upon-Tweed Branch.
Wet weather golfers soldier on in the rain
Tayside get the better of Aberdeen
WIND and rain greeted golfers who turned out for the annual Good Friday match between Tayside Region and Aberdeen District at Forfar Golf Club.
Because of the atrocious weather, play was restricted to one round only with Tayside Region coming out on top by 4½ — 3½.
This was the 41st competition between the two sides for the Directors Trophy which was presented to both clubs for annual competition in April 1953, although in 1958 no play was possible because of a snowstorm.
The result now stands at 21 — 16 in Aberdeen's favour with 3 matches halved.
Over the years, the numbers turning out for the clash have dwindled and the match is now normally 18 a-side.
However, it is still regarded by many members as the highlight of the season.
Morning coffee, lunch and high tea is always of a high standard with the course also in tip-top condition.
Because the outing is subsidised by both Clubs, the day is excellent value for money.
Despite the weather conditions this year, everyone enjoyed the day out and are already looking forward to next year's encounter.
So, members of Tayside Region and Aberdeen District please note in your diaries — Good Friday, 1 April 1994 at Forfar Golf Club.
‘I guarantee you will enjoy it,’ says Secretary Barrie Liddle.
Rod's name goes on trophy
EDINBURGH South Group Golf Society held its first outing on the Gullane No 3 course.
The weather was relatively kind with the competitors having a dry day with no rain or strong winds to contend with.
Winner of the event — a stroke play competition — Rod Keiller of Edinburgh Tollcross Branch.
An excellent day was enjoyed by all, with those taking part already looking forward to future outings.
Our picture shows Rod receiving the winner's trophy from Tim Sutherland, Senior Manager and Honorary President of the South Group Golf Society.
Looking on is Secretary Angus Johnston of Edinburgh Coniston Branch.
Two share top spot at Millport
TORRENTIAL rain greeted a group of golfers from Glasgow's West George Street Grouping when they went on an outing to Millport Golf Club on the island of Great Cumbrae.
Despite the weather, however, 17 of them braved the elements to play the one round Stableford competition.
Joint winners with 35 points each were Iain Donaldson of West George Street Branch and Calum Logan of Charing Cross Branch.
Apart from the bad weather the golfers and non-golfers in the party had to queue for about two and a half hours for the small car ferry to take them back to the mainland.
However, ‘a great time was had by all,’ said Helen Milnes of West George Street Branch.
Plymouth customer collects basket of goodies
TWO winners emerged when Plymouth Branch held a free prize draw to promote Royal Scottish Assurance and the Gold Ninety account
Winner number one was customer Barbara Stampe-Gilbert who was presented with a basket of ‘goodies’ after her name was picked from the hat.
Winner number two was the branch itself—for the competition produced 17 warm leads in just one week.
After receiving her prize from Plymouth Branch Manager Mike King, Barbara was congratulated by (from left) Steve Murphy (Royal Scottish Consultant), Richard Maddock (Section Support), Andrea Evans and Tracy Brooking (Customer Services Officers), Helen Fogwill (Section Support) and David Salisbury (Royal Scottish Regional Sales Manager).
Record price for clock
AN antiques dealer, who banks with Knutsford Branch, has set a British auction record by paying £26,800 for an English long case clock with a painted dial.
Roy Clements wanted it for his collection which is thought to be the largest in Britain.
Englishman Robert Hynam made the clock for the Russian Court at St Petersburg in 1760.
Six years later he moved to St Petersburg to become Court clock-maker.
Soon afterwards, his daughter married an Englishman called Sevier, a Director of the Siberian Bank and they had a son, Alfred Hynam Sevier, who became a medical practitioner to the Court.
During the Russian Revolution Alfred loaded the clock on to a cart and brought it back to England.
It remained in the family until the auction.
Knutsford Branch Manager Alan Page (left) is also interested in clocks and was delighted when Roy (right) stopped by with his purchase.
Hard work rewarded
FOR 25 years Marjorie MacRae has devoted much of her spare time to the teaching of Scottish country dancing.
Now all her hard work has been recognised by West Lothian Arts who have presented her with an Arts Individual Award.
The Award is one of four made annually to encourage the local community to mark outstanding achievements.
The others were given to an arts group, a sports individual and a sports group.
Marjorie's hobby has taken her all over Scotland and abroad.
She specialises in the teaching of adults and is secretary/treasurer of her local branch of the Royal Scottish Country Dance Society.
She was presented with her award — specially commissioned from Livingston Woodcarver John Davidson — by Scottish actress Dorothy Paul.
When on Bank duty, Marjorie works as Administration Manager at Edinburgh Chesser Branch.
Our picture shows Marjorie (right) receiving her award from Dorothy Paul.
Thirsty way to treasure
ALDWYCH Group staff set off on a treasure hunt — only to find they had to visit 15 pubs en route!
The event was the first of its kind but the 30 participants had so much fun there are already plans to stage another hunt in the summer.
At the start each team was given a map containing 30 pubs.
They had to find those to visit by answering a cryptic clue and once inside had to answer a question.
Points were awarded for naming the correct pubs and for answering the questions.
‘The United Colours of Personal Banking’— John Linsdell, Karen Jones, Wendy Miller and Cyrus Tadiwala — took the chequered flag and won a bottle of Tesco vintage champagne.
Celebrations at Bury St Edmunds
STAFF at Bury St Edmunds Branch had something to celebrate — and something to celebrate with — after wining Private Trust and Taxation's South of England promotion contest for the second quarter of the current financial year.
They were presented with a case of wine by David Street, Manager, Private Trust and Taxation.
Bury were judged top branch after Linsey Carlin, Business Development Co-ordinator, organised a series of clinics which produced over 20 leads.
These resulted in new tax cases, will appointments and other cross-selling opportunities.
Said Manager Phil Hicks, ‘We've had an excellent customer response to our campaign, and we are particularly pleased to see the award coming to the East Anglia Region.
David Street, Manager, Private Trust and Taxation (foreground), presenting the case of wine to (from left) Val Crompton (Assistant Manager), Linsey Carlin (Business Development Co-ordinator), Phil Hicks (Manager), David Anderson, Mark Bozeat, Diane Everitt, Stephanie Johnson and Karen Harris.