

Dear ,
Thank you for contributing to the summer edition of Rural Wales.
I am not sure whether we replaced your copy of that incongruously named book ‘Sunshine Miners’.
If not, let me know because the copy you loaned me has been returned.
I have also enclosed some photos you kindly sent.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely,
3rd August 1993
Dear ,
Thank you for providing me with an excellent short article for the summer edition of Rural Wales.
I presume you have seen it already, but I have enclosed an extra copy for your use.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely,
3rd August 1993
Annwyl ,
Thanks for providing me with an excellent article for the summer edition of Cymru Wledig.
I am sorry it has taken so long to send you a copy and return your slides.
It seems to take ages to get them back from the printers.
I have enclosed two copies of the magazine.
Please let me know if you would like more.
By the way, I simply haven't yet found time to draft our final submission to the WTB.
I know the time is slipping and I hope to get it done in the next two weeks.
There's always too much to do!
Kind regards to you and Moira.
Yn gywir,
3rd August 1993
Annwyl ,
Thank you for providing me with two very appropriate slides of new housing in Ceredigion.
It's a great help to know I can rely on you for such last minute needs!
In case you haven't seen how I used them, I have enclosed a copy of Cymru Wledig.
I have also returned the aerial photos you sent.
It's useful to know they are available.
Dymuniadau gorau.
Yn gywir,
MEMO: AT LAST!…
OUR NEW RECRUITMENT LEAFLET!
To: Branch Secretaries
Membership Secretaries
From: The Director
12th May 1992
I have pleasure in enclosing a few copies of our new recruitment leaflet which I hope you feel will enable you to attract a lot of people in your area to become CPRW members.
We have had 40,000 printed, so a good supply is available at HQ.
However, at a unit cost of 10p we want to use them as effectively as possible.
A detailed recruitment strategy has been drawn up by the National Executive Committee, which was discussed and agreed at the March Council meeting.
You should have received a copy of this, but in case it has been mislaid, another is attached.
You will see that we intend sending a leaflet to each member with the summer edition of Rural Wales, with the plea that they use it to recruit at least one new member.
We also want members to be inspired into greater action by CPRW's new campaigning message.
Of the other planned recruitment actions listed, those under (b),(c) and (d) need to be taken up by your branch committee.
We had hoped that the Assistant Director Branches would be have joined us by now to help branches plan recruitment work.
Unfortunately, however, Tony Walker will not be joining us until mid July, but I hope branches will be able to get going under their own steam in the meantime.
The need for a recruitment target
To be effective, recruitment needs to be planned and the results of each approach adopted carefully recorded.
We also need to set challenging, but realistically attainable targets.
At present we have 3,544 members.
We ought to aim to get at least 4,000 by the end of the year.
We have to allow for the gradual loss of existing members — an allowance of 5% may be a reasonable figure.
We would therefore need recruit 633 new members to reach 4,000 by the end of the year.
On the basis that this represents a challenging but realistically attainable target, I have calculated a target for each branch on the attached sheet.
Please let me know what you think.
5th April 1993
THE UNITED KINGDOM'S NATIONAL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT
You once said I should let you know when I thought you could help the work of CPRW.
Well, such a moment has arrived!
You may not be aware, but in the wake of last year's Earth Summit the Government is preparing a UK National Sustainability Report for submission to the United Nation's Commission for Sustainable Development.
CPRW is one of a small handful of organisations in Wales that has been asked for views on what the report should say.
We have given the matter careful thought and prepared a response, a copy of which is enclosed.
As you will see from the introduction, we believe there should be a much wider debate in Wales on such an important issue.
We have therefore written our response to inform and stimulate debate, as well as to influence the Government's thinking.
We believe that by circulating it widely to politiciansdecision-makers in both the public and private sectors, journalists, other voluntary bodies and so on, we will be doing the best we can to raise awareness and interest in sustainability.
I hope you agree this is vitally important.
We've put a considerable effort into drafting our response, and you will see that it's not quite complete.
We've received help from the Countryside Council for Wales towards the costs of writing and research, and we have a Welsh Office grant to enable us to translate it into Welsh.
However, we urgently need around £2,000 to £2,500 to get it printed and to pay for postage.
Would your company be able to help?
I have applied to the grant scheme Environment Wales for some funds, but I don't expect to get more than a few hundred pounds, if anything at all.
So I really need your support.
I am assuming Hydro Aluminium Metals, with its strong commitment to the environment, will want to be associated with an informative document promoting sustainable development.
Time is of the essence, as always.
Ideally we want to publish the document early in May, while there's still time to influence the UK Report.
I'm away on holiday until Monday 19th of April.
On my return I intend to complete the document and get publication underway.
I would therefore be grateful if you could let me know as soon as possible whether Hydro Aluminium Metals will be a sponsor.
You might like to know that I've approached no other company.
You can either wait until my return or leave a message through my office at the above address.
I do hope you can help.
Kind regards.
5th April 1993
THE UNITED KINGDOM'S NATIONAL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT
You may be aware that in the wake of last year's Earth Summit the Government is preparing a National Sustainability Report for submission to the United Nation's Commission for Sustainable Development.
CPRW is one of a small handful of organisations in Wales that has been asked for views on what the report should say.
We have given the matter careful thought and prepared a response, a copy of which is enclosed.
As you will see from the introduction, we believe there should be a much wider debate in Wales on such an important issue.
We have therefore written our response to inform and stimulate debate, as well as to influence the Government's thinking.
We believe that by circulating it widely to politicians, decision- makers in both the public and private sectors, journalists, other voluntary bodies and so on, we will be doing the best we can to raise awareness and interest in sustainability.
I'm sure you agree this is vitally important.
We've put a considerable effort into drafting our response, and you will see that it's not quite complete.
We've received help from the Countryside Council for Wales towards the costs of writing and research, and we have a Welsh Office grant to enable us to translate it into Welsh.
However, we urgently need around £2,000 to £2,500 to get it printed and to pay for postage.
I am sincerely hoping Hydro Aluminium Metals Ltd, whose managing director Albert Smith may be known to you, will come up with the bulk of this sum.
However, I think it would also be an excellent opportunity to combine forces with Environment Wales, something CPRW has yet to do.
I am assuming Environment Wales will want to be associated with an informative document promoting sustainable development.
Time is of the essence.
Ideally we want to publish the document early in May, while there's still time to influence the content of the UK Report.
I'm away on holiday until Monday 19th of April.
On my return I intend to complete the document and get publication underway.
I would therefore be grateful if you could let me know as soon as possible if Environment Wales could make a contribution of, say, £500 to £1,000 towards printing and circulation costs?
You can either wait until my return or leave a message through my office at the above address.
I do hope you can help.
Kind regards.
MEMO: Preparations for the UK Presidency of the EEC
To: Honorary Officers
From: The Director 4th June 1992
Since the formation of the UK Group of EEB Members we have been able to play a fuller role in the affairs of the EEB without too great a commitment of time and resources.
The group has met once since the last EEB AGM and another meeting is scheduled for June 9th.
An offshoot, to enable voluntary bodies to prepare for the Earth Summit, has met three times and included a meeting with the Environment Minister.
I have found all these meetings extremely valuable as a means of keeping in touch with UK and international developments in the environment field, and as a way of feeding in views from Wales.
One of the key issues to be considered at our meeting on the 9th of June will be the drafting of a Memorandum to the President of the European Council (in this case, the UK Government) which is presented at the beginning of each new presidency.
This sets out what the EEB believes to be the major priorities for the European Community during the period of the presidency.
A meeting has already been held with the Government's new Environment Minister, David Maclean.
I have attached a paper prepared for this which highlights many of the areas in which the EEB believes progress must be made over the next six months.
Please let me know if you would like further information or have any comments to make on this briefing.
4th June 1992
Dear ,
Project 21/91 River Usk Barrage
I wrote to your colleague, Bryony Chapman, on the 24th of April, enclosing a comprehensive report of this project, a statement of accounts and a further application for grant-aid.
I do not have any record of an acknowledgement so I would be grateful if you could confirm that they have all been safely received.
In looking back at my records I notice that I did not send you the enclosed form which I have now completed.
I hope you will be able to confirm that everything is in order and being dealt with satisfactorily.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
10th June 1992
Dear ,
Proposed Index to PPGs and MPGs
Following our recent telephone conversation I have drafted some thoughts on the nature of this proposed index on one side of A4.
I hope you find this useful as a way of progressing the idea.
My National Executive is keen to see such an index created for use by our branches and has allocated up to £1500 for its this purpose.
I would be only too pleased to work in conjunction with CPRE to enhance the quality of the index and agree arrangements for its regular up-dating.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: Proposed Index to Planning Policy Guidance Notes
To: Members of the Executive Committee
From: The Director 10th June 1992
You will recall that during the last Executive Committee meeting we considered a proposal to create an index to help branches make use of the increasing amount of planning policy guidance which is now available.
I have now discussed this idea with colleagues in CPRE who have indicated their interest in working jointly on this project.
I have drafted some further thoughts on what I think is required in the hope that we can reach agreement on form the index should take.
I have enclosed this for your information and would welcome any comments you may have on it.
4th June 1992
Dear ,
Your letter dated the 19th May to Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link has been passed on to me in my capacity as Vice Chair of the Link, but more relevantly perhaps as Director of CPRW.
The proposed Blackwood By-Pass is one of a large number of such schemes affecting parts of Wales.
Although they can bring some benefits to car-congested towns they almost always carry the penalty of significant environmental damage to the countryside and to the setting of towns.
We are increasingly questioning the wisdom of a car and road-led transport strategy which destroys important habitats and local landscapes both directly, in terms of the selected route, and indirectly through the quarrying and transport of aggregates, as well as by encouraging increased vehicular pollution.
In the case of the Blackwood By-Pass, I have passed your letter and the public consultation paper to our Gwent Branch in the hope that they will be able to look at the scheme in more detail.
You may like to have the name and address of its volunteer secretary who is Dennis Harper of 8 Pentonville, Newport NP9 5XH.
Yours sincerely,
4th June 1992
Dear ,
EEB UK Group meeting: 9th June
Thanks for the papers — I shall be attending.
Having looked at the draft Memorandum to the Presidency I can only say it seems to cover most of the key points.
I hope those you have indicated provide the necessary additional material.
However, I would like to see a much briefer, more targeted, memorandum than the huge document that is usually prepared by the EEB.
I do hope you can achieve this.
Although it is not strictly EEB-related, I wonder if we can use the meeting to consider the request by DoE for comments on the format and drafting procedure of the White Paper Second Year Report (paper enclosed).
It seems to me that the relatively open approach involving environmental NGOs, currently being displayed by the DoE, is not yet being reflected in Wales.
In this context I continue to be uneasy about the role of the Voluntary Sector Environmental Forum whose terms of reference are clearly relevant to Wales but whose work is largely related to England only.
I would like to pursue both of these issues with the Welsh Office and would appreciate a better understanding of what is being achieved through the forum and how voluntary environmental bodies feel about the White Paper Second Year Report procedure, which requires the publication of a separate report for Wales.
I look forward to seeing you on the 9th June.
Yours sincerely,
4th June 1992
Annwyl ,
Thanks for your letter of the 28th of May highlighting the danger of future valley drownings in Wales in order to meet the demands of an increasingly thirsty Southern England.
I share your concern and have indicated this to our friends in CPRE who are fighting to bring water use under rational control.
We clearly share a common interest in seeking a solution based on the conservation and rational use of existing supplies, rather than through the construction of new reservoirs.
While I am writing, I wonder if you would be prepared to attend a conference being held in Swansea on Tuesday 16th of June, details of which are enclosed.
I have a feeling that the subject could be of interest to you and I would appreciate a brief report of the proceedings.
We would, of course, pay the £10 registration and refreshments fee.
Please could you let Jenny know if you are able to attend so she can make the booking.
Dymuniadau gorau.
Yn gywir,
Neil Caldwell Cyfarwyddwr
MEMO: Government Consultation Paper on ‘Freedom of Access to Information on the Environment’
To:
From: The Director 4th June 1992
I recently discovered that this consultation paper had been sent out to some environmental NGOs in England in March for comments by the end of April.
I contacted the Welsh Office, let them know of our irritation at not being consulted and obtained a copy of the paper.
Our views are invited, despite the deadline having been exceeded.
As I think you may have a particular interest in this subject, I thought you would like to see the paper.
I would be very pleased to receive any views you may have on its content.
4th June 1992
Dear ,
I understand that you wish to call to see me to discuss CPRW's interest in the work of the Forestry Authority in Wales.
I would very much welcome this opportunity.
Two of the dates you have suggested (9.30am on either the 23rd or 26th) are suitable but I will be at a conference in Inverness on the 2nd and 3rd of July.
I look forward to hearing from you to confirm the meeting date.
Yours sincerely,
4th June 1992
Dear ,
Landscapes in a new Europe
After the Danish referendum I am tempted to ask: What new Europe?
However, I shall restrain myself!
Hope you are well.
I've just come across the details of your interesting looking conference in Blois.
It is unlikely I shall be able to attend, but I thought I would register my interest and ask for a copy of the conference report if it doesn't cost too much.
Keep up the good work.
Yours sincerely,
4th June 1992
Dear ,
INVITATION TO LAUNCH OF MAJOR ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVE
I am grateful for this invitation and would like to attend the launch.
I look forward to receiving further details.
Yours faithfully,
12th June 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for your letter dated March 1992.
I apologise for the delay in replying, but I have only just got to the bottom of my ‘in tray’ after months of chasing deadlines!
I share your concern for the future of our hedgerows.
We have been campaigning with CPRE to encourage their proper management and protection.
As a result the Government has now stated its intention to introduce a statutory Hedgerow Notification Scheme and fund a Hedgerow Restoration Scheme.
The first will require legislation which has been promised ‘at the earliest opportunity’ whereas preparations are already being made to introduce the latter throughout England and Wales.
Your general comments about sustainability are appreciated.
We have been active with others in emphasising the vital importance of developing a more sustainable lifestyle in the run-up to the Earth Summit, though our efforts appear to have had only limited effect, judging by the attitude of our political leaders.
Will simply must keep trying to get the message across.
I have enclosed a leaflet about CPRW and a copy of the latest edition of our magazine which I hope you find interesting.
Yours sincerely,
4th June 1992
Dear ,
Environmental Assessment of the Dyfed Gwynedd Powys Operational Programme Projects
Thank you for your letter of the 6th of May reassuring me that the partnership of local sponsoring bodies, the Welsh Office and the European Commission which manages the programme, takes into account environmental considerations when selecting and approving projects.
I hope you will allow me to remain somewhat sceptical about these vague reassurances which remind me of those that were regular given during the 1980s (prior to publication of the Environment White Paper) although it was evident that no rigorous assessment was ever made of the environmental effects of development.
I would therefore be grateful if you could let me know exactly what procedure is adopted to ‘take account of environmental considerations’ when decisions are taken and how, on the basis of the information which is consequently available, the balance is struck between development and the environment?
Yours sincerely,
Annwyl Gareth,
Thank you for sending me a copy of CCW's Research Programme for 1993.
It is very helpful to have and I shall read it carefully.
I have just returned from an interesting and enjoyable conference on Coastal Zone Management held during a beautiful weekend in Copenhagen.
It was organised by the European Environmental Bureau, of which we are members, and aimed at clarifying our objectives for European Community action (a Directive?) on CMZ in the run-up to the informal EC Environment Ministers meeting in Denmark later this month.
The meeting came to some useful conclusions and a resolution to the EC's Environment Ministers is being drawn up.
When I have a copy I will pass it on.
In any case, we will inevitably discuss coastal issues as part of our CCW/CPRW Partnership Plan when it is reviewed on the 10th of May.
In the meantime I have two other documents you and your staff might find useful.
The first (you may have) is the Declaration of the European Coastal Conservation Conference held in the Hague in November 1991.
This provided an important background to our deliberations in Copenhagen.
The second is hot off the fax!
It is the Declaration agreed at the recent UN/ECE/EC Environment Conference in Luzern.
Although it is couched in the inscrutable language of international political agreements, you may find it of some value in your dealings with the Government!
I should just add that I was lucky enough to be selected for the only European Commission sponsored place at the EEB conference.
This was agreed in consultation with other UK EEB members and I hope it reflects not only CPRW's modest financial position, but also our knowledge of, and interest in, coastal matters.
Yn gywir,
Neil Caldwell Cyfarwyddwr
5th May 1993
Dear ,
EC Action on Coastal Zone Management
Before I return to more mundane matters, I thought I should let you have a quick report on the EEB conference in Copenhagen.
I'm glad to say it was a business-like meeting which focussed on clarifying what action should be taken by the European Community on furthering Coastal Zone Management, particularly in the context of its 5th Action Programme.
A false assumption was made initially that progress was only possible through a Directive on CZM.
However, while we all agreed such was necessary, we also acknowledged the political obstacles in our way.
We therefore decided to press for immediate action where it could be taken, with the aim of achieving a Directive in the medium term.
In the final session we agreed the basis for a ‘declaration’ to the informal meeting of EC Environment Ministers being held in Denmark later this month.
Dr Sue Gubbay (MCS) and Fiona Reynolds (CPRE) are both on the drafting group, which inspires confidence!
I will ensure you have a copy as soon as it's available.
I'm sure you already have too many papers to read, but since I have spare copies I have enclosed a background paper we received on a European coastal conservation strategy, and a commentary on the EC and the Ramsar Convention in preparation for the 5th conference of the contracting parties of the Convention.
Make of them what you will!
We were given an excellent welcome by our Danish colleagues and the weather was superb.
Altogether an enjoyable and satisfying event!
Kind regards,
Neil Caldwell, Director
Date:
Dear 
Transport and Works Act 1992: River Usk Barrage Project
I would like you to represent my interests in the above project as someone whose private property may be adversely affected by the construction of a barrage across the river Usk by Newport Borough Council.
I am particularly concerned by the potentially damaging effects of a rise in groundwater level on my property following the construction of the barrage.
I understand you acted on behalf of local residents in the old docklands area of Cardiff and secured protective clauses for them in the Act of Parliament which now permits the Cardiff Bay Barrage to be built.
I would be grateful if you could try to protect my interests in the same way.
This request to you to represent my interests is made on strict the understanding that I will not be liable for the costs of so doing.
Please keep me informed of relevant developments.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
5th May 1993
Dear ,
River Usk Barrage
It was good to talk to you yesterday about our mutual interest in challenging the merits of the proposal by Newport Borough Council to build a barrage across the river Usk.
As I explained, we would be pleased to under-write the costs of enabling our agent, Mr John Popham, to represent your interest in protecting your property and the public amenity of the Glebelands against damaging groundwater effects that might be caused by the barrage.
This will not affect your rights to act independently, although I would encourage you to take advice from Mr Popham since he is very experienced in protecting the interests of local residents/community groups in cases where major developments are being proposed.
You may already have written to Mr Popham to ask him to act in this way.
However, I have enclosed several copies of a letter that you may like to use to invite your neighbours to take advantage of Mr Popham's services.
It would help if you could organise an action group to co-ordinate your local campaign, though this is not essential.
I have also enclosed some correspondence which Mr Popham has received or is preparing to send on your behalf.
We understand that Newport BC will apply for the Order to build the barrage on the 28th of May.
If they do, objections will have to be lodged by the 8th July.
Mr Popham will see that this is done on your behalf.
Finally, I have enclosed membership forms for CPRW and would be delighted to enrol you and anyone else who wants to support us.
Yours sincerely,
5th May 1993
Dear ,
Transport & Works Act 1992: River Usk Barrage Project
I have just received notice via our agent, Mr John Popham, whom I believe you know, that Newport Borough Council and Gwent County Council are preparing to apply to the Secretary of State for Wales for an Order under the above Act to enable them to proceed with the construction of a barrage across the river Usk.
As you know, we have been valiantly battling against this awful proposal for the last two years.
We have worked in alliance with the Gwent and Brecknock Wildlife Trusts and have kept in close touch with other voluntary and statutory bodies.
We believe we have caused the scheme's promoters considerable difficulties and wish to continue to be a painful thorn in their side!
We estimate the cost of this campaign so far has been in excess of £20,000.
The great majority of this has been covered by CPRW from our revenue account and through special appeals to our 3,500 members.
However, we have also been very grateful to WWF/UK for the valuable grants you have provided.
It is not an exaggeration to say that these kept the campaign afloat when it appeared to be sinking for lack of funds.
We are now preparing for the next critical round.
We understand that the two councils hope to apply for the necessary Order on the 28th of May.
If they do, objections will have to be lodged by the 8th of July.
We then expect a Pre-Inquiry meeting will be held by the Secretary of State sometime in September and that a Local Public Inquiry will take place either before or just after Christmas.
I would therefore like to make another application for grant-aid from WWF/UK on behalf of our alliance.
As you know, our case against the barrage is based on:
a)
its potentially damaging effects on the ecology and amenity of the river Usk up-stream and down-stream of the barrage;
b)
its potentially damaging effects on recolonisation of the Usk and neighbouring rivers by otters, which is currently taking place;
c)
its potentially damaging effects on the protected species, Twaite Shad;
d)
its potentially damaging effects on trees and shrubs in both urban and rural areas; and
e)
its potentially damaging effects on urban amenity areas and private properties in Newport as a result of a rise in groundwater level.
We have assembled a team of expert witnesses to present evidence on these issues.
We have tried to ensure they compliment the evidence being prepared by statutory objectors, including the Countryside Council for Wales and the National Rivers Authority.
Some of the work has already been done, but we still need to find around £15,000 to enable the expert witnesses to prepare their statements of case and to be available to present their evidence at the inquiry.
This sum includes the cost of ensuring our case is ably orchestrated by John Popham — an essential requirement!
I would be most grateful if you could let me know what more, if anything, I have to do to submit an application to WWF/UK for grant-aid towards the costs of preparing and presenting our case.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
8th June 1993
Dear ,
A NEW LEASE OF LIFE FOR BLAENAU FFESTINIOG MARKET HALL
Thank you for sending me further information on your ideas that could give Blaenau Ffestiniog's market hall a new lease of life appropriate to the Twenty-First Century.
I found these of great interest and I have sent them on to our Meirionnydd Branch Committee who will want to give them careful consideration.
We are always keen to support projects that offer social and economic benefits to the communities of Wales while protecting and enhancing the natural and built environments.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: ANALYSIS OF THE GOVERNMENT'S VIEWS ON NATIONAL PARKS
To: All branches that take in national parks
cc National Chairman and Vice Chairmen
From: The Director 9th June 1992
As usual, I represented CPRW at the Council for National Parks' meeting in London held in London last week.
Among an interesting agenda of issues, we considered the Government's stated position on many of the recommendations made by the Edwards Committee and the response to them by CCW and the Countryside Commission.
CNP's staff prepared a particularly useful paper for the meeting, which I have enclosed.
It outlines CNP's recommendations to the Edwards Committee, comments on the Government's statement and those of CCW and CC, and suggests appropriate further action.
I thought you would find the paper informative and helpful.
If you have any questions or comments I would be pleased to receive them.
You may also like to know that CNP is preparing to publish an important report on quarrying in national parks.
Further details will be supplied in due course.
9th May 1992
Dear ,
Carmel Woods SSSI, Dinefwr
I am trying to keep abreast of developments associated with this complex but very important issue.
As I understand it, MacAlpine is likely to withdraw the planning application for limited working it made last year and concentrate on pursuing its Interim Development Order application with Dyfed County Council.
I am advised that Dyfed is likely to reject the application and maintain its view of the extent of the IDO as presented in its High Court case.
There is every chance that the IDO application will eventually find its way back to the Welsh Office, who have declined to ‘call it in’ voluntarily.
If so, we would hope that objections from CCW, voluntary bodies and others will result in a public inquiry.
This is a only thumb-nail sketch which I hope is fairly accurate, though the complex and confused relationship between the planning and legal aspects makes it extremely difficult to second-guess.
I would appreciate any guidance on the way things may proceed.
I am writing specifically to gain some clarification regarding the prospect of declaring a National Nature Reserve over the area of the Carmel Woods SSSI.
I understand this has been given some serious consideration, but it has been decided not to proceed at present.
I wonder if you could give me some indication why this view has been taken?
Many thanks.
Yours sincerely,
9th June 1992
Dear ,
I had a chance last week to read your excellent discussion paper on Marine Protected Areas.
I thought I should let you know how valuable I think the analysis is to the conservation movement, and how helpful it is to be able to lend weight to a fresh strategy, such as that proposed in the paper.
I feel that you, Lynda Warren and the consortium of supporting organisations have made an important contribution to the debate on coastal and marine conservation and planning.
Well done and thanks!
Yours sincerely,
9th June 1992
Dear ,
It was good to see you again last week.
I felt the meeting was useful and hope that further co-ordination will enable all of us to campaign more effectively against the major road schemes that threaten Glamorgan and Gwent.
I mentioned the proposed CPRW sponsored study into transport and environment issues in Wales.
I believe that transport policy researcher, Stuart Cole, whom we have asked to chair the study, has been in touch with you to ask if you would be prepared to make a contribution by joining the steering group.
If all goes according to plan you should find further details of the study and proposed dates for a first meeting enclosed with this letter.
It is obviously difficult to predict exactly how the study will proceed.
Indeed, the terms of reference of the study, who will do what and the precise timetable for production of the report will be the major subjects for discussion at the first meeting.
However, we intend the study to produce an authoritative and influential report questioning the current road-led strategy and considering more environmentally sustainable alternatives.
Stuart Cole has given some preliminary thought to the ground the study should cover, although nothing is final.
We both believe the study will be strengthened by taking a broad and balanced look at transport and environment issues.
We have therefore tried to create a steering group combining a mix of experience and expertise.
I think Stuart is hoping several group members will contribute specific perspectives, each of which may form a chapter of the report, whereas others will contribute through critical assessment of the issues.
We are obviously hoping you will help feed in the environmental aspects to be addressed.
I do hope that you will be prepared to join the steering group.
Yours sincerely
9th June 1992
Dear ,
Welcome back from Hong Kong (I don't know exactly when you are due back, but this letter will still be relevant whether it's next week or next month).
I want to let you know about a study we have initiated on the usual basis of (almost) nil funds — hence we can't offer you a lucrative contract!
Nevertheless, I am sure you will be very interested in the subject which is ‘Transport and the Environment in Wales’.
You should find further details and proposed dates for a first meeting enclosed with this letter.
It is obviously difficult to predict exactly how the study will proceed.
Indeed, the terms of reference of the study, who will do what and the precise timetable for production of the report will be the major subjects for discussion at the first meeting.
However, we intend the study to produce an authoritative and influential report questioning the current road-led strategy and considering more environmentally sustainable alternatives.
We have asked transport policy researcher, Stuart Cole, of the Polytechnic of North London, to chair a steering group for the study.
Stuart has given some thought to the ground that needs to be covered, although nothing is final.
We both believe it is important to take a broad and balanced look at transport and environment issues in Wales.
We have therefore tried to create a steering group combining a mix of experience and expertise.
I think Stuart is hoping several group members will contribute specific perspectives, each of which may form a chapter of the report, whereas others will contribute through an assessment of the issues.
We would very much like you to join the steering group and I hope you will confirm your willingness to do so.
With best wishes.
Yours sincerely
9th November 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for your letter of the 26th October providing details of your remarkable Denmark Farm project.
I must admit to being unaware of it before you wrote.
In fact your letter arrived at just the right time, since I am now planning the Spring ‘93 Edition of Rural Wales.
Yes, I would like to feature your project, especially if you can provide me with two or three good quality photographs to illustrate your article.
The article itself should be no more than 1,100 words long and should be with me by December 31st, if not before.
Please look at the enclosed magazine to see the usual format for articles.
Each has a short opening paragraph (ostensibly written by the editor) which enables the reader to quickly grasp what the article is about.
Each ends with a short biographical note about the author.
You can choose whether these two paragraphs fall within your allotted 1,100 words, or are in addition to them.
Please would you confirm immediately that you will be able to provide this article and some suitable photographs by or before the 31st of December.
You can ‘phone me at home on  or leave a message at CPRW's office on .
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
14th June 1993
Dear ,
There is a strong rumour that the Government is now planning not to introduce an Environment Bill in the next Session of Parliament.
If so, this would mean that vital measures, such as the creation of independent national park authorities and a new Environment Agency, and laws to protect important hedgerows and common land, could be postponed yet again.
We urgently need to convince the Government that such measures are not only badly needed; they would also prove very popular.
Time is short, but we must mobilise the full strength of our membership to try to ensure that the Bill is brought forward quickly.
Please could I ask you to find a few minutes to write to the Secretary of State for Wales, Welsh Office, Cathays Park, Cardiff CF1 3NQ, urging him to persuade his cabinet colleagues of the importance of finding time for an Environment Bill which includes these measures.
Your letter need only be a few lines long, but use your own words to explain why you think time must be found for the Bill.
Thank you for your help.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: UPKEEP OF OUR PREMISES AT 31 HIGH STREET, WELSHPOOL
To: Richard
From: Neil
13th August 1992
This is to let you know that work is being done to maintain our premises at 31 High Street.
This was discussed with Ann earlier this year and is being carried out during August because it is the most convenient month.
The work consists of:
1
Making good the exterior render.
2
Replacing one rotten window frame and sill.
3
Painting of the exterior render and timber.
4
Painting all internal walls and features.
5
Recarpeting of the main work area.
I estimate this work will cost in the region of £1,500–£2,000.
We also desperately need to install a safe and economical heating system — this has been talked about for too many years.
At the moment we use a combination of electric oil heaters and open bar fires.
These are not only very expensive to run by they are also dangerous given the huge amounts of paper lying around the place.
I have attached an estimate for the installation of a cheap rate storage heater system, from MANWEB.
This makes allowance for installing heaters in the gallery area which we are due to take back in hand at the end of September.
Again, we discussed this with Ann who made permission dependent on completion of the sale of the Berriew cottages.
This is imminent, though I do feel we should really proceed anyway.
What do you think?
I know that Ann was rather keen to cover the cost of both these aspects from our revenue account.
However, I have been given no allowance under the ‘premises’ budget head and would prefer it if we asked the Trustees to allocate the requisite funds from our investments.
After all, we are in essence maintaining one of our principal assets — our freehold premises.
I am away on a short holiday in Scotland between August 14th-26th but would be pleased to discuss this over the telephone when I'm back.
I hope your new job is going well.
Visit by Mdme de Jonghe to Wales Wildlife & Countryside Link
May I express our disappointment at the last minute postponement of the carefully planned visit of Anne-Marie de Jonghe to Wales.
My colleagues and I in Wales Link were greatly looking forward to her visit, planned over a period of 18 months.
As the attached memorandum indicates, a large number of arrangements had been made to ensure a worthwhile programme, and representatives of all the other UK Links had agreed to attend our meeting.
Whilst these preparations have had to be cancelled, we are most anxious to rearrange the programme for later in the year.
I would therefore like to invite you or a member of your staff to join Wales Link at its meeting on Wednesday July 15th.
We hope that you will then be able to travel around Wales to see some of the issues with which we are concerned over the following two days.
I would be very grateful if you could let me know if you are able to accept this invitation.
We would be very pleased to meet you and feel sure that we can offer you an interesting and worthwhile programme.
Neil Caldwell Vice Chair
17th June 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for your letter confirming your willingness to permit us to use one of your paintings for this year's Christmas card.
This is greatly appreciated.
My colleague, Jenny Smith, will be in touch to make all the necessary arrangements.
Thank you also for the very useful information concerning the proposed upgrading of the A5 through Snowdonia.
We are very worried by the apparent incremental upgrading of this road and actively opposed the plans for the Padog Bends.
I know our local branch has also made representations about some of the other proposals.
I have copied your letter and this reply to Col Roy Davies, Chairman of our Caernarfonshire and Friends of Snowdonia Branch, because I know he will be interested to see your data.
As well as challenging the justification for piecemeal projects at a local level, especially where they would affect designated landscapes, we believe we need to develop a strategic overview of transport policy in Wales, questioning the present approach and proposing less environmentally damaging alternatives.
With this in mind we have established a small expert working party under the chairmanship of Stuart Cole, Director of Transport Research and Consultancy at the Polytechnic of North London.
Stuart has regularly advised the Welsh Affairs Select Committee on transport and environment issues.
The working party meets for the first time in July when it will define the terms of reference of the study.
I am sure it will want to consider the strategic issues arising from the A5/A55 relationship.
I am sure the committee would appreciate as much information as possible on the patterns of use.
The aim is to publish a radical and influential report within the next twelve months.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: Betws y Coed Training Course on Volunteering
To: Everyone who participated
From:
17th June 1992
I hope you enjoyed the training course on Saturday and found it of value.
I forgot to mention the importance of completing and returning the course evaluation form which we need to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the event, as well as to compile a report to our funding bodies at the end of the year.
You should find the evaluation form, plus a pre-paid envelope, among the papers you received prior to the course.
If you have not already done so, I would be very grateful if you could return the form as soon as possible.
If you are one of the people who left the course at 4pm, I have enclosed a copy of the Action Plan that was considered during the last half hour.
You should find this useful in putting some of the course ideas into action in your branch.
17th June 1992
Dear ,
It was nice to see you, albeit briefly, at CPRE HQ the other day.
I look forward to welcoming you to Wales (hopefully) at the next Wildlife Link /Forestry Commission liaison meeting on the 29th and 30th of October.
I am just writing to note that yet another transport consultation paper has turned up on my desk — this time its on the ‘proposed legislative response to recommendations in noise review report’.
I try my best to respond as intelligently as possible to as many consultations as I can manage.
However, at present I have had to conclude that it just isn't possible to respond to the transport ones, so I would be very pleased if you felt able to note on your response that CPRW supports CPRE's views on this issue.
You may have heard that we have initiated a ‘Transport and the Environment’ working party, under Stuart Cole's chairmanship, to develop a suitable transport strategy for Wales.
I am hoping this will improve my grasp of the key issues so that I can make a more direct contribution on this front in future.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: Cardigan Bay: Our approach to the oil industry
To: From: The Director
19th June 1992
The Cardigan Bay Forum has paid serious attention to the issues arising from the oil industry's increasing interest in exploring potential reserves in Cardigan Bay, including the forthcoming test drilling by Hamilton Brothers off Bardsey.
As a member of the Forum, the Ceredigion Branch is in touch with the issues, but I thought it was important to ensure all Cardigan Bay branches were well informed.
I have therefore enclosed copies of a recent CBF press release, plus some correspondence which should be self-explanatory.
The letters dated 25th May and 6th June were fully endorsed by the most recent meeting of the Forum which went on to pass a detailed resolution which is referred to in the press release.
We were fortunate that there were several people present at the Forum who were familiar with the oil industry internationally.
Among the presentations was one from Dr Clive Morgan, Director of the Field Studies Council Environmental Assessment Unit.
Clive, who is an active CPRW member, felt it was vital that environmental groups took a very tough line with the industry right from the word go.
In this respect, there were many at the meeting (including me) who felt the least we should be demanding of the industry and the regulators (the DTI) was that only the very highest environmental standards currently practised internationally (the Norwegian oil field was given as a good example) would be acceptable for operations in Cardigan Bay.
In eco-jargon this means a ‘zero emissions policy’ should be applied.
In other words, oil rigs should account for all materials both used and produced during operations — and everything should be brought on shore for safe disposal.
Notwithstanding this, we also believe the precautionary approach should be adopted, with some areas designated ‘inviolable’ where no drilling should be allowed.
You may have views on this in relation to the blocks currently being considered by the DTI for the next round of licences (see the map).
I hope we can adopt a unified approach along these lines.
Please let me have your views.
MEMO: Branch response to the draft Powys Structure Plan
To:
From: The Director
17th June 1992
Further to our meeting the other day, I have enclosed a copy of the detailed policies recently adopted by Anglesey Borough Council to guide windfarm developments on the island.
Please remember this is a District Policy which is, of necessity, more detailed and specific than is required of a strategic Structure Plan Policy.
However, you should find it helpful in identifying the issues which still need to be covered by the Powys Structure Plan Policy.
I have also enclosed an article to add to the considerable amount of reference material you should now be holding on this subject.
Our Montgomeryshire Branch Chairman has asked if both the Radnor and Brecknock Branches would send him copies of their responses to the structure plan, for his information.
Could you therefore send a copy of your final draft to: as well as to me via Welshpool.
Thanks.
17th June 1992
I realise that your elevation to the Peerage has proved rather controversial, but from CPRW's point-of-view it is very welcome.
Congratulations!
As you know, a good deal of lobbying takes place in the House of Lords to try to strengthen legislation in order to protect the environment.
It is extremely gratifying to know that we will have a knowledgeable and committed environmentalist in the House of Lords on whom we can rely for help whenever the need arises.
I look forward to working closely with you in future.
With best wishes.
18th June 1992
Wales Link and DGXI
Given all the momentous developments in the environmental sphere that are taking place on the world stage, with which I'm sure you are involved, I hope you won't mind me asking for help over an irritating little problem which is nonetheless of importance to UK environment groups.
I am sure you are familiar with the UK Link organisations, among them Wildlife Link.
Wales Link is the most recent addition to the family, and it brings together all the major environmental groups active in Wales.
I regularly attend the AGM of the European Environmental Bureau, which my organisation, the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales, has been a member for over 10 years.
Through these meetings I have got to know Anne-Marie de Jonghe, who I believe is primarily responsible for liaison between DGXI and environment NGOs throughout the Community.
At last year's AGM I extended an invitation to Ms de Jonghe to visit Wales on behalf of Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link.
We discussed the purposes of the visit which, among other things, would explore the help which the Commission could give to assist NGO ‘inter-country linking’ within the UK.
Arrangements were duly made to hold a special Wales Link Council meeting which Ms de Jonghe could attend.
We invited all the chairs of the other UK Link bodies (ie Wildlife Link, Countryside Link, Scottish Link, and Northern Ireland Link).
We also put together a two day programme, hosted by key NGOs, to show Ms de Jonghe some of the major EC related environmental issues affecting Wales.
I'm sure can imagine how pleased we were to have put together such a visit, addressing both UK and specific Welsh issues.
We were therefore very disappointed when Ms de Jonghe found she had to cancel everything at practically the last minute.
Such things happen, so we tried to be philosophical.
Nonetheless, we wrote to Ms de Jonghe's boss, Mr Jankovski, expressing our disappointment and extending a further invitation to him or a representative to attend a meeting in July.
Months passed but we received no reply.
I was asked by Wales Link to write again, but still no reply or acknowledgement has been forthcoming.
I have also written again to Ms de Jonghe to try to make progress with some of the issues that we intended to discuss during her visit.
Again, no reply has been forthcoming.
I have also telephoned on a number of occasions, but without success.
I have enclosed all the correspondence to indicate the sequence of events.
I really think by now, Earth Summit or no Earth Summit, that we should have received some acknowledgment from DGXI.
What makes me particularly frustrated is recalling the strong criticisms levelled at NGOs by Mr Jankovski and Ms de Jonghe during the EEB AGM, for allegedly operating in ‘an amateurish manner’.
I had some sympathy at the time, but not anymore.
I would be most grateful if you would make some inquiries to find out what is preventing DGXI from responding courteously to our invitations?
I hope you will not mind me having circulated this letter to Wales four MEPs, since I am sure they will be concerned to hear of these difficulties.
I look forward to hearing from you.
17th June 1992
Dear ,
Campaign to Reform the EC Structural Fund Regulations
Thanks for your latest guidance on this issue.
I will certainly follow this up with the Welsh Office.
In fact I am developing a revealing, but ultimately frustrating line of correspondence with the Welsh Office and I would be grateful if you could take a look at the enclosed letter copies.
I feel I am being ‘fobbed off’ with bland reassurances and I want to pin them down as much as possible.
Any advice you could give me would be appreciated.
I am also close to persuading colleagues on the Prince of Wales Committee's Environment Study Group (of which i am a member) to devote one of its prestigious weekend seminars during 1993 to an examination of the environmental regulations and/or assessment procedures that currently exist for EC money flowing into Wales, and what new procedures are necessary.
I am keen to keep in close touch with you on this subject.
Best wishes to you, Tony and Victoria.
Yours sincerely,
17th June 1992
Dear ,
ACHELOOS RIVER DIVERSION SCHEME, GREECE
We wish to express concern about the above scheme which does not seem to be compatible with the environmental principles adopted by the European Community over recent years.
We are therefore very worried to learn that EC Structural Funds could be allocated to help this potentially very damaging scheme become a reality.
We urge you to ensure the most stringent environmental assessment procedures are followed before any irreversible damage is done.
However anxious the Greek Government and other interests might be to proceed, we believe it is essential to ensure EC funds are only used to promote sustainable development which respects and enhances the environment of Greece and every other country of the Community.
Yours sincerely,
17th June 1992
Dear ,
RIVER USK BARRAGE BILL
Further to our recent telephone conversation I am writing to confirm my instruction that you help to organise and attend a meeting between CPRW, the Gwent and Brecknock Wildlife Trusts, and the promoters of the above bill, Newport Borough Council.
I hope we can use the occasion to brief our potential witnesses and to meet local Newport petitioners on whose behalf you are acting.
I am currently trying to confirm a suitable date.
The cost of these arrangements and your time will be met by CPRW.
I can also confirm that £300 is available to enable John Bowers, of the Leeds Business School, to continue pursuing his critical examination of the economic justification of the barrage scheme on our behalf.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: Future minerals demand in S Wales and offshore dredging
To:
From:
18th June 1992
I eventually got a chance to read the South Wales Aggregates Working Party's Regional Commentary which has been sitting on my desk for months.
Given the increasing pressure we and others are putting on offshore dredging, which has major implications for future terrestrial supplies, I thought you should also see the Commentary.
Perhaps you could let me have it back at the AGM?
Talking of which, I presume you have spoken to Dorothea about the presentation of the Annual Report.
I would also welcome a chat with you about the arrangements sometime next week.
Hope you are keeping well, despite the pressures.
By the way, I am chasing Mike Gash about the meeting we were hoping to hold to discuss our proposed coastal study.
19th June 1992
Annwyl ,
I am delighted you are able to call in to see us in Welshpool on Thursday morning next week (the 25th June).
As I suggested on the phone your best route is probably Hereford, Leominster, Ludlow, Bishop's Castle, Church Stoke, Welshpool.
When you arrive at the traffic lights in Welshpool turn left into the main street and carry on up past the town hall on your right hand side.
A little further up is a right turn and on the far corner of this a chip shop.
Next door to the chip shop is a sports shop, which is in effect the ground floor of the building we occupy.
To reach us you have to walk down this passage way between the two shops.
I will expect to see you at around 10.30am.
Yours sincerely,
19th June 1992
News of your OBE has been greeted with delight by many members of CPRW, not least those in the Clwyd Branch.
They have asked me to write to congratulate you on this well deserved honour, and I am very pleased to do so.
Your contribution to the work of CPRW has been considerable, spanning many years.
Your knowledge of the issues and your diligence in pursuing them to ensure protection of both the built and natural environments, is greatly admired and appreciated by us all.
On a personal note, you will recall that Betsan and I first met you when we were employed by the National Trust at Plas y Rhiw.
We greatly respected your guidance and always enjoyed your visits to the Plas.
It was a great pleasure to meet up with you again when I became Director of CPRW.
You might be interested to know that I first learnt of CPRW while rummaging through old papers left by the Misses Keating — and there were many!
Both Betsan and I would like to add our congratulations on your merited honour.
19th April 1993
Dear ,
UK National Sustainability Report
I came away from the Oxford seminar with a clear idea in my mind about what I should do to stimulate discussion on this subject in Wales.
As a result, I have drafted a document which I am hoping to publish and circulate widely.
I have enclosed a copy and would be most grateful if you could find the time to scan through it to see if I have made any errors of fact or tactics.
I know you are very busy but I do hope you can help in this way.
I hope to send the document to the DoE via the Welsh Office in the next couple of weeks and to publish it late in May.
I hope you are well.
See you soon.
Yours,
Neil
19th April 1993
Annwyl ,
Environmental Sustainability Targets for Wales in 2012
I enclose a copy of what caused me to miss the last meeting of the Powys Health Project.
The paper has been drafted in response to the UK National Sustainability Report currently being prepared by the Government.
It has been written to influence this report and to inform a wider audience.
I don't know if it is of any help to the PH Project.
I would be happy for you to use it in any way you felt appropriate.
I hope to see you on the 29th at Bronllys.
Pob hwyl!
Yn gywir,
Neil Caldwell Cyfarwyddwr
19th April 1993
Dear ,
CPRW's response to the UK National Sustainability Report
I don't know whether you've found time to consider my request for help with the publication of this response?
In the meantime I've been able to complete the document and have pleasure in enclosing copy for your interest.
Since returning from leave I have heard that ‘Environment Wales’ is unable to assist with funding, so I urgently need to find in excess of £2,000 to publish and circulate the document.
If you are able to help, I would very much like to launch the document next month when it will have maximum influence.
I understand you are back in your office on Thursday.
However, I am out of mine on Thursday and Friday, but you are very welcome to telephone me a home over the weekend on , or on the same number on Monday the 26th of April.
I am keeping my fingers crossed that you will want to help CPRW publish this report to stimulate wider interest in sustainable development in Wales.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
19th April 1993
Dear ,
CPRW's contribution to marking the 50th anniversary of the UN
Further to our telephone conversation today, I have pleasure in enclosing a copy of the document I have drafted in response to the Government's proposed National Sustainability Report being prepared in the wake of last year's Earth Summit.
You will see that this has been written to inform as well as to influence, in order to widen debate on sustainable development in Wales.
I am currently searching for sponsorship so that we can publish and circulate the report widely next month.
I wanted to let you know of this initiative because I thought it might be possible to:
a)
link its publication to the UN's 50th anniversary, and
b)
receive some help towards its publication from the WCIA.
I would be delighted to have your response to these suggestions.
With kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: Progress Report: Local Plans /Planning Questionnaires
To: All Branch Secretaries /Planning Secretaries
From: The Director
22nd June 1992
As you know, all District and Borough Councils in Wales are now required to prepare statutory District-Wide Local Plans.
Until the passing of the 1991 Planning and Compensation Act, District Local Plans were discretionary and few councils bothered to draft them.
Many found it more attractive to take development decisions without being encumbered by a publicly agreed plan.
Others never adopted their plans and subsequently ignored them when it suited.
A small minority adopted Local Plans and tried to follow them.
Now, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, all these councils have begun preparations to draft or update their plans.
We recently wrote to them asking to let us know how far they have got and for details of their public consultation programme.
Most have replied and I have been able to draft a progress report which enables you to see what stage your councils have reached and how they match up to progress in other councils.
We are chasing those that have not yet replied and we will update the report in due course.
You may also know that before the general election intervened, the Commons Welsh Affairs Select Committee launched a study into the planning performance of councils in Wales.
The committee clerk sent out a simple questionnaire asking for such information as: How many times was planning permission given in conflict with the policies of a Local or Structure Plan; How many times was permission given against the advice of planning officers.
We asked all County and District Councils to let us have a copies of their completed questionnaires, and to our surprise many have done so.
We have compiled a register of the data we have received showing the purported performance of your local councils.
Please let us know if there are any glaring inaccuracies.
As I mentioned in a previous memo, if the Government decides to endorse the re-establishment of the Welsh Affairs Committee, and it chooses to continue the study, we will want to give evidence.
I would therefore appreciate any information that could be used in preparing our evidence.
You might also like to urge your MPs to press for reinstatement of the WAC so that it can complete this important study.
24th June 1992
REFORM OF THE EC STRUCTURAL FUNDS
Further to our previous correspondence on this subject, I would like to re-emphasise CPRW's concern to see firm commitments to protecting the environment explicitly written into the Structural Fund Regulations.
These Regulations provide the framework for the operation of the Funds and clearly guide the Member States and others, on the EC's priorities.
They ensure that certain principles are applied uniformly throughout the Community, and give the Commission a legal basis on which to ensure compliance with these principles by the Member States.
Specifically, we believe that changes to the Framework and Implementing Regulations are required in the following areas:
1
Sustainable Development
Article 1 of the Framework Regulation (2052/88) should stipulate that all Structural Fund operations must be consistent with the principles of sustainable development.
It would then comply with Article B, and Article 2, of the new European Union Treaty after Maastricht.
The Preamble and Article 1 of Regulation 2052/88 should be amended to include a reference to Article 130 R of the Treaty.
Commitments to ‘sustainable development’, and to ‘integration’ of the environment in all the Community's other policies, must be given practical effect through changes to Regulation 4253/88.
Article 8 should include a requirement that all Community Support Frameworks (CSFs) contain a statement of priorities for joint Community and national action on the environment.
Article 25 should be changed to widen the remit and representation of Monitoring Committees to include environmental interests.
2
Partnership
Article 4 of Regulation of Regulation 2052/88 should be amended to allow the Commission to propose widening the basis of the ‘partnership’ at national, regional and local levels.
This extra power for the Commission is essential at the earliest stages of the planning process, where experience has shown that involvement of governmental environment departments, environmental research agencies, and non-governmental organisations can reduce subsequent environmental damage as well as enhance environmental and socio-economic benefits.
3
Information and Transparency
A new section should be added to Regulation 2052/88 to require Member States and the Commission to make information available about Structural Fund operations — from the planning stages through to monitoring and assessment — to the general public.
Member States vary widely in the amount of information they are willing to disclose.
This change would rectify these disparities and bring the legislative into line with the Freedom of Access to Information on the Environment Directive.
We believe the legislative changes outlined above would form the basis for more specific amendments in the co-ordinating and implementing Regulations and the Community Support Frameworks.
They would also guide the revision and updating of Integrated Development Operational Programmes.
We believe these legislative changes are vital to guarantee that environmental considerations are genuinely integrated into the Structural Funds.
We hope that you will press for these changes.
22nd May 1992
Thank you for your letter of the 12th of May.
Please accept my apologies for the damage done to one of your photos.
My assistant has explained how on this particular occasion things were done in too much of a rush because of other pressures.
However, I have asked her to take the time necessary to ensure all photographic material is properly packed and sent by recorded delivery, even if this means a day or two's delay.
You are right to note that two of your photos were used in the last magazine.
I have added another £25 to your fee as a result.
I also used one of your photos of the Pembrokeshire coast in our new recruitment leaflet, for which I have added a further £25.
I have added a further £25 because I have appreciated holding on to the material for so long.
This is all pretty arbitrary so please let me know how you feel.
I am always finance-conscious given our continual need to raise funds, but I also want to recognise your valuable contribution to our work.
I have returned 10 more of your transparencies with this letter.
My records indicate that I am now holding on to two, one of which I hope to use in the Annual Report.
Please let me know if this is not correct.
To my horror I have just noticed that you are not credited among the other helpful photographers in our recruitment leaflet.
We don't seem to be doing things very well here.
I must apologise for this stupid oversight which is doubtless my fault — a symptom of the pressure we seem to be constantly under these days.
Despite all the cock-ups, I want you to know that we do greatly appreciate your help.
22nd May 1992
SPGW: COUNTRYSIDE CONSERVATION AND GREEN BELTS TOPIC GROUP
Just a quick note to acknowledge receipt of the two papers you have prepared for the review.
I feel you summed up the points we discussed very fairly and produced two worthwhile and coherent papers.
I was pleased to be asked to join the topic group for its last discussion in Newtown.
I now look forward to seeing the next consultation document, which I believe will appear in the next month or two.
Kind regards.
22nd 1992
Welsh Historic Gardens Trust AGM at Gregynog
Thank you for sending CPRW the notice of this year's AGM and the Trust's Newsletter.
I feel the Trust has got off to a very good start under your directorship.
It is always a pleasure to meet you at Link meetings and other events.
I am sorry to have to say I shall not be able to attend the AGM since I will be away on a short holiday with my family.
However, I hope it goes well and that you and your committees get all the credit they deserve.
With best wishes.
21st May 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for writing about your SSSIs campaign.
You may like to know that CPRW has worked through Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link (to which WWF UK provides grant aid) to take up the threat to SSSIs with the Countryside Council for Wales.
We helped promote the Wildlife Link report: SSSIs: A Health Check and got some useful media coverage.
We also raised the report's detailed recommendations with CCW at a recent liaison meeting.
CCW has now provided a supportive and detailed response which is available through Wildlife Link.
We will continue to do all we can to increase the protection afforded to special wildlife sites.
For instance, I have today recorded a radio interview in Welsh stressing the need to have an application for quarrying on the Carmel Woods SSSI called in for a public inquiry.
The Secretary of State for Wales is currently considering this proposal.
For the record, your address for us is incorrect:
It is not: but:
Yours sincerely,
21st May 1992
Bringing the Earth Summit down to earth
It was good to meet up with you again the other day.
I have not forgotten our conversation about the need to get serious global environmental problems across to ‘ordinary people in Wales’ at a very personal level.
I think this is vitally important because few people yet realise the extent to which our current lifestyles are causing significant environmental damage and must be changed.
I feel the media have a great responsibility to inform the public in ways they can understand, how great the challenge is becoming and the need to make changes before it is too late.
With good advice I am sure you can use your communication skills to get the message across in an influential and entertaining way
I would be very happy to help you in any way possible.
In the meantime I have enclosed a statement which we helped to prepare in the run up to the Earth Summit.
I am afraid it is written in enviro-jargon, which will need translating into ordinary English or Welsh, but I hope it helps you think about the kind of issues that need to be got across in a popular television programme.
Remember, these issues will remain relevant long after the Earth Summit has become a matter of history.
Pob hwyl.
21st May 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for your letter of the 6th of May offering to send me your article on windfarming.
I would be interested in looking at this, although there is now so much pressure on space in our magazine that is may not be possible to include it.
You will appreciate that over the past two years much has been studied and debated on the issue of windfarms inside CPRW and we have worked closely with others, including CPRE.
You may find the attached paper of interest.
It is, I hope, a reasonable synopsis of our position.
Yours sincerely,
21st May 1992
Dear ,
Validating IDOs
Now that the registration period is over for Interim Development Orders, I presume you have moved into the phase of validating the claims.
I would appreciate some clarification of the process:
1
Is there a set time-limit during which the authority must complete the validation process?
2
Is the validation process essentially a legal one, verifying the legal validity of the claim?
3
If so, do minerals planning authorities have the necessary legal expertise to undertake this work?
4
If not, who will be asked to do it?
5
Will it be possible for the public to examine the register to check the legal validity of the claims?
6
Will it be possible to challenge the legal validity of the claims?
I will restrict myself to these questions, though there are many more I would like to ask.
I am naturally particularly interested in the Carmel Wood IDO claim, which I presume has been registered but my interest goes beyond this to encompass all the claims that have been made in Wales, which presumably are now subject to the same procedures being applied by your authority.
Yours sincerely,
19th May 1992
Dear ,
Your offer to CPRW of £500 worth of B&I Lines Travel Vouchers
I have appended a letter which you sent to us last year kindly offering CPRW £500 of B&I Travel Vouchers for our use in fund raising.
I subsequently wrote to you thanking you for this most generous offer and explaining that we wanted to use them as prizes in a raffle but were unable to proceed at that time.
We received a message by telephone that this was fine and that we were to get in touch when we were ready to take up the offer.
Since then we have been steadily searching for another prize to go with the vouchers.
Ten days ago we had confirmation that a company was willing to offer a 7 night holiday in Cyprus which means that are now hurriedly getting our act together.
The main reason for haste is that we want to promote the raffle through our magazine, Rural Wales, which is being ‘put to bed’ this week.
There is not a moment to lose.
The magazine will be circulated to our members and many others in early June.
Two books of raffle tickets will be enclosed.
In addition we will use our presence at national and county shows during the summer to sell more tickets.
I should say that it is our intention to offer the Cyprus holiday as first prize with the five runners up receiving £100 B&I Travel Vouchers, if this is an acceptable way of dividing up your donation to us.
I urgently need to talk to you to ensure that you are happy with this proposal.
B&I will be credited on each raffle ticket and in the promotion in the magazine.
However I am also concerned that because we have agreed to give the Cyprus holiday company some editorial space, we should also be offering B&I Lines something similar.
Unfortunately, we are getting desperately near the final deadline and most of the pages are already full.
The best I can do is to offer you a free ¼ page advert, but I must have all the details in the next 48 hours.
I am very sorry to give you such short notice about this.
I have tried several times to get in touch by telephone.
Everything has happened at the last minute, right up against our deadlines, but I am convinced that if we can promote the raffle through the summer magazine it stands every chance of being a great success.
I would be very grateful if you could telephone me as soon as you can.
My home telephone number is .
I will be available this evening and all day tomorrow.
It may help you to know our magazine format is A4 and a ¼ page advert would measure 97mm by 144mm or thereabouts, portrait format.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
22nd May 1992
CPRW Training Course: ‘Greening the Content of Local Plans
On behalf of CPRW, I would like to thank you and John Harvey for putting so much into leading the course last Saturday.
It was a great success, judging by the comments I heard afterwards, not only for enabling our volunteers to play an influential role in the local plans process, but for generating a sympathetic under- standing of the difficult balancing act expected of planners!
I thought the role-play exercise was particularly stimulating.
It is a pity a few more people, who promised to attend, did not turn up because we could have easily included them.
By the way, I am convinced that the black girl who joined us should have been on the cultural induction course next door.
No wonder she seemed so confused!!
It was the first multi-cultural CPRW meeting I have been to — most refreshing!
You and John provided a most informative and enjoyable day.
You were both heroes for giving up a beautiful sunny day to further the cause.
Thanks also for preparing all the useful notes.
I hope we can keep in touch.
19th February 1992
Dear ,
Mosaic Image of Wales
I am writing to confirm our order for a 500mm print of a regional mosaic of Wales for reproduction on the front cover of our summer magazine, Rural Wales.
I wish to use it to reinforce the message of the forthcoming Earth Summit — that we must develop our part of the world in a more sustainable way.
I will, of course, send you some copies of the magazine when it is published in mid June.
I would like to confirm our agreement that CPRW will pay £24.99 for the 500mm print and a £125 reproduction fee.
I do appreciate the discount since CPRW is a charity and we try to make our funds go as far as possible.
I would be most grateful if you could send the print as soon as possible to: Please send the invoice to me at our office in Welshpool.
Thank you for your help, it is appreciated.
Yours sincerely,
20th May 1993
Dear ,
Thank you for your recent letter letting me know that Iceland was unable to sponsor this year's Annual Report for CPRW.
A pity, but next year perhaps?
In the meantime, a rather urgent matter has arisen which prompts me to write again for help.
You may know that the Government has committed itself to producing a National Sustainability Plan by the end of this year, for submission to the United Nations Sustainable Development Commission.
We have been consulted on the content of this plan and we also attended a special seminar run by the DoE at Green College Oxford.
In preparing our views for the Government we felt one of the most pressing needs was to explain what the National Sustainability Plan is and why it is important, to a wider audience of opinion- formers and decision-takers in Wales.
We have therefore drafted a document with this objective in mind — a copy is enclosed.
We have been able to fund the research behind and preparation of the document internally.
We also have money from the Welsh Office to have it translated into Welsh.
However, we urgently need to find £1,500 to £2,000 to have it printed and widely distributed.
I had hope to find a single sponsor, but this has not proved possible in the short time we've had.
Now I am trying to find about half-a-dozen Welsh-based companies with a commitment to the environment to give say £250–£300 each towards its production.
I have in mind: Iceland, Welsh Water, Wallace Evans, Aspinwalls, Travers Morgan, Norsk Hydro and Ecogen.
I wonder if you could give me a quick (and hopefully positive) decision?
We would of course acknowledge Iceland’ support in the document, which is now being prepared for printing.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely
20th May 1993
Dear ,
The Government's National Sustainability Plan
Further to my telephone conversation with your assistant, I am now writing to ask if Aspinwall & Co can help us with an important project related to the above.
As you know, the Prime Minister, in the wake of the Earth Summit, made a commitment to prepare a National Sustainability Plan for the UK by the end of this year for submission to the United Nation's new Sustainable Development Commission.
We think this exercise is very important and have been among a small handful of organisations in Wales who have been consulted so far.
In particular, we were invited to attend the high-level seminar at Green College Oxford, run by the DoE on the subject.
In preparing our views for the Government we felt one of the most pressing needs was to explain what the National Sustainability Plan is and why it is important, to a wider audience of opinion- formers and decision-takers in Wales.
We have therefore drafted a document with this objective in mind — a copy is enclosed.
We have been able to fund the research behind and preparation of the document internally.
We also have money from the Welsh Office to have it translated into Welsh.
However, we urgently need to find £1,500 to £2,000 to have it printed and widely distributed.
I had hoped to find a single sponsor, but this has not proved possible in the short time available.
I am now trying to find about half-a-dozen Welsh-based companies with a commitment to the environment to give say £250–£300 each towards its production.
I have in mind: Iceland, Welsh Water, Wallace Evans, Aspinwall & Co, Travers Morgan, Norsk Hydro and Ecogen.
Fortunately, I am already getting positive responses from some of these and I hope you will be able to confirm Aspinwall & Co's willingness to lend support.
Time is of the essence.
It has already taken almost two months to prepare the document and get it endorsed internally.
I met the key officials from the Department of the Environment earlier this week and who told me that the Government is preparing to circulate a consultation paper on the National Sustainability Plan in mid June.
Ideally, we should try to get our document circulated at around the same time to gain maximum interest.
To achieve this, however, we must get publication underway within the next few days.
I wonder if you could give me a quick (and hopefully positive) decision?
We would of course acknowledge Aspinwall & Co's support in the document.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
21st April 1993
Dear ,
WO Consultation Paper: ‘Agriculture and Wales’ Environment’
Thank you for sending me a copy of the CCW's initial response to this paper.
This is very helpful.
I am concerned to ensure CPRW puts in a considered response so I have asked Professor Haines, who chaired our Agriculture Working Party, to convene a special meeting of expert and experienced people to advise us.
This will be held on Tuesday next week.
I have asked Michael to invite both Clooney Keenlyside and Chris Gilmore.
We are also working with other voluntary bodies through Wildlife and Countryside Link (UK) to produce a joint statement which you will no doubt see when it is published.
By the way, although we have yet to respond to Threshold 21, we will do so.
I intend putting together the internal views I have received on Monday next.
Our response should therefore be with you in early May.
Kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
22nd April 1993
Dear ,
Following our recent meeting I have prepared the enclosed report for a forthcoming CPRW Executive Committee meeting.
I would be grateful if you could just check to see if I have made any errors of fact, or have misunderstood any point you and your colleagues made to us.
I would be grateful if you could treat the report as reasonably confidential at this stage.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
23rd December 1992
Laura Ashley donation to CPRW
I would like to thank your Charities Committee for the generous Christmas present, in the form of a £250 donation, they have given to CPRW!
It came as a pleasant surprise and is most gratefully received.
I would like to assure the committee that we will put the money to good use in our work of protecting the countryside of Wales.
I will be pleased to keep you informed of this work during the coming year.
With kind regards and thanks.
MEMO: Letter to the Secretary of State for Wales
To:
From:
22nd June 1992
Thank you for your letter.
I enclose a shortened and redrafted version which I hope you feel takes account of your comments.
I am sorry if I appeared to spring the letter on you and I fully understand your desire to get it right.
I have observed a considerable ‘sea change’ in environment NGO /Government relations over the last twelve months.
I could list a range of new contacts that have developed in England.
These look set to continue.
In contrast, things are very much as they have always been in Wales.
Everyone is very friendly, but nothing of any substance is happening.
We last met the Secretary of State in May 1991.
We had a brief but promising exchange of letters in the autumn.
While NGOs in England have been meeting ministers and senior civil servants on a regular basis and having open discussions on subjects such as funding for voluntary environmental work via the DoE's Environment Forum, all we have had is a typically furtive ‘consultation’ on Environment Wales.
I've felt for sometime we needed to put more pressure on Welsh Office ministers who I feel are having a pretty easy time of it on the environmental front.
For the most part the Welsh Office merely acts as a ‘post box’ for consultation papers sent out by the DoE.
In fact we often benefit from the successful pressure applied on the Government at the centre.
I am very keen to see this being reinforced through stronger action here in Wales.
23rd June 1992
Dear ,
Proposals for an ‘M4 Relief Road’ to the south of Newport, Gwent
I recently attended a meeting of voluntary environmental bodies who share our alarm about the potential environmental impacts of this scheme.
I understand that Ove Arup has been appointed consultants to the Welsh Office to evaluate various options/routes, and that you are a member of the company's team assigned to this task.
I would therefore like you to note our major interest and concern in this matter.
I hope that you will be conducting a wide consultation with bodies such as ours.
In the meantime, I have enclosed some information about CPRW.
Yours sincerely,
22nd May 1992
Annwyl ,
Everything seems to be going fine with the production of Cymru Wledig and the Annual Report, but I am worried about last minute problems, particularly since I am off on holiday to Cornwall on Saturday morning!
My long suffering colleague, Jenny Smith, who desperately needs a holiday too, and hopes my absence will allow her to get one, has nonetheless agreed to be on hand on Tuesday morning to check the final details with you via the phone and FAX.
She is also very concerned to ensure the Annual Report is 100% correct, especially the accounts section.
We think you will be finalising the report on Wednesday, but perhaps you could clarify your plans with Jenny on Tuesday?
I have enclosed the annotated page proof which I hope you can follow.
Most changes are minimal and so a further proof is not necessary.
However, I would like Jenny to see pages 13 and 15 (by the way there are no page numbers) and the cover and inside back covers.
Could you also credit photographers on pages 6 and 7 because this is appreciated.
The same goes even more strongly for photos in the Annual Report.
I can't think of anything else so I'll finish by thanking you for all your hard work.
I hope all goes well!
Pob hwyl!
Neil
22nd May 1992
Dear ,
As always, I am grateful to you for helping with our recruitment leaflet, a copy of which I have enclosed.
I hope you like it!
I have returned the slide that I used, plus a small fee of £25 in appreciation.
As I am away on holiday I have asked this letter to be sent off in my absence
I hope you are well.
Yours sincerely,
22nd May 1992
Dear ,
THE EARTH SUMMIT
I've been meaning to write since we met up at the PoW seminar in Swansea.
I hope you are well.
Please could I ask you to adopt full press credentials as special correspondent for ‘Rural Wales /Cymru Wledig’ during the Earth Summit?
I would love to include a reflective article of say 500 words or so, in the autumn edition of the magazine.
If you could also supply a photo or two of you in your trunks on the beach, I would be even more grateful!
By the way, I met up with John Collins the other day and he and I were signing your praises.
Apparently you're sorting out all the Venezuelan Government's environmental problems at the moment!
I would also very much appreciate an opportunity to come over to Walford Manor, perhaps in August.
I'm away on holiday until the 1st of June, but I wonder if you could call me to a suggest a date?
Call my home first (); failing that speak to Jenny on .
In the meantime, best wishes.
Yours sincerely,
22nd May 1992
Dear ,
Planning for Windfarms
Thank you for your letter of the 18th May.
You are welcome to visit HQ in Welshpool to look at our files on windfarms.
I had heard that Brian John was coming to address your branch meeting.
I presume you have access to the various briefing papers we have circulated to branches over the last 18 months or so.
In case not, I have enclosed a copy of the statement agreed at our National Council in March which sums up our position fairly well.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: LIGHT AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL!
To:[Cnm
From:
22nd May 1992
I will probably have spoken to you on the ‘phone before you get this note, but just in case not I thought I would let you know how things are going.
I feel as if I have come to the end of a long list of jobs dating back over several months.
Jenny and I are just about dropping in our traces.
Nonetheless, practically everything we set out to do have been achieved, including the next magazine and the annual report.
I've also managed to catch up with the ever-lengthening list of official consultations.
I'm off with my family for a week's holiday in Cornwall and Jenny is hoping to take advantage of my absence to get some rest so the office will be ‘manned’ all next week by Heidi, though Jenny will be around at home.
I have enclosed a few things I would like you to look at when you have a moment.
One is Prince Charles' speech to the reconvened meeting of the Brundtland Commission last month, plus some other papers.
You should find them interesting
Another is an invitation to CPRW to join the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), together with a copious amount of information about the organisation.
It is, without doubt, one of the most influential conservation bodies in the world, ranking alongside the World-Wide Fund for Nature.
I think it is a tribute to the work that we've been doing recently that we have been invited to join IUCN.
You will see some of the other UK voluntary organisations that are listed as members, though interestingly not CPRE.
I've not been able to ask Fiona why, since I know she is personally very involved and helped draw up the UK version of ‘Caring For The Earth’ with Adrian Phillips.
I would very much like CPRW to join, not because it might lead to an international jolly (some hope!), but because I think it would be a feather in CPRW's cap, we will benefit from their advice and information, and we will be able to contribute something at a UK level.
However, the annual membership fee is about £150 and will need to be sent with our application by the end of June.
I think we can afford it.
I would be grateful for the papers back in due course.
Thanks.
MEMO: Draft Powys Structure Plan Consultation
To:
From:
22nd May 1992
Further to my recent memo on this subject, I have heard from the Brecknockshire Branch that they would like to take up my proposal that we hold an inter-branch meeting to discuss the draft Powys Structure Plan.
As a result, I have booked the Welsh Young Farmers Pavilion on the Royal Welsh Showground, Llanelwedd for 7pm on Wednesday the 10th of June, in the hope that as many as possible can make it.
This should allow ample time to enable each branch to finalise its comments on the plan.
I hope you can join me on the 3rd.
24th July 1992
Dear ,
Assessing the cost of local government reorganisation in Wales
You were kind enough to introduce yourself to me at the launch of the Welsh Environmental Managers' Network at the Garden Festival the other day.
I now have need to ask for your help!
I understand that Touche Ross prepared a report for the Council of Welsh Districts on the likely cost that would be involved in reorganising local government in Wales along the lines being proposed by the Secretary of State for Wales (or the CWD?).
I would be most interested to see a copy given our substantial interests in the effects of reorganisation.
I am not sure what form the report takes — it might be a lengthy document with appendices.
If so, it may only be necessary for me to see the Executive Summary to get the gist of its conclusions.
I would be grateful if you could let me have a copy of the most appropriate sections of the report.
Many thanks.
Yours sincerely,
MEMO: RIVER WYE USERS FORUM
To:
From: The Director
24th June 1993
I enclose details of a new forum being set up by the National Rivers Authority to try to reconcile and manage the competing range of interests that value the river Wye as a resource.
Although CPRW has not been prominent among the various warring groups who have fought to protect their interests over recent years, I assume we are concerned to see the river environment and its considerable amenity value protected.
I initially approached the Vice Chairman of our Brecknock Branch, Morlais Owens, to see if he would represent CPRW on the forum.
He retired as Chief Scientist for the Welsh Water Authority at the time of its privatisation, and is currently a member of the NRA's Welsh Regional Rivers Committee, among a host of other things.
However, his current commitments prevent him from giving time to the forum.
Perhaps we should decline the invitation to join the forum and just keep a watching brief, but I thought I should let you know of its existence and purpose, I would be interested to know if you think there is a suitable person in your branch who would be able and interested in representing CPRW on the forum.
Such a person should, I think, be prepared to act in this capacity for a few years to ensure continuity.
MEMO: EEB Coastal Conference in Copenhagen
To:
From:
26th April 1993
Thank you for sending me the documents being prepared for this conference.
Very helpful to know the EEB's intentions.
I have already spoken to the Deputy Chair of MCS and I understand that Dr Sue Gubay will be at the conference.
I have also had a chat with my friends Holly Harries from the Dyfed Wildlife Trust and Dr Stephanie Tyler from the Welsh Office of RSPB.
I have the RSPB's latest report.
In addition, I have obtained some relevant information from the Countryside Council for Wales.
I will telephone Caroline Steel today and also talk to the Avon Wildlife Trust.
All is in hand.
I look forward to seeing you there.
Best wishes.
Removal of the A5 (Chirk to Llandegai) from the Trans-European Highway Network /The Padog Bends scheme.
I cannot recall if we congratulated you on your resolute stand against the inclusion of the above section of the A5 in the proposed Trans-European Highway Network.
If not, I would like to apologise for the oversight and thank you on behalf of CPRW.
In fact I have just received a copy of ‘Transport in the 1990s’, which is an information pamphlet from the European Commission setting out the European Community's strategy for transport.
I notice that this includes the A5 (Chirk to Llandegai) in its map of the Trans-European Highway Network.
I feel sure this is an error caused by logistical difficulties, but I would be most grateful if you could clarify the exact current position with regard to your determined action to have this important section of road removed from the proposed Network.
Whilst this removal is extremely welcome, our concern over the efficacy of the clutch of up-grading schemes programmed for the A5 in ‘Roads in Wales’, remains strong.
As a serious objector to the Padog Bends scheme, we are surprised and disappointed not to have yet received a copy of your statement outlining the reasons why you have chosen the ‘preferred route’ for the by-pass.
I do hope you will be able to rectify this.
I am sure you will be interested to know that we are working with a consortium of other organisations, including the National Trust, to develop an alternative, less environmentally damaging scheme for this section, together with a future strategy for the A5 as a whole.
I hope you will be prepared to discuss these when we are in a position present the details.
Dymuniadau gorau.
26th April 1993
Proposed children's hospice on land at the Amelia Trust farm, Whitton Rosser, Five Mile Lane, Lancarfan.
We have taken a careful look at this application and feel that we must now draw it to your attention.
There is naturally widespread sympathy for the sincere objectives lying behind the proposal, and this is shared by CPRW.
However, we fear it is becoming so intense that many members of the Vale of Glamorgan Borough Council's Planning Committee are in danger of losing sight of their duty to have regard to vital Government planning guidance aimed at protecting the open countryside from unnecessary development.
We understand that the borough council's Director of Planning has concluded from this guidance that the application cannot be justified and should therefore be refused.
We strongly concur with this recommendation.
However, we believe many Planning Committee members are fearful that voting to refuse will make them vulnerable to unpleasant accusations that they are uncaring of the needs of terminally ill children.
As a consequence, they are likely to over-turn their officer's recommendation.
We believe the special nature of this case suggests the decision should be taken out of the hands of the borough council and examined dispassionately at a public inquiry.
We therefore ask you, as a matter of some urgency, to have it called in for your own determination.
Thank you.
26th April 1993
Reform of the EC's Structural Funds
You will doubtless recall that I have written to you before on this subject.
I have greatly appreciated the positive responses you have given to our concern to see the revised Structural Fund Regulations take full account of the need to ensure projects receiving funding do not harm the environment and, if possible, enhance its qualities.
I understand that revision of the regulations, which has been going on for sometime, is reaching its final phase.
I therefore thought I should let you have a commentary on the proposals for amending the regulations, which I have received from the World- Wide Fund for Nature's European Office, with which we are working closely.
Although this commentary appears on RSPB headed paper, has been drawn up by a community of interests, including CPRW.
I hope you will take a look at the document and do whatever you can to ensure its recommendations are taken up in the final version of the regulations.
I have also enclosed an interesting article by David Wilkinson of IEEP, expressing views with which we strongly concur.
Thank you for your assistance.
Kind regards.
MEMO: The A5 Campaign Consortium
To:
From:
26th April 1993
As you know, there was meeting of the Consortium last week, which I attended.
In fact I was asked to chair the meeting.
Melanie Walker, Wales Link Officer, will circulate the minutes in due course, so I will not go into details.
Briefly, the meeting clarified the aims of the Consortium, drafted a Consultant's Brief for the research project it wants to get underway, and considered how the Consortium should function.
It was a workman- like meeting which was well attended and benefited from the presence of a representative of the FUW.
The Consortium agreed to attract into membership all bodies that shared its objectives.
It also decided to ask Dr Mike Alcock to become its permanent chair.
While the full Consortium will meet every 2/3 months or so (or whenever necessary), the day-to-day work will be shouldered by an Action Group comprising: SNPS, NT, FoE, CPRW, NWWT and CNP.
The first meeting of the Action Group is scheduled for Monday 10th May at 2pm at the NT's property ‘Dinas’, near Betws y Coed.
The next full Consortium meeting will be held on Friday 11th June at 2pm at the Rhyd y Creuau Field Centre.
I cannot attend the Action Group's first meeting, nor do I think I will be able to do this regularly in any case.
I wonder if one of you would be prepared to represent CPRW on the Action Group?
In view of the fact that one of the main issues confronting the Group is the finalising of the Consultant's Brief and the commissioning of research, perhaps Ralph would be in the best position to assist?
Please let me know what you think.
26th April 1993
Dear ,
Forests and Sustainability
Just a quick note to congratulate you on the preparation of an excellent paper for the next WL/FC liaison meeting.
It is well written, concise and of real help in clarifying what needs to be done in the wake of the Earth Summit.
Well done!
I am saying this in a letter because I am sorry to say I cannot get to the next liaison meeting.
I am, however, delighted that both David Stanbury and Melanie Walker will be there, and I hope discussions go well.
I am sure you will press the FC to ensure environmental monitoring is vastly improved under the auspices of the Forestry Authority.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
26th April 1993
Dear ,
Joint Water Group Meeting: 27th April 1993
Thank you for notifying me of this meeting.
However, I am afraid that I am simply unable to attend.
I would be grateful if you could convey my apologies to those who are present.
I look forward to receiving the minutes in due course.
I hope everything goes well.
Yours sincerely,
26th April 1993
FUW Annual General Meeting — 5th May 1993
Thank you very much for inviting me to attend the forthcoming AGM in Aberystwyth.
I do very much appreciate this invitation although, for another year I'm afraid, I must tender my apologies.
We are only a small organisation and there are many conflicting demands on our time.
I also regret to say that our chairman, Mrs Dorothea Garnons Williams, who would I am sure have liked to attend, is recovering from a serious operation.
Happily, everything is going well.
Had I been able to come, I would have sought the union's support our wish to see full advantage being taken in Wales of the CAP's Agri-Environment Programme.
Our views on this issue coincide closely with those of the Countryside Council for Wales.
Once we have finalised our response to the Welsh Office, I think it would be very useful if we could meet you to explore shared interests and clarify how best we can work together on this issue.
In the meantime, I would like extend good wishes for a successful Annual General Meeting.
26th April 1993
Dear ,
Review of UK Cycling Policy
Please forgive me for not replying to your original letter.
I want you to know of our interest in promoting vastly improved opportunities for transport by cycle, both to enhance pleasure and health, but principally as part of a sustainable approach to future transport provision.
We are currently undertaking a study into the impacts of present transport policies on the Welsh environment which we hope to publish later this year.
We also intend to publish our response to the Government's proposed UK National Sustainability Report to the United Nations.
Both of these draw attention to the urgent need to provide better opportunities and facilities to encourage walking and cycling.
I would welcome your views on this subject.
I will try to ensure you receive a copy of both reports when they become available.
Yours sincerely,
26th April 1993
Dear ,
Proposed Heritage Coast Forum
Just a quick note to inquire how the HC conference went?
I have just received details of the proposed Forum, but do not intend to respond unless you think there is something important we should say.
I would be interested in having your views.
I have been lucky to secure European Community funding to attend a conference on the proposed EC Coastal Directive, being run by the European Environmental Bureau in Copenhagen over the 1st and 2nd of May.
You are welcome to raise anything relevant with me prior to my departure.
I will be at home on Thursday afternoon and first thing Friday morning.
My number is .
Otherwise, I hope to hear from you whenever you have a moment.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
26th April 1993
Dear ,
Felinfach Cheese Factory
Thank you for sending me the details of this extremely worrying case.
It really does appear to illustrate the negligent and Philistine attitude of the majority of CDC councillors at the present time.
I will not pursue this issue until I hear what, if anything, the branch wishes to do.
It is worth mentioning, however, that one of the emerging conclusions of the Welsh Affairs Committee inquiry (though it is still early days) is that CPRW could and should have done more to alert the Welsh Office to departures from planning policy and should have created more of a public stink over such abuses.
I fear we have gained little, if anything, from adopting a polite and civilised approach.
Indeed, we have probably lost ground we could have defended.
This is not so much a criticism as a view shared by many, including MPs and key civil servants at the Welsh Office.
I am quite sure lessons for everyone will emerge from the inquiry being carried out by the Welsh Affairs Committee.
By the way, I have received copies of the Dyfed consultation drafts on golf courses and windfarms, although I have not yet had time to read them.
I would be pleased to have the branch's views on them.
Kind regards,
Neil
26th April 1993
Dear ,
USK BARRAGE
I think I wrote to you a couple of months ago asking if you could provide a synopsis of the latest information regarding otter movements in the lower Usk area and the likely impacts of the barrage.
This was drafted following a discussion I had with John Popham.
I have no record of having received a reply and since everything is beginning to move again with the local authorities applying to the Secretary of State for him to lay Orders under the Transport and Public Works Act to enable them to proceed with public consultation on their scheme, the matter is becoming critical once again.
I would therefore be grateful if you could refer back to the letter I wrote and respond as best you can.
I would be happy to discuss this over the telephone, although a written response is really essential.
Please try me at home on , before trying to get a message to me via the CPRW office.
Hope all is well.
Yours sincerely,
30th June 1993
Dear ,
Mountain Bikes
Thank you for your letter of the 22nd June.
Like CPRE, we have not adopted any formal policy on this subject.
However, I think Steven Micklewright has summed up our concerns very ably, and there is little I can add at present.
You may like to know that we are represented on the Wales Access Forum, which has just been set up under the auspices of the Countryside Council for Wales.
I believe Gareth Roberts, Head of Recreation and Access in CCW, is responsible for its work.
It would seem an appropriate forum in which the issue of mountain bikes could be considered at a strategic policy level.
Yours sincerely,
26th March 1993
Dear ,
I would like to thank you and your colleagues for taking the time to meet me and some of my branch officials on Tuesday.
We found the discussion very useful since it gave us a better idea of the strengths and weaknesses in the future household projections and where the points of political leverage may lie.
You mentioned that an application in Montgomeryshire had been called in.
We seem to have missed this one somehow.
Could you let us know the application number so we can take a look at the file?
I am trying to encourage our branches to be systematic about identifying and recording departure applications and other cases where it seems planning guidance and officers' advice is being ignored.
I feel we ought to be able to give you a better idea of the performance of different planning authorities.
I am arranging for a copy of our submission to the Welsh Affairs Committee to be sent to you.
I am happy for you to see this, though as you know it is now a privileged document.
I would be grateful if you would give me a little notice if you intend to have a go at anything it contains!
I look forward to keeping in contact.
Yours sincerely,
29th March 1993
SUPPLEMENTARY RESPONSE TO TOURISM 2000
I have pleasure in enclosing a further submission in response to your Tourism 2000 consultation.
I hope you find this useful since it develops some of the issues raised in our initial submission.
I hope the review is going well.
I understand the draft strategy will be launched by the Secretary of State on the 24th of May.
Kind regards.
MEMO: SUPPLEMENTARY RESPONSE TO THE WALES TOURIST BOARD
To: Members of the Tourism Advisory Group
From:
25th March 1993
Thank you very much for making a further valuable contribution to the work of our Tourism Group.
I hope you found it worthwhile.
On the strength of the discussion I have drafted a supplementary response to the WTB which I enclose for your information.
This will be sent on Monday 29th March, so if you have any comments on it please let me have them as soon as possible.
If you like you can phone me at home on .
I have also enclosed a few of the papers I referred to at the beginning of the meeting, plus a travel claim form which you are welcome to use.
I look forward to seeing you on the 14th of June.
Please keep in touch.
25th June 1992
Dear ,
Local pressures on district councillors to get them to solve the rural housing crisis, caused by the Government's suppression of public sector house building, has persuaded some to abandon crucial planning policies that protect the open countryside from sporadic development.
As a result, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of occasions when councillors ignore the advice of their planning officers, override statutory planning policies and permit houses in the most inappropriate places.
This has alarmed the Local Government Ombudsman who would like powers to investigate persistent offenders.
It is common knowledge that these include Ceredigion, Ynys Mon, Dinefwr and Monmouth (not Montgomeryshire, as reported in your paper), although many other councils also show symptoms of the disease.
Before the general election the Welsh Affairs Select Committee began an investigation into this subject, but it has been brought to a halt by the failure, so far, to reform the committee.
CPRW believes such an investigation is desperately needed if we are to stem this slide into anarchy and social dissension.
To be fair to everyone planning must be based on publicly agreed planning policies, rather than on rendering personal favours.
Yours sincerely,
29th June 1992
Dear ,
ESG visit to Garden Festival, Wales
Thank you for sending me details and tickets for this event.
As soon as I received them I rang Rod Aspinwall to see if we could travel down together.
Unfortunately, it seems he is now unable to take part in the visit.
This means I have no choice but to travel down in my car on my own — very environmentally unfriendly I realise!
However I would appreciate one of the limited car parking tickets if they are available on the black market!
I hope you can oblige.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely,
29th June 1992
Dear ,
It was something of a coincidence that we wrote to each other at exactly the same time, albeit on different issues.
Thank you for your kind words about the magazine.
I have been limited to a reduced number of pages, but I have tried hard to make them count.
I hope to gradually increase the number of pages over the next few issues, if funds allow.
As far as the ‘Landsat’ image is concerned, a Welsh contact in the National Remote Sensing Centre (whose address is given on page 15 of our magazine) let me have the ‘mosaic’free of charge to reproduce.
His name is Islwyn Thomas.
You may like to write to him for more details.
I hope you are keeping well.
Yours sincerely,
1st July 1992
Donation to CPRW
Thank you for your letter of the 22nd June enclosing a valuable donation of £250, on behalf of Mrs I M Vaughan, to help CPRW's work.
This is greatly appreciated and will be put to good use in furthering the protection of the beautiful Welsh countryside.
I have pleasure in enclosing our Annual Report and Statement of Accounts, together with the current issue of our magazine, for your interest.
Your and Mrs Vaughan's support will strengthen our ability to tackle a whole range of pressing issues.
1st July 1992
Donation to CPRW
On behalf of CPRW, I would like to say how grateful we are for your request to the Trustees of Mrs L D Rope's Second Charitable Settlement to consider making a donation to CPRW.
We recently received a letter enclosing a valuable donation of £250 from the Settlement.
I enclose a copy of our letter of acknowledgement and thanks to C M Rope, Trustee, and would like also to convey our appreciation to you.
Your continuing support is greatly appreciated.
29th June 1992
Dear ,
CPRW/SCW collaboration over new golf courses
Thank you for your interesting letter.
It sets out what in most circumstances would be a very constructive and helpful approach on the issue of new golf courses.
However, the Sports Council for Wales is taking what can only be described as a very aggressive approach to this and a number of other sensitive recreation/environment issues at present.
For instance, they have challenged many aspects of the Edwards Report on National Parks and are also fighting hard to resist the ending of power boating on Llangorse Lake (something on which our local branch feels strongly).
I therefore would caution against getting too closely involved over golf courses.
There is, at present, too wide a gap between our two perspectives to make agreement along the lines you very constructively suggest, likely.
When you think how CCW and the WTB have collaborated to agree a set of Principles for Tourism in National Parks, we should try to remain hopeful that a similar joint approach can eventually be agreed for golf courses.
But, unfortunately, I believe we are quite a long way off that outcome at present.
By all means raise this subject under item 11 of the July Council agenda.
Yours sincerely,
29th June 1992
Dear ,
Thank you for sending me details of the forthcoming publication, ‘How to write a will and gain probate’.
I have given this careful thought in relation to the very limited funds we have available to encourage legacy income.
However, I have concluded that taking an advert would not represent the best value for money for us in this instance.
I am sorry to disappoint you, but wish the publication well.
Yours sincerely,
29th March 1993
Dear ,
Thank you for your kind remarks regarding our various documents and reports.
Your comments on the WTB's and the CCW's current consultations are welcome also.
We have just sent a supplementary response to the WTB which I enclose for information.
I will endeavour to keep in touch.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
It was good to see you at the DoE Green College Sustainability Seminar the other day.
I meant to tell you that we are taking an increasing interest in energy conservation matters, but I don't think we are on your mailing list for news, press releases etc.
Could you let me know what arrangements we would need to make to keep more closely in touch with what ACE is doing.
I notice that the Commons Environment Committee is taking another look at energy efficiency.
Presumably ACE will be submitting evidence.
I hope to keep in closer contact in future.
Kind regards.
MEMO: EEB SEMINAR ON COASTAL PROTECTION AND TOURISM
To:
From:
29th March 1993
I've just seen the details of the EEB seminar on Coastal Zone Management, Protection, Development and Tourism, to be held in Denmark on the 1st & 2nd May.
This is of real interest to me, since I am currently running a study into tourism (we have convened an expert advisory group) in order to influence the new ‘Tourism 2000’ strategy being prepared by the Wales Tourist Board.
I am also discussing the terms of reference of another study on coastal zone management in Wales with CCW.
Therefore the EEB seminar could be of value to me.
My ability to attend would be largely dependent on securing some funding.
I realise this is by no means straight-forward, but Raymond Van Ermen has made an approach to the EC (!).
Would you be prepared to put my name forward as the UK representative who would most benefit from funding assistance, if it was available?
Do you know of anyone else who is interested in the UK?
I enjoyed the Green College Seminar, although I was too exhausted to get really stuck into the debate.
It gave me a much clearer idea of what must be done to raise interest in sustainability in Wales.
I hope to make some progress with this next week.
30th March 1993
CARMEL WOODS CAMPAIGN
I've been meaning to get in touch, not least to congratulate you on your new post.
I'm sure you're relishing it!
Whenever I think about it there are many things which I feel I could usefully discuss with you:
local government reorganisation
national parks
planning policy
windfarms
oil exploration
transport policy
farming /forestry
sustainability
to name a few!
I would certainly welcome a chance to do so.
In the meantime, I understand you have been trying to find out how the Carmel Woods inquiry went.
I have just prepared a paper for my Executive Committee on this and I have enclosed a copy in the hope it might be of some value.
It would be good to meet up sometime.
Kind regards.
30th April 1993
Dear ,
Re: ‘Wild West’ claims shot down: Daily Post April 29th 1993
I feel sure many of your readers will have been annoyed by the way your reporter allowed our accurate and detailed evidence to the Welsh Affairs Committee on the way some planning committees have violated planning policies over recent years, to be so easily dismissed by the chairman of one of the guilty district councils.
CPRW gave the Committee a comprehensive memorandum of evidence and a large dossier of cases, many the subject of investigation by the Ombudsman, in which Welsh Office planning guidance, development plan policies, and the advice of planning, highway, agricultural, and other professionals was blatantly ignored.
As a result, we argued, the rights of the vast majority of people to an attractive and undeveloped countryside were being abused by acceding to the private interests of a few.
The Committee listened intently for two-and-a-half hours to further oral evidence its members asked us to provide.
When representatives of the offending authorities are called to account by the Committee, they will need to come up with some better answers to justify their past actions than that members of CPRW are just a fractious minority.
I hope the Committee will point the finger at the real culprits in its concluding report.
These are, firstly, the handful of cynical local councillors who have behaved deplorably by abusing their powers and damaging the countryside.
However, the Government and the Secretary of State for Wales must also shoulder some of the blame.
Most decent councillors have been placed in an impossible position because of the failure of the Government's housing and economic policies to deliver the affordable rural homes that are so desperately needed.
In many ways they have been forced to bend the rules to tackle a problem that the planning system did not create and cannot solve without perverting legitimate public interests.
So far the Secretary of State has failed to get a grip on the spiral of decline in planning standards in some of the most beautiful areas of Wales.
We sincerely hope the Welsh Affairs Committee and the weight of public opinion will now jerk him into action.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Dear ,
CCW evidence to the Donaldson Inquiry
I understand that you have submitted evidence to the Donaldson Inquiry.
I would be very helpful to have a copy of this.
Is it available?
Hope you are well.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Dear ,
Spotlight — 14th May
Thank you for your letter of the 20th March, inviting me to take part in the Spotlight programme on Friday 14th May.
I can confirm that I will be available.
Perhaps you would phone me at home () during the week running up to this date to let me know where I need to meet you.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Annwyl ,
TOURISM 2000 — An article for the next edition of Rural Wales
You made the fatal mistake of making a valuable suggestion at the last meeting of our Tourism Advisory Group — that there should be an article on the WTB's strategic review in the next edition of Rural Wales /Cymru Wledig.
I usually end up writing large chunks of each edition.
However, I am always on the look out for knowledgeable contributors who can write informatively and pose the questions likely to be of interest to our readers.
I wonder, therefore, if I could persuade you to draft a 1,000 word article on Tourism 2000?!
I realise that you are very busy and have a business to run, but I really do hope you can help.
As you know, I run the magazine on a pretty tight budget, but I could offer a fee of £100 if you could supply two or three good quality photographs with your article.
This is cheese-paring, I know, but it might help.
At least you will have a chance to air some of your ideas on the way forward for tourism in Wales.
I would be grateful if you could let me know immediately whether of not you can help by providing an article.
The deadline is the 10th May, but I will need to be sure the article will arrive!
Kind regards to you and Moira.
Yn gywir,
30th March 1993
Dear ,
The threat from opencast — a short article for the next edition of Rural Wales /Cymru Wledig
I've been giving some thought to the content of the next magazine with which I hope you can help.
I wonder if you would be prepared to draft a short article on the looming threat to the Gwendraeth Valley from opencast mining?
As space is very tight it would probably have to be limited to one page.
I'm really looking for something similar to the national parks article which appeared on page 19 of the last edition, written in an urgent, campaigning style.
It would need to be accompanied by one good colour or black and white photograph.
Do you think you could draft something along these lines, about 600–700 words in length?
I would like readers to know just how serious the threat from opencast mining is, what it could mean to the landscape, nature and communities of the Gwendraeth, and what they can do to help prevent it.
I would be grateful if you could confirm immediately whether or not you can help in this way.
The deadline is Monday 3rd of May, but I would need to be sure the article will arrive (sooner if you can do it).
Could you draft a short opening paragraph (as if you were the editor) and add a biographical note at the end.
You are welcome to call me at home on  if you want to discuss this, but note that I am away between the 3rd-19th April.
I hope you can help.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Dear ,
The 1993 Campaign — article for the next edition of Rural Wales
Thank you for the compliment you paid the last edition of Rural Wales.
Now it's your turn to contribute!
I would be very grateful for an article telling readers about the Campaign, its past successes in Wales and your hopes for the coming year!
Don't forget to mention that CPRW is a partner!!
You know the style of the magazine.
It is a campaigning vehicle, but mostly about policy-issues.
However, our association with SBBC gives us the chance to support practical community action to improve the environment, which is important.
I would like readers to know of the excellent efforts you have made to stimulate community action in Wales.
It seems to me there are a lot of positive developments to report and I'm sure you can do this in a lively, motivating way!
I need no more than 1,000 words, together with two or three good photographs of successful schemes in Wales.
If the quality of what's available leaves a little to be desired, perhaps we could get a professional photographer to supply what is required, but I would need early warning of this.
I have enclosed a copy of the magazine for reference.
I would like the article to come from you personally and include a short biographical note at the end.
Can you also put yourself in the editor's shoes and draft a short introductory paragraph.
The deadline is Monday 3rd May.
Please let me know immediately if this presents any problems.
Thanks.
Yours sincerely
30th March 1993
Dear ,
RURAL WALES Comment Column: How environmental education must and can be improved in Wales
I've been giving some thought to the next edition of our magazine Rural Wales /Cymru Wledig, and I would like to persuade you to contribute the next Comment Column (see page 2 of the magazine).
I was not alone in being impressed by your contribution to the recent Link meeting with Sir Wyn Roberts.
I hope you have been able to develop and promote your ideas with other interested parties since then, but I share your sense of frustration at the slow progress and limited imagination being displayed.
Hence I would be delighted if you would be prepared to use our magazine's Comment Column to clarify what you think needs to be done and the opportunities you think exist to make progress.
All I need are your thoughts in about 700–750 of your own words, plus a good black and white ‘mug shot’!
The deadline is Monday 3rd of May, but I need to be sure the article will arrive.
I would therefore be very grateful if you could confirm as soon as possible that you can contribute in this way.
I do hope so!
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Dear ,
An article for Rural Wales
I've been giving some thought to the next edition of Rural Wales/ Cymru Wledig, and to the contribution you could make.
You will, I'm sure, understand that I have to plan the content of each edition well in advance.
As a result I have had to conclude it will be quite difficult to include an article based on the interesting paper you wrote for the branch, in the next edition.
However, what I would like to suggest is that you contribute to the Comment Column of our autumn edition.
This column appears on page two of each edition, and allows the author considerable freedom to express his/her ideas, opinions and reflections.
I feel it would particularly suit what you have to say about CPRW, past, present and future.
I hope you find this suggestion a good one.
It will require you to encapsulate your thoughts in 700–750 words.
I will also need a good black-and-white photograph (face and shoulders).
If you haven't got one of these to hand, perhaps we could arrange for one to be taken over the next few months.
The copy deadline is the end of August — or sooner if you can do it.
Please let me know what you think.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
30th March 1993
Annwyl ,
Summer Edition: Rural Wales
I have now given some more thought to the next edition of Cymru Wledig.
As I explained last week, we can only afford to publish a 24 page edition, rather than the usual 32 pages.
However, I remembered that COED CYMRU had expressed an interest in sponsoring a supplement and I have ‘sold’ the idea to its national co-ordinator, David Jenkins.
I have told him that COED CYMRU can have eight pages, provided he can raise a minimum of £1,000 to cover its production costs.
My understanding is that he will try to find half-a-dozen wood processing /wood craft companies whose adverts would feature within the eight pages of editorial to be supplied by COED CYMRU.
In other words the supplement would pay for itself and COED CYMRU will be responsible for finding the advertisers.
The advantage to CPRW would be that we could produce a normal 28 page edition with colour, as previously.
We would also feature the work of a non-profit-making body of which we are a strong supporter.
While David Jenkins is getting on with putting this supplement together, I envisage that CPRW and GOLWG would proceed as normal gathering articles and adverts for 24 pages.
I would submit all the contents for 32 pages on Monday 17th May, as arranged.
You might like to know that apart from COED CYMRU, the summer edition will feature articles on the WTB's Tourism 2000 review, the Shell Better Britain Campaign, development pressures on the countryside, environmental education, opencast coal, an up-date on Carmel Woods, fresh thinking on forestry, and the effects of transport on the environment.
I hope all this is satisfactory.
Pob hwyl,
1st July 1992
Dear ,
I am writing this quickly on my return (Tuesday evening) from London, prior to setting off for the European rural conference in Scotland.
I hope you receive it care of the hotel.
I enjoyed meeting up with you at the JNCC presentation on Monday evening and was impressed in particular by Lord Selbourne's clear determination (shared by all the country council chairmen) to make the JNCC both an effective co-ordinating body between the councils and a strategic ‘think tank’ on issues where a UK or an international perspective is essential.
I share your desire to see CCW making a distinctive contribution to nature (and landscape) conservation in the UK.
The three areas you identified (Tir Cymen, coastal/marine conservation, and CMS) are certainly ones where CCW should be able to play a leading role.
As I mentioned, CPRW would be prepared to use its influence to press home the lessons of Tir Cymen, once some experience has been gained.
I also hope we can promote the concept of coastal zone management through our proposed coastal study, which I am discussing with Mike Gash and Eira Hughes.
I am sorry not to be present in Cardiff today.
However, I wish you every success in continuing to establish CCW's reputation in Wales and the wider world.
Yours sincerely,
6th April 1993
Dear 
1992 Accounts
I would like to make an appointment to see you next week to discuss the 1992 accounts, bringing with me the rest of the papers.
I would be most grateful if you would telephone and speak to either Heidi or me to let me know if and when this would be convenient for you.
Many thanks
Yours sincerely 
To some extent this section overlaps with the conclusion about policy in the different chapters of Section III, but provided the overlaps are minimised this structure should be clear and convenient to the reader.
SECTION V: SUMMARY
An overview of the report.
Draw out particularly the messages on selected main themes in the report.
These might be, for example:
The relationship between economic development and environmental protection: sometimes mutually reinforcing, sometimes pulling in opposite directions — the importance of effective assessment techniques and policy integration.
Our responsibility to future generations — the benchmark of 2012 — research — acting on the precautionary principle.
Public opinion, education, and individual rights and responsibilities — the consultations behind this report.
An action plan — making clear the Government's commitments and targets, both those established under White Papers and new decisions — action by other sectors also vital.
Monitoring and indicators — how new Government commitments will be followed up through the anniversary White Paper series — the development of indicators in key areas of concern.
International obligations — although the report is predominately a UK plan, it has also covered the UK's obligations as an EC member and as a developed nation towards the developing world.
APPENDIX 2
Eleven Principles for Sustainability
(From: ‘Putting Our Own House In Order’ published by the UK members of the European Environmental Bureau, 1992)
1 Wise and careful management and efficient use of non-renewable resources, such as primary energy sources including fossil fuels and minerals.
2 Developing the contribution made by renewable resources such as renewable energy and timber in environmentally responsible ways.
3 Demand management of all resources, ensuring the best use of scarce resources, moderating our demands on them and reducing consumption where necessary, in accordance with sustainable supply and capacity.
4 Protection and careful management of our native biodiversity, landscapes and cultural heritage.
5 Implementation of the ‘precautionary principle’ so that we anticipate problems and take action before they become acute.
6 Implementation of the ‘polluter pays’ principle so that producers and consumers pay the environmental costs of production and consumption.
7 Resource pricing to reflect environmental and social criteria.
8 Achieving effective integration of environmental objectives into all sectors of policy, especially through the use of advanced environmental impact assessment techniques.
9 Introducing policies in all sectors which work to prevent at source pollution and environmental damage, minimise the generation of wastes; avoid over-stretching the capacity of the environment to act as a ‘sink’ for wastes, and eliminate processes and products likely to present long-term environmental problems.
10 A commitment to full public participation in decision making and freedom of information in all sectors.
11 Apply these principles in all our dealings with other nations, especially in the fields of aid, trade, exports and imports.
AGRICULTURE POLICY ADVISORY GROUP
The Welsh Office Agri-Environment Package
On the 26th of March 1993 the Welsh Office published a package of measures based on the EC Agri-Environment Regulation which came into force during July 1992.
This provides for Member States to bring forward programmes to implement measures to encourage the use of agricultural production methods which will help maintain and enhance the countryside and environment.
CPRW has campaigned, with others, for a major reform of the CAP that will end support for environmentally-damaging production methods and move substantial sums into support for farming and farming-related action that protects and enhances the quality of the Welsh landscape, its wildlife, public access and the wider environment, while also sustaining existing rural communities.
CPRW believes the EC Agri-Environment Regulation represents an important, if partial, advance towards this ultimate objective.
In order to prepare an informed and adroit response to the Welsh Office on its proposed package of measures, CPRW has invited a number of people with special skills, experience and expertise to meet under the chairmanship of Professor Michael Haines, to consider the Welsh Office's proposals and offer advice on the most appropriate response for CPRW.
The following questions may help focus discussion:
1
Would CPRW's objectives, as stated above, be more likely to be achieved if Wales was regarded as a distinct ‘zone’(or region) under the Agri-Environment Regulation?
2
Do agricultural or environmental conditions in Wales justify a ‘zonal’ response, or is it only justifiable in political and administrative terms?
3
How could an alternative response to the Agri-Environment Regulation help integrate and simplify existing and proposed schemes?
4
How could more money be found to support the proposed and alternative schemes under the Regulation?
5
Is the package proposed by the Welsh Office best tailored to meet the needs of Wales?
6
If not, what changes or additions should be made?
It may be useful to look at each element of the package in turn.
It would be helpful if the following questions can be addressed:
7
Should existing schemes be included in the package?
How?
8
What are the key differences between ESAs and Tir Cymen, and which one (if either) should CPRW favour?
9
Who is best placed to advise and skill-train farmers on the implementation of the package?
10
How well targeted are the Moorland and Set-Aside schemes?
11
How well designed is the Habitat Improvement Scheme?
12
How effective is the approach to common land?
13
Is the Organic Farming Scheme a good one, despite limited resources?
Should existing organic enterprises receive some support from the scheme?
Council for the Protection of Rural Wales Welshpool CDCW/CPRW Powys
EVIDENCE PREPARED FOR CONSIDERATION AT A PUBLIC INQUIRY TO BE HELD AT THE REGENCY HALL, SAUNDERSFOOT, ON TUESDAY 6th DECEMBER 1988
The Case Against Application No: NP/75/88
Conversion Of An Existing Cliff Top Caravan Site At Meadow House, near Amroth, by 150 Permanent Holiday Chalets
Introduction
The Council for the Protection of Rural Wales is a voluntary body established 60 years ago with the expressed purpose of protecting the natural and man-made beauty of rural Wales.
It takes a broad view today of what is meant by the protection of rural beauty by including within this definition consideration of all aspects of environmental quality, as well as the general social and economic viability of rural communities.
It sets out to achieve its objective of protection by promoting the kind of policies and practices which it believes would enable the rural environment to be utilised and developed for the good of society without destroying aesthetic and spiritual beauty, and by opposing other policies and practices which in its view would have such an effect.
In this context it seeks to inform public opinion of the importance of protecting the traditional character of the Welsh rural environment, and to persuade decision-makers at every level to have due regard for this objective in carrying out their responsibilities.
As one means of achieving its aims CPRW has established County and District branches throughout Wales.
These branches apply the organisation's principles and policies to the local situation, influencing decision-making at a local level along the lines described above.
As a result, CPRW's branches are actively involved in influencing the objectives and performance of the County and District planning system, and regularly express their views on the orientation of plans or the merits of individual applications.
At a national level CPRW is concerned that the principles of good planning, as envisaged in the post war Town & Country Planning Acts, are rigorously applied throughout the Principality.
It is also concerned to avoid any precedent being established locally which might have serious and deleterious implications for the rural environment generally.
At a district level CPRW's branches seek to protect the important qualities of their own particular areas, using their special knowledge of local conditions.
The Importance Of National Park Designation
CPRW firmly supports the concept of special planning designation for areas of particular landscape importance.
During the first two decades of its existence it was one of many organisations which argued insistently for the creation of National Parks.
Since the 1949 National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, which made this possible, CPRW has continued to take a keen interest in ensuring that the protection afforded by this designation is effectively applied, especially in the three National Parks of Wales.
The aims and objectives of Britain's National Parks, together with the rights and responsibilities vested in National Park Authorities, have been fully described by both the Countryside Commission and the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park Authority, and so need not be repeated here.
What CPRW would like to stress, however, in relation to the application being considered by this Inquiry, is that the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park is the only one of the ten parks in existence which has been primarily designated for the superb and largely unspoiled quality of its coastal landscape.
It is for this reason, more than any other, that the application has caused so much public concern, since what is proposed raises quite fundamental questions about the way in which this special coastal landscape could be protected or despoiled in the longer term.
CPRW believes that in electing to determine this application, the Secretary of State for Wales has quite correctly recognised the important implications which the decision will ultimately have for the future of National Parks.
Whatever view he decides to take, he will in effect be indicating in a clear and unequivocal way the weight that should be attached to the objective of long term landscape protection which is so central to the purposes of National Park designation.
CPRW has no doubt that in this particular instance a decision to provide planning consent would be quite disastrous, whereas a rejection would strengthen the value of National Park designation at a time when development pressures of the kind being considered are on the increase.
Planning History Of Meadow House Caravan Park
This has been provided in some detail by the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park Authority.
CPRW contends that it illustrates all too clearly how a development which would never obtain consent in the enlightened planning world of today, can creep incrementally but inexorably towards permanence through stealth and dogged persistence.
At a human level it should not be difficult for those with some sympathetic imagination, to understand the reasons why both Members and Officers of the National Park Planning Committee have gradually acceded to determined pressure for further and further development.
CPRW believes that the logical consequence of this approach is now all too plain to see.
Whatever mistakes may have been made in the past, CPRW believes that the current Inquiry provides a most necessary and timely opportunity to reassess priorities.
While it may be too much to expect the applicant to appreciate the wider impact and implications of his proposal, and while it may be unreasonable to expect any but the most steadfast defender of National Park principles to resist continual local pressure for change, CPRW hopes that this Inquiry will enable a more far- sighted view of what is at stake, to prevail.
CPRW hopes that the Secretary of State will grasp the opportunity now before him to alter the pattern of development which has characterised this site for several decades, by challenging once and for all the aspiration of the current and any future owner, to establish a large and permanent residence for their tourist operations on the cliffs above Amroth.
Local And National Implications For The Coastline
Meadow House Caravan Park is probably one of the worst examples of an inappropriately located coastal caravan site anywhere in Wales, standing proud as it does on the crest of an otherwise unspoiled cliffline between Amroth and Saundersfoot.
However, it is by no means the only example of obtrusive and environmentally insensitive caravan site development to be found, either within the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park, or generally around the coastline of Wales.
Current trends in tourism indicate that the demand for all but the highest standard of caravan accommodation, is now on the wane, and the message from tourist consultants to site operators is that they must quickly go ‘up market’ by significantly up- grading the standard of accommodation and associated facilities on offer.
For many operators this involves a complete reappraisal of the nature of their enterprise, and underlines the importance of attaining more permanent occupancy of their site.
This is not easy to achieve, however, since like that of Meadow House Caravan Park, the sites in question often occupy positions along the coastline which, had they not been established before the advent of full planning control, would never have obtained planning consent, even for the ostensibly ‘temporary’ location of static caravans.
CPRW believes this point is of fundamental importance because although in planning terms many large, static caravan sites like Meadow House are considered to enjoy ‘permanent’ consent, the caravans themselves cannot be construed as being ‘permanent’in the same way as are brick and stone built properties.
For the most part they are only likely to be occupied during a limited period each year by a number of different families.
As a result there is always a possibility, however slight at present, that in the fullness of time, for one reason or another, the caravans could be removed.
In this event sites from which they were removed could be returned to their former use as agricultural land, or left to return to a natural condition, without serious difficulty.
It must be stressed, however, that CPRW recognises the important role played by tourism in the local economy of coastal areas, as well as in National Parks and other designated areas.
In this context it fully accepts that caravan sites, such as that at Meadow House, are presently an essential feature of the tourist industry.
But we also appreciate that tourism is ever-changing in nature, and that what is demanded today in terms of facilities and opportunities may not be what is required tomorrow.
The danger is that in responding without thought to this ephemeral demand the essential ingredient which creates the very tourist experience — the landscape, both natural and man-made — will be permanently disfigured.
CPRW has no doubt that this is the danger which confronts the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park at Amroth, and that should the wrong decision be made with regard to the application being considered, this danger would also then confront many other beautiful stretches of coastline around Wales.
It is therefore CPRW's long term hope that aesthetically unacceptable sites, such as that at Meadow House, will eventually be removed.
Should the present application receive consent this optimism would be very severely dented and disastrous consequences could follow.
Detailed Objections To The Application
The foregoing arguments should have underlined CPRW's fundamental opposition to the application.
These arguments, it believes, provide sufficient reason to reject the application.
However, CPRW also offers the following detailed criticism of what is being proposed:
VISUAL INTRUSION
Most of the site occupies a very prominent position on the sky line.
Its exposed cliff-top position also severely reduces the scope for screening through the planting of trees and shrubs.
The existing caravans, and particularly the new brick and stone built communal facilities already obtrude unacceptably into the landscape.
To construct the proposed layout of single and double story brick and stone built chalets, euphemistically referred to as a ‘typical Pembrokeshire village’, would cause considerably more harm.
The site can be seen very clearly from Saundersfoot and from many points along public paths and view points around the village.
Though not so easily seen from the east, the tops of some caravans are visible from the road climbing from Amroth Castle to Marros.
They are also partially visible from the coast path which passes over National Trust property.
It is clear that the existing site already disturbs the pleasing pattern of enclosed grass fields abutting an attractive cliff slope of natural vegetation.
What is proposed would cause further damage.
DENSITY AND DESIGN
The density of the development, achieving as it does the virtual replacement of existing static caravans practically one-for-one, is quite out of proportion with the density of surrounding settlements.
The design of individual chalets, while having some merit, will do nothing to prevent them from becoming even more obtrusive than the existing caravans.
The inclusion of two-story chalets further exacerbates this problem.
To suggest that the proposed development offers a design which would make it equivalent to a ‘typical Pembrokeshire village’ is a disingenuous distortion of the truth.
SCALE
The proposed development, though of an equivalent scale to the existing one in terms of the number of ‘units’, would in reality be comparable to a medium sized village.
At present there are 111 units (plus 37 permissions) extant associated with the community of Summerhill and along both sides of the road down to Wiseman's Bridge.
The proposed development at Meadow House, though not associated with any community, would more than double the number of habitable dwellings in the immediate vicinity.
In addition, it seems reasonable to assume that the development will attain an occupancy rate much higher than that at present .
This would be achieved through extending the season and by increasing the number of people who could be accommodated per unit.
Such a community would put pressure on existing services and infrastructure.
Even the economic benefits which might be purported to flow from the development would have their down side.
Large scale developments within a highly integrated small-scale rural economy, tend to have a negative and distorting effect.
But the fundamental point at issue is again the implication which consent for the development would have within the rest of the National Park, and across the coast and countryside of Wales.
CPRW is firmly of the view that consent for the Meadow House application will send a clear signal to caravan site owners and developers everywhere that existing caravan sites can now be seen as the acceptable location for entirely new villages, however inappropriate their location, design or scale.
The Local Planning Context
This has been well documented in the evidence provided by both the Pembrokeshire National Park Authority and the Countryside Commission.
The CPRW's Pembrokeshire Branch has been strongly committed over the years to ensuring that the Dyfed Structure Plan, the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park Plan and all local plans pay due regard to the need to protect the environmental quality of the area.
As a result they have contributed to the public consultation process which accompanies the development of such plans, and have always sought to ensure that local planning policies are properly implemented in relation to the assessment of individual applications.
It is CPRW's view that consent for the Meadow House application would contradict existing local planning policies and thus undermine their credibility.
These planning policies make it clear that there will be a presumption against the conversion of touring or static caravan sites to ‘other self catering accommodation’(e.g. Structure Plan Policies TR5 and TR14, respectively).
The latter policy does, however, include an important qualification:
TR14 ‘It is the policy of the County Council that there shall be a general presumption against the changeover of static caravans to other self-catering accommodation unless the proposals can demonstrate positive environmental benefits resulting from high standards of layout, design and materials.
Proposals shall not create any significant transport, amenity or public service provision objections.’
This approach is known as seeking ‘planning gain’.
CPRW does not object to such an approach, believing that it is quite appropriate for planning officers to explore the potential for overall planning gain in specific cases.
However, in relation to the Meadow House application, CPRW is firmly convinced that no real planning gain is being offered.
Indeed, the application actually represents a major planning loss, for the reasons outlined above.
Thus CPRW believes that genuine planning gain cannot be considered to have been achieved in this case.
The Potential For Further Environmental  spoliation 
CPRW is concerned about protecting the quality of rural Wales in the longer term.
It is therefore relevant to consider what might ultimately happen at Meadow House should the application be granted consent.
It now seems reasonable to expect that the new chalets will be filled either by short term letting through a central agency, or by ‘time sharing’ which seems to be popular these days.
Nevertheless, in the event that, in the future, short term letting could not provide a sufficiently profitable return, the possibility of long term letting or even the complete selling off of a number of these chalets, cannot be ignored.
CPRW has evidence that the sale of holiday units as permanent residences is already beginning to happen where the temporary occupancy clause, which is customarily enforced on caravan and chalet sites, has been withdrawn for some reason.
This has the effect of completely undermining a planned approach to the construction of new houses and the control of new settlements.
Such a situation would lead to the creation of completely new settlements on existing caravan sites which has already been described.
Conclusions
The Council for the Protection of Rural Wales views the serious implications of the Meadow House Caravan Park application with alarm.
It asserts most forcefully its opinion that should consent be given for the proposed development then an unforgivable error will have been perpetrated with major consequences for the Welsh coast and countryside.
It therefore urges the Secretary of State to reject this appeal, and in so doing unequivocally confirm the value which is attached to the long term protection of landscape quality in Wales' National Parks.
Caring for the Earth
During our 64th year, CPRW's founding philosophy that careful use of natural resources is vital if we are to protect the beauty and amenity of Wales' coast and countryside, was as strong as ever.
Each year has deepened our understanding of the way the processes of development impact upon the environment.
In 1992, we responded with enthusiasm to the theme of the Earth Summit: that our way of life here in Wales, as elsewhere across the World, must change if it is to become genuinely environmentally sustainable.
Not only did we call for a ‘Welsh Centre for Sustainability’ to help translate global commitments to sustainable development into practical action suited to Wales, but we also ran many persuasive campaigns highlighting the true environmental costs of a range of development proposals.
In addressing this task we combined local, national and international action, distinguishing ourselves as a strategic force for conservation.
This report attempts to cover the full range of our concerns and convey the strong sense of purpose that, hopefully, infused all our work during 1992.
One issue dominated above all others — the environmental damage caused by our relentless search for, and profligate use of, energy.
The amount of energy each of us uses to support our way of life here in Wales, is about ten times greater than that used by the overwhelming majority of people alive on the planet today.
Through this behaviour we not only accept irreversible environmental damage to our own backyard, we also export serious atmospheric problems across the whole world.
How can we expect people from developing nations to make sacrifices for the good of mankind, while we continue to squander and pollute?
Restraining the search for oil and gas
With the UK's known oil and gas reserves in the North Sea beginning to run down, the search for new reserves has shifted to our western seas.
Although the prospects of finding large quantities of oil and gas may be limited, this search and any future commercial exploitation poses a major risk to Wales' high quality marine and coastal environments.
We therefore worked hard with others to restrain the Government's and the oil industry's ambition to press ahead swiftly without taking sufficient account of the environmental effects.
We were strongly opposed to the licensing of two sensitive blocks of sea bed close to Bardsey Island.
However, once the licence to sink an exploratory well was awarded to the Hamilton Oil Company, we tried to ensure that it honoured the conditions attached to the licence, prepared an adequate oil spill contingency plan and designed an operational programme which minimised the risks to the environment.
Negotiations with the company produced some useful results, though we were disappointed that contaminated waste products produced during drilling were dumped over board.
However, we helped secure an enhanced sea bed survey, the results of which could help put an end to this dumping in future.
Fears that Hamilton's prospecting was just the thin end of the wedge were confirmed when the Government announced that many other sensitive blocks of sea bed around the Welsh coastline were being considered for licensing under its 14th Oil/Gas Round.
We joined a strong delegation from the Cardigan Bay Forum which met senior officials from the Department of Trade and Industry to urge the withdrawal of these blocks.
In the event, we were only partially successful; some were withdrawn while others were offered with conditions attached.
Valuable though such concessions were felt to be in the short term, we concluded it was wrong to encourage prospecting in sensitive waters without an adequate understanding of the nature and level of the risks involved.
We therefore called on the Government to suspend the 14th Round pending the results of a Strategic Environmental Assessment of all aspects of the search for oil and gas around the coastline of Wales, but to no avail.
Preventing the threat from ‘Orimulsion’
Fortunately we were more successful in supporting efforts to prevent burning of the dirty, bitumen-based fuel ‘Orimulsion’ at Pembroke power station.
National Power Plc initially tried to suggest that this could be done under its existing licence to burn oil.
However, the Government was persuaded by us and others that the company should apply for a new licence.
This meant advice was required from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, the National Rivers Authority and the Countryside Council for Wales, all of whom were seriously concerned about the environmental impact of dramatically increased emissions from the power station.
While we maintained pressure on the company, CCW published the results of a three-year study showing how badly some parts of Wales had already been damaged by acid rain.
It showed that a very substantial cut in pollution emissions was required to allow the natural environment to recover.
Burning ‘Orimulsion’ without cleaning up the emissions would clearly add to an already severe problem, so it was a relief to hear that the licence application had been refused.
We understand the company may reapply on the basis that Flue-Gas Desulphurisation (FDG) equipment will be fitted.
This may itself cause environmental problems, so we will be insisting on a full Environmental Assessment.
Turning the tables on opencast coal
Despite widespread agreement that opencast coal mining is among the most environmentally destructive activities carried out in Wales, the Government has until recently tried to increase output from this method.
We joined embattled coalfield communities in South Wales, who have suffered decades of dirt, noise and heavy traffic, in a call for a complete overhaul of Minerals Planning Guidance Note 3 which currently tells planning authorities that opencast mining should be permitted in the national interest.
We were pleased to learn that a revised draft of MPG3 was being prepared for consultation, and we tried to influence its content.
The Government's Energy Review provided an opportunity to press home the demand that opencast coal mining be severely cut back.
We captured the angry mood of the old mining communities who, having lost all their deep mines, are now facing the destruction of their countryside by opencast.
We supported their case that the future prosperity of the Valleys depends on healing the scars of the past and building a new industrial and commercial base that actually improves and protects, rather than destroys, the environment.
We were therefore delighted the Secretary of State rejected British Coal's plan for a major opencast mine at Pwll Du near Blaenavon, which we had opposed.
Putting wind power into perspective
Given the mounting problems associated with conventional methods of energy production, it is not surprising there is strong public support for the introduction of renewable energy schemes, especially wind power stations.
Whilst we also believe increasing amounts of renewable energy must be harnessed in future, our long-standing service to landscape protection meant that we saw the environmental costs of doing this perhaps more clearly than others.
Our efforts were therefore directed towards putting wind power into perspective as one element of a comprehensive solution based on energy conservation and efficiency, and assessing how and where wind turbines could be erected with the least damage to cherished landscapes.
We welcomed the publication of the Blandford Report by the local authorities in Dyfed, providing valuable advice on siting and design, but were disappointed Ceredigion District councillors chose to ignore it.
We were similarly frustrated by councillors' attempts in Radnorshire to approve a wind power station at Marcheini, against the advice of their planning officer.
We joined CCW in a successful appeal to the Secretary of State to get it ‘called in’, following which it was withdrawn.
Such battles are damaging to all parties, so we welcomed CCW's policy guidance on wind power and energy strategy in the hope that these will encourage a more landscape-sensitive approach in future.
Tackling the transport dilemma
Although the number of cars registered in Wales fell slightly during 1992, there was little reason to think that in the long term we will not be faced by an unsustainable surge in the number of private vehicles using Welsh roads.
With this in mind, the Welsh Office continued to propose major up-grading schemes that intrude into the countryside and destroy the setting of rural towns, unchanged for centuries.
Although each scheme has its pros and cons, and slight modifications might soften its impact, the cumulative effect is irreversible landscape damage, increased pollution and a degraded quality of life.
We began the year by contributing to a Wales Transport 2000 conference in Llandrindod Wells.
It highlighted the urgent need to develop less-damaging methods of transport and this led us to form an expert working party under the chairmanship of Stuart Cole, a transport policy research consultant from the University of North London, who is familiar with the Welsh transport system.
This made a promising start in preparing a report for publication during 1993.
Alongside this strategic review, we tackled specific schemes such as the heavy-handed engineering solutions proposed along parts of the A5 in North Wales.
We also joined the ‘Transport 2000’ PLATFORM Group formed to protect existing rail services from the worst effects of privatisation.
All these developments suggest transport issues will dominate our agenda in future.
Managing the demand for materials
In parallel with predicted growth in the demand for energy and fuel, the Government assumes demand for raw materials such as building aggregates will increase dramatically over the next twenty years.
During 1992 minerals planning authorities in Wales submitted their plans to show how this demand could be met.
Despite their best endeavours, it is clear the impact on the landscape and local communities will be considerable.
Many of the problems are likely to arise when quarrying companies activate the large number of old mining permissions they own without basic environmental safeguards attached.
We urged the Government to quicken the pace of its pedestrian review of these old permissions and to take powers to enable planning authorities to extinguish without compensation those that would cause an unacceptable level of damage.
All others should be brought up to modern standards using the principle that the polluter pays.
Meanwhile, flaws in the procedures introduced by the Government to bring Interim Development Orders up to modern standards were highlighted in the case of Carmel Woods near Llandeilo.
Claimed possession of an IDO by McAlpines Quarry Products Ltd over 470 acres of this nationally important limestone ridge, was rejected by Dyfed County Council, so the company appealed to the Secretary of State.
We prevailed on him to ensure the appeal was heard in public, and worked through Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link to help form a Campaign Consortium to prepare evidence to present to the inquiry.
The cost of so doing, though justified in this test case, illustrated the impossible odds facing planning authorities and voluntary bodies wanting to challenge the tenuous evidence on which so many IDOs are based.
Increasing concern over the effects of dredging sand and gravel from submerged offshore banks was reflected in our call for a full Environmental Assessment of an application for a licence to dredge part of the Helwick Bank off Gower.
Although the Welsh Office commissioned some elementary research, we were disappointed the licence was eventually approved on the basis it could be revoked if observable environmental damage was caused.
The private company was assigned the task of monitoring its own operations, which we find unacceptable.
Protecting the water environment
We continued to take a keen interest in protecting and improving the quality of Welsh rivers, lakes and coastal waters.
We were represented on local and national liaison committees with Welsh Water Plc and the National Rivers Authority.
We submitted a detailed response to the NRA's proposed scheme of water quality improvement targets which was being prepared for the Secretary of State's approval.
We also welcomed the Government's ideas to improve water conservation, though arguing they needed to go further, faster.
As a result of our pressure, there was growing recognition that the demand on water resources by proposed new development was an important factor to be weighed in the planning process.
Reforming farming and forestry
We welcomed the launch of CCW's experimental ‘Tir Cymen’ scheme designed to encourage farmers to produce environmental goods as well as food.
It was pleasing to note that many recommendations made by our Agriculture Working Party were taken up in the scheme.
We also welcomed the Secretary of State's commitment to designate new Environmentally Sensitive Areas in Wales and introduce a hedgerow renovation scheme.
However, these positive steps still did not add up to a radical new direction for farming on the scale that is needed.
We joined environmental organisations across Europe in calling for a vastly enhanced programme of ‘agri-environment’ measures under the reformed Common Agricultural Policy when European Agriculture Ministers met in Cambridge in September under the UK Presidency of the EC.
We also called on our Secretary of State to use this opportunity to introduce a comprehensive ‘green’ farming scheme for the whole of Wales open to every farmer.
We continued to encourage the Forestry Commission to assemble the building blocks on which a new environmentally-led approach to forestry can be based.
Indications that a gradual change in outlook had reached a critical point, came just before Christmas when we were invited to participate in high-level talks with the Commission on a new National Forestry Strategy.
The theme of sustainability dominated the discussions and raised hopes that public funds for forestry could unlock much improved environmental and public benefits in future.
Relating town and countryside
One of the greatest achievements of the post War period has been the creation of a land use planning system able to preserve some distinction between town and countryside.
However, attempts to undermine this approach continued to mount with councillors in some rural areas permitting increasing numbers of new houses in the open countryside, while others in urban areas yielded to the temptation to sprawl towns into the countryside, often along the line of major roads.
We worked hard at local and national levels to support planners and councillors who resisted such pressures.
We welcomed the shift towards a plan-led system and commented on a number of structure and local plans.
We called for the introduction of Green Belts as part of a package of measures designed to revitalise town centres and protect surrounding countryside as green lungs for urban dwellers.
We sought to strengthen Welsh Office planning guidance in ways that encourage good design, prevent abuse and minimise the environmental impact of necessary development.
We also attended a major European conference on the Future of Rural Society held in Inverness in June.
Planning for sustainability
We took advantage of a comprehensive review of strategic guidance in Wales to press home our view that land use planning must play a central role in reducing society's demands for finite natural resources.
We were pleased to see advice being prepared for the Secretary of State emphasising this point, urging him to set a clear direction towards a sustainable way of life in Wales.
We were not convinced, however, that his plan to reintroduce small unitary authorities would foster the vision and expertise needed to meet this challenge.
Indeed, we were most disappointed he squandered an opportunity to improve local government services by encouraging a superficial debate over boundaries.
Influencing the decision-makers
Our solid reputation for authoritative advice on rural and environmental issues led us to be consulted on a regular basis by the Welsh Office, its executive agencies and other bodies.
During the year we responded to the following official consultations:
Welsh Office:
Draft PPG Note 6, Town Centres and Retail Development
Draft PPG, Holiday and Seasonal Occupancy
WO consultation paper: Using Water Wisely
Environment Agency: Waste Disposal Planning
Review of the Provisions of the Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981: Old Mining Permissions
Local Government Reorganisation in Wales
Freedom of Access of Information on the Environment
Mineral Planning Note 3 (Opencast Coal Mining)
Draft PPG: Coastal Planning
Draft PPG: Industry, Commerce and Small Businesses
Draft PPG: Nature Conservation
Draft PPG: Telecommunications
Draft PPG: Renewable Energy
Welsh Office Agriculture Department:
Environmental Aspects of Support for Hill Farming
Draft Advice to County Councils on Indicative Forestry Strategies
Countryside Council for Wales:
Hedgerow Management
Hedgerow Renovation Scheme
Glyndwr's Way — proposed National Trail
Draft Guidelines on ‘Tir Cymen’ Initiative
Shaping opinion
Not only did we try to influence the views of those in positions of power through detailed submissions and meetings, we also sought to mobilise public opinion through the news media and our own publications.
We responded to innumerable requests from journalists for interviews and briefings.
On each occasion we tried to convey key issues in clear terms and explain how problems could be solved.
We kept our members informed of our campaigning work through the pages of ‘Rural Wales’.
Three editions were produced and mailed to our 3,700 members, plus a full report of our activities and a statement of accounts for 1991.
As well as campaigning for change, we also praised good practice through our ‘Rural Wales Awards’, sponsored by the National Westminster Bank Plc.
A plaque and certificate was presented by our branches to thirteen local projects each judged to have successfully protected or enhanced the visual appearance of the countryside.
They reflected our great breadth of interest, being given for cultural and educational activities, as well as for buildings and environmental projects.
We also ran our popular Youth Environment Conference, bringing together 35 sixth-form students from all parts of Wales to study a series of controversial development proposals.
It was held at the Orielton Field Studies Centre, just outside the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park.
Among the many topics provoking lively discussion was the plan to burn ‘Orimulsion’ at Pembrokeshire Power Station.
Working with others
We continued our policy of working in alliance with others to tackle issues of common concern.
This was achieved principally through Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link of which our Director is Vice Chair.
We were also delighted during the year to have agreed an important Partnership Plan with the Countryside Council for Wales.
This sets out a number of projects which reflect the common aims and interests of our two organisations, in support of which CCW provides an important, annually-renewable grant.
We strengthened our work at a European level though the European Environmental Bureau.
During its annual meeting in Brussels we prepared and presented the main resolution on ‘Subsidiarity and the Environment’.
We also worked closely with other UK members of the EEB to influence our Government's approach to the Earth Summit in Rio.
We supported local voluntary action to improve the environment as a partner in the Shell Better Britain Campaign, which provides grants and advice to local community groups.
Other organisations to whose work we contributed included:
Council for National Parks
Wales Council for Voluntary Action
Wales Rural Forum
National Rivers Authority
Welsh Water Plc (liaison)
Cardigan Bay Forum
Prince of Wales Committee
PoW Committee Environment Study Group
Heritage Coast Steering Group for Wales
Montgomery Waterways Trust
Powys Archaeological Trust
UK Joint Water Group
Improving performance
During 1992 we continued to improve the performance of both staff and volunteers in tackling planning and policy issues.
We were pleased to appoint Tony Walker as an Assistant Director responsible for branch development.
He has already done much to improve support for local action, encouraging and advising our many active volunteers.
He completed another successful series of volunteer training courses and prepared strategies to strengthen branch organisation and improve membership recruitment.
We also appointed Heidi Gomm as our Office Administrator, while Carole Richards became our part-time Membership Secretary following the birth of her son, Thomas.
We were also pleased to promote our long-standing Administrator, Jenny Smith, to the post of Assistant Director, Information.
With the help of our Holding Trustees, we were able to make further improvements to Head Office facilities.
Acting locally
All sixteen of our branch committees met regularly during the year, ensuring CPRW's ideals were translated into local influence and action.
Much of the work of the volunteers who run our branches is devoted to monitoring and commenting upon local planning policies and individual development proposals.
When these are considered of more than local importance, they are taken up at a national level.
Such was the case for plans to quarry Carmel Woods in Dinefwr, build thousands of new houses in Monmouth, erect a wind power station near Rhayader, build a gas terminal and power station in Delyn and a number of other major developments.
Building support
We produced an attractive new leaflet and used it to launch a recruitment campaign.
Despite the recession this helped us to retain the vast majority of our members and welcome new ones to our ranks.
We relied heavily on subscriptions and donations and were delighted by the loyalty and support we received throughout the year.
We would like to thank everyone who helped — individuals, private companies and trust funds.
Putting it all together
Clearly, 1992 was a busy and productive year.
It would not have been possible to tackle so many issues so successfully without the dedication of hundreds of volunteers working at both a local and national level.
Overall direction was provided by our strong National Council, while its Executive Committee skillfully guided its many campaigns.
Daily decisions were controlled by Honorary Officers, and executed by our small team of hard-working staff.
We hope our members and supporters are proud of what they helped us achieve and will continue to support us and introduce their friends to CPRW's vital work.
2nd July 1992
Dear 
Thank you very much for your letter of the 23rd June enclosing the travel vouchers for which we are most grateful.
I have enclosed a copy of our magazine which launched the raffle (please see page 8) together with a sample book of tickets.
You will be pleased to hear that the raffle is going well already.
Thank you for your support.
Yours sincerely,
1st June 1992
Dear 
Penygeulan Cottages, Berriew
We have today received a letter, copy enclosed, from our Agent in which he explains that the tenant has now offered £24,000 for the cottage which she occupies, but on condition that the bedroom which has the ‘flying freehold’ is returned to her cottage.
(You will remember that our Agent valued the cottage, without alteration, at £20,000 if sold to the tenant, but at just £10,000 to a third party).
Our Agent advises that we indicate that £25,000 is the lowest acceptable offer and that she pays for the alteration.
This would have the effect of reducing the value of the empty cottage by £5,000.
I would be grateful if you would let me have your instructions.
Many thanks
Yours sincerely,
Brecknock Branch News — October 1992
Autumn Event — Video Evening and Buffet Supper at Treberfydd on 13th November
We thought it might be a good idea to spend an evening aimed at providing some entertainment and some food for thought, not to mention some sustenance of more tangible nature.
We have assembled a collection of three videos, covering last year's National Park Conference in Brecon, the use and misuse of planning guidelines in one corner of Wales caused quite a stir when first televised, and won a CPRW award.
Once again our Branch President has kindly offered her home as a venue.
The general idea is that members (and any guests who are potential members) should arrive between 6.45 and 7.00 p.m. and collect a glass of wine.
Shortly after 7.00 we should show selections from the videos, which we hope will generate some discussion.
At about 8.30 glasses can be re-charged for a buffet supper, kindly provided by some of our members.
As usual there will be no charge, but there will be a receptacle for donations, and there will be a raffle.
If you would like to come, please fill in the form on the last page of this news.
If you are unable to come, but would like to make a donation instead it would be most welcome.
Summer Barbecue
In spite of lowering clouds and apocalyptic forecasts, plenty of hardy souls turned up to sample the culinary offerings of Brecknock's answer tot he Roux Brothers, and were rewarded with a pleasant, rain free evening, and a meal that reached even dizzier heights than last year — the proportion of charcoal to edible meat having been somewhat reduced.
Thanks largely to some generous donations from absent well-wishers, we also made more money than last year.
We expect to spend some of this on sponsoring students to attend the annual CPRW Youth Environment Conference in November — a very popular and rewarding part of CPRW's programme.
Brecon Beacons National Park Society
Many of you will be aware of the launch of the Brecon Beacons National Park Society a few weeks ago and are perhaps wondering what effect this will have on the activities of CPRW and this branch in particular.
There may be speculation whether the existence of two bodies with similar aims could lead to duplication of effort and competition for members which would diminish our influence.
I hope that this will not happen because CPRW has much wider objectives than the Park Society.
In case you find that potential recruits feel that the Park Society offers a marginally cheaper way of supporting the Welsh countryside, I think it is important that everyone understands the difference between us.
CPRW is a well established national organisation and the only voluntary body concerned with strategies for Wales as a whole which are intended to protect Welsh heritage, its countryside and the quality of life of its people.
The National Park is not an island and its future is strongly influenced by decisions made in Cardiff and Westminster, and indeed Brussels.
National policy decisions about farming, rural housing, pollution control and about the guidelines which planners are obliged to follow are matters on which the national voice of CPRW must be heard.
We can be proud that we are regularly consulted on a variety of mattes by government bodies and we are the only environmental group in Brussels that specifically speaks for Wales.
It is increasingly important that there is just such a Wales-based environmental group putting forward a Welsh viewpoint; and that such a group is seen to be supported at its grass roots by active branches playing parallel roles at local levels.
The Brecon Beacons Park Society will, of course, focus its attention on local issues arising within the Park, where we hope that their voice will support ours, and vice versa .
Although at the local level we will be pursuing similar objectives, when it comes tot he wider national issues, it will be CPRW that speaks out for those who not only care about the Park, but also see it as a special part of a special country.
Usk Barrage
Thanks very largely to Neil Caldwell's untiring efforts in commissioning ecological reports and co-ordinating environmental objectors, the Newport Council has once again withdrawn its Bill from Parliament.
This is by no means the end of the matter, because the Council still intends to pursue its objectives by other means, but it certainly seems to indicate that it may be having second thoughts about the project's viability and/or its acceptability.
Planning Matters
1.
Brecon Beacons National Park Plan — Second Review
Although we were very happy with much of this document, there were a few sections about which we had reservations, and on which we submitted detailed comments.
2.
Draft Powys Structure Plan
We thought that this was rather a superficial document, containing many forecasts which seemed to be based on inadequate data or questionable assumptions.
This was particularly noticeable, and particularly worrying, in the sections devoted to housing and employment.
There are subjects which are crucial to the future of all who live in Powys, but we found the arguments somewhat unconvincing.
We submitted a carefully considered response at the end of June, since when there has been a deafening silence.
3.
By-passes
Both the proposed Crickhowell and Builth Wells by-passes seem to have gone into hibernation.
This is perhaps not surprising, since neither proposal seems to have been properly researched from an environmental point of view.
This essay will use the lives and careers of two men, C.L.R.James and Eric Williams, as the basis for a study of the development of a nationalist identity in the British colony of Trinidad and Tobago between the years 1914–1956.
It will trace the roots of nationalist sentiments from their beginnings during the First World War, through to the election of the first national government in the history of the islands, the Peoples Nationalist Movement, in 1956.
In the process the essay will attempt to explain why a nationalist movement did not ascend to power earlier, and the reasons for its success when it did.
It will also attempt to describe how the rise of a nationalist movement was viewed, and effected, by each of these two men, both historians, both with different historical perspectives.
Born in Trinidad, in 1901 C.L.R.James was, as Beauchamp said of Toussaint L'Overture, one of the ‘most remarkable men in an age rich with remarkable men’.
In a life that spanned eighty eight years, James forged a reputation in historical analysis, political theory, philosophy, fiction, criticism, and sports writing.
His revolutionary vision and empathy with the oppressed peoples of the world led to his involvement in social movements in the United States, Britain, Africa and the Caribbean.
The son of a schoolmaster, James lived in he small town of Tunapuna near the capital, Port of Spain.
As a small boy, he spent his days either reading or watching cricket, a game that dominated all aspects of West Indian social and cultural life.
A precociously bright boy, he was attracted to the intellectual aspects of the game, as well as the physical participation in it.
In 1910 James won one of the island exhibitions giving entrance to Queens Royal College,(Q.R.C.).
In a system modelled on the English public school tradition, Oxbridge trained masters educated pupils in the classics, sport and the study of European history and literature.
Despite neglecting his studies for the attractions of the cricket pitch James emerged in 1918 with a sound understanding of European civilisation, and a keen interest in ancient Greece, a society in which sport was also developed as an integral part of life.
James was continuing to play cricket throughout this period having become a member of the Maple Club, and while his reputation as a player was growing it was his overall knowledge of the game that brought him most attention.
During the 1920s James earned his living as a schoolmaster, returning for a short period to teach History and English at Q.R.C., where amongst his pupils was Eric Williams, the future Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago.
James was beginning to hone his talents as a writer of fiction, and as part of a Trinidad literary circle that included such writers as Albert Gomes and Ralph de Boissière he helped found two important, if short-lived, literary journals as outlets for their writing: Trinidad (1929–30) and The Beacon (1931–3).
These provided a forum for an emerging, indigenous West Indian literature.
This circle of writers and intellectuals did not confine themselves to their own particular pursuits, for the West Indies was going through a period of great political change in the aftermath of the First World War.
The involvement of the West Indies in the war created a profound change in the outlook of its people, that was to lead to growing criticism of the colonial government.
A leading figure in this agitation was Captain André Cipriani, a French Creole, who through his prominence as mayor of Port of Spain continuously berated the Crown Colony Government.
James, who would in 1932, publish a biography of Cipriani, was much taken by the personality of this man who, with his organised labour movement posed a real threat to the colonial authorities.
Under the slogan ‘Agitate, Educate, Confederate,’ Cipriani was in effect, giving voice to a nascent nationalist movement in the West Indies, for he was advocating nothing less than the most rapid possible advancement of West Indians towards self- government.
The root of this discontent can be traced back to the experiences of troops of the British West Indies Regiment (B.W.I.R.) whilst they were stationed at Taranto, Italy, in 1918.
When recruited, black soldiers were informed by colonial officials that they would receive the same training, equipment, and pay as other British troops, they were also led to believe that there were possibilities for promotion.
It soon became evident that nothing of the kind was forthcoming: the racist strictures of the War Office prevented promotional possibilities, blacks were not even allowed to join in combat with the enemy.
Resentful at being used as manual labourers, blacks then discovered that they were not entitled to the same pay increases as white troops because, as the War Office ruled, they were ‘natives’.
On December 6, 1918, troops of the 9th Battalion B.W.I.R., unable to contain their frustrations any longer, discarded the racist fetters imposed upon them by the War Office and violently attacked their superior officers, severely assaulting the unit commander in the process.
The immediate consequences of this were the disarming of eight battalions, some eight thousand men, and the subsequent arrest on charges of mutiny of between 50 to 60 of the leading mutineers.
Of greater consequence however was the effect this incident had on the attitudes of West Indians in regards to their colonial masters.
In prefiguring insurrections the following year in British Honduras and Trinidad, the Taranto uprising had a profound effect on the development of black nationalism in the British Caribbean.
James meanwhile was making decisions concerning his future.
Realising that the only way he could possibly fulfil his considerable potential was by going abroad, James accepted the invitation offered by the famous cricketer Learie Constantine to join him in Nelson, Lancashire.
An important figure in the stimulation of James' intellect, Constantine had been developing his own political ideas whilst residing in the industrial heartland of Lancashire, and he now requested James' help in the formation of his autobiography.
So it was that in 1932, James took the journey from the colony to the metropolis with his sights set on becoming a novelist.
As it so happened another young scholar, one who's life was to become inextricably bound up with the politics of Trinidad, was also just about to make the same journey.
On completion of his secondary education at Q.R.C., the young Eric Williams had won a coveted scholarship to Oxford.
In the face of his father's protestations he had decided that the conventional path for the scholarship winner — law or medicine — was not for him; he was going to Oxford to do History.
As Williams began his career at Oxford, James plunged into the radical haunts of London.
The political and intellectual ‘zeitgiest’ of England in the Thirties appears to have suited James' radical and romantic temperament; this period of intense political ferment gave James the opportunity to become embroiled in the great political and ideological debates that so dominated the times.
James seems to have thrived in this milieux, and he was now lecturing on ‘The Case for West Indian Self-Government’ which he had had published by Leonard and Virginia Woolf's Hogarth Press in 1933.
It was during this time that James was able to reacquaint himself with another old school chum, Malcolm Nurse.
Malcolm had left Trinidad for the United States in the 1920s and whilst educating himself at Fisk and Howard Universities had developed a temperament of a distinctly militant revolutionary nature.
He had put this to good use by doing organisational work for the U.S. Communist Party in Harlem and he had taken the party name of George Padmore.
In 1928 a new world-wide trade union organisation, the Profintern, had been established by the Sixth International Conference of the Communist International and in charge of its Negro department was George Padmore.
Padmore later became a central figure in the organisation of African students into nationalist movements, and later again he became a political advisor to Kwame Nkrumah when the latter founded the newly independent state of Ghana.
It is worth noting at this juncture that, in Britain in the 30s, the prevailing view among those of a leftist orientation on the issue of global alignment was at least pro-Russian, if not actively pro-Communist.
Admiration for the Soviet Union was wide-spread among Labour Party members and the Fabian leaders, Sidney and Beatrice Webb, promulgated the belief that out of Soviet Communism would spring a new civilisation.
To many among the intelligentsia, an alliance with the Soviet Union offered the only practical defence for the Western democracies against the rising tide of fascism.
Such views were both pervasive and unexceptional at the time.
This, however, was the political and intellectual world to which our young colonials were exposed and from where they developed their own particular world views.
C.L.R.James did not concur with the British Left on this matter, having already declined George Padmore's invitation to join him in his work with the Communist International, he now joined forces with a group of Marxist, anti-Stalinist radicals within the Independent Labour Party.
The I.L.P. provided James and his fellow colonials, Padmore and Jomo Kenyatta, with a forum in which they could expound upon their own individual ideas concerning nationhood.
They were to gain invaluable assistance from the likes of Fenner Brockway, Jenny Lee, George Orwell, and the I.L.P. leader — James Maxton.
By now a confirmed Trotskyist, James had also published several more books: In 1936, ‘Minty Alley’— a short novel on Trinidad, and then; in 1937, ‘World Revolution’— which became the virtual Bible of Trotskyism.
He then followed up, in 1938, with his classic study of the slave revolution in Haiti led by Toussaint Louverture —‘The Black Jacobins’.
James' research for this brilliant book had taken him to the archives at Bordeaux, whereupon he discovered that his fellow Trinidadian, Eric Williams, had been there before him.
Williams had gone to Bordeaux to do research for his doctoral thesis, ‘The Economic Aspect of the Abolition of the West Indian Slave Trade and Slavery’.
Although not totally immured from the political activities of the 1930s, Williams nonetheless appears to have been completely absorbed in his academic studies at Oxford.
Having attained a First Class degree in History in 1935, he then determined upon a doctorate, which he completed in 1938.
In 1944, Williams published an expanded version of his thesis under the title ‘Capitalism and Slavery’, and in doing so broke away from the imperial tradition of historiography on the subject of the abolition of slavery.
What Williams' study sought to disprove were the currently entrenched theories concerning the underlying reasons for the abolition of slavery in the British Empire in 1833.
The theory under attack was the notion that a band of prophets, under the leadership of William Wilberforce, had roused the conscience of a corrupted nation and led humanity to a decisive victory over the evils of materialism, avarice and human exploitation.
This traditional idealistic interpretation of abolition was, argued Williams, unconvincing on a number of counts.
Firstly, it minimised the role in British economic history, especially the Industrial Revolution, of both slavery and the Caribbean colonies.
Likewise, the role of British economic history in the abolition of plantation slavery and the slave trade was also underestimated.
Williams' theory, in brief, was that whilst the West Indian plantation economy with its slave labour force was the prime factor in the development of mercantilist capital in Great Britain, the ascent in the early 19th century of the industrial bourgeoisie created new forces whose interests clashed with those of the more established capitalist group.
This new industrial bourgeoisie then threw their support behind the anti- slavery measures, not out of altruism, but out of their own economic self-interest, and this, asserted Williams, was THE decisive factor in the emancipation of the slaves.
In his study of abolition, Williams was effectively challenging the views perpetrated by an august body of imperial historians and in so doing was bringing into question the ‘moral legitimacy’ of the British anti-slavery movement.
Williams later acknowledged that his thesis was in fact the same one as propounded by C.L.R.James in his book ‘The Black Jacobins’.
But, as Ivar Oxaal has pointed out, a full reading of ‘The Black Jacobins’ reveals quite clearly that ‘this was not James's thesis’but rather it was just one half of that writer's theory as to the causes of abolition in the British colonies’.
While it appears that both James and Williams agreed that without an ascendant industrial bourgeoisie, the abolitionists ‘would have preached themselves as black in the face as any Negro’.
Beyond this, they could not agree.
For Williams, the rise of a new and powerful economic group in the British ruling class was the key point — the determining factor in the abolition of slavery.
But, as far as James was concerned, this was no more than a PRECONDITION for the abolition of slavery.
In his view, the root cause lay in the revolt of the weak, not in the economic interests of the strong.
For Williams, emancipation had taken place from above but, for James, it had taken place from below.
‘The Haitian Revolution’, he declared, ‘…killed the West Indian slave trade and slavery’.
Two differing interpretations, both stressing the role in history of class conflict yet both bearing the distinctive hallmarks of each writers' individual ideological perspective.
For Williams, the economic self-interests of the strong usually determine history.
James, however, held the unwavering view that it was amongst the weak and the exploited where one had to look for the root of historical change.
Both of these books have been hailed as classics of the anti-imperialist school of historiography and their publication ensured that ‘the posture of splendid moral isolation’, so typified in the historical view of British slave emancipation, would no longer be tolerated.
As for Williams and James, they would collaborate again on issues involving the West Indies, but this fundamental difference in their opinions would cause a rift between the two men which would have practical implications for the cause of the West Indian nationalist movement 25 years later.
The latter half of the 1930s saw James increasingly involved in issues concerning Africa.
In 1935 he had formed a group, the International African Friends of Ethiopia, to oppose the fascist aggression of Mussolini and with the help of his good friend, George Padmore, he later organised the International African Service Bureau (I.A.S.B.), whose journal, ‘International African Opinion’, he edited.
James had stated in the prologue to ‘The Black Jacobins’ that he had written the book with the independence of Africa in mind and he had considered it more than fortuitous that a number of other books by black writers had been published around the same time.
Such books as W.E.B.
Du Bois's ‘Black Reconstruction’ and ‘Cahier d'un retour au pays natal’, by Aimé Césaire, were, alongside ‘The Black Jacobins’and its companion study, ‘The History of Negro Revolt’, seen by James as concrete manifestations of an historical movement.
He argued that these publications were the precursors of the flood of artistic, intellectual and political creativity that accompanied the move towards colonial independence.
Seemingly never idle, James resumed his cricket writing in 1937.
He had written for the ‘Manchester Guardian’ on the subject during the seasons of 1933/4/5, then in 1937 he began writing for the ‘Glasgow Herald’— not reporting on county cricket as he had for the ‘Guardian’but instead turning his impeccable knowledge of the game to the study of the nature of the game itself.
As with most things in his life, cricket for James was a revolutionary activity.
He saw it as a struggle between the desires of the bourgeoisie, for whom sports were ‘mere entertainment’ and for whom play was merely a recuperative process following the real work of labour, and, the desires of the common people for whom games were ‘an alternative life-activity in their own right’.
In his brilliantly perceptive book, ‘Beyond a Boundary’, James traces the history of the modern game back to its inception during the lifetime of Hazlitt (1778–1830).
He sees it formed and shaped by ‘the yeoman farmer, the game-keeper, the potter, the tinker, the Nottingham coal-miner, and the Yorkshire factory hand’.
He describes how, by 1837, the game had evolved into a highly complicated sport, containing all the ‘typical characteristics of a genuinely national art form,…profoundly popular in origin, yet attracting to it disinterested elements of the leisured and educated classes’.
For James, the game was the invention of ‘the whole body of the people’ who, following the disappearance of Carnival from Europe, wanted organised sports because these were ‘…institutions that they helped to found and continue, as surely as their working-class struggles led to the formation of trade unions, as their struggles for the right to vote had also led to the founding of modern mass-political parties, to the grounding of the concept of democracy’.
Cricket, for James, was not ‘mere entertainment’ but an activity in which everybody, even those watching, has a participatory role; for like Carnival, the involvement of the crowd means they are not just watching a spectacle, but rather ‘they live in it’because, ‘its very idea embraces all the people’.
Once again James' unique view of the world places the mass of the ‘common people’ at the forefront of the historical process.
However, one detects more than just a hint of resentment when he talks of the ‘middle-class’, who, with their penchant for rationalisation and organisation, appear to have appropriated the game.
On the eve of World War II, both James and Eric Williams departed England for the United States.
Williams had gone to take up a post at Howard University, where at the age of 28, he began what would become a meteoric rise through the halls of academia,(Associate Professor in 1946, at the age of 35).
When not teaching the social sciences, Williams was filling his time by researching West Indian history, for this was the period leading up to the publication of ‘Capitalism and Slavery’.
His early research led to the publication in 1942 of ‘The Negro in the Caribbean’ in which he applauded the rise of working class leaders in the West Indies.
Then, in emulation of André Cipriani, he called for the middle class to join in the struggle for independence.
With research in mind and with the aid of a fellowship, in 1940, Williams had taken a journey to the Caribbean where he visited Cuba, Haiti, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic.
It seems his time in Havana was blissfully productive, able as he was to draw from a readily available wealth of historical data concerning the slave trade.
The conditions he encountered in these other counties however, appear to have left a deeper, and darker, impression on his mind.
The corruption and viciousness engendered by Trujillo's tyranny in the Dominican Republic; the unmitigated poverty and rampant prostitution of Puerto Rico,…
‘Uncle Sam's second largest sweatshop’, as he called it.
There were fairly obvious warnings here for a man contemplating the future independence of his own country, but, if he was shocked by what he saw here, it was the land freed by Toussaint Louverture, Haiti, that gave him most food for thought.
The opulence of the Presidential Palace, the well-to-do middle class houses, stood in stark contrast against the abject poverty — intellectual as well as physical — of the barefoot peasantry.
He was seeing the evidence left by America's policy of intervention, and, having just been told of Churchill's agreement to Roosevelt's demand for bases rights in Trinidad, found himself posing the question; ‘if Haiti's isolation, poverty and tyranny after independence represented one lesson to West Indian colonials’, did it also pose another,…‘that West Indian colonials were destined to graduate from European colonialism to American?’
He appears not to have had a ready answer to this question!
On his return to the United States, Williams embarked upon a series of lectures on Negro issues, and more specifically, issues concerning the Negro in the Caribbean.
This seems to have been an important period for Williams, for his lecture programme gave him the opportunity to broaden his contacts.
He was on Philip Randolph's ‘March on Washington’ platform in Chicago, and it was whilst lecturing in Boston that he made his first real contact with the Jamaican nationalist movement and significantly with Norman Manley.
His trip to the Caribbean, and subsequent lecture tour, not only widened his democratic vistas, it allowed him to expand upon his vision of an independent Trinidad whilst laying the foundation of his emergence as its intellectual spokesman.
James meanwhile continued the life of the independent radical writer and philosopher.
It is said that his journey to America had taken him via Mexico, where he spent some time in discussion with Trotsky, on the issue of Negro involvement in the revolutionary movement.
Leaving Mexico with some remaining doubts about Trotsky's analysis, he entered, and very soon broke with, the orthodox movement of Trotskyists in America.
Before forming his own political group in 1941,— the Johnson/Forest Tendency — he had been heavily involved with the Socialist Workers' Party (SWP) where he made a significant contribution, particularly on black issues, to the party newspapers ‘Socialist Appeal’ and ‘Labor Action’.
James broke with the SWP following the protracted debate on the question of whether or not the Soviet Union could be defended as a workers' state.
In James' view, it could not because it was not, and, as he had throughout the previous decade, he remained implacably opposed to the Soviet regime under Stalin.
Following his split with the SWP James and his small band of adherents joined with another small group, the Workers' Party, and with the aid his close collaborators, Grace Lee and Raya Dunayevskaya, he set about the task of examining the Hegelian dialectic and Marxist doctrine, which he believed would lead him to a fuller understanding of the Soviet Union, and in particular, Stalinism.
The culmination of this study was the publication of a number of manuscripts, among which was ‘The Invading Socialist Society’, published in 1947, and ‘Notes on Dialectics’, published in 1948.
The former, which apparently has to be seen in the context of the political climate of the 1940s, is an analysis of Stalinism and Stalinist parties as ‘tools of the Kremlin’, the issue of which led James to break with current Trotskyist thinking.
In ‘Notes on Dialectics’, James repudiated not only Trotsky and Lenin, but indeed many of his own theories on the necessity for a vanguard party within a revolutionary movement.
Trotsky, claimed James, had misunderstood the dialectic and therefore there was a fundamental flaw in his interpretation of history.
From his reading of the dialectic, James felt forced to conclude that the necessity for a vanguard party as an agent of social revolution was over.
The ‘party’ of the future could only be the mass of the labouring population, for as he wrote in 1950, in his self- proclaimed masterpiece: ‘State Capitalism and World Revolution.’
’ The great organisations of the masses…in the past were not worked out by any theoretical elite or vanguard…the new organisations will come as Lilburnes Leveller Party came, as the sections and popular societies of Paris in 1793, as the Commune in 1871 and the Soviets in 1905, with not a single soul having any concrete ideas about them until they appeared in all their power and glory’.
In making this break with tradition, James, it seems, had come to the conclusion that it was time for the intellectual elite to shut up and listen to the workers for a change for it was they who were at the sharp end of the production system and therefore they who first sensed any changes in patterns of production.
Having travelled the ‘road from revolutionary elitism to proletarian populism’, James' American sojourn was about to come to an end but, before it did, he would write ‘Mariners, Renegades and Castaways’ in which he expressed his poetic view of the world through an interpretation of the works of Herman Melville.
In 1952, James found himself caught up in the tide of Cold War paranoia sweeping America.
He was arrested on allegations of ‘anti-American’ activities and interned on Ellis Island to await deportation back to England.
The career of Eric Williams, in the meantime, had taken a more propitious turn.
While at Howard University he had taken up a position as a consultant on Caribbean affairs, this led him into full-time work for the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission, where in 1948, he became its Deputy Chairman based in Port of Spain.
On his return, Williams could now see for himself the changes that had taken place in the social and political structure of Trinidad and Tobago during his absence.
In 1937, a series of mass demonstrations in the oil industry had ushered in a period of severe labour unrest throughout the West Indies and this had led to the setting up of a Royal Commission, under Lord Moyne, to assess the social conditions on the islands.
Although initially withheld because it depicted conditions of extreme deprivation, the Commission's report was nonetheless instrumental in the decision, taken at Montego Bay in 1947, that the West Indies, under a federal system of government, should be guided toward Dominion-hood.
In Trinidad meanwhile, Eric Williams' fears about the West Indies succumbing to American imperialism had to some extent been realised.
Following the notorious deal struck by Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt in 1940, the Americans had built a naval base at the deep-water bay of Chaguaramas, and, whilst the huge influx of military and civilian personnel created something resembling a boom-time on the island, their recreational habits led to increased levels of prostitution and organised vice.
Besides their easy money and ‘Jim Crow’ racial attitudes, the Americans also brought their technical know-how.
In undertaking a series of major public works, they created a considerable amount of employment and income for the islanders.
If the American presence during the war period was looked upon ambivalently by the local population, its continued presence at Chaguaramas, following the cessation of hostilities, would lead to a protracted dispute between the foreign powers and the government of Trinidad and Tobago, a government led by that most unambivalent of men, Dr.Eric Williams.
In 1946, Trinidad and Tobago held their first elections under universal suffrage and, for these politically and culturally fragmented islands, the ensuing decade would be of the utmost importance, for it would see the emergence of a political leader who, through the Peoples Nationalist Movement, would revolutionise the political life of the colony whilst propelling it toward independence.
On his return to Trinidad in 1948, Eric Williams almost immediately got involved in public appearances at which he gave his opinions on historical topics concerning the West Indies and while his work for the Caribbean Commission strictly forbade any political involvement, it did not prevent him from opening a window on the West Indian past.
With his vast knowledge of West Indian history, Dr. Williams set out to educate his audiences on the colonial system — its wickedness and its heritage of economic stagnation.
He spoke on the evils of race and colour prejudice and he rarely failed to mention the issue of slavery.
It has been argued that Williams was obsessed by the issue of slavery and that underlying this obsession lay a deep seated racial resentment.
Suffice to say that his repeated harking-back to the subject did not please those islanders who considered the issue long since laid to rest.
If the view through Williams' window of history did not please everyone, it at least appears to have pleased many, especially those Negroes from the lower classes, and in particular Creole woman, who began to look upon him as some kind of messiah.
His continued appearance on the public platform and his considerable oratory skills gave Williams the opportunity to enhance his growing reputation as a spokesman for the ‘common man’.
This reputation he cemented when he founded the ‘University of Woodford Square’, a university offering free education for the masses!
Besides being an inspired public relations gimmick, the founding of the ‘univisitaire populaire’ was a genuine effort to elevate nationalist politics to the status of adult education.
It would become the fulcrum around which Williams' political career was built, for as a scholar and teacher he recognised, as did Aristotle, that education is politics.
A ROUGH GUIDE TO THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IN TRINIDAD.
Before we proceed with the political career of Dr. Williams, a brief history of national affirmation in Trinidad: 1914–1948.
In the period encapsulating the two World Wars the figure of Captain André Cipriani, ‘the champion of the barefoot man’ looms large.
A white, descended from Corsican immigrants, Cipriani had sharpened his latent powers of leadership in the prolonged fight to get equal treatment for West Indian soldiers during the first World War.
Following demobilisation, he set about the rehabilitation of the Trinidad Workingmen's Association, whilst at the same time getting himself elected as mayor of Port of Spain.
The Workingmen's Association, which later became the Trinidad Labour Party, with fifty-five affiliated sections in Trinidad and Tobago, was Cipriani's power base.
Closely resembling a trade union movement, the Workingmen's Association gave Cipriani a mass support that none of his politically independent rivals could match.
In return for their support he gave them lessons in how to oppose colonialism, in the development of national pride, and he taught them how to direct social discontent into reasoned political activity.
A self-confessed socialist, Cipriani duly supported all types of social reform, the mention of which was viewed as subversion at the time, and his record as a fighter against all forms of injustice is impressive:
He led from the front the campaigns for:
compensation for workmen,
a minimum wage and eight-hour day,
statutory restrictions on the use of child labour,
compulsory education and universal suffrage,
He championed:
the teachers in their fight against unfair treatment,
opposition to all forms of discrimination,
local democratic control of native economic resources.
A respectable enough record it seems, but it has to be remembered that Cipriani had to fight with at least two distinct handicaps.
There was the Crown Colony system which seems to have been designed for the business of not getting things done.
Certainly it was not a vehicle for a programme of socialist reform such as Cipriani had in mind, even if he did have a seat on its Legislative Council.
If the colonies' restrictionist constitutional regime was impervious to change, equally so were the local employer class represented by the Chamber of Commerce who, like a brick wall, stood solidly in Cipriani's path.
Like the patriarchal Victorian factory owners in Britain, they resisted any measures to eliminate child labour practices and the education of the masses, they opined, would bring about the economic ruin of the country.
With their own vested interests taking precedence over everything else, they resorted to the tactics of terror, intimidation and victimisation against those workers suspected of having labour or trade union sympathies, and with their considerable economic clout they simply bought the opinions of the government bureaucracy.
It is hardly surprising then, that with such formidable enemies, and in spite of his undoubted mass support, Cipriani met with such little success in his endeavours.
But while these two enemies were formidable enough, it also appears that in some ways Cipriani was instrumental in his own defeat, or put another way, ‘he had all the defects of his virtues’
For all his socialist language he was really an old style Tory Radical, despising the ‘system’ yet not possessing a clear vision of what would replace it.
He was not an intellectual, nor for that matter was he an historian!, basing his opposition on harsh personal experience rather than knowledge gleaned from books.
He therefore lacked those breeds' capacity to ‘set the problem in terms of historical perspective or first principles’.
His most serious error, it seems, was to believe that the British Empire with its governing gentleman class, held the high ground when it came to moral ‘rightness’.
This meant that he never fought them on his own terms, always theirs, and it blinded him to the realisation that when all else failed, when all the appeals for ‘fair play’ fell on stony ground, that he could have utilised his mass following of workers to shake the ground beneath the Empire.
The level of ambiguity which inevitably constrained Cipriani, was also to prove to be his Achilles' heel, for, how could he possibly fulfil the nationalist aspirations of the people before he resolved the problem of how to be a patriotic West Indian, and loyal to the Empire at the same time?
If Cipriani achieved little in the way of goals, he did, as C.L.R.James put it in his biography of the man —‘expand our conception of West Indian public personalities’.
Whereas Cipriani, in all his dealings, retained a high degree of honour, albeit confused, those that superseded him after 1938, heralded in a period that is recognised by some as the nadir of political life in Trinidad.
Although their more militant stance was probably vital for the development of the nationalist movement, the bombastic and buccaneering approach of the new breed of politician has led to accusations that they ‘lowered the tone of political life’.
This may or may not be true, but, what most certainly is true is that the next decade of Trinidadian political life was dominated by a diverse band of political mavericks who had only one thing in common.
None of them had a coherent programme, or strategy designed to bring the mass movement into power.
What they did precipitate, however, was the entry into politics of the trade unions and the working class.
But, unlike the Jamaican Peoples' Nationalist Party (PNP), who were in the ascendant, they possessed no clear-cut ideology nor political theory and they therefore were blind to the full significance of this achievement.
If the union struggle was to have any success it would need to have the complementary support of a political party, but as the ‘parties’ were preoccupied with the fight for short term gain and not permanent principles, they failed to capitalise on the situation.
For the political adventurers and profiteering fat- cats these were palmy days — indeed corruption and political fraud were so rife that the Trinidadian ‘bobol'or fraud became a byword in the political life of the Caribbean.
The gullibility of the electorate was tested to the nth degree by the promises of; more taxi licences, a ‘better’ carnival, ‘good and plenty water’and the equally uninspired promise from one candidate that, if reelected, he would abolish dog licences.
While the politics of the time may have been sterile, it does appear to have had more than its share of colourful characters; bogus radicals like A.P.T.James and Chanka Maharaj; the legendary and fabulously wealthy Bhadase Maraj, who was an American-style ward boss; Norman Tang, whose mastery of the ‘art’ of inscrutability made it possible for him to ‘develop the reputation of being the only minister never accused by the Civil Service of political interference’.
There were lots more, there were even one or two who, like Albert ‘Bertie’ Gomes, had more than just a tentative grasp of the deadly art of Trinidadian politics and finally there was Uriah Butler, who in 1946 — ten years after he had instigated the oil field demonstrations — led the most successful campaign in the first elections under universal suffrage.
Butler's earnest sincerity made him a popular hero and leader, especially among the oil-field workers, but despite its success in the elections his radical minority party was not invited onto the Executive Council by the Governor.
The fact that Butler's party demanded ‘home rule’ and the nationalisation of major industries could have had something to do with this decision!
In the general morass of Trinidadian political life there seemed to be little room for genuine political parties, such as the West Indian National Party,(1942) and the Caribbean Socialist Party,(1947).
Those that advocated social or political change in a reasoned and intelligent manner seemed to be either ignored or ended up defeated and disillusioned by the whole sorry mess.
Part of the problem was that Trinidad was so culturally and ethnically diverse and seemingly lacking any semblance of a common identity, the political arena therefore was simply a reflection of this diversity.
Add to this the vulgarity of American capitalist culture and the inherent snobbery of English expatriates and you get some idea of what awaited the future Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago.
In 1950, Eric Williams published a book, ‘Education in the British West Indies’, which contained his views on the setting up of a British West Indian University.
Williams had completed this document in 1946, while still resident in the United States, and in the meantime the University College of the West Indies had been established in Jamaica.
Belated or not, the publication of the book led Williams into a collaboration with a group of local educators and teachers whose views on education,…‘the uplift of the people, the progress of the Teacher’, were very much in line with those of Williams.
This group, known as T.E.C.A., the Teachers' Economic and Cultural Association Ltd. had been impressed by the strong nationalistic tone of Williams' book and they wholeheartedly agreed with his sentiments that education of the people should be ‘part of their democratic privileges and their democratic responsibilities’.
The T.E.C.A. group had been formed by a number of self-proclaimed socially conscious young teachers with specific aims in mind.
They felt that there were some fundamental problems within the education system on the islands, problems that the official teachers' union were failing to redress.
Their main grievances against the education system, which fell under the dual control of the church and state, were that it victimised teachers who showed dissent by questioning the working conditions or salary scale.
They alleged that black teachers were discriminated against by white administrators, and that the denominational boards showed intolerance toward those teachers whose religious beliefs conflicted with their own.
In the view of one of their leaders, W.J.Alexander, the teachers were ‘the victims, PAR EXCELLENCE, of colonialism.
We wanted to organise the teachers effectively, to improve their lot economically while at the same time making a cultural contribution to the community’.
While the aims of T.E.C.A. appear modest enough, by forging an alliance with Dr.Eric Williams they would come to realise that there was a much greater goal to aim for, and that the key to attaining this goal was the charismatic figure of Dr. Williams himself.
In November of 1954, Williams began a series of lectures at the Public Library, and while the theme of these lectures was by now a familiar one to his audiences (education in the West Indies), the public debate that ensued between Williams and the Reverend Dom.
Basil Matthews gave him the opportunity to expand on his vision of the West Indies under the full glare of publicity.
The debate centred around the issue of state control of education, of which Williams was in favour, and in particular the Aristotelian view on the issue.
But it appears that Williams had cleverly manipulated the debate in order to demonstrate the acquiescence of the church to slavery.
These debates were eventually brought to a close by Williams, but by this time his fame had spread throughout the islands and had given him a mass following, especially among the lower Creole class.
For those who might have missed his point however, Williams wrote for the ‘Trinidad Guardian’ soon after, ‘I see in the denominational school the breeding ground of disunity; I see in the state school the opportunity for cultivating a spirit of nationalism among West Indian people and eradicating the racial suspicions and antagonisms growing in our midst’.
The upshot of all this was the acclamation of Williams as a ‘Giant’, a ‘Master’, an ‘Apostle’.
Dr.Williams, it was said, ‘was responsible for an intellectual awakening hitherto unknown’.
But while there was praise in abundance, there were many people who felt in accord with his objectives and yet could not bring themselves to like the man himself, accusing him of cajolery, ruthlessness and arrogance; not very pleasant traits for a man to have, unless of course the man has political aspirations!
Williams continued to gather public support throughout 1954,(also the year that Learie Constantine returned after 30 years in England), and it seems that he was now consolidating his position in preparation for a decisive political move, but while he was still involved with the Caribbean Commission in an apolitical capacity, this move would be put on hold.
Away from the glare of publicity however things were taking shape, and by the Spring of the following year, 1955, a close circle of Williams' political associates had formed P.E.G., a secret Political Education Group, the purpose of which was the promotion into public office of Dr.Williams.
At the same time as this another organisation was being formed, The Peoples Education Movement,(P.E.M.) the aims of which, although suitably vague, were to provide a non-partisan platform from which Dr.Williams could continue his lectures and build up his support.
Whilst Williams and his coterie were planning their strategy, there were also some political developments of note in Jamaica, where in January the Jamaican Labour Party was ousted from power by Norman Manley's People's National Party, a success firmly rooted in mass popular support for a charismatic leader.
On the 21 June, 1955, the Caribbean Commission informed Williams that his contract with them would not be renewed.
That very same evening he appeared on the bandstand in Woodford Square and gave his first speech under the auspices of the P.E.M. The speech turned out to be nothing less than a vitriolic attack on the Commission, which he portrayed as an organisation run by ‘hide- bound conservatives in the British Colonial service’.
He implied that there were strong racist elements in the Commission which severely restricted the opportunities for blacks working within it.
He had been accused of being a Communist he said, simply because he had expressed democratic and nationalist sentiments in his book, ‘The Negro in the Caribbean’.
In short, he painted a picture of an organisation, which in microcosm, contained all the same evils as the colonial system of rule.
But the speech was more than just an attack on the Commission, for it was also an astute defence of his good name and reputation.
If the crowd in Woodford Square on that June evening were looking for an anti- imperialist martyr, that is what they got.
Williams presented himself as someone whose entire life had been blighted by the curse of British colonialism; even at Oxford, was he was not denied a fellowship because of his colour?
He, at least, was convinced that he was.
He portrayed himself as victim of imperialism, as a man who had suffered in the struggle against colonial rule, but who would not let it beat him.
Far from it, for he would now ‘cast down his bucket’ with the people of Trinidad and Tobago, the struggle would continue.
In his autobiography, ‘Inward Hunger’,(1969) Williams gives us an insight to how he felt at the end of this speech, ‘the audience had listened with rapt attention’…then…
‘Woodford Square roared its approval, and the roar was heard in London and Washington.
I had crossed the Rubicon.’
Easily enough said with hindsight, but then Eric William was not the kind of man who hid his talents behind a bushel, for as Ivar Oxaal noticed, ‘Eric Williams was always fundamentally, legally, morally and intellectually right’ while his opponents were ‘usually incompetent, malicious, and weak-willed creatures’who ‘are reduced to an incoherent blubbering as the omnipotent young black colonial reduces their arguments to ashes.’
The latter months of 1955, found Williams lecturing around the island on an almost nightly basis.
He had given a speech earlier in the year on the subject of ‘Constitution Reform in Trinidad and Tobago’, at the end of which he appealed for mass action and now he was testing the dedication and organisational abilities of his P.E.G.
and T.E.C.A. colleagues on a campaign for public signatures in favour of constitutional reform.
Whilst Williams gave talks on such themes as race relations and the need for genuine party politics on the islands, a volunteer group of supporters gathered in the signatures, and while his reception in some areas was not favourable, in general it was welcoming.
On the 8 October 1955, Williams left the island for over two months, but before he did he was able to present the recently appointed Governor, Sir Edward Betham Beetham, K.C.M.G., C.V.O., O.B.E., with the signatures of 28,000 people who supported constitutional reform.
(A subject which was being debated in the Legislative Council.
LegCo.)
On January 15, 1956, the Inaugural Conference of the Peoples' National Movement was convened in the Good Samaritan Friendly Society Hall, Port of Spain.
The Peoples' Charter, which comprised the fundamental principles of the movement, was approved by the Conference, the show, as they say, was on the road.
The Charter, like most political manifesto, threw vitriol on the current state of affairs in Trinidad, political as well as social, and then went on to describe much that they would do to improve the situation; but then, to paraphrase Andy Rice-Davies — they would wouldn't they?
In preparation for the next elections, Williams persuaded a number of local politicians and businessmen to join him in running for office on the P.N.M. ticket.
Amongst these were Dr.Patrick Solomon, who had been out of politics for five years; Dr.Winston Mahabir, an East Indian physician, and Gerard Montano a popular businessman from the San Fernando district.
Williams also managed to induce the highly revered former cricketer, Learie Constantine, into becoming the chairman of the movement.
When the elections were held in September, 1956, the P.N.M. were the only party out of the seven running to contest all 24 constituencies, with the result that they won 13 seats (later rising to 14) and polled 39% of the vote.
Unfortunately this was still not enough to give them a parliamentary majority as the Legislative Council contained four members who would be nominated by the Governor.
Had the Governor delegated these four seats to independent politicians, and more specifically, politicians who despised Williams, of whom their were many, the likely outcome would be parliamentary stalemate.
In the end, the Colonial Office took the decision to allow the P.N.M. to select two of its members to sit on the LegCo. thereby giving them victory with a clear majority.
The government of the Peoples National Movement were sworn in on Friday, October 26, 1956, its first aim achieved, it was now on the road toward its foremost goal, full internal self-government and the elimination of colonialism.
Before these goals could be attained.
the P.N.M. would have to sort out a few more issues of contention; a Federated West Indies for instance; constitutional reform; should they let the U.S. retain its naval base at Chaguaramas? and, are we a socialist movement?
On this last point, C.L.R.James certainly had an opinion.
He had returned to Trinidad in May, 1958, after 25 years absence and was clearly impressed by the mass support for Eric Williams and the P.N.M. ‘With a movement like this you can do anything’, he informed Williams.
Although still deeply committed to Marxism, in James' view the nationalist movement had ‘an autonomy and validity of its own’, and he therefore, on Williams' request, gave his services to the cause.
James took on the rather unglamorous task of editing the party paper, ‘The Nation’ and, almost single-handedly, established the paper's reputation and prestige throughout the West Indies.
Whilst James worked selflessly for the party, sending forth a barrage of witty and caustic editorials, particularly on the issue of Chaguaramas.
In a short time he became disillusioned, not with the movement itself but with the P.N.M. leadership.
In James' opinion the party should be used as the instrument to build and consolidate ‘the mass party’.
The reality, as he saw it, was that now ‘the P.N.M. leadership had control of state power, the building of the party apparatus had become superfluous.’
He was left to lament: ‘In many cases the party does not exist except in name, and the most urgent and repeated efforts to correct this meet with the indifference, carelessness, ignorance and, now, the obstinacy and hostility of the party leadership.’
In an effort to put the situation right, James approached Eric Williams, only to be told by the good doctor that, ‘there was nothing to discuss’.
In 1960 James published a personal study of his time with the P.N.M., ‘Party Politics’, in which he managed a retort to Dr.Williams that was equally as terse but considerably more acerbic: ‘In my time here I have ‘discussed’ socialism with Dr.Williams for at most three minutes.’
Clearly, as far as James was concerned, the party was over.
In his view, ‘revolutionary politics means the deepening of the democratic process’ and he was therefore saddened by the sight of Williams building a political party that was apparently, meant to serve as the ‘extension of his imperial personality’.
James' experience with the P.N.M. left him convinced that the middle class in the Caribbean was an impediment to the building of a new society.
He was incensed by what he considered the usurpation of the nationalist movement by the middle-class.
‘The democracy and West Indian nation was won by mass revolt.
Even this revolt was led by men who were not typically middle-class.
When, after 1937–38, the democratic movement started, it was a labour movement…
By degrees, the middle-class took over the political parties.’
James saw the West Indian middle-class as conservative by nature, ‘nationalist but subservient to British imperialism, believing in democracy but frightened of mass mobilisation.
I do not know any social class which lives so completely without ideas of any kind…
They aim at nothing.
Government jobs and the opportunities which association with the government gives allow them the possibility of accumulating material goods.
That is all.’
But, middle-class or not, bereft of ideas maybe, tenacious in power, certainly.
Eric Williams and the P.N.M. would take Trinidad through to Independence in 1962, having failed to align the whole of the West Indies into a single federation.
They would see off James and his Workers' and Farmers' Party, and every other party for that matter, in the 1966 election.
They would experience the rise of a new and more militant revolutionary nationalism, the Black Power movement, imported by Walter Rodney.
This they have so far managed to suppress with the aid of their ‘close friends’ the Americans.
Dr. Eric Williams retained his leadership of the P.N.M. up until his death in 1981, C.L.R.James retained his revolutionary fervour right up until his death in 1989.
The so- called middle class leaders of the P.N.M. have, up until now, managed to hold on to power, which is extraordinary considering they were ‘so completely without ideas of any kind’.
Item: 4q — The Charities Act 1992
The Executive appointed a sub-committee to look into the implications of the new act.
For various reasons, it has not been possible to arrange for this sub-committee to meet.
However, decisions do now have to be taken.
To bring you all up-to-date, I enclose a copy of a memo which I circulated to the members of the sub-committee in January.
I recommend that the following action now be taken:
1.
A letter, signed by the Chairman, be sent to all of the Charity Trustees (the Executive Committee) enclosing a copy of CPRW's constitution, the booklet ‘Responsibilities of Charity Trustees’.
A declaration should be enclosed for the Charity Trustee to sign saying that s/he has read the constitution, understands her/his responsibilities and that s/he is not disqualified from acting as a Charity Trustee.
A similar letter (from the Chairman) should also be sent to anyone who, in future, is standing for election to the Executive.
This should become standard practise.
2.
It is obvious to me that our branches are part of the main charity.
In fact what has happened is by approving their constitutions the Charity Trustees have delegated the management of the affairs of the local branches to freely elected committees of local members.
However, the act makes it absolutely clear that the Charity Trustees remain ultimately responsible.
Branches should report regularly to the main charity (we do receive their minutes and annual reports at Head Office) and their accounts should form part of the main charity's accounts.
The Charity Commissioners understand that many charities are out of step in this matter but they do wish to see matters being regularised as soon as possible.
I suggest:
a.
A letter is sent to each Branch Chairman and Treasurer explaining the new act.
b.
All Branches should be asked to ‘close their books’ at the end of December 1993 regardless of when their financial year started.
This will bring them in line with Head Office as from January 1994.
c.
They should also be asked to adopt a standard form of accounting — Head Office should send a basic standard format to be followed.
d.
Treasurers will be told that they will have to submit their accounts (and all supporting documents) to Head Office at the end of each financial year and these will be audited along with Head Office accounts.
e.
A summary of Branch accounts should appear alongside Head Office accounts with a note informing members that full details will be sent on request.
f.
The opportunity should be taken to also look at each Branch constitution to see if any need to be revised in the light of the new legislation.
The Charity Commissioners have now published the ‘exposure draft’ of SORPS2 (Statement of Recommended Practice) for accounting.
Our Accountant has been given a copy.
When the consultation period ends and the final SORPS2 is published, a date will be set (probably July 94) after which all charities will have to comply with the procedures.
Jenny Smith
7th May 1993
26th March 1993
Dear 
CPRW Christmas Card
CPRW is an environmental charity whose main aim is to safeguard the Welsh countryside from inappropriate development.
I enclose some information about our work.
As you may know, CPRW produces a Christmas Card each year and we have always chosen to reproduce a painting by a living artist working or residing in Wales.
I enclose samples of the last two cards we have produced.
This year we hope to produce a card depicting a winter landscape scene in South Wales.
We will produce 20,000 cards and they will be on sale through many outlets in Wales.
We are unable to pay the artist for the use of his or her painting, but we do offer 200 complimentary cards.
Artists have found in the past that they have many enquiries about their work after having a painting reproduced by us.
I have been asked to approach you to see if you would like to submit a slide or photograph (or indeed an original) for consideration when we are choosing this year's design.
The decision will be made in early May and the cards produced in time for the major summer shows in Wales.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely 
Dear Mr Tress
CPRW Christmas Card
CPRW is an environmental charity whose main aim is to safeguard the Welsh countryside from inappropriate development.
I enclose some information about our work.
As you may know, CPRW produces a Christmas Card each year and we have always chosen to reproduce a painting by a living artist working or residing in Wales.
I enclose samples of the last two cards we have produced.
This year we hope to produce a card depicting a winter landscape scene in South Wales.
We will produce 20,000 cards and they will be on sale through many outlets in Wales.
We are unable to pay the artist for the use of his or her painting, but we do offer 200 complimentary cards.
Artists have found in the past that they have many enquiries about their work after having a painting reproduced by us.
I have been asked to approach you to see if you would like to submit a slide or photograph (or indeed an original) for consideration when we are choosing this year's design.
The decision will be made in early May and the cards produced in time for the major summer shows in Wales.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely  
As Chairman of CPRW, I strongly recommend this report of our work during 1992.
Each year we tackle more and more difficult problems threatening potential damage to rural Wales, some of an international nature, and others apparently purely local, but nonetheless important for the future.
Where do we find a solution when balancing the economic needs of Wales for the well-being of both those who live and work here, and the many thousands who visit?
We all appreciate the hills and valleys, the rugged coast, the history, culture, and indeed the peace and quiet, and the need for their protection.
CPRW has its feet firmly on the ground, but at the same time we need a ‘sustainable’ view that is far-sighted, since decisions taken today will have repercussions for good or ill in the years ahead.
We are a voluntary body, but thankfully are able to influence the decision-makers because we have among our members those with local knowledge and with expertise in many disciplines relevant to our work.
Also, we have a small, dedicated, professional staff.
Fortunately, we had past members with vision over the years, and from one of these we inherited a considerable legacy which will give us a firm basis for future work; an investment which can be used frugally when the occasion demands.
So often people say to us that they wish us well and that we are doing a good job.
Thank you, we believe we are, but please join us for our future strength lies firmly in our membership.
Dorothea Garnons Williams OBE JP DL National Chairman
5th April 1993
Dear 
RURAL WALES MAGAZINE
Neil is on leave and has asked me to reply to your letter of the 31st March.
He says that your suggestions for the 8 page entry on native woodlands sound great!
Neil is assuming now that you will put together the supplement — editorial and advertisers.
With regards to the latter, once they're hooked and a fee agreed (with you) put them on to our publishers and advertising agents GOLWG — contact Tina Wilson  Blwch Post 4, 13 Stryd y Bont, Llanbedr Pont Steffan Dyfed SA48 7LX.
We need to find an absolute minimum of £1,500 from advertisers and preferably £1,500.
Many thanks
Yours sincerely 
June 1993
Dear 
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales has just published its annual report for 1992.
We enclose a copy of this and we hope that you will find time to read it and see what CPRW has been up to during the past year.
There are few community councils in Wales which do not have some area of countryside or open ground where nature flourishes, be it inland or on the coast.
Fewer still would argue that people did not need green spaces within their communities.
Since its foundation in 1928, CPRW has been dedicated to protecting the countryside of Wales.
We are a small charity dependent on subscriptions and donations to continue our work from everyday monitoring of planning applications to fighting larger campaigns to protect rivers, ancient woodlands and areas of outstanding beauty.
However we fully realise the importance of people in those landscapes.
CPRW firmly believes that the only people who can protect those green spaces are the communities who live there.
CPRW is an organisation of volunteers which exists to help local people protect their local environment.
That is our only purpose.
To those of you whose Community Councils are already members of CPRW, we hope you enjoy reading the annual report and support the work we are doing.
Please feel free to write to us with your comments.
For those of you who are clerks to Community Councils which are not members of CPRW, I would like to ask you to consider joining and help us both to strengthen the ability of your community to protect and enhance its environment.
Even if you decide not to join, our branches are always glad to give you their support, but by actually joining you would give us CPRW a stronger voice both locally and nationally.
Yours sincerely 
Director's Paper: OIL EXPLORATION IN CARDIGAN BAY
The Cardigan Bay Forum, of which we are a founder member, has been paying serious attention to the issues arising from the oil industry's increasing interest in exploring potential reserves in Cardigan Bay, including the forthcoming test drilling by Hamilton Brothers off Bardsey.
At its last meeting on the 11th June it passed the following resolution:
1
In terms of licensing blocks of the sea bed for exploratory drilling for oil, certain areas of Cardigan Bay should be considered inviolable and be completely excluded from any licensing procedure to exploit mineral resources.
2
There should be full public consultation at all stages of hydrocarbon licensing, exploration, commissioning, production, decommissioning and site rehabilitation; and that public access to monitoring data be a mandatory requirement.
3
The licensing authority (the Department of Trade & Industry) should prepare an Environmental Statement on all ‘environmentally sensitive areas’ and such statements should always be available for public scrutiny prior to such areas being offered for licensing.
4
All offshore activities should be regulated in the spirit of the EC Directive on Environmental Impact Assessment and full EIAs should be required on all significant activities and developments.
Such assessments should always be available for public scrutiny.
We were fortunate that there were several people present at the Forum who were familiar with the oil industry internationally.
They stressed that it was vital that environmental groups took a very tough line with the industry right at the outset.
In this respect, there were many (including me) who felt the least we should be demanding of the industry and the regulators (the DTI) was that only the very highest environmental standards currently practised internationally (the Norwegian oil field was given as a good example) would be acceptable for operations in Cardigan Bay.
In eco-jargon this means a ‘zero emissions policy’ should be applied.
In other words, oil rigs should account for all materials both used and produced during operations — and everything should be brought on shore for safe disposal.
I also believe the precautionary approach should be adopted, some areas being designated ‘inviolable’ where no drilling should be allowed.
Please note the extremely sensitive blocks currently being considered for the next round of licences (see the map).
I propose that we adopt a unified approach along these lines and I would appreciate Council members' views on the subject.
NEW STRATEGY FOR THE WALES TOURIST BOARD
Preparing Our Response
As the document included with Council members' papers makes clear, the Wales Tourist Board has launched a major review of its strategy for tourism in Wales.
This is taking the form of a structured public consultation leading up to the publication of a new strategy in September 1992.
The main landmarks along the way are as follows:
Oct/Nov 1992 — publication and circulation of a number of specially commissioned ‘discussion papers’ addressing key issues, including tourism and the environment;
Jan/Feb 1993 — views stimulated by these papers to be with the WTB for consideration;
May 1993 — draft tourism strategy to be published for widespread public consultation;
Jun/Jul 1993 — views stimulated by the draft strategy to be with the WTB for consideration;
Sept 1993 — finally agreed tourism strategy published.
Tourism and its influence on the environment is clearly of great interest to CPRW, however no recent work has been done on the subject.
The WTB's strategic review is therefore provides a major opportunity for us to clarify our views and influence the Board's future direction.
I recommend that arrangements are made to enable us to prepare a considered response to this consultation along the lines of our other policy studies.
However, this approach is very demanding of staff time.
It should also be noted that under our Partnership Plan with CCW we have agreed to commence a policy study into coastal zone management in autumn 1992.
In fact I am finding it difficult to establish the exact terms of reference for this study, given that a number of related studies are already underway.
I therefore met CCW staff recently and agreed that the coastal study be rescheduled to commence in April 1993, giving us time to make all the necessary preparations.
In the meantime, a tourism study should be got underway as quickly as possible to ensure we maximise our influence over the WTB's thinking.
I suggest to Council that we adopt the following approach:
a)
relevant papers are circulated to branch committees as soon as possible, inviting comments;
b)
up to ten knowledgeable people are selected from within the ranks of CPRW to form a Tourism Working Party;
c)
the working party should meet in mid January to prepare a initial response to the WTB;
d)
the working party should meet again in March to refine its thinking and, perhaps, invite the WTB's Head of Policy to join the meeting at some point;
e)
the working party should meet in June to draw up its considered response to the WTB's draft strategy.
This should subsequently be published.
I think it would be helpful if the working party was guided by someone sympathetic to CPRW, with a special knowledge of the issues involved.
I am pleased to report that Professor John Aitchison, Head of Human Geography at UCW Aberystwyth is prepared to play this role if Council so wishes.
He is available for the first working party meeting on Monday 18th January, and I suggest it is held in Aberystwyth at 2pm.
I would be pleased if Council could consider this matter and endorse or amend the proposed approach.
RECENT RESPONSES BY CPRW TO GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS
Dear ,
I have pleasure in enclosing copies of some recent responses we have made to important Government consultations:
Welsh Office: Draft PPG: Industry, Commerce and Small Businesses
Welsh Office: Draft PPG on Coastal Planning
Welsh Office: Mineral Planning Note 3 (Opencast Coal Mining)
Government: Freedom of Access of Information on the Environment
Welsh Office: Local Government Reorganisation in Wales
Welsh Office: Review of the Provisions of the Town & Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981: Old Mining Permissions
Given your interest in the above issues, I thought you would find our views of interest.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Yours sincerely,
RECENT RESPONSES BY CPRW TO GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS
Dear ,
I have pleasure in enclosing copies of some recent responses we have made to important Government consultations.
Given your interest in the above issues, I thought you would find our views of interest.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Yours sincerely,
DIRECTOR'S DIARY
Sept
21st
Biannual liaison meeting: Wales Link /CCW, Newtown.
22nd
Partnership Plan review meeting, Welshpool.
25th
Transport Working Party, Newtown.
29th
Regional Rivers Advisory Committee, NRA, Cardiff.
30th/1st
Council for National Parks AGM & seminar, Tenby.
Oct
1st-2nd
From Manchester Airport to Aberdeen for meeting with the Hamilton Oil Company.
7th
UK Joint Water Group, Peterborough.
10th-16th
Leave
19th
Staffing Sub-Committee, Welshpool.
20th
Annual Conference WCVA, Cardiff.
20th
Meeting with strategic planner, Welsh Office.
21st
Meeting CCW's PR Officer, Welshpool.
23rd
Meeting to discuss collaborative approach to the Royal Welsh and National Eisteddfod, Llanelwedd.
26th
Meeting Head of ‘Tir Cymen’, Welshpool.
27th
WTB Tourism Strategy Conference, Newtown.
28th
Holding Trustees meeting, London.
28th
Meeting Stuart Cole, Transport Study Chair, London.
29th
Attended part of EEB Transport Conference, London Zoo.
29th
Pre-meeting of Wildlife Link's biannual liaison meeting with the Forestry Committee, Duffryn House.
30th
Biannual liaison meeting: Wildlife Link /FC, D.H.
Nov
9th
Meeting CCW re: Partnership Plan, Bangor.
9th
Briefing meeting with Hamilton Oil, Bangor.
10th
Meeting DoE re: Earth Summit /White Paper, London.
12th
Wales Advisory Forum, Shell Better Britain Campaign, Newtown.
13th
Earth Summit Conference, Welsh Institute for International Affairs, Bodelwyddan Castle, Clwyd.
17th
UK Steering Committee, Shell Better Britain Campaign, London.
19th
Montgomeryshire Branch relaunch meeting, Newtown.
21st
Executive and Council meetings, Newtown.
24th
UK /EEB Group meeting, London.
27th
Managing Demands of the Countryside seminar, Cardiff.
30th
Transport Working Party, Shrewsbury.
Dec
2nd-5th
EEB Annual Meeting, Brussels.
8th
Wardens Training Course, lecture, Plas Tan y Bwlch.
10th
‘Towards Sustainability’ conference, Cardiff
10th
Bristol Airport to Edinburgh for Wildlife Link meeting prior to special meeting with Forestry Commission.
11th
National Forestry Strategy, meeting with FC, Edinburgh.
15th
Meeting Gwent CC with branch to discuss housing figures Cwmbran.
18th
Wales Link Management Committee meeting, Corris.
A meeting of the Executive Committee to be held in the Royal Oak Hotel, Welshpool, at 11am Saturday, May 8th 1993
AGENDA
1
Attendance and apologies
2
Minutes of Executive Committee meeting on 9th January 1993: To confirm their accuracy.
3
Minutes of Council meeting on 13th March 1993:
4
Matters arising:
a)
E4.93a Improvements and fire safety at Tyn Gwyn:
To receive an oral report and to note that the approved work has been satisfactorily completed.
To decide what further work is required.
b)
E4.93b Preparations for the Royal Welsh and Eisteddfod: To receive an oral progress report.
c)
E4.93d Usk Barrage: To receive an oral progress report.
d)
E4.93e (C3.93a) 14th Oil Licensing Round: To receive an oral progress report and to agree further action.
f)
E4.93f (C3.93c) Transport and Environment Study: To receive an oral progress report and to decide how the Working Party's report should be treated.
To note progress on the Llanbedr DC By-Pass campaign.
g)
E4.93g 1994 Budget: To note that an Executive meeting will be held on Saturday 6th of November to consider next year's budget and other matters.
h)
E4.93h (C9.93) Tourism Advisory Group: To receive an oral progress report.
i)
E4.93i (C3.93d) Future Housing Provision: To receive a report of the meeting with Welsh Office on 23rd March and oral evidence to Welsh Affairs Committee on 28th April.
To decide further action.
(Please refer to the enclosed paper from the Director).
j)
E6.93 Welsh Office Agri-Environment Proposals: To receive an oral report on these proposals and a special CPRW Agriculture Advisory Group meeting chaired by Professor Michael Haines.
To decide what action should be taken.
k)
E7.93 The European Environmental Bureau: To note that the Director was nominated as the UK EEB members' representative to an EEB conference on coastal protection development held in Denmark on 1st & 2nd May for which he received European Commission funding.
To receive an oral report on the conference.
l)
E8.93 (C4.93) Proposed National Forestry Strategy: To receive an oral progress report and to agree what action should be taken in terms of approaching Welsh Office ministers and the WO's Forestry Advisory Group.
(The Director can provide the FC framework for this strategy on request).
m)
E9.93 (C3.93e) Carmel Woods Campaign: To agree what further action should be taken in light of the public inquiry.
(Please refer to the paper from the Director).
o)
E10.93 Staff Contracts: To receive a report and agree terms of sickness benefit so that contracts can be signed.
p)
E11.93 (C7.93) Operation of the Campaign Fund: To consider the policies agreed by the Council and to decide what further action is required.
q)
E13.93 The Charities Act: To receive an oral progress report and to decide what further action is required.
r)
E14.93 Volunteer Training Programme: To receive an oral progress report.
s)
E15.93 Strategic Planning Guidance /The Lost Land: To note that a detailed response was made to the draft advice to the Secretary of State.
(The Director can provide a copy of the response on request).
To consider what action should be taken in light of CPRE's report: The Lost Land.
(Please refer to the shortened version circulated for the last meeting).
t)
E16.93 Christmas Card: To receive an oral progress report.
u)
C3.93b Marcheini Windfarm Proposal: To receive an oral report and to agree what approach should be taken with regard to the latest proposal.
v)
C5.93 Local Government Reorganisation: To agree what further action should be taken in regard to:
the Welsh Office White Paper (copies supplied on request);
possible branch reorganisation.
x)
C8.93 1993 Recruitment Campaign: To receive an oral progress report.
5
Quarterly Financial Report:
To receive a tabled report from the Hon.
Treasurer.
6
Response to the UK National Sustainability Report:
To endorse the response and to decide how it should be promoted.
(Please refer to the enclosed copy).
7
The Annual General Meeting:
To consider procedural and other relevant matters.
8
Director's and Assistant Director's Diaries:
To receive copies of these diaries.
9
Any Other Business.
Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales
Item: 4(i) — PROJECTED FUTURE NEW HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Background
A meeting took place between CPRW and Welsh Office officials on Tuesday 23rd March.
We identifies the areas of interest as:
a)
How the WO calculates future housing need — we asked if a distinction could be made between the quantitative factors and the qualitative assumptions/aspirations, including political objectives.
b)
How the negotiation over housing targets between the Welsh Office and county planning departments is conducted.
We asked for guidance as to how this may work following local government reorganisation.
c)
How the Welsh Office takes account of environmental factors such as‘carrying capacity’, consequent natural resource and infrastructure requirements, and Government environmental and planning policies (White Paper, PPGs, MPGs etc.).
Population Predictions
Mr Swires Hennesey explained how future housing projections were calculated.
The process commences with an estimation of future population trends for the UK as a whole.
This figure is then broken down for each of the UK countries.
The WO then further subdivides this for the eight counties of Wales.
The estimates are based on observed trends picked up by the census, new GP registrations and other means.
He was most insistent that this exercise, like all the work of HMG's Statistical Office, was strictly non-political.
A key aspect of the methodology used to estimate population trends was the assumption that policies in place at the time of the analysis would continue.
No attempt was made to ‘second guess’ the effects of any new policies that might be adopted in future.
The effects of new policies would only be felt when the next analysis was made when, presumably, such effects would be picked up in observable data.
In the case of the Valleys Initiative, for example, its potential effects in terms of population retention were not predicted.
If the policy was successful, its effects would be picked up when the next analysis was undertaken, and projected into the future.
Hence for Wales as a whole, the historically high population growth experienced during the second half of the 1980s is being projected forwards at virtually the same rate for the 1990s.
This can be seen in the Graphs 1 and 2.
The projected future population growth rate for Wales is then broken down for each county.
It was not explained how this was done in detail, but a range of factors is used and county planning departments as consulted.
There is probably a fair degree of subjectivity in this exercise.
The comment was made that ‘the estimate for Powys was rather high’.
The resulting projections for each county are considered ‘base estimates of growth’.
These are then taken by the counties and further refined.
We were told that although up to this point no account had been made for the effects of new policies, the counties were at liberty to estimate the effects of new policies — either theirs or the Government's via planning policy guidance and the work of development agencies, TECs etc.
This refinement of the ‘base estimate’ usually took place within the context of a review of the structure plan.
We were told that because most counties adopted a political strategy of economic growth and expansion, they almost always revised the base estimate upwards.
The only exception at present is Gwynedd County Council which is trying to dampen inward migration and retain its resident population.
However, the WO statisticians said this county practice of estimating higher than the ‘base estimate’ population growth did not add up — there simply will not be enough people to reach the higher estimates, even with the historically high levels of inward migration being predicted.
(In the case of Mid Glamorgan the WO predicts slight population decline, whereas the county predicts positive growth.)
The result across the whole of Wales is an over-provision of housing land.
Predicted New Housing Requirements
Once the population trends have been estimated the complex process of predicting future household formations and thus new housing requirements, takes place.
Three major factors affect this calculation: Natural growth of the indigenous population (this depends on its age/sex structure).
Then there is the trend towards smaller household size.
Average household size was 2.61 persons in 1991 and it is predicted this will fall to 2.51 by 2001 and 2.41 by 2011.
There are a range of factors causing this trend.
Finally, there is inward migration.
We were told that even if inward migration was to stop for the next ten years, 45,000 new houses would still be needed to cater for the predicted natural growth of 49,000 people, plus the trend towards smaller households.
A further 16,000 houses would be needed for the predicted 40,000 incomers expected to arrive over this period.
Environmental Effects
We asked at what point the environmental effects of catering for housing growth were taken into account?
We were told this was done when structure and local plans were drawn up.
It was also accounted for in Government planning guidance and other environmental policies that influence land use.
The Secretary of State and his officials had an opportunity to participate in the process of plan-making.
They would not normally interfere in local decisions about where new housing would be located, unless such decisions clearly breached Government guidelines.
The Secretary of State's interventions would be kept to a minimum and would usually focus on strategic issues.
When we said we could not recall the SoS intervening to revise county estimates of population growth downwards (although he had just intervened to revise Gwynedd's upwards) we were told that of course Mr Hunt shares the counties' desire for growth and expansion.
In Gwynedd the argument was only over a few hundred dwellings.
The real issue was protecting personal freedom (of incomers) to buy properties on the free-market.
So far as minimising the environmental effects was concerned the WO encouraged planning authorities to discuss problems with them at an early stage.
We were told that indications of public concern over proposed development strategies were also influential on the WO and the SoS (a clear invitation to CPRW to turn up the heat).
We discussed the difficulties of transforming the concept of sustainability into practical policies, although it was felt the increasing emphasis on plan-led planning, urban containment and the reuse of urban and derelict land, would help.
We considered the problem of enforcing Government planning guidance.
For instance, although PPG7 discouraged sporadic housing, several district councils had a reputation for permitting it.
We referred to the forthcoming Welsh Affairs Committee inquiry.
We urged the WO to get the SoS to revoke a few such departure applications to send a clear signal to these (and all planning authorities), that the SoS expects them to follow Government guidance.
We were told that the WO was hoping such draconian action would not be necessary, although they were watching an appeal case in North Cornwall against the SoS for the Environment who was pursuing several revocation orders.
We were told that no further departures had occurred in Anglesey since the Secretary of State took the council to task.
There was a hint that the threat of revocation had been used in this and other communications with difficult councils.
We referred to the 1992 NOP survey which indicated that 13,000,000 people wished to relocate to a rural area, and that this created a powerful demand which would be difficult to satisfy even if the provision of housing was completely unconstrained.
The WO felt this demand was not itself unconstrained because those desiring to move to the countryside would need to sell their houses first.
We responded by observing that, since the biggest component of natural growth was a reduction in household size, there may not be a need to sell before purchasing.
We also drew attention to the way some councils, notably Monmouth BC, allowed barn conversions to dwellings.
We were told that PPG7 generally discouraged this practice.
Again we raised the question of enforcing planning guidance.
At this point we were told that the WO often found it difficult to get a clear indication of what was going on until it was too late to intervene without revocation being necessary.
However, we were told an application for a house in the open countryside in Montgomeryshire had just been called in.
We said we would let the WO have sight of our evidence to the Welsh Affairs Committee, and that we would try to give them more consistent evidence of breaches of planning guidance.
We thanked the WO officials for the time and trouble they had taken to discuss all these issues with us.
We felt the meeting had been very worthwhile in giving us a better understanding of the way new housing targets were estimated, the relationship between the WO and planning authorities, and the points at which environmental factors were taken into account.
We also felt the officials were sympathetic to our concerns and were keen to help us direct our pressure more effectively towards influencing planning authorities, public opinion and the Secretary of State.
Conclusions
The way that the WO population projections are undertaken means that patterns of recent behaviour (such as the very high levels of in-migration experienced in the mid/late 1980s) are projected forward without question.
In this sense, the effects of past policies are also projected forward, making them sensitive to political assumptions.
Projected future in-migration is a very significant (if not the only) factor requiring the release of large amounts of land for housing.
Graphs 1 and 2 suggest that much lower rates than projected could be likely on past performance.
A desire to return to much lower rates could be Welsh Office policy, but it is quite the opposite at present.
Recommendations
We can probably be most influential if we concentrate on the following issues:
i)
strengthening countryside /environmental protection in Government planning guidance at every opportunity;
ii)
strengthening countryside /environmental protection in structure and local plans at every opportunity;
iii)
campaigning for better use of the existing housing stock to cater for smaller households;
iv)
challenging the claimed benefits of growth and showing how growth causes environmental impacts that degrade the quality of life for the indigenous population and are unsustainable for future generations;
v)
encouraging policies that combine urban regeneration with countryside protection;
vi)
improving the quality and consistency of the monitoring of planning applications/policies by branches so that we can provide a better picture to the Welsh Office and politicians of environmentally damaging development trends; and
vii)
consider engaging professional help to get a critical analysis of WO population/housing growth predictions and the likely impact of catering for this growth.
Item: 4(m) — CARMEL WOODS CAMPAIGN
The Public Inquiry
The public inquiry into ‘the legal validity and extent’ of McAlpine's claimed IDO over 470 acres of the Gwenlais Valley was heard in Carmarthen between the 15th–25th of February.
The Carmel Woods Campaign Consortium, represented by Michael Burrell QC, submitted a detailed and well-researched case involving many local witnesses and two expert witnesses.
The case sought to prove that McAlpine's claimed IDO was ‘void for uncertainty’.
As expected, arguments during the inquiry revolved around legal interpretation of the evidence purporting to validate McAlpine's claim, and the extent of the Secretary of State's powers (under case law) to resolve the dispute.
Despite the limited time available to prepare the Consortium's case, the tremendous commitment of everyone involved — local people, expert witnesses, Mrs Kent (our solicitor), and Mr Burrell — ensured that the case, when presented, was a strong one.
It is dangerous to predict the outcome of public inquiries.
However everyone involved in the Consortium's case appears to feel it was well constructed and presented.
They also feel that the balance of argument tipped in our favour as the days went by.
Apparently, McAlpine's QC, Mr Carnwarth, became less and less effective, and gave a tired performance in summing up.
Judging from remarks between Mr Carnwath, Mr Steele (QC for Dyfed County Council) and Mr Burrell, the prevailing view is that the inspector will find against McAlpine, but that the company will seek a Judicial Review in the High Court, where the arguments will recommence at a  rarefied legal level.
It has been suggested the case may yet go to the Appeal Court and possibly the House of Lords.
The Appeal
Not surprisingly, the final cost of presenting the case has exceeded the prediction of £30,000, at around £36,000.
It should be stressed that both Mrs Kent and Mr Burrell did considerably more work than they were paid for.
Their personal commitment to the case was an important ingredient in its success, and is an important factor in considering what further action should be taken.
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation /Wildlife Trusts Partnership took on the role of lead-organisation within the Consortium, although they have tried hard to liaise with all other partners, particularly CPRW.
They have paid the bill, even though not all of it can be covered from their appeal through the seven Welsh Wildlife Trusts and other pledges of support.
They believe that when all pledges and donations have been received, the shortfall should not be too great.
We pledged (and have now paid to RSNC) £5,000.
To date, our appeal through the magazine has raised between £1,500 and £2,000, which is perhaps a little disappointing.
The Welsh Wildlife Trusts, with three times our membership raised nearly £10,000.
This shows how crucial it is to have funds available to support action when required from our Campaign Fund.
The Executive will have to decide whether to add the money raised by the appeal to the £5,000 or retain it as a part-contribution towards the pledge we made.
What happens next?
It is likely to be some months before the inspector reports to the Secretary of State.
It would be surprising therefore if the SoS announced his decision before the autumn.
Given the legal complexities and the likelihood of an appeal to the High Court, his decision may not be announced this year.
Four possible outcomes have been identified:
a)
McAlpine's claim over 470 acres agreed in full.
b)
A much smaller, though potentially damaging ‘pink area’ is agreed in full.
c)
The ‘pink area’ is agreed with modifications.
d)
The claimed IDO is declared void for uncertainty.
Outcomes (a) or (b) would enable McAlpine to proceed to Part II of the IDO registration procedure under the 1991 Planning and Compensation Act.
Under this it must come forward with a Plan of Operations that shows how quarrying can take place in a way that minimises environmental damage and nuisance.
It is assumed that Dyfed County Council and the Countryside Council for Wales will be amenable to reaching a compromise.
The Consortium will have to decide what to do at this point (see Scenario 2 below).
Outcomes (c) or (d) would be very likely to cause McAlpine to challenge the legal validity of the Secretary of State's power to reach these conclusions, in the High Court through a Judicial Review.
We have already received guidance from Mr Burrell on the issues likely to require resolution in the High Court and the grounds on which McAlpine's arguments could be countered.
It should be noted that resolution of these issues may/could be sought whatever the outcome of the public inquiry.
However, under outcomes (a) or (b), someone other than McAlpine would have to initiate the action (see Scenario 2).
Scenario 1
Probably the most likely outcome is one in which McAlpine seeks a Judicial Review.
A comparable recent conservation cause which went through the High Court and all the way to the Lords was an argument over navigational rights on the river Derwent.
This case was successful from a conservation viewpoint, although a considerable investment of time and resources was required from a consortium of interests, which had to take financial risks.
Under Scenario 1, the Carmel Campaign Consortium would have to decide whether to contest McAlpine's appeal.
The following observations are relevant:
a)
If McAlpine initiates the action it is marginally more likely that the Consortium could win costs against the company if McAlpine lost.
b)
The Consortium would have to decide if it could afford not to fight McAlpine, having already made a major investment (politically and financially) in the case.
c)
The Consortium can call on strong legal representation in Mr Burrell and Mrs Kent, both of whom are personally committed and wish to see the matter pursued.
While they might make allowances, they would need to be paid.
d)
The Consortium might find another party to act on its behalf.
It has been suggested the Director of Public Prosecutions might be persuaded to do this.
We might be able to assist the Secretary of State, although this is unlikely to be acceptable to him or the Consortium.
e)
The Consortium would need to be convinced the Carmel Woods IDO was sufficiently important to merit further action.
In relation to(e), the Consortium needs to know how many IDO claims have already been validated and how many are outstanding that could be affected by the outcome of the Carmel case.
Friends of the Earth have been researching the position across England and Wales, but have yet to publish the results.
It may well be that the majority have been validated, but that those outstanding are the largest and most environmentally damaging.
It is worth considering if and how those already validated might be open to review (possibly under the 1981 Minerals Act?) in light of the outcome of the Carmel case.
It is possible to consider the merits of the Carmel case in two ways: legal and political.
The legal merits are complex but still of importance.
However, the political aspects may be more important for at least two reasons:
a)
The case is well known in England as well as Wales, and is seen as a trial of strength between the conservation and quarrying lobbies.
If the Consortium eventually wins the case it would give other embattled communities and planning authorities fresh confidence to challenge outstanding IDO claims, rather than compromise.
b)
The ultimate objective of those organisations involved in the Consortium is to have the review procedures in the 1981 Minerals Act completely overhauled.
The flaw in this Act is the requirement on planning authorities to pay compensation for restrictions and revocations of existing minerals permissions, including IDOs.
The Secretaries of State could take powers under the Act to widen the circumstances under which such restrictions and revocations could be made without compensation, but they are extremely reluctant to face the wrath of the industry, for obvious reasons.
The Carmel Woods case helps highlight the enormous difficulty of challenging the validity of IDO claims under the 1991 Act and also helps keep the spotlight on the legacy of old minerals permissions which planning authorities are powerless to tackle under the 1981 Act.
Scenario 2
If McAlpine finds itself in a position to proceed to Stage II of the IDO registration procedure, i.e. the drawing up and presentation of a Plan of Operations, the Consortium will have to consider the following:
a)
How to influence the plan to reduce the environmental effects of proposed quarrying operations.
b)
How to win the argument that the IDO is dormant rather than active, since this has considerable bearing, not least on whether compensation is liable if workable reserves are limited by conditions.
c)
How to get the plan called in for consideration at a public inquiry, since there is every likelihood Dyfed County Council and possibly CCW would be prepared to negotiate a compromise, based on past performance.
d)
Whether to contest the Secretary of State's decision in the High Court.
This may be difficult but necessary.
Conclusion
The battle to save Carmel Woods is unlikely to be resolved by the public inquiry.
It is an important case both legally and politically.
The Consortium (including CPRW) will have to decide what further action can and must be taken.
This will require judgement, commitment and resources.
18th June 1992
Dear ,
Implementation of the EC's Directive on the Freedom of Access to Information on the Environment
As you know, we were most disappointed not to have been invited to give our views on the above consultation paper earlier this year.
We were, however, grateful to receive a copy subsequently, even though a month had passed since the deadline for comments.
I have enclosed our response to Government's proposals and hope that, despite its late arrival, it will be taken into account before the proposals are finalised.
Yours sincerely,
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EC DIRECTIVE ON THE FREEDOM OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the Welsh Office consultation paper
Introduction
We were disappointed not to have been invited to offer our views on this consultation paper when it was distributed to consultees in January.
We first learnt of its existence in May, some weeks after the deadline for comments had passed.
We contacted the Welsh Office and were belatedly sent a copy of the paper.
Our views on its content were invited.
We are pleased offer our detailed views below and hope they will be taken into account before the Government finalises its procedures for the implementation of the EC Directive.
Given the subject covered by the consultation paper, we are rather concerned not to have been notified of its existence.
It appears as if most voluntary environment bodies active in Wales have not been consulted.
Statement of principle
Three major weaknesses of the paper are its lack of clarity, its lack of detail and the many opportunities it offers to those who hold information that should be made public, to use various loopholes to avoid so doing.
We believe the Government should underpin its commitment to open government and freedom of information by establishing a principle that all information, except that tightly defined as being genuinely commercial sensitive, should be publicly available.
Such a statement of principle is notably absent from the Government's proposals.
What information is covered?
More guidance is needed to define exactly what is covered by the new procedures.
Will information which has been used to determine projected levels of natural resource consumption or calculate growth indicators, such as future private car demand, be covered, for instance?
Unclear guidance on this point could cause confusion over what information should be made available, and give rise to demands for information not covered by the disclosure provisions.
What bodies are covered?
Here again, the guidance is too vague.
We believe specific criteria should be formulated to enable a reasoned judgement to be made as to whether any new body should be subject to the provisions.
All government departments should also be included insofar as their activities affect the environment.
We wonder whether the list of affected bodies contained in Annex D is complete?
Voluntary Information
We are concerned that the general exemption covering the publication of information volunteered to public bodies is too far-reaching and undermines the principle that all information on the environment should be disclosed except in certain tightly defined situations.
Sensitive Information
More detailed guidance is needed to define what genuinely constitutes ‘commercially sensitive information’.
We suggest that the procedure laid down in the Environmental Protection Act for registers under parts I and VI of the Act could be used in this situation.
This puts the onus clearly on the party supplying the information to show that it is sensitive and leaves the decision whether to allow the withholding of information to the regulator or responsible body concerned.
The party has the right of appeal to the Secretary of State who is the final arbiter.
The criteria used by regulators or responsible bodies to deem information sensitive should be made public.
Need for an independent body
The adoption of such a procedure raises the question of who would act as the regulatory or responsible body to oversee implementation of the Freedom of Access to Information on the Environment procedures.
We believe that the Government should establish an appropriate body to carry out this function and ensure a consistent approach across all the bodies covered by the procedures.
This competent body could provide guidance on the preferable format(s) for the presentation of information.
This could be drawn up in consultation with the major users of such information.
Other detailed comments
We are concerned that the exemption of ‘unfinished data and documents’ could be abused to prevent information from being properly disclosed.
We do not agree that information on ‘alternative engineering options /solutions in the light of environmental factors’ should be exempted from publication.
We would have thought this was a prime candidate for disclosure.
The statement of areas of information held should identify restricted as well as unrestricted information.
We believe that, where a request for information has been inadequately answered, it is insufficient to expect the applicant to ‘seek a remedy through the usual democratic channels or through a judicial review’.
The former procedure can be time-consuming and ultimately ineffective, while the latter is usually prohibitively expensive.
We would prefer an explicit presumption in favour of disclosure, with the onus on the provider to prove, to the satisfaction of the competent body we propose, that certain information is genuinely commercially sensitive.
5th April 1992
Dear 
CPRW Agriculture Advisory Group /Working Party Mark II
Further to our telephone conversation earlier today, I enclose two sets of address labels for the potential members together with a list of names, addresses, telephone numbers etc.
I confirm that you will be writing extending an invitation to join the group and calling the first meeting for 2p.m. on Tuesday 27th April at the university.
I was pleased to hear that you managed to obtain ten sets of the papers and confirm that both Neil and Geoffrey Sinclair already have a set.
With best wishes
Yours sincerely 
22nd May 1992
HEDGEROW RENOVATION SCHEME — CONSULTATION
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on CCW's proposed hedgerow renovation scheme prior to its launch.
We believe the scheme is well designed in terms of both its objectives and its means of delivery.
We greatly welcome its introduction.
There are only a few detailed comments we wish to make:
a)
It is unclear whether all the eligibility criteria listed in points (i) to (iii) need to be satisfied before a grant will be awarded.
We believe that they should.
b)
Given that £1 million was spent in 1990 under the WOAD Farm and Conservation Scheme for the provision, replacement or improvement of hedges (80% of this on hedge-laying), we are disappointed that only a further £0.2 million is to be made available during 1992 under CCW's new scheme.
Welcome though any new money is for the conservation of important landscape features such as hedges, we cannot see how CCW can hope to tackle the huge legacy of hedge deterioration apparent in many parts of Wales with this relatively small sum of money.
We can only presume the allocation for the current financial year is the first element of a rapidly expanding budget over the full five years of the scheme.
c)
It is clear that the scheme needs to be administered so that it dovetails with and reinforces the benefits of other grant schemes which provide for hedge renovation and management.
We are not in a position to identify potential benefits and pitfalls, but it does seem as if CCW is alive to the way in which all the schemes should integrate effectively.
d)
We support the proposed targeting of the new scheme provided CCW is satisfied that other schemes can deliver equivalent benefits in designated areas.
e)
We support the policy of encouraging the retention of local hedge-laying styles as these contribute to the distinctive qualities of different areas of countryside.
f)
We would like to see the scheme handbook promote the need to conserve hedgerows, using attractive language and design, as well as conveying technical information about the scheme.
g)
We strongly support the proposal to produce a Code of Best Practice in collaboration with bodies experienced in land management techniques.
h)
We are pleased to see a programme of monitoring and review built into the scheme and hope that it will be possible to measure its success at the end of its first three years and make adjustments as necessary.
We wish CCW every success with the scheme and will be pleased to help promote it in every way possible.
Dear Mr Hughes
Thank you for your letter.
Neil Caldwell is on holiday until the 19th January 1993 but I will pass your letter on to him when he returns.
Yours sincerely 
22nd April 1993
Dear 
Renewal of Motor Insurance
Peugeot Diesel 309 Turbo K420 BEP and Peugeot Diesel 309 G755 KAW
Further to our telephone conversation earlier today, I confirm that I completed the renewal forms.
I failed to declare Dr Neil Caldwell's motoring convictions because I thought that they were ‘fixed penalty’ offences.
I apologise for this error.
As you will appreciate, we completed fully the recent form you sent us, which was the first time I can remember seeing one of this kind.
If we had had something similar before, this would have revealed the full extent of our Director's motoring convictions.
I can assure you there was no intention to mislead our insurers.
Yours sincerely 
A Conference Message From:, Director, Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales
CPRW is a national charity dependent on membership subscriptions and supporters' donations.
It aims to influence the policies and actions of organisations and individuals whose actions affect the countryside, its communities and the wider environment, in order to secure the protection and improvement of the visual beauty and general amenities of the countryside, towns and villages of Wales and to encourage the environmentally sustainable use of resources.
We have branches in every part of Wales whose aim it is to protect the local environment, while encouraging sustainable forms of development.
We produce in-depth reports highlighting problems and offering solutions.
We talk to ministers, MPs, peers, councillors and planners — in fact anyone who has an influence on the countryside.
We work in partnership with others and are represented on:
Wales Rural Forum
Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link
Wales Transport 2000
Welsh Heritage Coast Forum
Prince of Wales Committee
Council for National Parks
Shell Better Britain Campaign
European Environmental Bureau
I would be delighted to tell you more about our work and to work with you on issues of common concern.
Job Description: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (INFORMATION)
1
To assist the Director and deputise when necessary to ensure the Campaign's work is implemented effectively.
2
To be responsible for communicating information about, or relevant to, the work of the Campaign, both internally and to outside organisations and individuals, including:
a)
maintaining up-to-date media contact lists and running the news release service;
b)
briefing organisations and individuals, as required by the Director, on matters of concern to the Campaign;
c)
responding to requests for information from the general public on issues with which the Campaign has a special interest or expertise;
d)
assisting with the internal flow of information.
3
To have overall managerial responsibility for the running of the office, including:
a)
managing the daily work of the Office and Membership Administrators;
b)
up-keep of the accounts and regular financial analysis;
c)
stock control and the maintenance of equipment;
d)
ensuring the up-keep and maintenance of Ty Gwyn.
4
To provide administrative support to national committees and to prepare and maintain their minutes.
5
To act as personal assistant to the Director.
6
To carry out the above duties under the supervision of the Director.
7
To carry out any other duties reasonably requested by the Executive Committee
10th June 1992
Your ref.
JAL/JJH
Dear 
Mrs Charlotte Vaughan-Thomas deceased
Thank you for your letter of the 9th June safe receipt of which we hereby acknowledge.
I confirm that the contents are understood.
For your records I would inform you that the name of this charitable organisation changed from ‘Council’ to ‘Campaign’in 1991 and a copy of the relevant minute is attached.
Yours faithfully,
WALES WILDLIFE AND COUNTRYSIDE LINK
United Voluntary Action For The Countryside
Wales is blessed with a large number of environmental voluntary bodies dedicated to the conservation and quiet enjoyment of the countryside.
Whilst each has its special purposes, all share a common concern to help people protect, understand and enjoy the environment more effectively.
Instead of wasteful duplication of effort, these bodies have now created a ‘Link’ organisation so that they can share information and ideas, reinforce each others' action and, where possible, speak with one voice on matters of common concern.
The Link helps facilitate a dialogue on such matters with Government Ministers, MPs, statutory authorities and others with a serious interested in the countryside.
Wales Link has over twenty member bodies and a growing number of ‘associates’.
Its members represent a combined total of 2.5 million people who care about the conservation, protection or quiet enjoyment of landscape, wildlife or amenity in Wales.
Its funds from subscriptions are enhanced by grants from the Welsh Office, the Countryside Council for Wales, the World-Wide Fund for Nature and the Vincent Weir Trust.
It employs a full-time Link Officer to administer its work.
16th April 1993
Dear 
Meetings of CPRW's National Council
I have been asked to enquire if we could hold meetings of our national Council at your hotel on a regular basis.
The meetings are held on the 2nd Saturday of March and the third Saturday of November each year.
The meetings are attended by approximately 40–45 people and we would want tables and chairs arranged in conference style.
We would wish to order a sandwich lunch for those attending.
Can you please let me know if you would be willing to take this booking on a regular basis, commencing with Saturday 20th November 1993 and if so the charge that you would make to us.
Yours faithfully 
19th April 1993
Dear 
Applications for Licenses:
The Black Lion, Llanfair Caereinion
The Royal Oak, Pontrobert
It has been brought to the attention of the Montgomeryshire Branch of the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales that the Committee will be considering licenses for these two public houses on Tuesday 20th April.
Whilst we would not wish to comment on the suitability or otherwise of the particular applicants, we do however appreciate the value of such establishments to rural communities.
The loss of such facilities can contribute to the difficulties experienced by small communities.
We also understand that the Black Lion is situated in the conservation area in Llanfair Caereinion.
Too see these premises re-opened and repaired would indeed improve the appearance of this area of the town.
Yours faithfully 
22nd May 1992
Dear ,
Consultation: Mineral Planning Note 3
We are grateful for the opportunity to stress how very urgently we believe this MPG Note is in need of a fundamental revision.
I have pleasure in enclosing our detailed views on this matter in the hope that they will prompt a rapid and thorough-going review of existing planning guidance on opencast coal.
Yours sincerely,
PLANNING GUIDANCE ON OPENCAST COAL MINING
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the Welsh Office Consultation on Mineral Planning Guidance Note 3
Introduction
We are grateful for the opportunity to stress how urgently we believe MPG Note 3 is in need of a fundamental revision.
There can be no doubt that opencast mining is one of the most environmentally destructive land uses currently permitted in Wales today.
This view is supported by a number of independent inquiries, the most recent of which was that undertaken by the House of Commons Energy Select Committee in 1987:
’ To those affected, the cost of noise, dirt, traffic and social upheaval can be very high…
We agree with CPRE that ‘opencast mining is one of the most environmentally destructive processes being carried out in the UK’.
The sites are among the most ugly examples of the ravages of industrial exploitation.’
(paragraph 152)
We believe the thrust of MPG Note 3 runs directly counter to the principles of sustainable development enshrined in the 1990 Environment White Paper: ‘Our Common Inheritance’ in encouraging the increasingly rapid depletion of a strategic and finite fossil-fuel reserve in order to achieve the barely disguised goal of improving the economic viability of British Coal.
In this respect, MPG Note 3 is becoming an ever more glaringly discordant seam of advice within an increasingly environmentally-sensitive, plan-led planning system.
This must be rectified as soon as possible.
The 1980s — A decade of destruction
In 1981 the Flowers Commission published what is still the most comprehensive report to date on the opencast industry.
It was responding to increasing public concern about the high social and environmental costs of this form of coal extraction, and it concluded:
‘…as older, more unprofitable and less environmentally acceptable deep mines are closed and more efficient and profitable operations take their place, the volume of opencast mining should be allowed to decline.
In the meantime, there should be no increase in the present target of 15 million tonnes per year.
The uniquely sensitive character of the British countryside and the high population density of the country would not be able to accommodate, without unwarrantable damage, a target in excess of that level.’
(paragraph 11.82)
The report defined four situations in which opencast mining could be justified:
a)
where coal would otherwise be sterilised by built development;
b)
where part of the site (a substantial area) could be environmentally improved by coaling or subsequent restoration;
c)
where there is a demonstrable need for a certain grade of coal which cannot be met from deep mines, and
d)
to supply demonstrable short term increases in demand that deep mine production is too inflexible to supply.
In its subsequent White Paper on Coal and DoE Circular 3/84 (WO 13/84) the Government decided to reject many of Flowers' recommendations, including a progressively declining target for production.
Instead it promoted free-market conditions which, it was envisaged, would stimulate an increase in opencast output, since it represented a ‘cheap’ source of coal whose production was ‘in the national interest’.
This presumably reflected a belief either that the damage caused by opencasting had been exaggerated by Flowers or that this damage was fully justified by the perceived benefits gained from increased production.
The appearance of MPG Note 3 in 1988 sought to strengthen this approach, pushing resolution of the inherent conflict between opencasting and the environment in favour of this most destructive form of development.
It effectively ensures that the environmental case against opencasting must be an overwhelmingly strong one:
’…there is a strong case in the national interest for allowing these resources to be developed unless there are overriding environmental considerations.’
’ The greater these benefits are the stronger the environmental objections would need to be to deny permission.’
A new climate for planning in the 1990s
There has been a remarkable change of climate, in planning terms, since the appearance of MPG Note 3.
This is most effectively encapsulated in PPG Note 12 which replaces the presumption in favour of development with one in favour of the development plan.
In addition, it recognises the central importance of planning in promoting sustainable development:
’ The Government has made clear its intention to work towards ensuring that development and growth are sustainable.
It will continue to develop policies consistent with the concept of sustainable development.
The planning system, and the preparation of development plans in particular, can contribute to the objectives of ensuring that development and growth are sustainable.
The sum total of decisions in the planning field, as elsewhere, should not deny future generations the best of today's environment.’
(paragraph 1.8)
It also makes very clear that the explanatory memorandum of development plans:
’…should have particular regard to the conservation of finite or non-renewable resources such as land and energy…‘
Given this new direction for planning and development, we cannot see how it is ‘in the national interest’ to maximise opencast coal production.
We would argue that because the environmental and social costs are so high, it is in the national interest to ensure that opencast production is kept to a minimum.
It should only be allowed in clearly defined circumstances, such as those proposed by the Flowers' Commission, which we generally support.
Opencast versus deep mining
MPG Note 3 states that ‘Opencast coal is not in competition with deep mined coal’.
However, the last few years have seen a major closure programme of deep mines in Wales as elsewhere.
In the anthracite coalfield of South Wales, for example, British Coal has closed virtually all of its underground capacity and is planning to dramatically expand its opencast production.
Given that the sale price of both types of coal is essentially the same, it is very profitable for British Coal to shift production towards opencast.
This does not make opencast coal ‘one of the cheapest forms of energy in the UK’, but rather one of great profitability to BC primarily because the full social and environmental costs are not currently being paid.
Social and environmental costs
Much has been written on the social and environmental costs of opencast coal.
Most recently the Welsh Affairs Select Committee vividly described the appalling burden borne over many decades by communities surrounded by opencast workings (‘The Future of Opencast Mining in Wales’, 1991).
It also revealed the paltry sums thrown at such communities by BC to compensate for the lower quality of life they are forced to endure.
There is also some suggestion that health problems increase in opencast mining areas, something which urgently needs verifying through a major community health research study.
We support the Select Committee's recommendation that air quality be continuously monitored around sites and the data made publicly available.
Once the natural qualities of a site are destroyed through opencasting (eg. soil structure, drainage, landform, trees, hedges and other landscape and habitat features) it is quite impossible to recreate them.
Even the best examples of restoration, and there are perhaps a few, fall far short of compensating for the lost of ‘real countryside’.
In general, BC's stewardship of the land is poor, with areas in which it has operated having a depressed and unkept appearance.
Given the profits that are made from opencast coal, the small sums devoted to social compensation and environmental restoration are a continuing scandal.
Undermining the ‘Valleys Initiative’
The late 1980s saw the start of a long overdue restoration programme to clear away the scars of industrial exploitation and ‘green’ the South Wales Valleys.
Whatever one may think of the effectiveness of the Valleys Initiative, it has the powerful appeal of historic social justice, since it offers the people of these areas a taste of the quality of life that has been achieved elsewhere through the profits of our industrial past.
The massive investments now being made in land reclamation and environmental improvement, the latest of which is the remarkable Ebbw Vale Garden Festival Site, are being blunted by the great shift from deep to opencast mining in parts of the Valleys.
This gross contradiction in public spending priorities must be resolved in favour of a genuine ‘green’ future for the Valleys.
An example of how expansion of opencast coaling can thwart the deep-rooted desire of coalfield communities to grasp the opportunities being created through the Valleys Initiative to develop a diverse and high quality economy can be seen in the Amman and Gwendraeth valleys.
The 1991 Amman Valley Regeneration Strategy cites opencast mining as creating ‘substantial difficulties’ for both valleys ‘in terms of the quality of the local environment and its blighting effect upon alternative local economic prospects’.
The spiral of decline can only be reversed if opencasting is reduced.
Areas of Interest Maps
MPG Note 3 erroneously assumes ‘…there need be no inherent conflict between the interests of the opencast industry and the protection of the environment…
‘. It envisages helpful co-operation between the industry and minerals planning authorities in order to define areas of interest in which economic, social and environmental needs can be comfortably accommodated.
This is a long way from reality.
There is, quite understandably, a distinctly uncomfortable relationship between the opencast industry (primarily BC) and minerals planning authorities, who do not want to pre-empt their assessment of specific applications by approving general areas of interest.
As a result, Areas of Interest Maps represent little more than a statement of intent at a given moment in time by BC.
They can, nonetheless, have a devastating impact by blighting wide areas, suppressing property prices and severely denting the future economic prospects of a locality.
BC is currently encouraged to adopt a speculative approach when drawing up such maps as a result of the pro-opencast policies in MPG Note 3.
This is a vivid reminder of the significant social effects of Government planning guidance.
By the same token, a fundamental change in the direction of such guidance could deliver considerable social and economic benefits by establishing demanding criteria against which opencast planning applications would have to be assessed.
It would clearly constrain the speculative tendencies that are currently all too apparent, and significantly reduce the effects of blight borne by long-suffering communities.
Conclusion
The advice in MPG Note 3 ever more starkly contradicts the Government's commitment to plan-led sustainable development and is in urgent need of fundamental revision.
Opencast coal represents a strategic, finite reserve of fossil fuel that should be conserved ‘in the national interest’.
The true social and environmental costs of this form of extraction should be reflected in new planning guidance that lays down demanding criteria, based on Flowers' recommendations, that would need to be satisfied before planning permission could be justified.
We urge the Government to make swift progress towards this extremely desirable goal.
29th March 1993
Dear ,
DRAFT MINERALS PLANNING GUIDANCE NOTE 6 (MPG6)
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the revision of this important planning guidance note.
I have pleasure in enclosing our considered response which we hope will be taken into account when finalising the guidance for publication.
Yours sincerely,
GUIDELINES FOR AGGREGATES PROVISION IN WALES AND ENGLAND
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the revision of Minerals Planning Guidance Note 6 (MPG6)
Introduction
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the proposed revision of MPG6.
As the Note makes clear, the working and winning of aggregates is causing increasing public concern in terms of its serious and irreversible impact on the environment, and on the quality of life of communities in close proximity to the activity.
It is also clear that these concerns and impacts are likely to increase significantly over the twenty year period covered by the guidance note, and beyond.
We firmly believe the land use planning system has a central role to play not only in minimising the environmental and social costs of ensuring essential aggregates provision, but also in managing demand.
Over recent years we have become increasingly alarmed by the dramatic growth in aggregates demand and the assumption that this growth will continue and must be catered for.
We therefore welcome the tentative commitment to demand management in draft MPG6.
However, the assumption remains that most demands must be met, albeit by a progressive adjustment in the sources of supply.
Before commenting in detail, we would like to welcome the publication, alongside the draft MPG, of a Policy Issues Paper.
This was a considerable aid to understanding the thinking behind the draft guidance.
We will refer to this document (PIP), as well as the draft MPG, in our response.
The consumption of aggregates
We are extremely critical of the strategy outlined in draft guidance because it seeks to meet a projected near doubling in aggregates consumption over the 20 year period 1991 to 2011.
We agree with the vast majority of minerals planning authorities (MPAs) that meeting this demand would result in severe environmental impacts.
The Government also recognises that areas which can be worked in an environmentally acceptable manner are likely to decrease over the period of the guidelines (PIP 4.12).
Instead of tackling the underlying causes of this dramatic growth in projected consumption, the draft MPG attempts to shift the burden away from‘traditional land based sources’ to imports from outside Wales and England (presumably from so-called ‘super quarries’) and by recycling secondary aggregates.
However, even under this scenario the amount of crushed rock which would be required from land based sources in Wales would rise by a third.
The fact is that even if significant quantities of material can be made available from super quarries and recycling (both of which cause their own environmental problems) the environment and communities of Wales are facing a dramatic and unsustainable burden from aggregates provision in the years ahead.
Welcome though many of the Government's proposals are for reducing the demand for aggregates (PIP 6.20), the efficient use of materials, different approaches to construction, increasing the price of aggregates, making better use of waste materials and introducing voluntary codes by the public sector to use less material, will prove insufficient unless they are reinforced by a development strategy that questions the need for aggregates-intensive development, such as roads.
We do not therefore believe the draft guidance, despite valiant efforts to convince, has fully embraced the concept of sustainability.
It accepts unsustainable projections of growth, tries to soften the consequent massive impact on the environment and on communities, and only tinkers at the edges in terms of the way planning and other controls will be used to dampen demand.
We urge the Government to go much further through the introduction of Strategic Environmental Assessment techniques to bring aggregates consumption down to levels that are environmentally and socially acceptable.
Inter-generational equity
A basic principle of sustainability is that the needs of the present generation should be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
As PPG1 puts it:
‘The sum total of decisions in the planning field, as elsewhere, should not deny future generations the best of today's environment.’
Paragraph 6.15 of the Policy Issues Paper indicates that this principle requires minerals planning to ensure that ‘the net quality of environments affected by the extraction of aggregates remains constant or improves over time’.
We would like to see this commitment more clearly expressed in MPG6.
This being said, it is extremely difficult to assess whether net environmental quality is being maintained or improved, since it is difficult to know what value future generations will place on the environments that will be damaged under MPG6 in order to feed development demands.
However, given that people's personal valuation of environmental qualities (such as the open countryside) has tended to increase in proportion to the degree to which they are degraded through development, it is reasonable to assume that what may appear to be a net benefit to the present generation in a trade-off between the environment and a proposed development, is quite likely to be considered a net loss in retrospect by a future generation for whom the natural environment has become a more precious commodity.
We believe therefore, that inter-generational equity is best ensured though the adoption of a precautionary approach to developments such as quarrying and dredging.
This is another important reason why the projected growth in demand which MPG6 aims to satisfy, should be rejected as unsustainable.
Life-cycle analysis
We welcome the Government's increasing desire to gain a better quantitative understanding of the many environmental impacts of minerals activity through its research programme.
However, we believe there are limitations in the extent to which such impacts can be assigned strict quantitative values.
We believe organisations like ours are important in reflecting the equally valid qualitative values which the public assigns to them.
What we believe is required is a better understanding of both the quantitative and qualitative impacts arising during the full life-cycle of use of minerals products.
This would then help MPAs and the Regional Aggregates Working Parties better assess the true environmental carrying capacity of their areas.
Strategic Environmental Assessment would not only help reveal the level of sustainable resources (new and recycled), but also determine the priority for their use.
Recycling and re-use of secondary aggregates
In principle we are strongly attracted to the proposal to replace primary (freshly won) aggregates by increasing recycling and the use of suitable secondaries such as slate wastes.
We are aware, however, that both of these options are likely to give rise to their own set of environmental problems.
For instance, recycling could require large scale temporary storage facilities, while secondaries are often found in environmentally sensitive locations where their reworking could have disagreeable effects.
Moreover, we cannot understand why the 10% contribution estimated to have been made from this source to total aggregates provision in the past was added to, rather than subtracted from, projected future demand (PIP 2.7).
This seems little more than a ploy to ensure the revised estimate of demand (1992) matches that previously forecast in 1991.
The guidelines for aggregates provision in the North Wales region under MPG6 indicates that while the proportion of supply from primary sources will decline from over 90% at present to around 20% in 2011 (still requiring an absolute increase of over 4 million tonnes per annum to meet rising demand), the supply from secondary and recycled sources is expected to increase from 10% to over 70% during this period.
We are anxious to know where this massive increase will be found?
If, as we suspect, it is to be found by removing old slate tips in Gwynedd, we would want to register our considerable concern at the impact on these tips, most of which have lain undisturbed for decades and contribute in varying degrees to the local landscape, as well as on the rural road network and communities.
It may be that in weighing up all relevant factors, extending an existing quarry would be preferable to the wholesale removal of an old tip.
Because MPG6 attempts to meet rather than manage demand, both will be required.
We believe a much better understanding of the environmental implications of using secondary aggregates is urgently required.
We would certainly be pleased to see them making a greater contribution, but only if it can be shown that there would be genuine environmental benefits in so doing.
We are not convinced that just because large quantities of potential secondary materials are present in the North Wales region, they can be used to meet unsustainable demand at an acceptable environmental cost.
New supplies from coastal super quarries
Option II presented on page 20 of the Policy Issues Paper, on which draft MPG6 is based, seeks to reduce the proportion of aggregates required from land won supplies in Wales and England by encouraging a dramatic growth in new supplies from coastal super quarries.
Because of the long lead time that would be required to bring such supplies on stream (not only in opening the quarries but also in preparing suitable dock facilities) it is not envisaged they will make a major contribution until the second ten years covered by MPG6.
During that time it is anticipated they will account for initially 3% and ultimately 18% of aggregates provision.
Draft MPG6 makes it clear that coastal super quarries are considered to be sites which produce at least 5 million tonnes per annum with reserves of at least 150 mt.
It also indicates that sufficient rock of suitable quality exists in remote coastal locations in Scotland and other parts of North West Europe.
Notwithstanding our reservations over exporting the impact of the unsustainable demands of Wales and England to these locations, or the likelihood that aggregates companies would choose this option as opposed to taking up old planning permissions, we wish to make it clear that we would be fiercely opposed to any proposal for a super quarry along the coastline of Wales.
We do not believe draft MPG6 offers a balanced view of the pros and cons of coastal super quarries (paragraphs 41 and 42).
The idea has its parallel in the ever-higher smoke stacks and ever-longer sewage outfalls which were designed to export pollution problems as far as possible from their source.
Just as international opinion has rejected this strategy as short-sighted and unacceptable, so will it also take this view, we are sure, in relation to coastal super quarries.
This is yet another reason why we must get to the heart of the problem by controlling consumption, rather than searching hopefully for grand solutions.
The guidelines for aggregates provision in the South Wales region under MPG6 indicates that while the proportion of supply met from primary land sources will decline from 65% to about 45% over the period from 1991 to 2011 (although requiring an absolute increase of up to 4 million tonnes per annum to meet rising demand), coastal super quarries are anticipated to supply almost 30% of demand during the last five years of this period.
This means nearly 6 mt/pa will have to be berthed from super tankers in addition to nearly 4 mt/pa of marine sand and gravel.
We are anxious to know where this large quantity could be transferred from ship to shore?
We understand there are only two locations where facilities currently exist that could handle tankers of the size likely to be employed; namely, Baglan Bay (Port Talbot) and Milford Haven.
The former is a private facility but is at least nearer to the area of greatest potential demand than the latter.
We would be strongly opposed to the shipment of vast tonnages of aggregates into the South Wales region via Milford Haven for a number of reasons, not least the environmental damage, pollution and energy loss that would occur in transporting the material across the region to where it was required.
New supplies versus existing reserves
Both the Policy Issues Paper and draft MPG6 indicate that the levels of existing reserves of aggregates in Wales are more than adequate, at over 1200 mt, to meet the projected demand of 546 mt under Option II (PIP, page 20).
Yet it is suggested that the availability of this total figure ‘may be constrained by such factors as production capacity, economic factors and environmental considerations’(PIP, 4.1).
It is likely that very severe environmental damage would be done if parts of this reserve were activated.
Yet MPG6 suggests that many old permissions currently dormant and often in extremely sensitive locations without environmental conditions attached, will need to be brought into production during the 20 year period.
Just as disturbingly, the draft guidance goes on to suggest that in order to allow future generations to have some reserves after 2011, some of these potentially very damaging permissions should to be held in reserve to satisfy the principle of sustainable development!
We have urged in previous submissions to the Government that the Secretary of State should take up available powers under the 1991 Planning and Compensation Act to enable minerals planning authorities extinguish environmentally unacceptable old permissions (including IDOs) without compensation.
We firmly believe that unless this is done it is possible that minerals companies could activate these permissions either tomorrow, at any time during the 20 year period, or beyond.
Permitting new supplies, as is suggested in paragraph 55 of draft MPG6, only postpones the day when such a prospect has to be faced.
We therefore believe that until such time as the Government can clarify what proportion of the projected demand it is willing to satisfy under MPG6, can be acceptably met through existing reserves, and what realistic mechanisms it intends to apply to extinguish the remainder, no new sources of supply should be permitted.
Marine dredged aggregates
There is growing public concern over the effects of dredging marine aggregates.
In the South Wales region it is expected that the annual quantity required from this source will rise from about 2.8 mt to 3.6 mt over the 20 year period, despite the fact that as a proportion of overall consumption it will fall from 15% to 10%.
We recently objected to the licensing of new supplies from Helwick Bank, off the Gower peninsula.
It is clear there is considerable uncertainty over the effects of dredging this and other submarine accumulations of sand and gravel in the Bristol Channel.
Such effects could include a reduction to the natural reservoir that replenishes beaches under natural conditions, and damage to the marine ecosystem.
We were far from satisfied with the conditions attached to the Helwick licence that allow the company to regulate the environmental impact of its own operations.
We are surprised that despite acknowledging in paragraph 45 of the draft guidance that there appears to be a finite supply of marine aggregates and that much of this will be required to supply soft and hard coastal protection schemes made necessary by predicted sea level rise through global warming, MPG6 aims to increase supply of building aggregates from this source for South Wales.
This makes it all the more vital that a proper understanding of the hydro-dynamic relationships at work in the marine environment is gained.
We welcome the fact that a study is being undertaken to assess potential resources in the Bristol Channel and trust this will help to identify important physical relationships that must not be prejudiced through excessive dredging.
National Parks, AONBs, SSSIs and other designated areas
The draft guidance recognises the importance of protecting specially designated areas.
However, it is not unusual for existing permissions or potential new reserves of aggregates to be found in such areas.
It is therefore essential MPG6 is clear and unambiguous in listing the criteria that must be satisfied before any new extraction should be permitted.
We do not find this to be the case.
We note, for instance, that the guidance in paragraph 63 is incompatible with that found in PPG7.
Although MPG6 repeats the advice in PPG7 that ‘major development should not take place in [National Parks or AONBs]save in exceptional circumstances’, it is weakened by supplementary criteria 63(ii) and 63(v).
Previous criteria used to test whether mineral developments should be permitted in these special areas applied to all proposals not just those deemed ‘major development’.
Given that what may be considered a minor development elsewhere could have a serious impact on the landscape quality of a designated area, we believe the need to prove ‘exceptional circumstances’ must apply to all new proposals.
Moreover, applications must be considered on this basis, not just ‘on their own merits’.
We believe the need to consider the impact that refusing to permit minerals applications might have on local economies is adequately covered by the requirement to demonstrate they are ‘in the public interest’(MPG6, paragraph 63).
This matter must not be singled out in a way that allows it to be used to override National Park objectives.
We also believe that encouraging minerals operators who want to extend their quarries to show how this ‘would achieve an enhancement to the local landscape’, will make it much harder for planning authorities to refuse extensions where there are clearly no exceptional circumstances involved, just because landscape improvements are proposed.
This is the usual ploy used by most minerals operators in designated areas.
We believe that exactly the same approach should be adopted where an application would affect an SSSI, NNR or another national or international nature conservation designation.
Moreover, while we accept the degree of protection afforded to other environmentally significant areas in development plans may not be as high as that for nationally designated areas, we would expect the need to protect such areas to be an important material consideration, otherwise there seems little point in identifying such areas.
Efficiency of use
We strongly support the aim of ensuring the best use of the total aggregates resource by minimising wastage and avoiding the use of higher quality materials where lower grade ones would suffice (MPG6, paragraph 27).
We are not surprised to learn that over-specification is widespread, particularly for fill, hardcore and capping layers in road construction.
It is obvious that the relatively low price of high grade primary aggregates discourages efficient use of available resources and increases wastage.
This will continue to occur while growing demand is met by releasing new reserves.
We will welcome Government action to encourage via research, disseminating information and policy initiatives, practical measures to promote greater efficiency of use.
However we want mandatory standards and specifications introduced to ensure appropriate waste materials are used where available, rather than higher grade primaries.
We believe it will take more than just gentle persuasion to bring an end to over-specification and waste.
Other comments
We are delighted that the Government attaches considerable importance to up-to-date development plans and a plan-led approach to the supply of minerals (MPG6, paragraph 51).
We look forward to seeing how minerals local plans will provide ‘an adequate and steady supply of aggregates [to]meet the needs of the community and [ensure]economic growth is not hindered’(MPG6 paragraph 9), without causing unacceptable damage to the environment.
We also look forward to seeing how development plans will ‘ensure development and growth is sustainable’(PPG12) by reducing the demand for natural resources such as aggregates.
We do not believe the guidance in MPG6 paragraph 71 that minerals applications should simply ‘have regard to’ the development plan reflects that contained in PPG12; namely that ‘development must accord with the development plan unless material considerations dictate otherwise’.
It is essential MPG6 and PPG12 are compatible in this respect.
Whilst we agree with the sentiments in MPG6, paragraph 85, that the planning system should be expected to work as efficiently as possible in expediting minerals applications, we believe the quality of decision-making is more important than its speed, given the significant issues involved.
Without prejudice to our views in paragraph 27 above, we favour a reduction in landbanks from 10 years to 5 on the basis that it would signal the urgent need to reduce the rate of supply and consumption of minerals, and conserve existing reserves.
Will MPG6 achieve its desired objectives?
Despite the foregoing criticisms, we recognise and welcome the change of direction signalled by the draft guidance.
We do not believe, however, that it goes as far as is necessary in embracing demand management and sustainability.
As a result, we do not share the optimism expressed in the Policy Issues Paper that the policies proposed in MPG6 to encourage greater efficiency, increased recycling, use of waste, and a shift in the pattern of supply, will achieve those goals in sufficient degree to ‘bear down on demand and make important contributions to minimising the extent of extraction needed to provide a steady and adequate supply of aggregates for the construction industry’(PIP, 6.23).
As the paper goes on to point out: ‘The availability of substantial permitted reserves and the effect this could have on implementation in the case of Option II [on which MPG6 is based]needs to be considered.’
We believe that the industry and the demand it satisfies will have to come under much greater restraint than is offered by the draft guidance before improved efficiency, recycling and use of waste — all options currently more risky and expensive — are taken up in a serious way.
If this is to happen we believe the Government must get to grips with the immense problems stored up in the legacy of old minerals permissions.
This means adopting a firm but rational strategy that enables unacceptable old permissions to be extinguished without compensation, while those that are potentially acceptable are quickly brought up to modern standards, also without compensation.
Both approaches can be justified on the principle that the polluter should pay.
It would be quite wrong to expect society to pay potential polluters (minerals companies) hundred of millions of pounds to compensate them for not damaging the environment.
Until this legacy is tackled we believe MPG6 should make it absolutely clear that no new permissions should be granted, for to do so merely puts off the evil day when the problem of old permissions has to be confronted.
It is a legacy of this and previous generations and must be tackled now.
We believe it would be a cynical interpretation of sustainable development to pass it on to future generations to solve.
We recognise that MPG6 can only offer part of the solution to the serious problems of over-consumption endemic in our society at present.
However, as currently drafted it does far less than it should to contribute to that solution.
For this reason we urge the Government to revise it thoroughly before it is published.
30th April 1993
PLANS FOR AGGREGATES PROVISION IN WALES UP TO YEAR 2011
You will recall that I recently sent you a copy of our response to draft Mineral Planning Guidance Note 6 published by the Welsh Office.
You will have seen how alarmed we are by the plans to meet a vast increase in aggregates demand.
This will accelerate environmental damage and cause misery to many communities across Wales.
It flies in the face of commitments made at the Earth Summit to reduce consumption.
We believe it is vital that the Secretary of State is persuaded to revise his plans.
The powerful aggregates industry is already leaning on him hard to prevent him from doing so.
We urge you to make immediate representations to him, and to the Secretary of State for the Environment, expressing opposition to the impact their plans will have on your constituents and the environment.
I have enclosed a briefing prepared by our sister body, CPRE, which you should find useful.
Please also refer to our response to MPG6 — another copy can be sent on request.
If you act now you can prevent the bitter local disputes in your constituency which will arise from increased aggregates quarrying and haulage over the next twenty years.
Thank you /Diolch yn fawr.
30th April 1993
PLANS FOR AGGREGATES PROVISION IN WALES UP TO YEAR 2011
You will recall that I recently sent you a copy of our response to draft Mineral Planning Guidance Note 6 published by the Welsh Office.
You will have seen how alarmed we are by the plans to meet a vast increase in aggregates demand.
This will accelerate environmental damage and cause misery to many communities across Wales.
It flies in the face of commitments made at the Earth Summit to reduce consumption.
We believe it is vital that the Secretary of State is persuaded to revise his plans.
The powerful aggregates industry is already leaning on him hard to prevent him from doing so.
We urge you to make immediate representations to him, and to the Secretary of State for the Environment, expressing opposition to the impact their plans will have on your constituents and the environment.
I have enclosed a briefing prepared by our sister body, CPRE, which you should find useful.
Please also refer to our response to MPG6 — another copy can be sent on request.
If you act now you can prevent the bitter local disputes in your constituency which will arise from increased aggregates quarrying and haulage over the next twenty years.
Thank you /Diolch yn fawr.
24th June 1992
Dear ,
REVIEW OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (MINERALS) ACT 1981: OLD MINING PERMISSIONS
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the proposals currently being considered by the Government for tackling the problems associated with minerals planning permissions granted in the 1950s, 60s and 70s.
I have pleasure in enclosing our considered response which I hope will be carefully considered before the proposals are finalised.
Yours sincerely,
REVIEW OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (MINERALS) ACT 1981: OLD MINING PERMISSIONS
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the Government's draft proposals for tackling old mining permissions
Introduction
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment upon these proposals and warmly welcome the Government's clear desire to tackle the severe environmental problems associated with old minerals planning permissions granted in between 1947 and 1982.
This would build on the very positive package of measures contained in the 1991 Planning an Compensation Act designed to bring Interim Development Order permissions up to modern environmental standards.
The Stevens Committee
We share the Government's disappointment that the provisions introduced by the 1981 Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act, have not been widely used.
These were broadly based on the recommendations of the 1976 Stevens Committee Report on Planning Control over Mineral Workings, which proposed that mineral permissions should be reviewed periodically and modified, where necessary, to bring them up to date.
We support the views of the County Planning Officers Society and the Government that the 1981 provisions have not been widely used because of(a) the financial implications of compensation for minerals planning authorities (MPAs),(b) the staffing and resource implications for MPAs who were expected to implement the provisions, and (c) the complexity and cumbersome nature of the provisions themselves.
It is worth noting the conclusions of John Goodman of Kent County Council, where a serious attempt has been made to use the provisions, recorded in ‘Mineral Planning’ this year:
‘In my view the Government made at least one fundamental mistake when drawing up the legislation, by ensuring that it was the duty of the regulating authority to pay most of the cost of updating old permissions to modern standards.
This is not expected in the implementation of say health and safety improvements to sites, so one might ask why it should apply to measures designed to mitigate the physical impact of operations on nearby residential areas, and to ensure proper restoration and aftercare.’
‘In my opinion there is one issue which far outweighs all the others — compensation.
This problem has to be tackled head on; without it any other tinkering with the legislation is just a waste of time.’
The Polluter Pays Principle
This fundamental environmental principle is supported by the Government through European and international agreements.
It is gradually being introduced into every sector of business.
We firmly believe it must also underpin the operations of the minerals industry.
This clearly implies that the full environmental costs of mining operations should be borne by the operator.
The use of finite public funds, raised by the tax-payer, to compensate large minerals companies for the cost of meeting modern environmental standards is no longer tenable.
Level Playing Field
We also agree with the Government that minerals operators should enjoy a ‘level playing field’ of high environmental standards which apply right across the industry.
The fact that the new requirements relating to the upgrading of IDO permissions have placed some minerals operators at a disadvantage in relation to their competitors who may have equally poorly controlled post 1947 planning permissions, needs to be rectified.
In short, all existing and future minerals planning permissions must be brought up to the environmental standards expected today, and provision must be made for a regular upgrading of standards in the future.
Local Government Reorganisation in Wales
Before going on to look at the Government's proposals in detail, we want to underline our serious concern over the threat to strategic minerals planning associated with the proposed reorganisation of local government in Wales.
In our detailed responses to the Secretary of State of the 30th October 1991 and the 10th June 1992 we highlighted what we saw as the threat to strategic planning policies, embodied in the existing county structure plans, as a result of the creation of 23–25 relatively small unitary authorities.
Our concern becomes particularly acute in relation to minerals planning.
Not only will the proposed reorganisation plunge local government into confusion and uncertainty for a number of years, during which we can expect little progress with the review and upgrading of old minerals permissions, but the resulting structure of small unitary authorities is very unlikely to deliver either the resources or the strategic perspective required to implement the proposed review.
We therefore fear that, in Wales at least, it is unlikely much progress will be made in tackling this urgent problem.
Proposed Statutory Time Limit
We welcome the proposal to reduce the statutory time limit on all existing and future permissions which we believe is essential if minerals operations are to be brought up to and maintained at modern standards or reviewed to assess whether they should be extinguished because the environmental costs of working is too high.
We urge the Government to reduce from 60 to 10 years the life of minerals permissions through new legislation, as proposed in the consultation paper.
We recognise that the imposition of such a time limit would have significant resource implications for MPAs in relation to the need to determine the necessary applications.
They should be given additional resources.
Moreover, they should be given guidance to the effect that the Government will support them if they decide, at the time of review, not to grant fresh permissions on environmental and social grounds.
It is essential that the time limit is not seen purely as an opportunity to negotiate renewed permissions with upgraded environmental standards.
Statutory Review Duty on MPAs
Alongside our desire to see new legislation, we believe that it is essential that positive action is taken immediately to tackle all existing minerals permissions.
This can and must be done through the imposition, by the Secretary of State, of a statutory duty on MPAs to review such permissions over the next four years.
This duty is essential to ensure MPAs take decisive action to upgrade extant minerals permissions.
It has the advantage of being possible through the enactment of secondary legislation.
MPAs should be given the power to require Environmental Assessments, where necessary, as part of the review.
We agree with the Government that MPAs should be advised that, in carrying out this review, they should concentrate first on permissions granted between 1948 and 1969, during the first two years, as these are more likely to lack the conditions and/or present the most serious environmental problems.
However, MPAs should be still be given discretion to determine the exact order of the review in relation to the most serious problems encountered in their areas.
Future Review Regime
Once the review is completed it is vital that a continuing review regime is established to prevent stagnation while environmental standards continue to rise.
However, we do not favour a recurring blanket review but propose that all new minerals permissions, as well as existing ones following initial review, should include conditions specifying the timing and content of subsequent reviews.
The advantage of this approach is that spreads the review process, avoiding the ‘bunching’ of permissions for review towards the end of the specified period.
Thus it ensures a continuous process of review covering all permissions.
MPAs should be given guidance on the type of conditions which may become relevant, including those relating to compensation.
They should also be given and encouraged to use enforcement powers where necessary.
Amended Compensation Regime
As stated earlier, the key to achieving serious progress in the review and upgrading of old minerals permissions lies in amending the existing compensation regime.
The Government has wisely ensured that it has the powers, under section 116 of the Planning and Compensation Act, to amend this regime as it sees fit.
We firmly believe these powers must now be used to introduce a new regime based on the Polluter Pays Principle.
In carrying out the review proposed in paragraph 10 above, MPAs will clearly have to distinguish between permissions that need improving to bring them up to modern standards, and those that are/would damage designated sites, important water resources etc.
In relation to the latter category, the Secretary of State should give MPAs the power to revoke or substantially amend permissions without any compensation where working is/would:
a)
damage nationally designated sites (eg SSSIs, National Parks, AONBs);
b)
cause an unacceptable level of environmental damage to important non-designated sites;
b)
damage important water resources.
In relation to permissions requiring improved conditions, the Secretary of State should specify the types of condition that may be imposed, following review, without attracting compensation.
We believe that as well as covering new and upgraded operating, restoration and aftercare conditions, these should include:
a)
end-use conditions limiting the end-use of certain high quality minerals to high specification applications;
b)
the timing and content of future reviews.
We strongly believe that neither action  revoking damaging permissions, nor the imposition of new conditions, under the first review should wait until the whole review is complete, otherwise unacceptable damage will almost certainly occur.
Extending IDO Provisions
Given our preferred strategy for the review and upgrading of minerals permissions described above, we do not feel it is necessary to extend the IDO provisions under the 1991 Act to other permissions, as suggested in the consultation paper.
We believe our package of proposed measures will achieve the desired objectives without the need for primary legislation.
Conclusions
We warmly welcome the Government's determination to tackle environmental problems caused by old minerals permissions.
We believe most of the measures proposed can be used as a package and applied immediately, without the need for fresh legislation.
We urge the Government to make swift progress with this issue, for there have already been too many years of procrastination during which we have paid a high price in terms of serious and irreversible environmental damage.
INDEX OF NATIONAL PLANNING POLICIES
If this changes, please do let us know.
The Index will be updated regularly and we really do need to know who to send the updates to.
At the back of the collection of PPGs, you will find PPG 22 ‘Renewable Energy’.
This was issued in February 1993 and has not been included in the Index.
As part of CPRW's 1993 Volunteer Training Programme, a course will be held on Saturday 12th June in Llandrindod Wells ‘Influencing Local Development’.
This course will cover the most effective ways of using the Planning Index.
If you would like to book on this course, please refer to the Training Programme or contact Head Office.
The course notes which accompanied the first ‘Beating the Developers’ course, are available on request.
We do hope that these documents will help you in your work of monitoring local developments — we would welcome your comments.
Mr P L Roberts P2(c) Planning Division Welsh Office Cathays Park Cardiff CF1 3NQ
29th March 1993
Dear ,
DRAFT MINERALS PLANNING GUIDANCE NOTE 6 (MPG6)
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the revision of this important planning guidance note.
I have pleasure in enclosing our considered response which we hope will be taken into account when finalising the guidance for publication.
Yours sincerely,
GUIDELINES FOR AGGREGATES PROVISION IN WALES AND ENGLAND
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the revision of Minerals Planning Guidance Note 6 (MPG6)
Introduction
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the proposed revision of MPG6.
As the Note makes clear, the working and winning of aggregates is causing increasing public concern in terms of its serious and irreversible impact on the environment, and on the quality of life of communities in close proximity to the activity.
It is also clear that these concerns and impacts are likely to increase significantly over the twenty year period covered by the guidance note, and beyond.
We firmly believe the land use planning system has a central role to play not only in minimising the environmental and social costs of ensuring essential aggregates provision, but also in managing demand.
Over recent years we have become increasingly alarmed by the dramatic growth in aggregates demand and the assumption that this growth will continue and must be catered for.
We therefore welcome the tentative commitment to demand management in draft MPG6.
However, the assumption remains that most demands must be met, albeit by a progressive adjustment in the sources of supply.
Before commenting in detail, we would like to welcome the publication, alongside the draft MPG, of a Policy Issues Paper.
This was a considerable aid to understanding the thinking behind the draft guidance.
We will refer to this document (PIP), as well as the draft MPG, in our response.
The consumption of aggregates
We are extremely critical of the strategy outlined in draft guidance because it seeks to meet a projected near doubling in aggregates consumption over the 20 year period 1991 to 2011.
We agree with the vast majority of minerals planning authorities (MPAs) that meeting this demand would result in severe environmental impacts.
The Government also recognises that areas which can be worked in an environmentally acceptable manner are likely to decrease over the period of the guidelines (PIP 4.12).
Instead of tackling the underlying causes of this dramatic growth in projected consumption, the draft MPG attempts to shift the burden away from‘traditional land based sources’ to imports from outside Wales and England (presumably from so-called ‘super quarries’) and by recycling secondary aggregates.
However, even under this scenario the amount of crushed rock which would be required from land based sources in Wales would rise by a third.
The fact is that even if significant quantities of material can be made available from super quarries and recycling (both of which cause their own environmental problems) the environment and communities of Wales are facing a dramatic and unsustainable burden from aggregates provision in the years ahead.
Welcome though many of the Government's proposals are for reducing the demand for aggregates (PIP 6.20), the efficient use of materials, different approaches to construction, increasing the price of aggregates, making better use of waste materials and introducing voluntary codes by the public sector to use less material, will prove insufficient unless they are reinforced by a development strategy that questions the need for aggregates-intensive development, such as roads.
We do not therefore believe the draft guidance, despite valiant efforts to convince, has fully embraced the concept of sustainability.
It accepts unsustainable projections of growth, tries to soften the consequent massive impact on the environment and on communities, and only tinkers at the edges in terms of the way planning and other controls will be used to dampen demand.
We urge the Government to go much further through the introduction of Strategic Environmental Assessment techniques to bring aggregates consumption down to levels that are environmentally and socially acceptable.
Inter-generational equity
A basic principle of sustainability is that the needs of the present generation should be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
As PPG1 puts it:
‘The sum total of decisions in the planning field, as elsewhere, should not deny future generations the best of today's environment.’
Paragraph 6.15 of the Policy Issues Paper indicates that this principle requires minerals planning to ensure that ‘the net quality of environments affected by the extraction of aggregates remains constant or improves over time’.
We would like to see this commitment more clearly expressed in MPG6.
This being said, it is extremely difficult to assess whether net environmental quality is being maintained or improved, since it is difficult to know what value future generations will place on the environments that will be damaged under MPG6 in order to feed development demands.
However, given that people's personal valuation of environmental qualities (such as the open countryside) has tended to increase in proportion to the degree to which they are degraded through development, it is reasonable to assume that what may appear to be a net benefit to the present generation in a trade-off between the environment and a proposed development, is quite likely to be considered a net loss in retrospect by a future generation for whom the natural environment has become a more precious commodity.
We believe therefore, that inter-generational equity is best ensured though the adoption of a precautionary approach to developments such as quarrying and dredging.
This is another important reason why the projected growth in demand which MPG6 aims to satisfy, should be rejected as unsustainable.
Life-cycle analysis
We welcome the Government's increasing desire to gain a better quantitative understanding of the many environmental impacts of minerals activity through its research programme.
However, we believe there are limitations in the extent to which such impacts can be assigned strict quantitative values.
We believe organisations like ours are important in reflecting the equally valid qualitative values which the public assigns to them.
What we believe is required is a better understanding of both the quantitative and qualitative impacts arising during the full life-cycle of use of minerals products.
This would then help MPAs and the Regional Aggregates Working Parties better assess the true environmental carrying capacity of their areas.
Strategic Environmental Assessment would not only help reveal the level of sustainable resources (new and recycled), but also determine the priority for their use.
Recycling and re-use of secondary aggregates
In principle we are strongly attracted to the proposal to replace primary (freshly won) aggregates by increasing recycling and the use of suitable secondaries such as slate wastes.
We are aware, however, that both of these options are likely to give rise to their own set of environmental problems.
For instance, recycling could require large scale temporary storage facilities, while secondaries are often found in environmentally sensitive locations where their reworking could have disagreeable effects.
Moreover, we cannot understand why the 10% contribution estimated to have been made from this source to total aggregates provision in the past was added to, rather than subtracted from, projected future demand (PIP 2.7).
This seems little more than a ploy to ensure the revised estimate of demand (1992) matches that previously forecast in 1991.
The guidelines for aggregates provision in the North Wales region under MPG6 indicates that while the proportion of supply from primary sources will decline from over 90% at present to around 20% in 2011 (still requiring an absolute increase of over 4 million tonnes per annum to meet rising demand), the supply from secondary and recycled sources is expected to increase from 10% to over 70% during this period.
We are anxious to know where this massive increase will be found?
If, as we suspect, it is to be found by removing old slate tips in Gwynedd, we would want to register our considerable concern at the impact on these tips, most of which have lain undisturbed for decades and contribute in varying degrees to the local landscape, as well as on the rural road network and communities.
It may be that in weighing up all relevant factors, extending an existing quarry would be preferable to the wholesale removal of an old tip.
Because MPG6 attempts to meet rather than manage demand, both will be required.
We believe a much better understanding of the environmental implications of using secondary aggregates is urgently required.
We would certainly be pleased to see them making a greater contribution, but only if it can be shown that there would be genuine environmental benefits in so doing.
We are not convinced that just because large quantities of potential secondary materials are present in the North Wales region, they can be used to meet unsustainable demand at an acceptable environmental cost.
New supplies from coastal super quarries
Option II presented on page 20 of the Policy Issues Paper, on which draft MPG6 is based, seeks to reduce the proportion of aggregates required from land won supplies in Wales and England by encouraging a dramatic growth in new supplies from coastal super quarries.
Because of the long lead time that would be required to bring such supplies on stream (not only in opening the quarries but also in preparing suitable dock facilities) it is not envisaged they will make a major contribution until the second ten years covered by MPG6.
During that time it is anticipated they will account for initially 3% and ultimately 18% of aggregates provision.
Draft MPG6 makes it clear that coastal super quarries are considered to be sites which produce at least 5 million tonnes per annum with reserves of at least 150 mt.
It also indicates that sufficient rock of suitable quality exists in remote coastal locations in Scotland and other parts of North West Europe.
Notwithstanding our reservations over exporting the impact of the unsustainable demands of Wales and England to these locations, or the likelihood that aggregates companies would choose this option as opposed to taking up old planning permissions, we wish to make it clear that we would be fiercely opposed to any proposal for a super quarry along the coastline of Wales.
We do not believe draft MPG6 offers a balanced view of the pros and cons of coastal super quarries (paragraphs 41 and 42).
The idea has its parallel in the ever-higher smoke stacks and ever-longer sewage outfalls which were designed to export pollution problems as far as possible from their source.
Just as international opinion has rejected this strategy as short-sighted and unacceptable, so will it also take this view, we are sure, in relation to coastal super quarries.
This is yet another reason why we must get to the heart of the problem by controlling consumption, rather than searching hopefully for grand solutions.
The guidelines for aggregates provision in the South Wales region under MPG6 indicates that while the proportion of supply met from primary land sources will decline from 65% to about 45% over the period from 1991 to 2011 (although requiring an absolute increase of up to 4 million tonnes per annum to meet rising demand), coastal super quarries are anticipated to supply almost 30% of demand during the last five years of this period.
This means nearly 6 mt/pa will have to be berthed from super tankers in addition to nearly 4 mt/pa of marine sand and gravel.
We are anxious to know where this large quantity could be transferred from ship to shore?
We understand there are only two locations where facilities currently exist that could handle tankers of the size likely to be employed; namely, Baglan Bay (Port Talbot) and Milford Haven.
The former is a private facility but is at least nearer to the area of greatest potential demand than the latter.
We would be strongly opposed to the shipment of vast tonnages of aggregates into the South Wales region via Milford Haven for a number of reasons, not least the environmental damage, pollution and energy loss that would occur in transporting the material across the region to where it was required.
New supplies versus existing reserves
Both the Policy Issues Paper and draft MPG6 indicate that the levels of existing reserves of aggregates in Wales are more than adequate, at over 1200 mt, to meet the projected demand of 546 mt under Option II (PIP, page 20).
Yet it is suggested that the availability of this total figure ‘may be constrained by such factors as production capacity, economic factors and environmental considerations’(PIP, 4.1).
It is likely that very severe environmental damage would be done if parts of this reserve were activated.
Yet MPG6 suggests that many old permissions currently dormant and often in extremely sensitive locations without environmental conditions attached, will need to be brought into production during the 20 year period.
Just as disturbingly, the draft guidance goes on to suggest that in order to allow future generations to have some reserves after 2011, some of these potentially very damaging permissions should to be held in reserve to satisfy the principle of sustainable development!
We have urged in previous submissions to the Government that the Secretary of State should take up available powers under the 1991 Planning and Compensation Act to enable minerals planning authorities extinguish environmentally unacceptable old permissions (including IDOs) without compensation.
We firmly believe that unless this is done it is possible that minerals companies could activate these permissions either tomorrow, at any time during the 20 year period, or beyond.
Permitting new supplies, as is suggested in paragraph 55 of draft MPG6, only postpones the day when such a prospect has to be faced.
We therefore believe that until such time as the Government can clarify what proportion of the projected demand it is willing to satisfy under MPG6, can be acceptably met through existing reserves, and what realistic mechanisms it intends to apply to extinguish the remainder, no new sources of supply should be permitted.
Marine dredged aggregates
There is growing public concern over the effects of dredging marine aggregates.
In the South Wales region it is expected that the annual quantity required from this source will rise from about 2.8 mt to 3.6 mt over the 20 year period, despite the fact that as a proportion of overall consumption it will fall from 15% to 10%.
We recently objected to the licensing of new supplies from Helwick Bank, off the Gower peninsula.
It is clear there is considerable uncertainty over the effects of dredging this and other submarine accumulations of sand and gravel in the Bristol Channel.
Such effects could include a reduction to the natural reservoir that replenishes beaches under natural conditions, and damage to the marine ecosystem.
We were far from satisfied with the conditions attached to the Helwick licence that allow the company to regulate the environmental impact of its own operations.
We are surprised that despite acknowledging in paragraph 45 of the draft guidance that there appears to be a finite supply of marine aggregates and that much of this will be required to supply soft and hard coastal protection schemes made necessary by predicted sea level rise through global warming, MPG6 aims to increase supply of building aggregates from this source for South Wales.
This makes it all the more vital that a proper understanding of the hydro-dynamic relationships at work in the marine environment is gained.
We welcome the fact that a study is being undertaken to assess potential resources in the Bristol Channel and trust this will help to identify important physical relationships that must not be prejudiced through excessive dredging.
National Parks, AONBs, SSSIs and other designated areas
The draft guidance recognises the importance of protecting specially designated areas.
However, it is not unusual for existing permissions or potential new reserves of aggregates to be found in such areas.
It is therefore essential MPG6 is clear and unambiguous in listing the criteria that must be satisfied before any new extraction should be permitted.
We do not find this to be the case.
We note, for instance, that the guidance in paragraph 63 is incompatible with that found in PPG7.
Although MPG6 repeats the advice in PPG7 that ‘major development should not take place in [National Parks or AONBs]save in exceptional circumstances’, it is weakened by supplementary criteria 63(ii) and 63(v).
Previous criteria used to test whether mineral developments should be permitted in these special areas applied to all proposals not just those deemed ‘major development’.
Given that what may be considered a minor development elsewhere could have a serious impact on the landscape quality of a designated area, we believe the need to prove ‘exceptional circumstances’ must apply to all new proposals.
Moreover, applications must be considered on this basis, not just ‘on their own merits’.
We believe the need to consider the impact that refusing to permit minerals applications might have on local economies is adequately covered by the requirement to demonstrate they are ‘in the public interest’(MPG6, paragraph 63).
This matter must not be singled out in a way that allows it to be used to override National Park objectives.
We also believe that encouraging minerals operators who want to extend their quarries to show how this ‘would achieve an enhancement to the local landscape’, will make it much harder for planning authorities to refuse extensions where there are clearly no exceptional circumstances involved, just because landscape improvements are proposed.
This is the usual ploy used by most minerals operators in designated areas.
We believe that exactly the same approach should be adopted where an application would affect an SSSI, NNR or another national or international nature conservation designation.
Moreover, while we accept the degree of protection afforded to other environmentally significant areas in development plans may not be as high as that for nationally designated areas, we would expect the need to protect such areas to be an important material consideration, otherwise there seems little point in identifying such areas.
Efficiency of use
We strongly support the aim of ensuring the best use of the total aggregates resource by minimising wastage and avoiding the use of higher quality materials where lower grade ones would suffice (MPG6, paragraph 27).
We are not surprised to learn that over-specification is widespread, particularly for fill, hardcore and capping layers in road construction.
It is obvious that the relatively low price of high grade primary aggregates discourages efficient use of available resources and increases wastage.
This will continue to occur while growing demand is met by releasing new reserves.
We will welcome Government action to encourage via research, disseminating information and policy initiatives, practical measures to promote greater efficiency of use.
However we want mandatory standards and specifications introduced to ensure appropriate waste materials are used where available, rather than higher grade primaries.
We believe it will take more than just gentle persuasion to bring an end to over-specification and waste.
Other comments
We are delighted that the Government attaches considerable importance to up-to-date development plans and a plan-led approach to the supply of minerals (MPG6, paragraph 51).
We look forward to seeing how minerals local plans will provide ‘an adequate and steady supply of aggregates [to]meet the needs of the community and [ensure]economic growth is not hindered’(MPG6 paragraph 9), without causing unacceptable damage to the environment.
We also look forward to seeing how development plans will ‘ensure development and growth is sustainable’(PPG12) by reducing the demand for natural resources such as aggregates.
We do not believe the guidance in MPG6 paragraph 71 that minerals applications should simply ‘have regard to’ the development plan reflects that contained in PPG12; namely that ‘development must accord with the development plan unless material considerations dictate otherwise’.
It is essential MPG6 and PPG12 are compatible in this respect.
Whilst we agree with the sentiments in MPG6, paragraph 85, that the planning system should be expected to work as efficiently as possible in expediting minerals applications, we believe the quality of decision-making is more important than its speed, given the significant issues involved.
Without prejudice to our views in paragraph 27 above, we favour a reduction in landbanks from 10 years to 5 on the basis that it would signal the urgent need to reduce the rate of supply and consumption of minerals, and conserve existing reserves.
Will MPG6 achieve its desired objectives?
Despite the foregoing criticisms, we recognise and welcome the change of direction signalled by the draft guidance.
We do not believe, however, that it goes as far as is necessary in embracing demand management and sustainability.
As a result, we do not share the optimism expressed in the Policy Issues Paper that the policies proposed in MPG6 to encourage greater efficiency, increased recycling, use of waste, and a shift in the pattern of supply, will achieve those goals in sufficient degree to ‘bear down on demand and make important contributions to minimising the extent of extraction needed to provide a steady and adequate supply of aggregates for the construction industry’(PIP, 6.23).
As the paper goes on to point out: ‘The availability of substantial permitted reserves and the effect this could have on implementation in the case of Option II [on which MPG6 is based]needs to be considered.’
We believe that the industry and the demand it satisfies will have to come under much greater restraint than is offered by the draft guidance before improved efficiency, recycling and use of waste — all options currently more risky and expensive — are taken up in a serious way.
If this is to happen we believe the Government must get to grips with the immense problems stored up in the legacy of old minerals permissions.
This means adopting a firm but rational strategy that enables unacceptable old permissions to be extinguished without compensation, while those that are potentially acceptable are quickly brought up to modern standards, also without compensation.
Both approaches can be justified on the principle that the polluter should pay.
It would be quite wrong to expect society to pay potential polluters (minerals companies) hundred of millions of pounds to compensate them for not damaging the environment.
Until this legacy is tackled we believe MPG6 should make it absolutely clear that no new permissions should be granted, for to do so merely puts off the evil day when the problem of old permissions has to be confronted.
It is a legacy of this and previous generations and must be tackled now.
We believe it would be a cynical interpretation of sustainable development to pass it on to future generations to solve.
We recognise that MPG6 can only offer part of the solution to the serious problems of over-consumption endemic in our society at present.
However, as currently drafted it does far less than it should to contribute to that solution.
For this reason we urge the Government to revise it thoroughly before it is published.
22nd May 1992
Dear ,
PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE: COASTAL PLANNING
Thank you for inviting Wales Link's member bodies to comment on this important planning policy guidance note.
I am pleased to enclose their considered response which I hope will be carefully considered before preparation of the final PPG Note.
I am sorry about the late arrival of our response which is partly due the time involved in consulting member organisations.
Yours sincerely,
COASTAL PLANNING
Response by Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link to the Welsh Office draft Planning Policy Guidance Note
Introduction
Wales Wildlife and Countryside Link enables representatives of environmental non-governmental bodies to bring together their views on issues affecting the conservation, protection and quiet enjoyment of landscape, wildlife or amenity in Wales.
A list of our members is appended at the end of this response.
Wales Link welcomes the appearance of a PPG Note concerned with coastal planning because it focuses attention on an important national resource that has been marginalised in strategic planning terms.
We are pleased the Government attaches sufficient importance to the coast to break with the tradition of subject-based PPG Notes to issue a spatial PPG Note in this case.
It is a welcome advance on Welsh Office Circular 36/72 ‘Planning the Undeveloped Coast’.
However, it highlights the clear lack of an agreed national coastal strategy by the Government.
The Welsh Dimension
The PPG Note is particularly welcome in Wales, given the length and importance of our coastline.
We believe there is a vacuum in coastal planning advice.
For this reason we welcomed the fact that the Minister of State, Sir Wyn Roberts, backed the Wales Tourist Board led Marinas Review Group which attempted to negotiate a statement of principles to guide coastal developments during 1990/91.
However many of the group's participants were extremely disappointed that the Chairmen of the Welsh Development Agency and the Development Board for Rural Wales withdrew their support from the statement just before its publication, despite their officers having contributed fully to its preparation.
This aborted attempt at developing an integrated approach illustrates that most statutory and local authorities in Wales recognise the need for, and benefits of, a coastal strategy for Wales, but that various key players (especially the development agencies) are unwilling to integrate their statutory objectives with those of others in the interests of achieving sustainable development, without being given a clear ministerial direction that they are required to do so.
The lack of both a coastal strategy for Wales and strategic mechanisms for delivering it, is highlighted in paragraph 3.11 of the draft PPG Note.
English planning authorities are already given policy advice on coastal issues, whereas in Wales the work of the Coastal Strategic Working Group is emphasised.
This group was established in May 1991, under the aegis of the Strategic Planning Forum, to prepare a report for the Secretary of State for Wales as part of a review of strategic planning guidance.
We would like to point out that the present remit of the group in no way parallels the standing conferences of the English regions.
The PPG Note should therefore clarify the Welsh Office's coastal strategy and explain how it will be implemented.
We believe the Coastal Working Group should be retained to work closely with the Welsh Office to prepare and review advice for the Secretary of State on coastal matters.
The need for such a forum is all the greater if the strategic planning role of the counties is lost in the reorganisation of local government.
We believe there is an urgent need to strengthen existing marine and coastal expertise in the Welsh Office.
The House of Commons Environment Select Committee report on Coastal Zone Planning and Management (28.4.92) recommends the creation of a specialist marine unit in the Department of the Environment.
We believe a parallel unit is desperately required in the Welsh Office to help ensure the wise use of our valuable coastal resources.
Detailed Comments on the draft PPG Note
The reasons which lead the Government to conclude that the coast represents an ‘important national resource’ need to be specified.
There is an opportunity here to explain why the coastal zone is so special.
For instance, it is highly dynamic and not static; it is either eroding or accreting.
A valuable and vulnerable resource should be used wisely, but there is no mention of an environmentally sustainable approach to the development of the coast.
We believe the extension of planning controls below the Low Water Mark is long overdue.
We therefore support the call for a review of present limitations, made by the Commons Environment Committee.
It will require legislation to change this situation which means that the Government must show some determined leadership.
In the meantime, planning authorities should try to co-operate as much as possible, within the confines of the present system.
We warmly welcome the duty being placed on local authorities to recognise the offshore impacts of coastal developments and vice versa.
However, this duty should be made more onerous and explicit in the PPG Note.
It should advocate consultation and active information seeking by local authorities whenever they are concerned with coastal and offshore developments.
The role of the Countryside Council for Wales as an advisor in this area should be emphasised.
We agree that there are problems where development proposals span the Mean Low Water Mark and we share the belief of many observers, including the Commons Environment Committee, that these problems could be overcome by the logical extension of planning powers beyond this mark.
The draft PPG Note's acknowledgement of the relevance of Environmental Assessment to such developments is very welcome.
We believe the PPG Note should explain planning mechanisms in the coastal zone.
For example, it should describe the role of the Ports and Harbours under the General Development Order and the scope of the Crown Estates Commissioners.
There are other European Community Directives which have a bearing on the coast, and indirectly of coastal planning, such as Water Quality Objectives.
Although the new PPG Note is welcome, significant points in the Circulars it replaces have been lost.
In particular, it no longer encourages local authorities to adopt management policies and management plans for Heritage Coasts.
We will return to this point when discussing paragraph 3.20.
We strongly support the emphasis on the inter-relationships and fragility of coastal ecosystems and estuaries.
We agree that the coast should be treated as a special resource where development is only allowed under special circumstances.
Local authority planning policies might require an applicant to demonstrate first that a proposed development required a coastal location and, if this was the case, to show that recyclable coastal sites had been considered before undeveloped or partly developed coastal sites were targeted.
We welcome the emphasis on recycling coastal land for appropriate coastal uses.
We are rather concerned about the proposal to divide the coast into only five specific categories.
This could inadvertently promote a simplistic zoning pattern in local authority policies.
It may also be interpreted (e.g. at public inquiries) as prioritising the importance of such coastal types.
In any case, we would recommend the first two categories be combined to prevent the separation of landscape and nature conservation criteria.
We support the priority given to these key policy issues and would again recommend the formula we suggested in 2.2.
These paragraphs are warmly supported, but unlike the visual impact criterion which, quite justifiably applies to the whole coastline, the ecological impact section seems to be restricted to designated sites only.
This should be altered to apply generally to ensure that nature conservation issues are taken into account in all development decision-making.
This principle is warmly supported because it rightly treats the coast as a limited and special resource.
See our comment on marinas in 2.13 below.
We support the Government's promotion of recycling coastal land for uses which require a coastal location, but we feel that such developments as supermarkets that do not need coastal locations, should not be given them.
Unfortunately there are recent examples in Wales where coastal sites have been foolishly allocated to such uses.
Whilst we agree that demand for boat moorings is likely to grow, we believe the solution does not have to take the form of the ‘designer’ marinas of the 1980s, where extensive residential and leisure development were required to finance the capital investment in pontoons and related marina works.
Yacht and boat clubs are starting to finance pontoon berthing facilities by means of debenture schemes amongst their members.
Local planning authorities should be encouraged to explore the scope for this kind of provision in their areas, rather than be expected to allocate large marina sites in their plans.
We support the emphasis placed here on understanding coastal processes prior to development plans being drawn up.
We strongly advocate sustainable use of coastal resources, which includes the exploitation of minerals.
Again, coastal processes should be well understood before such operations are permitted.
We would like to re-emphasise the need to recycle coastal sites such as those used for power generation.
It is heartening to see the Precautionary Principle being applied to potential risk situations, even though it is not applied more widely throughout the PPG Note.
We are also pleased that the guidance removes existing doubt for local authorities regarding the possibility of compensation claims in such cases.
It would be highly beneficial to the natural environment if additions to existing works could also be made subject to planning control.
The draft PPG Note rightly points out that existing coastal defence policies are not always the cheapest option.
It would be helpful if the guidance also mentioned the economic and environmental advantages of ‘soft’ sea defences over ‘hard’ones, in many situations.
The precautionary approach to development in areas which may become candidates for managed retreat in the future is most welcome.
The application of Environmental Assessment (EA) to coastal zone projects has been poor, especially under the Government View procedure for dredging licences and under Private and Hybrid Bill Parliamentary Procedures.
We are therefore pleased to see emphasis placed on EA in the guidance.
Natural coastal systems operate across man's artificial administrative boundaries.
For those reasons listed in 3.3, and others, the Government should direct local authorities to collaborate in an attempt to obtain a holistic view of processes within coastal cells.
This is the only way to achieve sensible planning of estuaries, large embayments and other geographically interdependent stretches of coast.
This is recognised in the Commons Environment Committee's recent report.
We support the emphasis of data collection and analysis on coastal resources prior to preparation of the development plan.
The four points in 3.4 would be more logically places after 3.8.
The third of these points could mention recycled coastal land.
We support a networking approach with other specialist bodies (3.6) and would like the guidance to encourage liaison with non-governmental bodies, such as has been done in the draft PPG Note on Nature Conservation.
We want to point out again the difficulty of drawing up regional strategic guidance in the absence of a stated national coastal strategy.
Guidance on the structure of co-operative links would be welcome to ensure consistency, as opposed to the varied nature of the coastal fora which are evolving on a voluntary basis.
We would also like a commitment to co-operation within and between Government departments on coastal planning.
Whilst acknowledging the success of Heritage Coast planning and management policies, the PPG Note no longer advocates the management elements.
This is a departure from the Circulars it replaces, and must be made good.
We do not think it necessary to give special attention to marinas (see comment under 2.13).
We suggest an alternative wording for the second of the proposals: ‘-to recycle valuable coastal land which has become redundant, e.g. the regeneration of rundown coastal towns and ports; and…’
The pointers towards management practices here are to be welcomed.
We are pleased that the guidance acknowledges the need for coastal and estuarial management plans, but we feel these should be actively encouraged by the PPG Note.
It is disappointing that the Heritage Coast management plan model has not been built upon in the Note.
ANNEXES
We believe that an annex listing information sources would increase the value of the PPG Note.
As well as listing the statutory bodies and their responsibilities in the coastal zone, the relevant national voluntary bodies could be included, such as was done in the PPG Note on Nature Conservation.
An annex citing examples of good practice would also be helpful.
Examples could include Hampshire County Council's Coastal Strategy and Sefton Metropolitan Borough's coastal planning and management policies.
Conclusion
Local authorities understandably lack specialist information about coastal systems.
This is partly because there is no political pressure coming from the seaward side of the land/ sea divide and hence little inclination to spend precious time and money investigating the subject.
This is why a national lead is so essential.
The draft PPG Note is a welcome step in that direction, but could go much further in giving guidance on the practical implementation of coastal policies.
We trust that Welsh Office Ministers will take the opportunity presented by this PPG Note to develop a national coastal strategy and explain how they expect it to be co-operatively implemented by all the key players in the field.
21st May 1992
Dear ,
Draft PPG Note: Industry, Commerce and Small Businesses
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on this draft PPG Note.
I have pleasure in enclosing our considered response and hope it will be carefully considered before the final draft is prepared.
Yours sincerely,
INDUSTRY, COMMERCE AND SMALL BUSINESSES
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the Welsh Office draft Planning Policy Guidance Note
Introduction
We welcome the fact that the Government's commitment to the environment following publication of the White Paper: ‘This Common Inheritance’ has stimulated a full revision of PPG Note 4 on industrial development.
However, we are concerned about the distinct lack of any clear recognition that the principles of environmental sustainability, which were at the heart of the White Paper, should underpin the future development of industry, commerce and small businesses.
In our view, it is no longer sufficient to describe the Government's aim as ‘encouraging economic development in a way that is compatible with environmental objectives’.
The suggestion that the planning system can ‘integrate’ economic and environmental objectives and ‘weigh up’the importance of development against environmental quality perpetuates an unhelpful distinction between two apparently incompatible priorities.
There is an urgent need to develop practical definitions of ‘sustainable development’ and to offer planning authorities much clearer guidance on what is and what is not environmentally sustainable.
We have already made representations to the Welsh Office on this matter.
Welcome Advice
We welcome the enhanced environmental considerations in the guidance, particularly that on the relationship between transport, pollution and energy use; the importance of taking care when converting buildings of special architectural or historic interest; and on the application of Environmental Assessment to industrial and commercial development.
We also welcome the greater emphasis on development plan policies.
We believe development plans are a vital means of securing the integrated approach to environmental and economic objectives which the guidance seeks.
Clear and up-to-date development plan policies should also lead to a reduction in the number of speculative applications and in the success rate of appeals against local authorities.
Other aspects of the guidance which we welcome include — strengthened advice on avoiding the rigid separation of industrial and residential uses, subject to environmental constraints; the use of conditions and obligations to control the intensification of industry; and the advice against charging for pre-application advice.
Problems associated with the B1 business class
There is growing evidence that the new Business Use Class introduced in 1987 is reducing the ability of planning authorities to retain manufacturing floorspace in urban centres.
It has reinforced the shift of office development to out-of-town locations and resulted in the intensification of employment in economically buoyant areas.
This has had damaging environmental consequences, such as creating new pressures for house building and increasing reliance on car-based transport.
Whilst we recognise that the Government does not want local authorities to use development plan policies to limit change of use rights, we believe the final guidance should indicate the special circumstances in which such constraints may be justified, for example, in order to avoid environmental problems or to sustain the traditional employment base of a particular locality.
In the longer term we would support a review of the B1 Business Use Class to extend the powers of local authorities over this form of development.
Development Control
The planning functions of local authorities are a public service and we therefore endorse the principle that they should not charge fees for pre-application advice on development proposals.
We believe that such advice should be available on a similar basis to amenity and environmental organisations concerned about particular developments.
We are concerned that the emphasis on speed of decision-making should not undermine quality.
Mixed Uses
We support the guidance that rigid separation of residential and industrial developments should be avoided.
Within certain environmental constraints, a mix of land uses can bring important environmental benefits including reducing the need to travel.
We believe that planning authorities should try to avoid problems that result from transport generation, noise and pollution stimulated by a highly zoned land use strategy.
The guidance appears to suggest that the approach to urban and rural industrial and commercial developments should be basically similar.
In our view, rural development should be qualitatively different from its urban counterpart, given that the existence of narrow country lanes, agricultural activities and a dispersed settlement pattern make it necessary to develop a smaller scale pattern businesses closely related to existing enterprises.
We would like to see the special qualities of rural development more clearly described in the PPG Note.
We recognise the considerable environmental benefits that can be obtained from the conversion of redundant buildings in both rural and urban areas, in reducing the need for new buildings, preserving buildings of historic or architectural value and encouraging appropriate economic diversification.
We support conversions that offer new job opportunities in rural areas, so we are concerned by the preponderance of current conversions to residential use.
This should be discouraged through planning guidance.
Economy: the guiding principle?
We are unhappy about the fact the guidance stresses the need to sustain the rural economy as ‘the guiding principle’ of development in the countryside.
This does not accord with the concept of environmentally sustainable development or with existing guidance in PPG Note 7:
‘…local planning authorities should take account of any special designation…and then weigh the following factors:
the need to encourage rural enterprise;
the need to protect landscape, wildlife habitats and historic features;
the quality and versatility of the land for use in agriculture, forestry and other rural rural enterprises;
the need to protect other non-renewable resources.’
This list does not suggest that greater weight should be attached to any one of the four main considerations.
We are anxious to ensure consistency in planning policy advice so that conflict does not arise from different interpretations.
Conservation and heritage
We welcome the guidance on the conversion of buildings of special architectural or historic interest.
We believe that the principles of ensuring that alterations do not damage the historic fabric of the building and respect its special character should be applied wherever buildings judged worthy of retention, particularly those contributing to the special character of a locality, are proposed for conversion.
Recycling urban land
We welcome the strong advice encouraging the recycling of urban land for industrial purposes.
This can be a difficult and expensive process, but it is one that delivers a range of environmental benefits.
Experience shows, however, that this approach is only effectively implemented where there are tough constraints on urban edge and greenfield sites.
Lax local authority policies and the undermining of policies of restraint on appeal, severely undermine processes of urban regeneration.
We have seen too much of this happening during the last ten years and believe it is time to tighten constraints through the use of various mechanisms including statutory Green Belts.
This approach should be encouraged more explicitly in the PPG Note.
Locational factors
We welcome much of the guidance in this section of the Note.
While we recognise that more detailed research is needed on the relationship between housing choice, employment location and transport demands, certain factors are beginning to emerge.
We support the location of new industrial and commercial developments in areas already well-served by good transport infrastructure and public transport.
Such developments should not stimulate increased need to travel among their workforces.
Environmental Assessment
We welcome the section on Environmental Assessment (EA).
We are concerned, however, by the suggestion that EA is only applicable to ‘major’ developments, when the appropriate criterion is ‘significant impact on the environment’(Town and Country Planning (Assessment of Environmental Effects) Regulations 1988).
It is essential that this definition, which stems from the European Community EA Directive, is consistently maintained.
We are also concerned about the negative tone of the advice on EA.
Although EA may cause some delay to a development proposal, we believe it is far more important to ensure that such a development avoids generating environmental impacts that may cost time and money to overcome (if indeed they can be overcome), than avoid the process because of its apparent inconvenience.
We hope this section will be redrafted.
Conditions and enforcement action
We support the bulk of the guidance on the use of conditions to overcome specific problems associated with developments.
However it is important that local planning authorities are encouraged to ensure that such conditions are practically enforceable.
In this respect, we are unhappy about the weak advice on enforcement action which places undue emphasis on negotiation rather than serious punitive action which can actually create conditions in which effective negotiations can take place.
We therefore wish to see removal of the advice that planning authorities should consider ‘the likely effect on the operation of the business’ when considering justifiable enforcement action.
Design and quality of development
We are disappointed that the guidance makes no reference to the importance of the design and quality of industrial and commercial development.
We believe this is particularly important given the scale and visual impact of buildings erected for economic development purposes.
There is great public concern about design and quality, especially when development takes place on a greenfield site.
Although screening and landscaping can help reduce visual impact, it is not on its own an adequate response to design issues.
We therefore believe the PPG Note should encourage planning authorities to include policies and guidance on design and layout criteria for industrial and commercial developments, including the use of locally-appropriate building materials and styles whenever possible.
Development plan policies should also encourage the reuse of derelict buildings.
PROPOSED INDEX TO PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTES AND CIRCULARS
During the last five years Planning Policy Guidance Notes (PPGs) and Minerals Policy Guidance Notes (MPGs) have been published with increasing frequency.
In general, these two series of notes have been welcomed by CPRW and CPRE as a means of clarifying and consolidating Government planning policies.
Both bodies have been able to comment on draft PPGs and MPGs and have secured a number of improvements to their content.
The existence of an increasingly comprehensive series of planning policy notes offers significant opportunities to CPRW and CPRE branches, which are primarily responsible for monitoring and commenting upon local planning policies and applications for development.
The quality and influence of their comments can be greatly enhanced if reference is made to relevant sections of PPGs and MPGs.
However, the sheer volume of planning policy guidance is already quite daunting and likely to become more so as further guidance is issued.
The creation of a relatively simple index could help branch volunteers access some of the key information contained in the guidance notes.
Careful thought would have to be given to the design of such an index to take the following matters into account:
a)
It must be simple enough to be used efficiently by non planning professionals, but detailed enough to produce meaningful results.
b)
It must be designed for use in conjunction with a file containing an up-to-date collection of PPGs, MPGs and circulars, so that it can help quickly identify relevant policy statements for use in the preparation of responses to local planning authorities or in statements to public inquiries.
c)
Arrangements will need to be made to enable the index and the file to be kept up-to-date.
There is a danger that the index, if too all-embracing, could fail to provide the simple introduction to planning policy guidance that is required.
It could also make process of up-dating too demanding to sustain.
It is therefore necessary to establish the limited objectives of the index at the outset.
It should be no more than an introductory aid, enabling the user to identify relevant sections of PPGs and MPGs, and encouraging him/her to delve more deeply.
It should comprise no more than 10 pages listing key words linked to relevant PPGs and/or MPGs, with paragraph numbers given whenever possible.
Dear ,
DRAFT PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTE 6 TOWN CENTRES AND RETAIL DEVELOPMENT
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on this important draft planning policy guidance note.
Please find our response attached.
Yours sincerely,
DRAFT PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTE 6 TOWN CENTRES AND RETAIL DEVELOPMENT
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to draft Planning Policy Guidance Note 6 (Revised)
Introduction
Increased personal mobility, principally through growth in private car ownership, has dramatically altered shopping patterns over recent years.
Perhaps the most obvious feature of this change has been the widespread development of out-of-town superstores and retail parks.
These rely, almost exclusively, on customers gaining access by private car, and often include discount fuel outlets as a ‘loss leader’ attraction.
Concurrent with the growth of this car-based retailing, many people have observed a steady decline in traditional forms of town-centre retailing.
Where this has occurred, there is often a variety of causes, but most are associated with the effects of development policies which have over-emphasised the importance of private vehicular transport.
In our view, the impact of out-of-town shopping on the viability and vitality of town centres must be seen in the wider context of the growing imbalance between private and public modes of transport.
The physical impact of car-based development policies
Increased environmental awareness has begun to reveal the physical impact of encouraging private modes of transport.
Large amounts of undeveloped land, a finite resource, have been covered by roads and built development.
As traffic congestion has built up in town centres, so new development centres have sprung up on the urban fringe and in the open countryside, where car-based access is, at least initially, easier.
A recent study published by CPRE (The Lost Land) has revealed a massive under-estimation in the amount of land taken for development in England, in the Government's official statistics.
Whilst no comparable analysis has been done for Wales, it is likely that the more developed parts of the country would show a similar trend.
It is also clear that the transport sector, dominated as it is by private modes, represents the fastest growing source of airborne pollutants, including greenhouse gases.
It is now agreed that global action is urgently required to first to control and then to reduce these and other emissions.
It is also agreed that this can only be achieved by changing current patterns of human behaviour (see for example, the European Commission's Green Paper on Sustainable Mobility).
This has clear implications for future retail developments.
The social impact of car-based development policies
It is often forgotten how many people in a developed country like Wales, either do not own a car or do not have regular access to one.
As a result, car-based development policies have tended to reduce the freedom of choice and quality of life of this still numerically significant section of the population, while dramatically increasing them for that section with regular access to a car.
This has contributed to the widening gap between ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’recorded in recent times, which some would argue undermines social cohesion and ultimately impoverishes the quality of life for everyone in society.
Furthermore, as the draft PPG Note points out, shopping is a necessary feature in everyone's life.
Town centres have grown up around the market place over many generations.
They are, or were, the main meeting place for both town and country dwellers alike, performing an important social and cultural function.
There is a widespread feeling, however, that the decline in the vitality and attractiveness of many town centres today, together with the social insulation caused by car-based transport, have diminished the social qualities which town centres have offered for so long.
Convenience versus sustainability
Against this background of recent dramatic change in retail patterns that have remained town-based for centuries, the new guidance is welcome.
The convenience of major shopping developments and the wide range of goods and produce they provide in a concentrated location, must be judged in future against wider environmental and social criteria.
Even with the best of intentions it will be difficult to undo past developments.
The potential to encourage lifestyle changes that would make retailing more environmentally sustainable are more limited than they were just a decade ago.
We are not convinced that the attraction of out-of-town shopping is entirely a response to consumer demand.
Major retail chains have invested massively in advertising to create a new demand and a new dependency that fuels more of the same.
We believe it is essential that local planning authorities are encouraged to take a much more critical view of commercial supply and demand forecasts.
These are not targets to be met and should not be the basis or a starting point for development plan policies.
The retailing industry must go further in its professed commitment to environmental protection by developing more sustainable shopping patterns, guided by the land use planning system.
Detailed comments on the draft PPG Note Paragraph 5 — Retail Patterns and Car Use
A clearer distinction should be made between out-of-town and off-centre or edge-of-town developments.
Whereas the former can be particularly damaging in terms of land-take and car-dependence, the latter can utilise already urbanised land, reduce town-centre traffic and benefit from public transport systems.
We are concerned that the draft PPG Note suggests that out-of-town food superstores may reduce car use.
We understand that this reference is based on research commissioned by Sainsbury PLC.
Although this may not be widely applicable, the reference will used to justify out-of-town foodstores in wholly inappropriate locations.
Instead, we would like to see a clearer indication of the circumstances in which car use can be reduced through different shopping patterns.
Paragraphs 7 to 9 — Success Rate of Appeals
The Government's encouragement of major out-of-town retail development should not be overlooked.
Over the period 1984 to 1991/2 the level of successful appeals on major retail applications has been consistently high in relation to other types of development.
In five out of the last seven years the success rate for this type of appeal has been the first or second highest for all categories and almost one in every two appeals has been lost by local authorities.
This is an indication of how far government policy has undermined local planning authority priorities on the ground.
Paragraph 11 — The Value of Small Shops
We welcome the recognition of the value of small urban and rural shops.
We agree that the loss of the traditional local shop can have a particularly severe impact on the community it serves.
However, such shops have closed with increasing frequency during the period that large out-of-town retail centres have been developed.
Farm shops may also have contributed to this decline in the local store.
Paragraph 14 — Retail Diversity
We believe that the protection of a healthy and attractive countryside depends to a large extent on the rejuvenation of towns as attractive places in which to live and work.
We agree that towns, especially their centres, should offer a wide range of services.
We would welcome the inclusion of guidance to encourage increased diversity in the types of retail outlet found in town centres, so that particular concentrations of, for example, building societies or take-aways, can be better managed.
Paragraphs 16, 17 and 29 — Town Centre Design
The loss of local character and distinctiveness in the look of town centres is one of the factors making them ‘soulless’ places in which to live and work.
This is partly the result of inadequate control over facades and signing, reinforced by the trend toward corporate design by major retail chains.
We welcome the support for design briefs, and we hope the final PPG Note will encourage the retention and recreation of local character and distinctiveness in retail design.
Paragraphs 20 to 26 — Development Plans
We firmly support a plan-led approach to retail development and therefore welcome the general thrust of the draft PPG Note.
Emphasis on the importance of integrating retail developments with housing, employment and transport policies is particularly welcome.
We also think reference should be made to the need to minimise the demand for new distribution warehouses.
Despite all its fine sentiments, however, the main weakness in the guidance is its lack of clear operational advice on development plan policies and on the matters to be weighed in planning decisions.
Although planning authorities are urged to consider the differential effects of in-town and out-of-town developments, the guidance studiously avoids giving a clear indication of the shopping patterns to be favoured in future.
Without a clear Government lead, local planning authorities will have no reason to feel confident that a refusal of planning permission for an out-of-town development will be supported by the Secretary of State.
We are surprised that the guidance makes scant reference to the importance of strategic planning guidance, particularly since it stresses the close scrutiny which the Secretary of State will want to give to large scale or controversial proposals, which must be referred to him.
This recognition of the more than local effects of major retail development confirms how crucial it is to place such development within a strategic context.
Uncertainty over the future of county structure plans in Wales, as a result of proposed local government reorganisation, reinforces this point.
Whilst we recognise that planning guidance should not be too prescriptive in terms of retail floorspace limits, we think that local planning authorities should set guidance limits which reflect some estimate of the environmental capacity of the plan area.
In this context, the final PPG Note should encourage local planning authorities to apply environmental appraisal techniques in designing development plan policies.
Clear guidance on its use in assessing the environmental impacts of different retail development options would help reinforce the Government's stated objectives in PPG Note 12.
Paragraphs 27 to 40 — New Retail Developments
We are no longer convinced it is the job of local planning authorities to ‘balance’ competing demands in relation to land use.
This is what planners have striven to do since land use planning emerged as a professional discipline, yet it has led to the over-exploitation of environmental capital and an inexorable decline in the quality of the environment.
The concept of balance implies that a trade-off is always possible; that different and sometimes mutually exclusive objectives can be accommodated simply by spatial separation.
We strongly believe that in future, planning should attempt to ‘reconcile’ competing demands.
Reconciliation implies the need to achieve harmony by making different objectives compatible.
We believe that this what is required if we are to achieve environmentally sustainable development.
We accept that it is not the function of the planning system to preserve existing commercial interests or to inhibit competition between different methods of retailing.
This does not mean, however, that the effects of competition are always an irrelevant consideration.
Where a local planning authority believes a development will harm the public interest through its land use impact on other sites, such as the vitality of town centres, this should be a material consideration.
Guidance to this effect is required in the final PPG Note.
We welcome the advice that new retail development should be sited so as to reduce the number and length of car journeys and to provide for those who do not have access to a car.
However, we do not believe the PPG Note will achieve these objectives unless weakening caveats such as‘where possible’(paragraph 30) are removed and stronger operational guidance is given.
The guidance should require site selection to be based on the positive need to encourage access other than by car.
Although the draft PPG purports to elaborate on the concepts of town-centre vitality and viability, we do not believe it provides a sufficiently clear explanation to avoid lengthy debates at public inquiries over these terms.
A clearer indication of the patterns of retail development that can reduce car use is required.
We would also like to see the constraints on major new out-of-town shopping centres listed in paragraph 37 applied to centres of less that 50,000 sq m.
We believe that the sensitivity of the receiving environment should be the determining factor, particularly in relation to the need for an Environmental Assessment (paragraph 39).
We are pleased to see the guidance state unequivocally that major retail developments are inappropriate in Green Belts.
We look forward to the designation of Green Belts in the more developed areas of Wales and presume that this guidance will then apply.
Until this happens we believe such areas will continue to be particularly vulnerable to this and all other types of development.
We are not clear what is meant by ‘important countryside’ outside Green Belt areas (paragraph 37).
We understand from PPG Note 7 that all countryside should be ‘safeguarded for its own sake’.
We expect the final PPG Note to be compatible with existing guidance.
Reference to agricultural land of ‘high quality’ in the same paragraph should be changed to the ‘best and most versatile agricultural land’for the same reason.
Other Matters
Proposals for major retail development are often ‘sweetened’ by offers of planning gain, particularly in relation to the provision of transport and other infrastructure.
Some of the most controversial planning agreements have been struck in this way.
We believe clear guidance on this issue should be provided in the final PPG Note.
Although the draft PPG Note recognises the cumulative impact of retail developments on town centres, the Direction proposed by the Secretary of State relates only to schemes which are individually in excess of 20,000 sq m.
We believe that the Direction must require notification of all schemes which either individually or cumulatively add up to 20,000 sq m, where separate schemes are being considered together.
Major out-of-town retail developments often become centres of other kinds of development once planning permission has been given.
They can encourage the development of entirely new forms of warehousing and distribution reliant on road transport, resulting in further environmental impact.
We would therefore like the final PPG Note to include guidance on the powers available to local planning authorities to control such consequential development, especially where sensitive sites are involved.
ON VERGE OF A NEW ERA IN PLANNING FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, CONFERENCE TOLD
Two hundred delegates gathering in Cardiff today for a Euro-Conference on ‘Sustainability’ will be told that new planning policies must be used to encourage environmentally sustainable forms of development.
Dr Neil Caldwell, Director of the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales, will urge delegates to grasp the ‘historic opportunities’ that now exist to plan a sustainable society and avoid the mistakes of the past.
Dr Caldwell will say: ‘We are on the verge of a new era in land use planning.
The ‘let it rip’ days of Nicholas Ridley are over and a new package of environmentally-sensitive planning policies (2) has been put in its place, thanks to campaigning groups like CPRW.’
But Dr Caldwell warned that ‘failure to change the consumption patterns of relatively rich countries like Wales would break the fragile global consensus achieved at the recent Earth Summit, and lead to environmental disaster.
Fortunately our planning system can now help to reduce demands for energy and resources.’
CPRW wants to see the new generation of structure and local plans conforming to government advice on sustainable development (1).
All such plans must be subject to an environmental appraisal and show how local resources will be conserved and sustainably used.
‘This is a great opportunity, for which the Government deserves credit’, said Dr Caldwell.
‘Cynical ‘business as usual’ must be replaced by ‘business for survival’from now on.’
Notes for Editors
The 1991 Planning Act replaced the notorious planning policy ‘presumption in favour of development’ with a ‘presumption in favour of the development plan’.
Thus new all new developments must conform with the development plan which must ‘work towards ensuring that development and growth are sustainable’.
(Quote from paragraph 1.8, Welsh Office Planning Policy Note 12).
Since the passing of this Act vast areas of Government planning guidance has been reviewed and new guidance issued on such subjects as coastal planning, nature conservation, sport and recreation, and archaeology.
All of this stresses the need to ensure that future development must enhance rather than damage the environment.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
CARMEL WOODS CAMPAIGN CONSORTIUM LAUNCHED
The long-running campaign to save Carmel Woods in Dinefwr from destruction by quarrying moves into a higher gear today with the launch of a Campaign Consortium (1) and a public appeal for £30,000 towards professional costs.
Founder member of the consortium, CPRW, has already pledged £5,000 and will be launching its own appeal through its magazine next month.
The money is needed to hire legal and planning experts to present evidence that the consortium believes proves McAlpine's claimed planning permission to quarry almost 500 acres of limestone habitat, is ‘void for uncertainty’— ie. is not legally valid.
A public inquiry is due to commence on the 16th of February.
(2) CPRW's Director, Dr Neil Caldwell, said, ‘The case we will present to the inquiry is based on nine years of research.
We have engaged a top barrister to mount the best defence possible for this nationally important site (3).
But we desperately need the public to help us win this battle.’
Notes for Editors
Members of the Carmel Woods Campaign Consortium include the Royal Society for Nature Conservation /The Wildlife Trusts Partnership, the Dyfed Wildlife Trust, the Campaign for the Protection of Gwenlais Valley, Friends of the Earth, the Open Spaces Society and CPRW.
McAlpine Quarry Products Ltd has appealed to David Hunt against the non-determination of their registered Interim Development Order, under the 1991 Planning and Compensation Act.
Mr Hunt has ordered a public inquiry ‘to determine the legal validity and extent’ of the claimed IDO.
This will commence on the 16th of February at the Carmarthen Bowls Club.
The inspector is holding a pre-inquiry meeting at the club, starting at 10a.m. on Friday the 22nd of January (today), during which the Campaign Consortium will be launched.
CPRW believes Carmel Woods is of national (UK) importance for two reasons:
a)
It is an ‘NCR’ Site of Special Scientific Importance for biological and geological reasons.
CCW wants to manage it as a National Nature Reserve, but this is being blocked by the IDO claim.
b)
This is the first public inquiry into an IDO registration and the outcome could have far-reaching consequences for many other IDOs across Wales and England.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY IS ESSENTIAL IN EUROPE
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales will tell the annual meeting of the European Environmental Bureau (EEB), being held in Brussels this week, that protection of the Welsh environment is dependent on there being a level playing field in environmental policy across the whole European Community.
During the meeting, voluntary environmental bodies from the twelve EC member states will debate and adopt a declaration on the EC's ‘Fifth Action Programme on the Environment and the Subsidiarity Principle’.
This will be presented to the Edinburgh Summit on the 11th of December.
Many EEB members, including CPRW, are worried that the existing framework of EC environmental policy could be weakened by arguments over ‘subsidiarity’ if responsibility for setting environmental standards is returned to the discretion of individual member states.
CPRW's Director, Dr Neil Caldwell, who is in Brussels, believes the UK Government and others could make the environment a ‘sacrificial lamb’ in its campaign against perceived European centralism.
‘The whole edifice of EC environmental policy, which is aimed at ensuring uniform standards, is at stake’, said Dr Caldwell.
‘If one country is allowed to get away with lower standards, then the others will quickly follow to ensure their products can compete.
We should be aiming for higher standards, not encouraging lower ones’, said Dr Caldwell.
Dr Caldwell will also tell his European colleagues that, for all its talk about the principle of subsidiarity, the UK Government has an appalling record of centralism within the UK state.
‘We had an extraordinary example of this recently when the Department of Transport was asked to nominate roads for the proposed Trans- European Highway Network, and failed to consult Welsh Office Ministers before proposing the A5 across Snowdonia.’
‘It is ignorant to suggest that ‘federalism’ equals ‘centralism’.
If Wales was part of a federal United Kingdom, we would obviously have far more control over our own affairs’, said Dr Caldwell.
Notes for Editors
The European Environmental Bureau is the federal organisation representing voluntary environmental bodies in the 12 European Community Member States.
It also has links with similar bodies in Eastern Europe and the EFTA countries.
During the annual meeting its members will meet representatives of the European Commission and Parliament.
CPRW has been a member of the EEB for many years and works through it to influence European and global environmental policies.
ENVIRONMENT AWARD FOR PENNAL CHURCHYARD
The Meirionnydd Branch of the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales will award their annual Rural Wales Award this year to Pennal Parish Council for the work done in Pennal Churchyard.
The Improvements have taken some years to transform the churchyard and to rebuild the wall around it.
The poor state of the wall required it to be rebuilt and the people of Pennal took advantage of this to tidy up the churchyard and to turn it into a ‘heritage garden’.
The Rev. Geraint ab Iorwerth said ‘We have kept the character of the church and the village, but we have also made a garden where people can come to enjoy nature and enjoy our heritage.’
The Award will be given by Mr John Roberts of Meirionnydd CPRW to mark CPRW's recognition of the hard work of local people caring for their environment.
Also, the Manager of the National Westminster's Tywyn Branch will be at the Church service on Sunday morning as a representative of the Bank who sponsor the Award scheme nationally.
Notes for Editors
The Rural Wales Awards, sponsored by National Westminster Bank, can be given by the county branches of CPRW for practically anything that promotes environmental good practice, or displays design that is in harmony with the landscape, or that has served to restore an important landscape feature (natural or man-made), or that is innovative or promotes better environmental awareness and understanding.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
Photographers and reporters are warmly invited to attend the ceremony after the Church Service in Pennal at approx 12:00 am on Sunday 25 October.
MEETING THE DEMAND FOR BUILDING MATERIALS WILL SCAR THE FACE OF WALES, CPRW WARNS
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales has told the Welsh Office that its plan to meet a near doubling of demand for aggregates over the next 20 years, will cause irrevocable harm to many areas of Wales (1).
In its response to new planning guidance on aggregates provision, CPRW has welcomed the emphasis placed on recycling and more efficient use of resources, but has condemned the huge rise in consumption which the guidance tries to satisfy rather than control.
‘The Welsh Office knows very well that meeting this demand will cause serious environmental damage and suffering to many communities’, said CPRW's Director, Dr Neil Caldwell, last night.
‘It is trying to shift the burden from land- based quarries to coastal super-quarries, off- shore dredging and the reuse of waste materials, but by meeting forecast demand, even land-based quarries will have to produce 35% more aggregates by early next century’(2), said Dr Caldwell.
NORTH WALES: CPRW is alarmed at the plan to find three-quarters of the needs of North Wales from waste materials, while still increasing primary production by 35% to find the other quarter.
It fears that vast quantities slate waste in Gwynedd will be quarried and exported causing severe damage to the landscape and its wildlife, the network of rural roads and many Welsh-speaking communities.
However, it does support some reuse of slate waste.
SOUTH WALES: Despite primary production rising by 35%, millions of tonnes of material from coastal super-quarries will be needed to satisfy projected demand.
CPRW fears much of this will have to be landed in Milford Haven, because of its deep-water facilities, causing a huge increase in road haulage across South Wales.
The amount dredged from the Bristol Channel will also increase, despite fears that it is already affecting beaches, and reducing their buffering capacity as sea-level rises due to the ‘green-house’ effect.
MID WALES: New sources of sand, gravel and crushed rock will be needed to not only to meet the demand in Mid Wales, but adjoining areas of England as well.
CPRW is worried that many areas of beautiful countryside, some protected as special landscapes, could be badly damaged.
‘This is a critical moment’, said Dr Caldwell.
‘We either dig up the countryside to meet growing aggregates consumption on roads, buildings and other major civil engineering projects, or take a decisive step towards a more sustainable society’.
‘Everyone must urge their MP to tell the Secretary of State for Wales his strategy is wrong and must be changed’, said Dr Caldwell.
Notes for Editors
CPRW has responded to draft Minerals Planning Guidance Note 6 (MPG6) which is a key statement of Government policy on future provision of aggregates (sand, gravel and crushed rock).
The graph in Figure 2 (attached) shows the rising demand which MPG6 seeks to satisfy.
Wales is divided into two regions (North and South Wales) for aggregates provision.
The following statistics are taken from MPG6:
The North Wales Region
The guidelines envisage that over the period to 2011 the proportion of aggregates supply met from primary land-based sources in the region will decline from 85% to just over 20%.
Land-based sand and gravel from the region will increase from 5% to 20% by the end of the decade.
The supply from waste/recycled resources is expected to increase to over 70% of regional aggregates consumption by 2011.
The South Wales Region
The guidelines envisage that over the 20 year period to 2011 the proportion of aggregates supply met from primary land-based sources in the region will decline from 65% to around 45%, despite a net increase in output.
Marine sand and gravel is expected to supply between 10–15% of rising demand.
Imports from coastal super-quarries (in Scotland and Northern Europe) will supply almost 30% of consumption by 2011.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
Sunday 10th January: For Immediate Release
CALL TO HALT OIL SEARCH THREAT
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales, is calling on the Government not to issue any new licenses to allow oil companies to prospect for oil and gas off the Welsh coastline.
CPRW's National Executive Committee agreed this course of action yesterday, following a request from the Friends of Cardigan Bay that CPRW join them in calling for a suspension of the 14th Round of Oil/Gas Licensing (1).
Both bodies believe the Government must look much more closely at the environmental impact and risks associated with further prospecting before any new licenses are issued (2).
CPRW opposed the issuing of licences to the Hamilton Oil Company to prospect close to Bardsey Island.
When it met officials from the Department of Trade and Industry last year to urge that areas of the seabed close to the coastline and islands of Wales be withdrawn from the licensing round it was only partially successful.
Several areas that CPRW considers of ‘extreme environmental sensitivity’ are currently being offered to oil companies by the DTI (see map).
‘We are alarmed by the reckless way in which the Government seems determined to press ahead with oil prospecting against the advice of its official advisers on nature conservation’,(3) said CPRW's Director, Dr Neil Caldwell.
‘The protective measures taken by the ‘experienced’ Shetland oil industry have been used to reassure us that the environmental risks associated with this industry are now minimal.
The fact is, a disaster like that facing the Shetlands could also engulf Great Ormes Head, Skomer or Gower in the future, inflicting huge damage on the environment and economy of Wales’, said Dr Caldwell.
Notes for Editors
Permission to prospect for oil and gas in blocks of the seabed in UK waters is given to oil companies that bid under an annual licensing round to the Government.
The Department of Trade and Industry is currently considering bids under the 14th Licensing Round which includes the blocks shown on the attached map.
CPRW is a member of the Cardigan Bay Forum.
The CBF wants the Government to carry out a Strategic Environmental Assessment of the impact of oil prospecting in and around Cardigan Bay before any new licenses are issued.
It also wants environmentally sensitive areas of the Bay made inviolable.
CPRW believes this approach must also be adopted around Anglesey, Pembrokeshire, Gower and Lundy.
The Government's official scientific advisers, the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, has recommended that many of the blocks currently being offered to oil companies should be withdrawn from the licensing round.
The Countryside Council for Wales is a member of the JNCC.
PUT PRINCIPLE BEFORE £100,000 RADNORSHIRE'S COUNCILLORS URGED
Radnorshire District Council's planning committee, who meet today to decide whether to permit a windfarm on Bryn Titli in the unspoilt upper Wye valley, have been urged to reject both the application and the £100,000 cheque offered by National Wind Power Ltd to the council in exchange for planning permission.
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales believes members of the planning committee should draw confidence from the company's blatant action.
‘We want local councils to use their muscle to negotiate with developers to ensure wind power stations are only permitted in places where they do least harm to beautiful landscapes and rural communities’, said CPRW's Director, Dr Neil Caldwell.
‘But, sadly, those in Mid Wales have so far proved a ‘soft touch’ for hard-nosed developers.’
‘However, the threat that councillors may back the strong opposition coming from local people by rejecting the scheme, as recommended by their planning officer, has shown the potential for serious negotiation.
Instead of accepting what may appear to many to be a cynical bribe, Radnorshire must deliver a clear message that it will not sell its beautiful countryside or the quality of life of its residents for cash.
If councillors put principle before temptation, they will be able to ensure that wind power stations are built in the most appropriate locations from now on’, said Dr Caldwell.
Notes for Editors
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
‘INADEQUATE’ USK BILL RETREAT ON THE CARDS?
Newport Borough Council is close to withdrawing its Private Usk Barrage Bill from Parliament for a second time.
This controversial move was revealed during a meeting with petitioners against the bill last week (1).
When the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales, and the Gwent and Brecknock Wildlife Trusts met council officers and their advisers they asked for an assurance the council would proceed with the bill (2).
The voluntary bodies complained they would be forced to incur unreasonable costs preparing their case for Parliament if the bill was to be withdrawn yet again.
They believe the council, aware of its weak case in favour of the barrage, is trying to wear down the opposition by attrition.
The borough council has also been told that its measures designed to compensate property-owners for groundwater damage that might result from the barrage, were ‘gravely inadequate’.
John Popham, a parliamentary agent representing 13 local residents who have petitioned against the bill, believes that ‘residents of Newport should be given the same degree of protection as the government has decided is necessary for property owners in Cardiff’.
In a letter to his clients (3), Mr Popham describes Newport Borough Council as ‘effectively judge and jury in its own court’.
He has warned the council that unless it rectifies this situation it should expect strong opposition against the bill.
Notes for Editors
Representatives of the three voluntary bodies met officers of Newport Borough Council, its parliamentary agent and its engineering and environmental advisers at Newport Civic Centre on Tuesday 8th September.
During the course of the meeting it became clear that the council is considering withdrawing the bill for a second time in the hope of being able to adopt a new parliamentary order-making procedure under the 1992 Transport and Public Works Act, which may come into force in the next parliamentary session.
This would avoid the need for a select committee hearing but would mean that a public inquiry would be held.
The full text of the letter from Mr Popham to his clients is attached to this news release, together with a covering letter from Dr Neil Caldwell, Director of CPRW.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the countryside and the amenities of the towns and villages of Wales.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
SHOPPING LIST IS A POOR INITIATIVE
The Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales has greeted the publication of the Secretary of State's Second Anniversary Report on the Environment in Wales with a call to him to transform this ‘shopping list’ of projects into a proper integrated environmental strategy.
CPRW has called on Mr Hunt to transform this list into a ‘bold, coherent and integrated environmental strategy for Wales’.
It wants him to go beyond the landscaping of degraded industrial sites as a means of attracting new investment, to embrace the concept of ‘sustainable development’ which was backed by the UK government at the recent Earth Summit.
‘Whilst we support land reclamation, urban redevelopment and housing improvements, and recognise they can improve the quality of life for many people in Wales, unless these activities are designed to achieve more than just aesthetic goals they may actually increase environmental damage through energy consumption, waste generation, increased resource demands and traffic flows’, said Dr Neil Caldwell, CPRW's Director.
‘We want to see a coherent strategy drawing together Mr Hunt's disjointed range of projects under global themes such as climate change, waste management, energy efficiency and biodiversity.
It would then be possible to see what progress the Welsh Office and its various agencies are making towards the attainment of common goals.
Clearer direction should also be given to local government, private business and the public showing what they must do to build an environmentally sustainable society.
Targets are needed so that performance can be properly measured by the Secretary of State and the public’, said Dr Caldwell.
‘We believe Mr Hunt's initiative is in serious danger of slipping behind current thinking’, concluded Dr Caldwell.
Notes for Editors
The 1990 White Paper requires the government to publish an annual progress report showing how far it has got with the ‘greening’ of its policies and actions.
Responsibility for the main report lies with the Department of the Environment, but the Welsh Office also publishes a report describing progress with the list of commitments Mr Hunt made in the Welsh chapter.
He refers to this list as his ‘Environment Initiative’.
CPRW is Wales' premier countryside watchdog group.
Established in 1928, it plays a vital role in protecting the country's coast and countryside, while encouraging sustainable rural development.
Funded by members' subscriptions and supporters' donations, CPRW is an authoritative source of guidance on conservation issues for political leaders, the news media and rural bodies in Wales.
AN OVERVIEW OF CPRW RECRUITMENT
CPRW RECRUITMENT STRATEGY 1992/1993
Recruitment to any organisation must be an ongoing process, however it was thought that a concerted effort should be made by CPRW in 1992 to significantly increase membership.
A number of measures were agreed a meeting of Council held on 14th March 1992 as a comprehensive strategy to increase CPRW's overall membership to 4,000 (0.14% of the population of Wales).
Realising that there would be ‘natural wastage’ over the year, a recruitment target of 633 was set, and this proportionally divided between the various branches.
A number of methods were outlined to reach this target of 633.
Briefly these were:
a)
Member Get Member,
b)
Branch Mailing Lists,
c)
Summer Events,
d)
Local Outlets (Dispensers),
e)
International Mailing,
f)
Reciprocal Mailings,
g)
Regular Recruitment by HQ.
Some of these methods were to be undertaken by the Branches and some by HQ.
Below is an analysis of how successful the various strategies were:
a) Member Get Member
X new members were recruited this way.
A personal approach from a friend or acquaintance seems to sway many people to join.
Comparison with CPRE statistics suggests that the effectiveness of this method may decrease if used without a break.
b) Branch-Produced Mailing Lists
This was CPRE's most successful recruiting ploy for the period quoted above.
It was CPRW's least successful.
Not one single name was forwarded from branches to HQ, and so no action could be taken.
c) Summer Events
HQ attended the Royal Welsh Show and the National Eisteddfod.
Both these events were moderately successful; x at The Royal Welsh Show and Y at the National Eisteddfod.
Although they showed a monetary loss, Council agreed that the benefits outweighed these.
d) Local Outlets (Dispensers)
A cardboard dispenser unit was produced for distribution at various types of outlets throughout Wales.
All branches received some and they were left in public places.
So far x members have been recruited by this method.
By its nature, it is a long term investment and some of the dispensers may remain where they are for at least a year.
e) International Mailing
A volunteer in Radnorshire, with much hard work, organised a mailing to Welsh ex-patriot societies in North America.
No members were recruited by this method.
f) Reciprocal Mailings
A number of environmental organisations were approached to do a reciprocal mailing with branches or HQ.
The National Trust declined, CADW are still considering the proposal, the Brecknock Wildlife Trust agreed to take 1,000 leaflets and the Dyfed Wildlife Trust 3,000.
We recruited 1 member from Brecknock and 3 from Dyfed.
g) Regular Recruitment by HQ
Letters written to members of the public in contact with HQ regularly include a membership leaflet.
This has been the second most successful method of recruitment; x new members were recruited by Head Office in 1992.
2. 1992: SUCCESS OR FAILURE?
While we have more or less maintained our overall membership figure, and that in a deep recession, we have fallen far short of the targets set in March 1992, which were felt at that time to be reasonable and achievable.
Some of the methods we have tried such as e) and f) have been very disappointing.
Perhaps we were wrong to expect so much of them.
In the case of d), this is perhaps a long term strategy which will yield a slow but, hopefully, steady trickle.
We have room to be pleased with a), c), g), although there may be ways to tweak them up further.
Method b) home produced mailing lists, which was CPRE's single most successful recruitment method between January and June 1992, did not really get off the ground.
Perhaps there is a natural reluctance to give addresses to an organisation such as CPRW which intends to write demanding time and money.
3.
RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS TO THE 1992 RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN
Perhaps the target of 4,000 by the end of 1992 was unreasonable in itself.
This was the first year that CPRW had set targets and perhaps we were too optimistic.
However some branches have managed to make good progress towards meeting their target.
Anglesey for example are within a hair's breadth of attaining theirs.
As targets were proportional this begs the question, is the failure to make progress with recruitment linked to the dynamism of the branches?
Our branch members are volunteers who have given, taken together, many centuries of person-years to CPRW.
However in many branches active members who do actual work, not just attending committee meetings are few.
Those who do the work are overburdened with other matters; policy/planning/social organising/publicity, to name only a few.
They do not have the time or energy to take on recruitment seriously.
The Suggested Changes to Branch Operation, if acted upon by branches, should rectify this.
I believe that if I have one person in each branch whom I can support and direct to implement the branch recruitment strategy we will make some progress.
THE 1993 RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN
Initial suggestions to be discussed for the 1993 strategy are:
1)
We did not keep adequate, easily retrievable records over the year, noting how each new member had been recruited.
A simple pro forma could perhaps be designed to this end for 1993.
2)
Some branches' totals appear better than they should; Pembrokeshire and Ceredigion benefited from having the Youth Conference and National Eisteddfod in their areas so they received a disproportionate number of HQ recruits.
Perhaps a recruitment target could be divided in two; those to be recruited by HQ and those by the branch themselves.
This would have the psychological effect of making the branch total lower, but also clearly reveal the actual progress that the branch itself has made.
3)
There should be a branch recruitment strategy (broadly the same for each branch) which is agreed upon and taken as the personal responsibility of a nominated Branch Recruitment Secretary.
As parts of this strategy we should consider using all the methods employed last year again.
4)
CPRE did very well with their road verges leaflet.
This leaflet took an easily accessible matter (not too academic or removed from peoples' everyday lives) and turned it into a hook for recruitment.
Perhaps our windfarm leaflet could be used as our equivalent?
These are further developments of thoughts outlined in ‘An Overview of CPRW Recruitment’.
That was primarily considering the failures of last year's recruitment programme (in as much as we felt far short of our recruitment targets.)
I've been doing more thinking about what we should do in future.
1.
Last Year's Problems
Basically, the methods we used, although tried and tested by other organisations did not bring us the 4,000 members we hoped to see by the end of 1992.
By and large, HQ recruitment activities (rolling general recruitment, summer events) were as successful as other work pressures allow them to be.
We recognise that the bulk of actual recruitment spade work will be done at a local level, but, apart from a few heroic efforts, the branches were not up to it.
Possible reasons for this are;
1) Unrealistic target.
Suggest 5,000 members by 2000
2) Lack of expertise in the branches
3) Lack of guidance to branches from HQ
4) Lack of motivation in the branches
From travelling around I get the impression that, although they say they want to, most branches have other concerns which prevent them from taking up recruitment in an effective way.
We must also recognise that we have not given them the support and management guidance on practical recruitment that they, as volunteers, need.
There may also be an element of not wanting to change cosy (although dilapidated) branch structures, by bringing in new members.
The paper accepted at the November Council on ‘Suggested Changes to Branch Recruitment’ will go some way to addressing these problems.
If suggestions are acted upon, a Recruitment Officer will be appointed which will give branch recruitment activity a focus.
This focus can be used to direct all recruitment efforts.
This person will be strongly encouraged to attend the training course on recruitment (if they are unwilling then they should not be doing the job).
They will be the contact of the Assistant Director (Branches) within the branch and a strong, supportive relationship should be built up.
A branch recruitment strategy should be agreed upon between the Recruitment Officer and the AD(B).
This will consist of an achievable target and a programme of recruitment events.
These events can be the same as those employed last year.
The difference will be that there will be a well motivated, well managed person in place to take personal responsibility for them on behalf of the branch.
Almost of equal importance as regards recruitment is the post of Publicity Officer.
It is important that the branch broadcasts clearly visible messages which advertise interested members of the public of the existence of CPRW and the work it is doing.
They then become potential recruits for the Recruitment Officer's annual programme of events.
The Publicity Officer post then is supported by training, and a direct managerial relationship with AD(B).
2.
Next Year's Solutions
I will over the next year endeavour to establish both a Recruitment Officer and a Publicity Officer for every branch.
I will switch emphasis from attending Branch meetings to meeting on a one to one basis with these people in each branch.
We will agree an achievable recruitment and publicity strategy for each branch.
I will produce a practical resource pack for both posts.
3.
Headquarter's Recruitment Responsibilities in 1993
Our responsibilities fall into two main categories; a coordination of branch recruitment work and our own independent initiatives.
Headquarter's has a key contribution to make in recruitment.
We have no regional offices, and do not appear in any local telephone books; publicity material like the leaflets have HQ address on them and so many people making contact with CPRW for the first time, no matter where they live, come first to us.
Methods of recruitment that HQ is responsible for are; following up general enquiries, attending national summer events, and international mailings.
There is no reason to refrain from any of these at the moment, although the cost v. benefit of international mailing may mean that, with a little more experience, we may reassess its worth.
Methods that are used by other organisations, which may be worth considering are direct advertising in national press, and production of a recruitment leaflet based on an issue of concern such as the CPRE Road Verges leaflet, and various Greenpeace examples.
APPENDIX A Possible Recruitment Strategies for 1993
a)
Member Get Member — Branch responsibility — good success in 1992.
We should continue with this one.
b)
Branch Mailing Lists — Branch responsibility — dismal failure in 1992.
We should closely look at why this flopped before suggesting it for next year as another failure would be demoralising.
c)
Summer Events — HQ responsibility — good success in 1992.
Should continue.
d)
Local Outlets — Branch responsibility — moderate success in 1992.
Should continue.
e)
International Mailings — HQ responsibility — abject failure in 1992.
Should consider cost before retrying.
f)
Reciprocal Mailings — Branch responsibility — small success in 1992.
Because of cost should be reserved for very ‘hot’ lists.
g)
Regular Recruitment — HQ responsibility — good success in 1992.
Should continue.
h)
Direct Advertising — HQ Responsibility — high cost but should perhaps consider experimenting
i)
Issue of Concern Leaflet — HQ Responsibility — high cost but windfarm leaflet could be modified to this end.
j)
National Poster — HQ Responsibility — potential cost problems but worth trying
k)
National Video — HQ Responsibility — high cost but if funding can be found worth trying.
CPRW RECRUITMENT STRATEGY 1992
Recruitment to any organisation must be an ongoing process, however it was thought that a concerted effort should be made by CPRW in 1992 to significantly increase membership.
A number of measures were agreed a meeting of Council held on 14th March 1992 as a comprehensive strategy to increase CPRW's overall membership to 4,000 (0.14% of the population of Wales).
Realising that there would be ‘natural wastage’ over the year, a recruitment target of 633 was set, and this proportionally divided between the various branches.
A number of methods were outlined to reach this target of 633.
Briefly these were:
a)
Member Get Member,
b)
Branch Mailing Lists,
c)
Summer Events,
d)
Local Outlets (Dispensers),
e)
International Mailing,
f)
Reciprocal Mailings,
g)
Regular Recruitment by HQ.
Some of these methods were to be undertaken by the Branches and some by HQ.
RECRUITMENT ANALYSIS FOR CPRW IN 1992
A total of 234 new members were recruited:
1.
Member Get Member: 44
2.
Youth Conference: 26
3.
Through Magazine: 23
4.
Through Head Office: 18
5.
National Eisteddfod: 14
6.
Royal Welsh: 10
7.
Branch Events: 8
8.
Through Local Branch: 8
9.
Free Membership: 5
10.
Dispensers: 4
11.
Exhibitions: 3
12.
Christmas Gifts: 3
13.
Unknown: 66
14.
Community Council Mailing:2
a) Member Get Member
probably the largest numbers of new members were recruited this way.
A personal approach from a friend or acquaintance.
Surprisingly, a glance at CPRE's recruitment figures from January to June 1992 does not give this method as one of their most successful.
The only reason I can suggest for this is that they may have ‘member get member fatigue’; ie it has been used very often in the past and now sees diminishing returns.
b) Branch Produced Mailing Lists
This was CPRE's most successful recruiting ploy for the period quoted above.
It was CPRW's least successful.
Not one single name was forwarded from branches to HQ, and so no action could be taken.
c) Summer Events
HQ attended the Royal Welsh Show and the National Eisteddfod.
Both these events were moderately successful.
Although they showed a monetary loss, the number of members recruited was up on last year.
d) Local Outlets (Dispensers)
A cardboard dispenser unit was produced for distribution at various types of outlets throughout Wales.
All branches received some and they were left in public places.
Around 5 members were recruited by this method.
By its nature, it is a long term investment and some of the dispensers may remain where they are for at least a year.
e) International Mailing
A volunteer in Radnorshire, with much hard work, organised a mailing to Welsh ex-patriot societies in North America.
No members were recruited by this method.
f) Reciprocal Mailings
A number of environmental organisations were approached to do a reciprocal mailing with branches or HQ.
The National Trust declined, CADW are still considering the proposal, the Brecknock Wildlife Trust agreed to take 1,000 leaflets and the Dyfed Wildlife Trust 3,000.
We recruited 1 member from Brecknock and 3 from Dyfed.
g) Regular Recruitment by HQ
Letters written to members of the public in contact with HQ regularly include a membership leaflet.
This has been the second most successful method of recruitment.
2.
SUCCESS OR FAILURE?
While we have more or less maintained our overall membership figure, and that in a deep recession, we have fallen far short of the targets set in March 1992, which were felt at that time to be reasonable and achievable.
Some of the methods we have tried such as e) and f) have been very disappointing.
Perhaps we were wrong to expect so much of them.
In the case of d), this is perhaps a long term strategy which will yield a slow but, hopefully, steady trickle.
We have room to be pleased with a), c), g), although there may be ways to tweak them up further.
Method b) home produced mailing lists, which was CPRE's single most successful recruitment method between January and June 1992, did not really get off the ground.
Perhaps there is a natural reluctance to give addresses to an organisation such as CPRW which intends to write demanding time and money.
3.
REASONS WHY
Perhaps the target of 4,000 by the end of 1992 was unreasonable in itself.
This was the first year that CPRW had set targets and perhaps we were too optimistic.
However some branches have managed to make good progress towards meeting their target.
Anglesey for example are within a hair's breadth of attaining theirs.
As targets were proportional this begs the question, is the failure to make progress with recruitment linked to the dynamism of the branches?
Our branch members are volunteers who have given, taken together, many centuries of person-years to CPRW.
In most branches active members who do actual work, not just attending committee meetings are few.
Those who do the work are overburdened with other matters; policy/planning/social organising/publicity, to name only a few.
They do not have the time or energy to take on recruitment seriously.
The Suggested Changes to Branch Operation, if acted upon by branches, should rectify this.
I believe that if I have one person in each branch whom I can support and direct to implement the branch recruitment strategy we will make some progress.
ONWARD!
Initial suggestions to be discussed for the 1993 strategy are:
1)
We did not keep adequate, easily retrievable records over the year, noting how each new member had been recruited.
A simple pro forma could perhaps be designed to this end for 1993.
2)
Some branches' totals appear better than they should; Pembrokeshire and Ceredigion benefited from having the Youth Conference and National Eisteddfod in their areas so they received a disproportionate number of HQ recruits.
Perhaps a recruitment target could be divided in two; those to be recruited by HQ and those by the branch themselves.
This would have the psychological effect of making the branch total lower, but also clearly reveal the actual progress that the branch itself has made.
3)
There should be a branch recruitment strategy (broadly the same for each branch) which is agreed upon and taken as the personal responsibility of a nominated Branch Recruitment Secretary.
As parts of this strategy we should consider using all the methods employed last year again.
4)
CPRE did very well with their road verges leaflet.
This leaflet took an easily accessible matter (not too academic or removed from peoples' everyday lives) and turned it into a hook for recruitment.
Perhaps our windfarm leaflet could be used as our equivalent?
EXECUTIVE BRIEFING PAPER
Towards a Branch Development Strategy
Introduction
This discussion paper reflects the initial thinking of the Assistant Director (Branches).
Although he only took up his duties in mid July, he has already attended several branch meetings and has supported branch representation at a number of summer events.
He has quickly gained an insight into the strengths and weaknesses of current branch activity and has attended one of our training course on volunteering.
Objectives of a Branch Development Strategy
The two principal objectives would be:
a)
to involve more members in Branch activity, to spread the workload and to expand the work undertaken;
b)
to provide opportunities for members not attracted to committee work to make a useful contribution.
Getting people involved
Branches undertake a great deal of complex and important work.
While most do it effectively there is always room for improvement.
This paper is intended to examine how changing the way branches are run could enable us to get more members involved and expand the work done.
Only a small proportion of members currently take an active part in branch work.
Passive members could be transformed into active ones, they could take some of the strain off the present overworked committees.
I appreciate that branches have often made repeated exhortations in newsletters to encourage such members to get involved.
Why then have they not done so?
I believe there are at least three of key problems;
i)
they don't feel welcome;
ii)
they don't feel capable;
iii)
they don't have the opportunity.
On the first point: if we want to grow we must reach out beyond the circle of friends to people who have previously had nothing to do with CPRW.
We must reach out to all levels of society and to all ages.
CPRW has an image of being mainly composed of people from one social group and one age group; a point made by our President in the summer edition of Rural Wales.
We must somehow transcend this and create an atmosphere at our meetings which is welcoming to people from all types of background.
We must also avoid branch meetings seem like a gathering of old chums into which an outsider might be shy of intruding.
Of course many committees are composed of old chums, but a way of making meetings less forbidding to those outside the circle is to hold them on neutral ground outside members homes.
I would like to suggest that branches adopt this as a policy.
On the second point: a new member may come to a meeting quite prepared to help, but wary of taking on a very demanding job.
It is important that people are aware what they are letting themselves in for.
To this end it could help if all committee posts had a proper job description detailing duties, skills required and likely hours.
We must also try to ensure we get people capable of doing specific jobs to a reasonable standard.
In some cases, for example the high profile job of a Press Officer or the technically demanding role of Planning Secretary, committee members might want to be sure they are filled by people with the right qualities.
If a candidate is a newcomer, this might be done by holding an informal interview.
That is not to say only experts need apply for these jobs; we run a programme of training weekends and people taking up committee posts should be strongly encouraged to attend an appropriate local training weekend.
I would like to put forward this last point as a suggestion to be adopted by branches.
I would also like to see the programme being more directly tailored to different posts on branch committees (see below).
On the third point: a member may want to help but not get the chance to sound out if his or her help is needed.
Few branches hold general meetings other than the AGM, where ordinary members can comfortably ‘just turn up’.
This contributes to the lack of contact between the branch members and the members of the branch committee, leading both to feel isolated.
On the one hand, long serving committee members complain that they can't find anyone to take on their work after perhaps years of occupying their post.
On the other, members often say that they don't feel involved; that committees do all the work without reference to them.
By increasing the number of general meetings for members they would have the opportunity to feel more involved in and would make the organisation more democratic.
I would go further and suggest these meetings should be open to ‘all-comers’ and should highlight a topic of local interest to attract potential recruits.
I would like to suggest that branches hold open meetings at regular intervals, one of which would be the AGM.
Branch committee structure
So far, I have considered ways of encouraging members to become actively involved.
We certainly need good committee people but we also need to involve members with other skills as well.
One way of doing this is to identify jobs that can use people with different temperaments and backgrounds.
At present there are some defined posts on each committee and a number of committee members ‘without portfolio’.
I think it would be beneficial for each committee member to have a clearly defined area of responsibility in order to spread the load and develop expertise in particular areas.
Appendix A indicates the posts that could be created.
Working Groups
Some areas of branch work could best be undertaken by Working Groups or Sub Committees.
It is not reasonable to expect one person to be solely responsible for fundraising, campaigning or recruitment work.
Each member of a committee assigned a specific area of work should be encouraged to recruit a small Working Group from outside the committee to help them.
These Working Groups would undertake tasks of a practical nature and they could provide opportunities for people not attracted to committee work to become involved and make a contribution.
Some of these jobs might appeal especially to younger people.
The benefit of creating such groups is that it breaks down the multifarious functions of a branch committee into discreet areas, to which special attention can be given.
Assigning people to different posts also creates roles and gives a great sense of purpose and value to those on the committee.
Just loading the committee with responsibility for everything inevitably means setting priorities with some subjects receiving less attention than others.
Individual volunteers
At an even more informal level, people with less time, or no inclination to serve on even a Working Group could help with recruitment, man stalls at shows, make refreshments at meetings, distribute posters etc.
Branches should try to compile and maintain a lists of people willing to help on a casual basis like this.
Advertising
When posts fall vacant they should be widely advertised within the branch by word of mouth and through the branch newsletter.
If the post is a pivotal one, consideration should even be given to advertising it in the local press and community newspapers.
Some areas have volunteer clearing agencies where people wishing to volunteer can register.
Of course the majority of people who volunteer do so because someone they know has asked them and this avenue should not be ignored.
Job descriptions should give the title, duties and likely hours.
Expenses can be a sensitive issue but they should be available to all volunteers if needed.
Head Office can draw up a general set of specimen job descriptions for all posts, if this is thought to be helpful.
Training
A programme of volunteer training courses is already offered to committee members (and others).
The take-up has been disappointing in some respects, with the most highly motivated members attending several courses.
A glance at the current programme shows that we already have courses on planning, recruitment and publicity.
I believe that next year's programme should be more explicitly tailored to fit the range of posts within branch committees (Appendix A).
I also believe that upon taking up their post, all new post holders should receive a pack from HQ detailing their duties and rights, as well as outlining a training plan to support their work.
They should also be invited to meet others holding similar posts after the first six months to discuss common concerns.
Finance
If branches take up the suggestions made in this paper they may find themselves having to increase annual expenditure.
I believe branches should not be afraid of spending money on legitimate expenses if these are necessary to further campaigns and raise the profile of the local organisation.
Research shows that a high profile group which is seen to be effective in its campaigning at both national and local levels, draws people to itself.
I was struck by the fact that the majority of people visiting our stalls at summer shows had either not heard of us, or had only the vaguest idea about what we do.
Many of these people were genuinely concerned about development pressures but didn't know enough about CPRW to be attract to join.
I believe it would be very helpful if we could establish a Campaign Fund to which branches could apply for grants to help them undertake innovative or special projects designed to strengthen their capacity to campaign.
We could learn much from CPRE which has been administering a Campaign Fund for this purpose for a few years.
In the long run, we should aim to appoint two field officers to give day-to-day support for branch work.
Conclusion
These are some ideas I have had to strengthen branch work.
I would appreciate the Executive's reaction.
I would also like to know how members think a branch development strategy should be drafted, approved and introduced over the next few months.
PROGRESS REPORT: DRAFT LOCAL PLANS
CLWYD
Alyn and Deeside District Council
Response not yet received
Colwyn Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation planned
Comment: Intend it should occur ‘towards the end of the year’.
Contact: Mr Stan Yeates, Principal Planner
Delyn Borough Council
Stage: Draft Deposit consultation completed
Comment:
Inspector's Report and the Council's formal response to his recommendations will be published together after they have gone to committee.
Modifications will then be placed on deposit for consultation though relevant dates for this cannot be agreed until the Inspector's Report has been fully assessed.
Contact:
Mr Iwan Evans ()
Glyndwr District Council
Stage: Draft Plan on Deposit, Public Inquiry in November.
Comment:
‘Authority is well on the way towards adoption of the Local Plan.’
Has consulted CPRW.
‘It is now too late to make fresh representations’ but ‘officers will be considering the need for a review as early as possible given the continuously changing circumstances and national planning context’.
Contacts:
Rhuddlan Borough Council
Stage: All consultations have been completed and the plan is likely to be adopted later this year.
Rhuddlan Borough Council
Contact:
Mike Pender, Principal Planning Officer.
Wrexham Maelor Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation completed.
Draft Plan will be placed on deposit during the summer.
Contact:
Mr Adrian Walters or Mr Clive Nicholas
DYFED
Carmarthen District Council
Stage: The Council envisages a Pre Draft Deposit consultation being held ‘within the next 12/18 months to enable the Plan to be placed on deposit early in 1994’.
Comments: ‘CPRW is of course one of the main consultees and will receive early notification of the publication of the consultation draft.’
Contact:
Mr Stuart Wainright
Ceredigion District Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation unlikely until mid 1994
Comment: ‘Council is committed to the preparation on a Local Plan and has started with the preparation of a series of village working documents.
These documents are…used in preliminary consultations with local members, community councils and with the County Surveyor.
[They]are used in this interim period in providing informal planning advice and guidance.’
Contact: Allan Lewis
Dinefwr Borough Council
Response not yet received
Llanelli Borough Council
Stage: Preliminary work just beginning.
Public consultation draft ‘will be available in early 1994’.
Contact — Mr Roger Fidler, Assistant Director His Assistant, Mr John Edenborough
Preseli Pembrokeshire District Council
Stage: ‘The Council is currently considering the third and final draft Local Plan covering the north of the District, which will complete Local Plan coverage of the area with informal Council approved Local Plans.
These three Plans will form the basis of a statutory District Wide Local Plan, required under the terms of the Planning and Compensation Act 1991.’
Comment:
‘No detailed programme has yet been drawn up for the production of the District Wide Plan.
Contact:
S A Taylor, Forward Planning Officer
South Pembrokeshire Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation planned for Spring 1993.
Contact:
Robert Smith and Martin Bell, Forward Planning Officer
GWENT
Blaenau Gwent Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit ‘Issues Report’ published December 91
Comment:
‘Would be interested to learn whether CPRW wishes to be involved in the local planning process and be consulted at the appropriate stages?’
Contact:
Mr G McHugh
Islwyn Borough Council
Stage: Draft Plan published for consultation in October 1991.
In the light of comments received (including from CPRW)‘The Working Party has suggested a number of amendments and it is the intention of report these to a Special Development Services Committee Meeting of the Council on 30th June 1992’.
If these are accepted the Local Plan will go on deposit in mid October.
Contact:
Mr Norman Liversuch, Forward Planning Officer
Monmouth Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation commences Monday 29th June and continues for 12 weeks.
Comment:
‘The Plan will cost £25.00 plus £5 postage and packing’
Monmouth Borough Council
Contacts:
Newport Borough Council
Stage: Production of draft Plan — Autumn ‘92
Consultation on draft Plan — Winter ‘92/93 Deposit of Local Plan — Spring ‘93
Comment:
‘In March a Policy Directions Paper was accepted by the Council.This was the second stage in the process leading to production of the Plan, linking an earlier Issues and Context Report and the draft Plan.’
Have not heard from Gwent Branch Secretary and wants to know if they have got the correct address (they have).
Contact:
J M Wignall, Urban Development Department
Torfaen Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation in October 1991.
Deposit Plan ‘is expected to be produced during the Autumn’.
Comment:
‘A report on consultations received and amendments made to the draft Plan is due to be put to the Planning Services Committee at the end of June’.
Have received no comments from CPRW.
Contact:
Mr David Lucas, Assistant Director, Planning Services
GWYNEDD
Aberconwy Borough Council
Stage: Not started.
Comment:
The Council had resolved to prepare a plan prior to it becoming mandatory.
Implementation ‘has been precluded for a number of years by the absence of realistic resources to undertake the task (in terms of funding and/or staff).
It is not envisaged that specific new resources will be identified to enable Local Plan work to proceed at any meaningful level (either through in house preparation or the engagement of consultant services).’
Contact:
P A Hardwick, Economic Development & Planning Policies Manager.
Arfon Borough Council
Stage: Arfon presently covered by two Local Plans, one adopted in 1987 and the other on the 6th May 1992.
Following this work on the preparation of a District Wide Local Plan to replace these will begin.
Programme of work not yet determined.
Contact:
Cyngor Dosbarth Dwyfor
Stage: ‘Discussion Document published in July 1991.
A Draft Plan is being produced and a consultation programme is being put into operation.’
Contact:
Local Planning Section.
Meirionnydd District Council
Response not yet received
Cyngor Ynys Mon/ Anglesey Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation completed May 1992
Contact:
Jim Woodcock, Assistant Director of Planning
MID GLAMORGAN
Cynon Valley Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation document ‘anticipated to be available towards the end of September 92’.
Expect Draft Local Plan to be deposited during Jan/Feb 93.
Contact:
Mrs Lesley Hodsden ()
Merthyr Tydfil Borough Council
Stage: Preparation of Local Plan ‘has commenced’.
‘A draft document is scheduled to be available in October 1992.
This will be the pre-deposit draft stage, moving towards deposit in Spring 1993.’
Contact:
Miss Catherine Haskey ()
Ogwr Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation took place in July 1991
Contact:
Mr D Llewellyn, Principal Assistant Planner
Rhondda Borough Council
Stage: The Council has a Borough-wide District Plan currently in place.
‘This is however nearing the end of its useful life and is therefore currently under review.
It is intended that a consultation draft will be available in August of this year.’
Contact:
Miss J Carpenter ()
Rhymney Valley District Council
Response not yet received
Taff-Ely Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation anticipated in Spring 93
Contact:
Mr Ratcliffe
POWYS
Brecknock Borough Council
Stage: Ystradgynlais Area Draft currently at its Pre Deposit consultation stage.
Section covering area to the north of the BB National Park will undergo its Pre Deposit consultation in Spring 1993.
Comment:
‘In due course, both sections of the Brecknock Local Plan will be placed on deposit at the same time as one composite document.
It is unlikely that formal deposit will be reached until the end of 1993 or early 1994.’
Contacts: Ruth Hair, Senior Planning Assistant
Peter Morris, Forward Planning Assistant
Edgar Jones, Deputy Borough Planning & Ind Dev Officer
Montgomeryshire District Council
Stage: Preparations being made for Pre Deposit consultation which is expected early 1993.
Comment:
‘It is our intention to provide a full opportunity for organisations such as your own to contribute at an early draft plan stage before we proceed to the more formal statutory plan stage.’
Contact:
Nick Smith and G J Davey
Radnorshire District Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation scheduled for July.
Contact:
Geoffrey Bennett until October ‘92 then Mrs Cath James.
Can also contact Robert Csondor regarding Local Plan.
SOUTH GLAMORGAN
Cardiff City Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation took place from March to May 1991.
Council confirmed its response to comments and approved a number of amendments.
Revised proposals went before Council on 27th May 1992.
It is envisaged that a Deposit Draft will be available in September.
Comment:
Local CPRW Branch submitted comments on 13th May 1991.
Further comments or objections can be made when the Plan is placed on deposit.
Contact:
Mr Clive Farrant ()
Vale of Glamorgan Borough Council
Stage: Pre Draft Deposit consultation expected June/July 1992.
Comment:
‘Will ensure that CPRW is fully consulted during the plan making process.’
Contact:
Mr J Harvey ()
WEST GLAMORGAN
Lliw Valley Borough Council
Response not yet received
Neath Borough Council
Stage: Draft Local Plan completed its deposit stage on 10th of March 1992.
Council is ‘currently appraising replies received and it is likely that a public inquiry will be held during late October 1992’.
Comment:
CPRW was consulted.
Contact:
Owain Lewis, Principal Planner (Development).
Port Talbot Borough Council
Response not yet received
Swansea City Council
Response not yet received
ST MELANGELL — Patron Saint Of Hares
In our last issue Stephen Briggs described the sad state of some of Wales' abandoned churches.
On a more optimistic note, CPRW member ROBERT HEATON now describes the repair of one church saved from a similar fate.
The scheme won a Prince of Wales Award in 1992.
In a remote valley created by a fold in the Berwyn mountains of Mid Wales stands the little church of Pennant Melangell.
It is approached by a narrow and winding one-track lane two miles from the nearest village; a place of peace and tranquillity where a Celtic saint founded a Christian settlement in the eighth century AD.
St Melangell was the daughter of an Irish king from whose court she fled to avoid marriage.
She found sanctuary in this remote place where she stayed alone for fifteen years.
Then, one day, Prince Brochwel of Powys was hunting in the valley and his hounds raised a hare which took refuge in a thicket.
Taking a closer look, the prince found the virgin praying while the hare hid under her garment.
His hounds were urged on but fled howling.
The huntsman raised his horn to his lips but was unable to remove it.
After hearing her story, Brochwel gave her the lands at Pennant as a permanent refuge.
Here Melangell founded a community of virgins and lived a further thirty seven years in the valley.
She has been regarded as a patron saint of hares ever since.
No doubt the original buildings were of timber but the first stone church was built in the 12th century with an apse at the east covering the site of the saint's grave.
In the church a carved stone shrine was erected to contain the saint's relics.
This became the object of pilgrimage until the shrine was destroyed some time in the 16th century.
The tradition of St Melangell was never forgotten and the little room at the east end, despite being rebuilt in the 18th century, has always been known as Cell-y-bedd (the room of the grave).
Fortunately parts of the carved shrine were preserved by being built into the walls of the lychgate, the porch and the south wall of the church.
In 1954 the condition of Cell-y-bedd was causing much concern because all three walls were badly cracked and leaning outwards.
The roof was also leaning and coming away from the east wall of the church.
One suggestion made at this time was that Cell-y-bedd should be demolished.
However we were called in and were able to advise that the building could be saved.
Work was carried out in 1958 which included the rebuilding of the shrine in Cell-y-bedd.
Excavations below the floor revealed the slab over the grave of Melangell and the foundations of the 12th century apse.
Minor work was carried out inside the church which included the removal of the false chancel arch made out of timber, lath and plaster, and the matchboard ceiling in the chancel, because of extensive damage caused by furniture beetle.
Unfortunately no further work could be carried out through lack of funds.
By 1987 the condition of the church was again giving cause for concern.
Despite the repairs in 1958 the walls of Cell-y-bedd had continued to deteriorate and the rest of the church was in poor condition.
One solution put forward this time was to abandon the building remove the roof and leave the church as a ruin.
No regular services had been held in it for many years, although it had been used for funerals and the occasional service, remaining open for visitors and pilgrims to Cell-y-bedd and the shrine.
Fortunately the Diocesan Advisory Committee decided that Pennant Melangell Church was of such importance that they wished to promote a full scheme of repair and reordering.
It was agreed that Cell-y-bedd should be taken down and rebuilt in the form of an apse on the foundations found in 1958.
Before rebuilding, an archaeological excavation was carried out by the Clwyd-Powys Archaeological Trust which established by radio-carbon dating that the site had been used as a burial ground for about one thousand years before Melangell's time.
During the work the original opening between Cell-y-bedd and the church was discovered, thus explaining the entry in the Parish records in 1721 ‘for shutting up Melangell's door — 9 pence’!
Melangell's grave slab has been reset in the floor of Cell-y-bedd and the shrine rebuilt to its full height in the chancel, which is believed to be its original position.
The fine 14th century carved screen had been partly mutilated in the 18th century.
The original loft had been taken down and the balustrade removed to the west end to form a gallery.
Now the screen has been moved back to its original position, a new loft formed and the balustrade reunited with the lower part.
A new ceiling has been formed in the chancel which follows the shape of the remains of medieval wallplaster found on the east wall.
The simple barrel shape divided by oak ribs is similar to many other examples in Wales.
Electric lighting and heating have been installed for the first time, but all fittings have been concealed as much as possible and all the original oil lamps and 19th century pews have been retained.
Several new pieces of furniture have been introduced, all designed by the architects to match simple 18th century fittings and made by Richard Dowling, a furniture maker with a workshop in nearby Llangynog.
The building work was carried out by Antur Tanat Cain (an employment training agency) using local instructors and trainees, and also by local building contractor David Tunstill.
Throughout the scheme the St Asaph Diocesan Advisory Committee was most supportive.
Tribute must be paid to the Restoration Committee, the Parochial Church Council, and the Reverend Paul Davies and Mrs Davies who worked so hard to raise the money for the work.
Since work started a greatly increased number of visitors have been arriving, and since the reopening regular services have been held.
Now that the work has been completed I hope the church will continue to attract pilgrims to the shrine of St Melangell, as it has for the last eight hundred years.
ROBERT HEATON is an architect who has worked in Wales since 1949.
He is a founder member of TACP Architects of Wrexham.
His firm has worked on the restoration of many historic buildings in Wales.
He was for nine years Consultant Architect to Llandaff Cathedral until his retirement.
He is also a member of the Ancient Monuments Board for Wales.
OPENCAST COAL — The truth must be aired
Last autumn the Government's proposed Energy Review and the falling demand for coal seemed to hold the prospect of a much- needed tightening in controls over opencast mining.
In the event, this optimism was misplaced.
A campaign for an environmentally- sensitive national energy policy needed more than ever.
PETER STRINGER explains:
Anyone who has seen or lived near an opencast coal mining site will understand and agree with a statement which appeared in the First Report of the House of Commons Energy Committee (1986–87): ‘We agree with the CPRE that ‘opencast mining is one of the most environmentally destructive processes being carried out in the UK’.
The sites are among the most ugly examples of the ravages of industrial exploitation.
However, we also had an opportunity to study restored sites and we were generally impressed by the quality of what can be seen.
CPRE and TCPA argue, however, that hidden damage to the environment (destruction of the water-table and long term reduction in agricultural productivity), as well as the destruction of mature countryside created through the centuries, are costs too high to be offset by the benefits of cheap, clean coal’.
The environmentally destructive nature of opencast coal mining was also recognised by the Royal Commission on Energy and the Environment (The Flowers Commission, 1981).
It concluded:
‘…the uniquely sensitive character of the British Countryside and the high population density in much of the country would not be able to accommodate, without disastrous consequences, a target for opencasting in excess of 15 million tonnes a year’.
The government response was predictable: ‘In the longer term the appropriate level of opencast output should be determined by the market subject to the acceptability of individual projects through the planning system’.
The planning implications of this policy became clear in Minerals Planning Guidance Note 3 (1988): ‘Opencast coal can often be produced cheaply and profitably…(it) is also an integral part of British Coal's overall production and makes a vital contribution to their finances…it is in the national interest to maximise production where that can be done in an environmentally acceptable way’.
In Wales the opencast industry has exploited shallow reserves lying close to the limestone outcrop with the result that working and restored sites are concentrated on a relatively narrow tract of land stretching from Montgomery to Kidwelly.
Most of mining has taken place on greenfield sites, and the quality of restoration and aftercare rarely compensates for the loss of visual appeal or wildlife habitat of the land sacrificed for so- called cheap energy.
In social terms opencasting causes people to move, housing stock to be destroyed and an unacceptable reduction on the quality of life during the period of site working and early restoration work.
British Coal's last anthracite deep mine, with reserves of 20m tonnes, has been closed.
Anthracite is imported at a rate of 1m tonnes per annum.
The potential for improving our balance of payments is clear.
British Coal has declared an interest in no less than 15 possible opencast sites on the anthracite field.
Five working sites currently produce less than 0.1m tonnes per year.
When BC is privatised, speculative demands will threaten even more sites and communities.
Now what about the one balancing factor, the planning system?
The problem is that the burden to oppose a development falls upon local communities.
Plagued by years of opencast development in their areas some local communities have been able to mount an effective campaign against individual applications.
the Secretary of State still had to announce his long awaited decision on the Brynhenllys Inquiry and he rejected British Coal's appeal for a large site at Pwll Du.
But despite the success each battle is a David and Goliath affair and success depends upon the work of a few dedicated people.
In effect the task is to win each battle but the war will go on unabated.
Anyone who campaigns against opencast must recognise that British Coal has access to enormous PR resources.
In a PR booklet published at £15.00 (but given free to opinion makers and decision takers) called ‘Sunshine Miners’ the Surface Miners Prayer says it all, ‘Lord, remind the man who would move a mountain to remove the small stones of public opinion first…
’ The job of the British Coal (and its powerful lobby of contractors) is to convince the nation as a whole that opencast mining is environmentally acceptable.
On the 25th March 1993 Mr Howard updated the DoE guideline to planners thus ‘it would be against the national interest to refuse planning permission for the extension of economic indigenous coal where the development can be carried out in an environmentally acceptable way.
Communities in the coalfields will continue to fight opencast development against enormous odds as they see it as an environmentally destructive process which threatens their lives, homes and environment culture.
They are fighting for the protection of their largely rural environment.
What they need in their fight is a wider awareness at national level that opencast coal mining is not an environmentally acceptable means of winning coal.
SHARING THE EARTH
Schemes for ‘set-aside’ are merely the tip of the iceberg.
Millions of acres of farmland may be redundant within twenty years.
What will become of this land?
One option is to restore wildlife habitats.
BARBARA and NEIL TAYLOR describe a project which offers a blueprint.
‘I love the Welsh countryside’, said one of our visitors recently.
‘It looks no neat and lush.
You can see it's in good heart.’
Many people share this view and appreciate a countryside with neat, close-trimmed hedgerows, bright green fields and no messy patches of rushes, nettles, brambles or gorse.
For left to herself Nature can seem unruly and overwhelming.
But a tidy countryside, as neat and controlled as a suburban garden, is not a natural countryside, nor is it even the traditional farmed countryside.
Paintings from the 19th and early 20th centuries show us a countryside where humans are not dominant but co-exist with Nature in the struggle for life; where cultivated fields are everywhere bounded by the wilderness which constantly threatens to encroach and claim back its own.
Our neat, controlled countryside is a relatively recent phenomenon, a product of the revolution in farming practices since the Second World War.
But a walk through lush green countryside reveals an environment remarkably short of wildlife.
Gone are the scents, colours and sounds of the meadows of the past, alive as they were with bees, butterflies, grasshoppers, frogs and voles; gone are the wildflowers and rippling purple headed grasses.
In the thin and trimmed hedgerows few birds or mammals find thick cover for heating and feeding their young.
Yet this type of countryside people have come to appreciate and believe is ‘in good heart’.
It would be wrong to look for villains in this.
Following the experience of the war, when Britain came close to running out of food, farmers were entreated by successive governments to increase production.
That process was continued by the EEC through its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), for which it is estimated by the Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation (OEDC) each adult in the EEC is now paying over £220 a year as a taxpayer and consumer.
Ironically, the very forces which have created such a barren environment for wildlife may now be about to come to its rescue, as agricultural surpluses, the heavy cost of the CAP and the demands of world trade are forcing hard political decisions.
We are on the brink of a new revolution in the countryside, for already the process has begun whereby over the next 20 years millions of acres of farmland will be taken out of production.
This revolution which, without proper management could be as socially devastating as the enclosures movement, offers a real possibility for recreating a rich and diverse countryside — the living countryside our grandparents knew.
The RSPB, as part of its ‘Campaign for the Countryside’, has recently called for two and a half million acres of farmland to be taken out of production and converted to wildlife habitats, a process to be paid for by money diverted from CAP into conservation.
However, restoring and recreating wildlife habitats is a relatively new science and there are few blueprints to follow.
The Shared Earth Trust is developing such a blueprint at the Denmark Farm Conservation Centre, based on a 40-acre upland farm in West Wales.
It is typical of the farmland which will increasingly become redundant.
Until the mid-eighties Denmark Farm had been run as an intensive stock farm which, inevitably, had produced a degraded environment for wildlife — wet meadows and marshes drained; traditional hay meadows ploughed and reseeded to rye grass; all wild corners cleared; and an old orchard, hedgerow and two-acre bluebell wood grubbed out.
Heavy use of fertilisers and high stocking rates had maintained a tight-cropped monoculture of little interest to wildlife.
In 1987 the Shared Earth Trust took over the management of the farm and set out to reverse this process, establishing a long term programme to develop Denmark Farm as a haven for wildlife and a genetic bank from which wildlife species will be able to spread out and recolonise the surrounding countryside when future agricultural policies make this possible.
A management group of specialists (including representatives of the Countryside Council for Wales, Dyfed Wildlife Trust, Otter Project Wales and RSPB Wales) helped draw up the initial conservation plan and now guides all aspects of the management and monitoring programme.
In creating the conservation plan the Trust's initial purpose was not to create a special reserve for rare species, but rather a haven for the common things of Nature which ought to be on any farm — meadow and hedgerow flowers and grasses, butterflies, dragonflies, lizards, frogs, newts, hedgerows and owls.
It is designed as a case study of what can be achieved on almost any upland farm in Britain, and the changes are being scientifically monitored so the results can be shared with other conservation agencies.
In the six years 1987–92 the Shared Earth Trust has transformed Denmark Farm by restoring and creating twenty inter-linked habitats, including hay meadows becoming rich in species, marshes and wet meadows restored to wetlands, a new one-acre lake, eight small ponds, 13 acres of woodlands and shelterbelts, and thick, luxuriant hedgerows.
Many adult and student volunteers and over 400 schoolchildren have shared in creating this wildlife haven and the results have been quite miraculous.
Denmark Farm now teems with life as a myriad of creatures and plants have rushed back to make their home here.
In only six years it has become a significant nature reserve in its own right.
In 1985 only 15 species of bird nested on the farm; in 1992 our breeding list had reached 45 species and we had 156 pairs of birds nesting here.
Barn owl have bred for the last three years, and skylarks and meadow pipits have recolonised the wet meadows; ten species of African migrant use the hedgerows and patches of gorse, bramble and nettles; a colony of 20 pied flycatcher use the many nest boxes erected around the farm.
Our richest wildflower meadow now has 62 species of plant, including the trefoils, vetches, sorrels and wild grasses essential as breeder plants for butterflies such as meadow brown, ringlet, large and small skipper, small heath, common blue and small blue copper.
These are some of the 22 species of butterfly which can be seen in abundance all over the farm.
But perhaps the most indicative of the Trust's success so far are the 16 species of dragonfly and damselfly which use the farm — only one species less than the 17 we could expect on the site.
One summer's day in 1992 saw local schoolchildren doing field studies here, counting all the invertebrates they could find in one-metre squares of meadow.
They found grasshoppers, beetles, slugs, caterpillars, spiders and then calculated on the basis of their findings that this three-and-a-half acre meadow must contain well over 100,000 large invertebrates.
On an earlier visit these children had closely observed nesting birds taking food to their young.
Now they began to see for themselves the amazing interconnected web of life which links the creatures and plants on Denmark Farm, and the critical role which each link plays in maintaining the chain of existence — the working ecological system.
The Shared Earth Trust was born of a belief that we share the land with all living creatures and have a duty to preserve its riches.
Our Trust's logo is the Tree of Life — so important in early Celtic Christianity — which depicts the interdependence of all living things, with no one species dominant, without beginning and without end.
The Trust also believes that our countryside belongs to the whole nation, and an important part of its work at the Denmark Farm Conservation Centre involves creating public access to this pocket of living countryside and sharing it as a resource with local people and the many city- dwellers all over Britain who support the experiment financially.
The Denmark Farm Conservation Centre is in part financed by the Countryside Council for Wales, who have recognised the experiment as being of national significance.
As such the Centre may also be a blueprint of how central government could support wildlife conservation on redundant farmland and enable existing farming families to remain on the land with the new role of guardians of the traditional countryside and its wildlife.
As the Denmark Farm experiment shows, it is not too late to restore our countryside — arguably the richest aspect of our national heritage — and recreate a living countryside with a rich biological diversity.
BARBARA and NEIL TAYLOR were among the founders of the Shared Earth Trust and now work for the Trust as its project co- ordinators at the Denmark Farm Conservation Centre.
For further information about the Centre and arrangements for visits please contact the Taylors at: The Shared Earth Trust, Denmark Farm Conservation Centre, Betws Bledrws, Lampeter, Dyfed SA48 8PB (Tel:).
LAND OF WHOSE FATHERS?
CPRW's Gwent branch has attacked the amount of undeveloped land needed to meet the new housing target in the revised Gwent Structure Plan.
This has required the Borough of Monmouth to identify land on which 5,500 new homes can be built during the next fifteen years.
JOHN EDWARDS believes this controversial ‘numbers game’ threatens large tracts of the Welsh countryside.
The end of the selfish eighties saw a groundswell of popular desire to flee the sharp competitiveness and tension of the cities to the imagined tranquillity and neighbourliness of the countryside.
Magazines indulging the urban view of rural life, epitomised by ‘Country Living’, are fuelling the dream.
The idea that one can earn a living away from the smoke, perhaps by tele-commuting, are popularised by journalists.
Last year a NOP survey, ‘Regional Lifestyles’, found that no less than 13 million people want to abandon their city life and move to the country.
Since the passing of the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act we have been able to feel reasonably secure the open countryside would not be built upon.
Ribbon development, urban sprawl and scattered housing were all brought under reasonable control.
But with the loosening of controls during the 1980s and the increasing contempt shown by local councillors towards planning, can we be confident this tidal flow of disenchanted refugees from the cities will not destroy the very qualities people find so attractive?
In my view the central threat to the countryside comes from the sheer numbers of people who want to buy a piece of it.
The essence of the countryside is that it has a very low level of development, and farming and forestry predominate.
If we try to share it out, only a few can be satisfied.
The vast majority, including many who live there now, will simply not be able to afford their share.
However, its character will be destroyed in the process.
The Government has strong views on the character and philosophy of planning.
They believe in market forces and what they paraphrase as ‘personal choice’.
They believe that if lots of people want to leave England and live in Wales then they should be able to do so.
This government has been in office so long that this view of personal freedom has become written into detailed policy and into legal planning advice.
I need only quote from a few Welsh Office publications:
‘The philosophy underpinning the Government housing policy rests firmly on the belief that housing is first and foremost a matter for the private sector.’
‘The role of the Welsh Office is to…ensure that planning legislation and guidelines balance the needs of the environment and the need for new properties in such a way as to maintain a sufficient supply of new homes at minimal cost to the environment.’
‘Where shortages occur, local authorities are advised to increase the housing land supply by expediting planning applications’.
HOUSING IN WALES (Welsh Office, 1991)
‘The planning system must provide an adequate and continuous supply of land for housing taking account of market demand.’
‘A balance has to be struck between the need for development and the interests of conservation.’
(my emphasis)
‘Sites must not only be free, or readily freed, from planning, physical and ownership constraints, but also capable of being developed economically, in areas where potential house buyers want to live and suitable for the wide range of housing types which the housing market requires.’
‘LAND FOR HOUSING IN WALES’(WO, PPG3, 1992)
‘The increasing efficiency of agricultural producers and changes in agricultural policy mean that retaining as much land as possible in agricultural use no longer has the same priority.’
THE COUNTRYSIDE AND THE RURAL ECONOMY (WO, PPG7, 1992)
All these documents also contain statements about protecting the environment and the countryside, but the message to planning authorities and local politicians is clear: Find a way to satisfy the market.
In March I joined a CPRW delegation which met the senior Welsh Office planners and statisticians to find out more about the basis of the population and future housing projections given to the eight Welsh counties by the Secretary of State for inclusion in their Structure Plans.
These figures determine the amount of land that must be set aside for housing in Local Plans.
The most startling insight I gained from this meeting was the proportion of overall growth in housing provision being made to satisfy migration from England.
I am not trying to make a nationalistic point here.
It just happens that published Welsh Office data on migration across the border is a good measure of the flight from cities as it affects Wales.
For example, over the ten year period (1991 to 2001) the Welsh Office predicts a population growth of about 80,000 people.
Of this total about 40,000 are migrants from England.
Table 6 from their ‘1989 Based Population Projections for the Counties and District Health Authorities of Wales shows the projected net population change for this period split into various phases.
It shows that the percentage of overall population growth due to migration is to be:
I think everyone would be surprised at these figures but might think: ‘OK, I suppose these migrants are needed to fuel the economic health of Welsh industry, and we must tolerate the environmental cost of housing them.’
But the same table also allows one to deduce the distribution of these migrants county by county and it shows that the great majority of migrants are being directed into the rural areas of Clwyd, Dyfed and Gwynedd.
It seems to me that the policy of projecting such high migration rates will be self fulfilling.
These projections are also highly questionable given previous rates of migration (Figure 2).
Most recent trends suggest a large demand so the Welsh Office is offering a large supply.
Migrants are therefore bound to arrive.
The policy is self-fulfilling, probably with accelerating positive feedback.
Given the inevitable damage to the rural environment that will result, I do not consider this outcome is what we, or the Government, intend by the concept of ‘sustainable planning’.
I am sure I am not alone in thinking it is misguided to allow such a large amount of the beautiful countryside of Wales to be built on to encourage migration.
These migrants pose a greater threat than the demand arising from natural population growth or the reduction in household size because they have an atypically strong intention to occupy rural sites.
It also disturbs me that such a lucrative and plentiful outside demand will distract our house-builders from meeting the more important and yet less profitable needs of the existing population and from ensuring the provision of genuinely ‘affordable housing’.
As long as there is a strong and unrestrained demand from those who can afford to leave the cities, the countryside will remain under threat.
Market forces and the house building industry will continue to force housing into the countryside regardless of the damage does.
The market cannot be expected to exercise self- restraint — this is the duty of government.
CPRW must urge a return to responsible planning to provide for the really needy while protecting the open countryside.
JOHN EDWARDS is…
CULTURAL LANDSCAPES
The pages of ‘Rural Wales’ illustrate increasing concern over the future of the countryside and rural communities of Wales.
TIM WEBB believes such concern is misplaced if it fails to address cultural as well as environmental issues.
Speculative house building is devouring farmland and natural habitats and changing the character of communities.
At the same time, lack of access to housing is forcing many local people to move away.
Other developments such as quarrying, opencast mining, motorways, barrages, marinas, and oil-drilling, are threatening to destroy large parts of our environment for the sake of very dubious economic gains.
It is becoming increasingly obvious that the interests of the environment, the landscape, rural communities, the Welsh language and the character and culture of all parts of Wales, are not separate but interconnected issues.
It follows that any strategy to protect them and to ensure their future must include all these aspects, rather than attempt to protect one at the expense of others.
Take housing for example.
If unnecessary development is to be avoided, the principle must be sustainability — making full use of the existing housing stock for the needs of local people.
If we attempt to restrict development without ensuring access for local people, the result will be to force them out.
Although the natural environment would be protected, the human environment would be ruined.
In the same way, Environmental Impact Assessments ensure that the effect of developments on the natural environment is at least considered.
This principle needs expanding to cover impacts on communities, and on language and cultural identity.
It should also take account of planning consent already given, making planners consider communities as an integrated whole.
Several years ago a small group of people sat down to consider this problem and, after a great deal of discussion and argument, came up with a six-point-plan for new legislation with the special needs of Wales in mind (although they are also relevant to other countries inside and outside the UK).
The six main headings are:
Research and Strategy — local authorities should carry out detailed ongoing research into the housing needs of every community and produce a strategy which would be the basis for all housing provision and development.
Housing for Rent — local authorities should be responsible for ensuring that rented housing was available for all local people in need of it, provided wherever possible from the existing housing stock (in contrast to Tai Cymru's present policy of forcing housing associations to build new houses).
Adequate resources must be provided by central government, but much of the cost could be met from accumulated capital receipts, which councils are not allowed to spend at present!
Help for First-time Buyers — the main element should be an extensive ‘shared ownership’ scheme, but once again based on the existing housing stock.
Priority for Local People — this would further ensure access to existing housing and obviate the need for new development by giving first choice to a ‘local band’ of buyers and second choice to a ‘semi-local band’.
Properties not sold in these two bands would be available to the ‘open market’.
This would also have the effect of gradually restoring house prices to a local market level, but without financial loss to existing owners.
Planning for the Community — new housing should only be allowed to meet local needs, and an assessment should be made of the effect of every proposed development on the community, its environment, language and cultural identity.
These assessments would be binding.
Structure and local land would have to follow the same criteria.
Reappraisal of Planning Permission — all existing permissions should be reassessed according to the same criteria as above, and authorities would have the power to rescind or modify them.
I believe the effect of these proposals would be to safeguard the natural and cultural environments of Wales.
It is not a utopian idea but a perfectly practical one.
However it requires people and groups concerned with the environment and the countryside to work and campaign together with those concerned with housing and the Welsh language if it is to be realised.
TIM WEBB is a campaigner with Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg (The Welsh Language Society) and joint author of their Property Act Handbook.
He is a member of CPRW and Friends of the Earth, and, by profession, a social worker.
Full details of the above proposals are contained in the ‘Property Act Handbook’ which is available for £1.50 from Swyddfa Cymdeithas yr Iaith, Penroc, Rhodfa'r Mor, Aberystwyth, Dyfed.
STRATEGIC VISION APPLAUDED
When the Strategic Planning Forum of Welsh local authorities published a consultation paper on the future of strategic planning in Wales last year, CPRW was disappointed to see the tired old economic-growth-based formula emerging once again.
Emphasis was on development, jobs and the economy, with only a short chapter at the end on the environment.
The only reference to sustainable development was to be found in paragraph two hundred and thirteen.
We are delighted to report that the ensuing debate we helped stimulate has transformed this orthodoxy into a vision now worthy of positive support.
In its draft submission to Mr Hunt, the Forum states: ‘In developing land use policies which will take Wales into the 21st Century the principle of sustainable development has emerged from the consultation exercise as a vital issue to be addressed.
(It) emphasises the interaction between the economy and the environment and, if sustainable principles are to be embraced, then there is a need to shift the balance of considerations much more in favour of the environment than hitherto.
Strategic Planning Guidance…can provide the framework to begin the necessary work which will have to be undertaken if sustainability is to be given any credence within the development plan framework.’
The Forum recognises that sustainable development is a difficult concept to embrace because it is still ill-defined in terms of practical planning policies.
‘There is a need to disaggregate the concept into more manageable parts but within an overall strategy which is concerned with the impact of human activity within the eco-system.
In this context the proposal for a Welsh Centre for Sustainability put forward in a CPRW Discussion Paper merits further consideration especially in providing a useful action- orientated research role’, states the Forum.
All this may seem mere words, but words and their meaning are at the heart of the planning process.
Strategic planning guidance from the Welsh Office is used to formulate county structure plan policies which are translated into more detailed local policies on which hundreds of development decisions based every week.
The Forum's report highlights guidance that is need to help plan waste management, the production and conservation of energy, protection of the natural and built environment, coastal development, minerals, derelict land and housing.
Vital economic issues like infrastructure, employment, tourism, and retailing are also covered, but an attempt is made to address them within the context of sustainability.
Of particular interest to CPRW is the Forum's view that ‘…that the application of Statutory Green Belts may be helpful in controlling settlement form’.
It suggests criteria the Welsh Office should use to define Green Belts, all of which should win CPRW's support.
The Secretary of State has been awaiting this advice for sometime.
Nothing now prevents him from issuing a Policy Planning Guidance Note on Green Belts in Wales.
But how will it be realised?
The Strategic Planning Forum's study has been led by structure plan staff from the eight Welsh county councils, with help from their colleagues in the districts.
However, CPRW fears the loss of high quality planning staff when the counties are abolished under Mr Hunt's ill-conceived reorganisation plans.
The appearance of a sensitive strategy for the future development of Wales, the first review for a quarter of a century, is a timely reminder of the skill and experience in planning built up since the creation of the Welsh counties in 1974.
Before that, a patchwork of smaller counties struggled to deliver a wide range of services, with help from a tiny Welsh Office.
Under Mr Hunt's current proposals we look set to return to the fifties and sixties.
However, it is now impossible for the revived old counties to deliver services of the quality we demand today.
Many will therefore be hived off to quango-like agencies based on the eight-county structure.
Others, like strategic planning, could become the direct responsibility of the Welsh Office.
CPRW views this prospect with alarm.
The Welsh Office has shown itself barely capable of handling planning matters referred to it under the appeals system.
How can it seriously contemplate taking on responsibility for structure plans which, under the law, must form part of the framework of development plans covering Wales?
The only alternative would be to require the new unitary councils to club together to carry out this and other strategic functions, but that begs the question: Why abolish the counties in the first place, only to recreate them in a less accountable form?
SHETLAND SHATTERS OIL DREAM
Those who hope the discovery of commercial qualities of oil off the coastline of Wales will usher in an era of employment and prosperity, must surely be reflecting on the price being paid by the Shetland islanders in the wake of the Braer disaster.
How like the Llyn Peninsula Strumble Head looks from the air, and how awful the nightmare would be, should it suffer a similar fate.
Although the spill arose from the transport of crude oil rather than the operation of the island's indigenous oil industry, it highlights the risks faced by communities in close contact with the oil business.
As such, it has significance for the coastal communities of Wales around which there are concentrations of tanker traffic, and a growing interest in the search for new oil reserves.
CPRW was among a large number of bodies that opposed allowing the Hamilton Oil Company to drill an exploratory well in a very sensitive area of seabed close to Bardsey Island.
Despite this, the Government is prepared to allow equally sensitive areas close to the beaches and islands of Wales to drilled in the future.
Our President, Lord Williams, asked the Secretary of State for Wales to prevent the discharge of contaminated rock and muds during Hamilton's recent drilling operations.
His reply was anything but reassuring.
Although it is his statutory duty to protect the Welsh environment, he simply referred the matter to the Department of Trade and Industry.
The DTI is currently proceeding with the 14th Round of Oil/Gas Licensing through which it is selling oil companies the permission to explore many blocks of seabed which the Government's official advisers on nature conservation have said should not be disturbed or put at risk in this way.
CPRW's National Executive Committee has called on the Government to halt the 14th Round, pending a more thorough assessment of the environmental risks involved.
We believe higher standards of care are required.
The dumping of contaminants ‘in situ’ must be ended and the most sensitive areas of seabed must not be disturbed by exploration.
Until these things happen we are opposed to any new licences being sold to oil companies by the Government.
Please lend your support to by writing to Tim Eggar MP, Minister for Energy, Department of Trade & Industry, Ashdown House, 123 Victoria Street, London SW1E 6RB.
THE ENERGY REVIEW — Opportunity or Threat?
The Government's Energy Review, triggered by the storm over the pit closures programme, could launch a rational and integrated energy policy based on vastly improved conservation measures and an environmentally ‘least bad mix’ of energy sources, or worsen the damage already being caused to the environment.
The pit closures crisis has revealed the extent to which the ‘privatised’ energy market is artificially rigged.
Nuclear power still attracts massive subsidies while coal mining is expected to compete in a harsh world market.
Many factors influence the profitability of different sources of energy.
Environmental controls on emissions, for instance, are of growing importance, as the debate over ‘Orimulsion’ has shown.
Where orthodox economics fails, however, is in valuing natural reserves, like the coal that would lost forever through pit closures, or the quality of the countryside destroyed by opencast mining.
Opencasting is one of the most environmentally destructive activities being carried out in Wales today.
The attractive Gwendraeth Valley in Carmarthenshire, for instance, faces a cluster of proposals that could devastate its countryside and culture.
Other areas of South Wales have been blighted for years, while renewed threats are now being made to cut open parts of Clwyd's countryside.
CPRW believes one outcome of the review must be a reduction in this type of coaling through tougher planning controls.
We recently joined with other organisations to write to the Secretary of State for the Environment urging him to change the rules set out in Minerals Planning Guidance Note 3.
We want ‘a significant tightening of the criteria against which opencast applications are judged’.
If this does not happen we could be facing the appalling prospect of over half the UK's coal production coming from a method that was only initially allowed as an emergency War-time contingency.
‘GREEN’ FARMING FOR ALL
The plethora of environmentally-sensitive farming schemes dreamed up over recent years is thought by some to be causing more confusion than clarity.
A common response from farmers left out of these schemes is: ‘Why can't I also be paid for providing environmental services?
Isn't my countryside good enough?’
Others are quite literally hedging their bets, hoping the next scheme will pay more than the last.
CPRW believes there is now a chance to cut through this confusion to create a universal scheme that could provide stability and renewed confidence to the hard-pressed Welsh farming community.
Included in a reformed Common Agriculture Policy, is an ‘Agri- Environment Programme’ which is aimed at promoting and funding grant-aid schemes on a regional basis.
We believe the general character of both the environment and farming in Wales is such that the country can be viewed as a distinct region within the European Community.
When rumours leaked out that the Welsh Office, rather than grasping this opportunity, were seeking a ‘derogation’ to allow it to maintain the present battery of schemes, CPRW asked David Hunt to ‘introduce a single, comprehensive agri-environmental scheme for the whole of Wales, integrating existing area-based schemes such as ESAs, Tir Cymen, National Park and SSSI management agreements, as well as the extensification and organic farming conversion schemes currently under consideration.
We would like to see it encompass these and other elements so as to allow every farmer in Wales an opportunity to volunteer a package of agri-environmental commitments drawn from a broad menu of approved activities, as the basis for a negotiated, long term, grant-aid agreement.’
The chairman of our Agriculture Working Party, Professor Michael Haines also wrote to Mr Hunt along similar lines.
His contacts with the farming community convince him that such a universal scheme would command widespread support: ‘I am equally convinced that the agencies responsible for the current array of schemes would welcome a coordinating initiative which would maximise their effectiveness and avoid the current duplication of effort and potential waste of public monies…
Bearing in mind your warm endorsement of our report (to CPRW)…and the widespread support it has received both in Wales and further afield, I trust you will actively consider taking an initiative which will receive general support…and could give considerable kudos as well as economic and environmental benefits to Wales.’
STOP PRESS
Mr Hunt has replied as follows: ‘Whilst I acknowledge that there is merit in the concept of a single, universal agri-environmental scheme for the whole of Wales, there are many complex legal, resource and administrative matters that need to be properly and fully addressed before I could consider whether to proceed in this way.
My officials are, with others, exploring these matters but there is no possibility of these deliberations being concluded in time to meet the EC's deadline of July 1993 for member states to submit their agri-environmental proposals under Regulation 2078/92.
This does not, however, mean that the opportunity of introducing such a scheme is lost forever.
I am presently considering what measures should be included in the first Welsh Agri-Environment Plan and will consult widely about them in due course.
HEDGEROWS GET HELP
An attempt to reverse the decline in the extent and condition of our hedges and hedgerow trees has been launched by the Countryside Council for Wales and the Welsh Office.
Their Hedgerow Renovation Scheme is designed to bring back into good management selected hedgerows that are in poor condition, over- grown, gappy, thin or neglected, but which are capable of restoration.
They must be in need of more than routine maintenance, be part of a pattern of hedgerows visible to the public, valuable to wildlife and/or of historical significance.
A booklet describing management guidelines and rates of grant can be obtained from CCW's regional offices in Aberystwyth (), Bangor () and Cardiff ().
CPRW BACKS CITIZENS' RIGHTS
CPRW played a key role in drafting a declaration to the Edinburgh European Summit insisting that ‘subsidiarity’ must ‘guarantee EC citizens the right to a clean and healthy environment’.
This phrase is taken from the European Council's own ‘Declaration on the Environment’ signed in Dublin in 1990.
We asked environment groups from all twelve EC member states at the annual meeting of the European Environmental Bureau held in Brussels, to remind EC governments that ‘subsidiarity’ means much more than the balance of power between them and the European Commission.
The EEB declaration makes it clear that European environment groups ‘believe that when decisions are taken on the respective competence of the Community, Member States and regional and local government in actions to protect the environment, the overriding objective must be to secure the highest quality of life for the Community's citizens.
This, rather than the short-sighted desire of some Member States to cling to dangerous and outdated illusions of ‘national sovereignty’, is what really matters.’
CPRW won support for its challenge to proposals to return responsibility for setting environmental standards to Member States.
EEB members believe that subsidiarity (the principle that action should be devolved to the lowest competent level of government) has always applied to the EC's environmental policies, which are among the most popular achievements of the Community.
CPRW's Director, who moved the declaration, said: ‘When it comes to complaining about ‘EC centralism’ the UK Government hasn't a leg to stand on.
We in Wales know it is the most centralist government in Europe.
Subsidiarity really means involving everyone at every level — Community, national, regional and local — in building an environmentally sustainable society, and giving citizens stronger legal rights of appeal whenever serious damage is threatened.’
TOURISM 2000
The Wales Tourist Board is preparing a new strategy ‘to take tourism into the next century’.
To assist the process of public consultation the Board has prepared a number of discussion papers tackling themes which will be covered in the strategy.
‘These will be used to stimulate discussion of the opportunities and problems which face tourism in Wales, and to provide a focus for debating different policy options.’
CPRW believes this review provides it with a major opportunity to influence the Board's future direction.
To guide our response to the discussion papers and the new draft strategy promised in May, we have set up a Tourism Advisory Group under the chairmanship of Professor John Aitchison.
It includes CPRW members with a special interest in tourism and others who have views and experience of relevance to our work.
Of particular interest are the discussion papers on Tourism and the Environment; Coastal Resorts; and Infrastructure Services.
These raise questions like: What is sustainable tourism?
Should tourism raise funds for conservation?
Can tourism damage the qualities on which it is based?
How can it be made more environment-sensitive?
We hope our advisory group will help us clarify our responses to these and other questions during the consultative process.
CRITICAL WRITINGS ON R S THOMAS
Originally published by Poetry Wales in 1982, this updated edition of critical writings on R S Thomas not only explores the evolving approaches Thomas has to a variety of, by now, well- established themes, but also contains an extended bibliography of source material, invaluable to any student or reader of Thomas's work.
Long held to be the leading contemporary poet of Wales, the ideas that have occupied Thomas's attention throughout his writing career of some forty-six years are represented by fourteen essays chosen by Sandra Anstey.
The author was awarded a doctoral degree for her research on R S Thomas and edited Thomas's Selected Prose in 1986.
She is at present Officer for English at the National Language Unit of Wales.
Having researched extensively into critical writings on Thomas since the publication of the first edition, Anstey has retained seven of the original essays, adding a further seven to give a comprehensive collection reflecting some reappraisal of Thomas's writings and also responses to new work over the past ten years.
Anstey's approach to this edition was initially intended to be thematic but she has reverted to the chronological format of the first edition, thus not only dispensing with the problems of placing the themes but also giving the reader a parallel in comment on Thomas's development both in poetry and prose.
The book commences with Cecil Price's ‘The Poetry of R S Thomas’ published in 1952, the year when ‘An Acre of Land’first established Thomas's critical acclaim, and concludes with A M Allchin's ‘Out of the Silence’published in 1991, together with an appraisal of Thomas's latest publication ‘Counterpoint’(Bloodaxe 1990).
This collection reflects a critical interest in Thomas's work over recent years, exemplified by book length studies; D Z Phillips'’ Poet of the Hidden God’(Macmillan 1986) and ‘R S Thomas: Y Cawr Awenydd’edited by M Wynn Thomas (Gomer 1990) amongst others.
The diverse range of these insights, from Brian Morris's investigations into the ‘Topography of R S Thomas’(an interesting travel guide to Thomas territory) to James Davies's excellent ‘Attempts to Evade: R S Thomas Impressions’(an analysis of Thomas's interest in the meeting of pictures and poetry) to name but two, provides an accessible and immediate plethora of facets on the poetry and prose of the poet.
MAKING SPACE
The 1980s saw a great upsurge of interest in the environment.
This resulted in a greater awareness not only of global issues, but also of threats to our immediate surroundings.
Open space has come under immense pressures from developments such as housing and road building, or neglected due to lack of resources.
These areas are of vital importance as it is through them that the majority of people experience ‘the countryside’ at first hand, whether for formal or informal recreation.
Making Space recognises the need for local community action, together with improvements in the law and policy, to protect, enhance and create open space.
The book's aim is to help guide local communities through the various and often daunting processes involved when tackling local environmental problems such as open space.
Since this involves such a wide subject base it would be quite easy to criticise the book on what has been omitted, especially as the guide is only 82 pages long.
However extensive research by The Open Spaces Society has resulted in a concise reference guide that even where detail is lacking, such as the section on obtaining a grant, there are numerous references to further sources of information.
The book is conveniently divided into six sections: Researching Your Space; The Planning System; New Spaces; Organising Action; Types of Spaces; and Finding Your Way Around.
It is encouraging that a great deal of emphasis is placed on aspects of plan preparation, whether this be the research or the surveying, since knowing your facts is vital before organising action.
The Types of Space section is particularly informative and should stimulate communities to identify the green areas in their neighbourhoods and hopefully lead to a greater appreciation of them.
I have two requests, however, regarding any proposed update of the book.
Although there are numerous examples of local groups undertaking practical projects which are most encouraging, I would have liked to have seen them covered in more detail.
My other request, probably unrealistic, is to make the book more beneficial to local communities in Wales by publishing a special Welsh edition.
This has been done for the Shell Better Britain Campaign's excellent ‘Getting Help’ guide.
However, any publication that encourages communities to think about their local environment and assists in its protection and improvement is a welcome sight.
This book is a useful starting point for any small group wishing to undertake positive action.
WELSH LONG HOUSES
Four Centuries of Farming at Cilewent
This book traces the history of the development of the traditional Welsh long house — a farmhouse which gave shelter and warmth to farming families and their livestock all under one roof.
It is a link which goes back to the Bronze Age and was common throughout the British Isles in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
In England and parts of Wales these gave way to more sophisticated detached farmhouses as agriculture improved, coupled with more scientific improvements in the 18th and 19th centuries.
However, in the poorer upland areas old ways persisted and long houses continued to be built up until the early 19th century.
This book traces the history of the different regional long house types which emerged during the 16th century.
The four distinct types built in Gwent, Glamorgan, Powys and Dyfed are covered with localised variations in siting of doorways and fireplaces.
In North East Wales fireplaces are found on sidewalls rather than the upper end of the hall against the gable, as in South East Wales.
The final part of this excellent book covers the history of Cilewent, a farm situated at the height of 1,050 feet on the head-waters of the river Claerwen in the old county of Radnor.
The eventual removal and reconstruction of this house at Sant Fagans between 1955 and 1957 came about as a gift from the Birmingham Corporation to the Welsh Folk Museum.
This book is a must for students of Welsh culture and architecture.
More importantly, it allows all of us to study the real vernacular architecture of Wales.
ROBIN DEAN
ABERGAVENNY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
Residents of Abergavenny, whether local born or incomers, seem to develop an unusually strong affection for the town, as is apparent in this excellent book.
The Civic Society is to be congratulated for doing a service to Abergavenny by persuading a number of established residents to reminisce in order to capture memories of the town before they are lost for ever.
The Society has displayed confidence in the contributors by printing their nostalgic talk verbatim and the result is a fascinating account of the town in the earlier part of this century, through the voices of the men and women who were there at the time.
This style makes easy reading and might form the basis of a ‘live performance’ as it has the feel of a radio script.
CPRW members will be saddened by many references to the destruction of much of the centre of Abergavenny between 1950 and 1980 despite the efforts of the Civic Society and others.
Buildings which were evidence of its 900 years history have disappeared and their places taken by unremarkable retail stores and car parks so that several references to streets and buildings in the book are difficult to follow.
A map of the town as it was at the beginning of this century, plus one as it is today, would have added considerably to the understanding of a reader not familiar with the town.
There are many lessons to be learnt from accounts of buildings knocked down with no care for wall paintings and historic artifacts, and certainly no interest in their architectural importance.
Stories of life before and during the 1939–1945 War paint a vivid picture of a market and railway town which will interest visitors and residents alike, although including more dates to put the stories into their context would have increased their value, particularly to new residents seeking to learn more about the area.
A strange omission is any reference to the Pen y Fal and Maindiff hospitals which were important employers in Abergavenny for many years.
The presentation of memories as they were told brings this book alive, but the Civic Society might have been better served by their publisher who should have avoided duplicating four paragraphs in two chapters attributed to different contributors.
The photograph on page 128 is of the gate of the original school established in the reign of Henry the Eighth and not the much later Grammar School building described in the adjoining text.
The jeweller's in Nevill Street recalled by Mr Charles Price was owned by Mr Rowe, although the dictating error turning it into Rose the Jewellers is readily understood.
It is only too easy to find minor errors in a publication which contains so many names and so much information, but these are the very features likely to lead to the book being treated as a reference by local historians for years to come.
This publication may encourage other Civic Societies and perhaps CPRW Branches to attempt the production of similar books.
They would benefit by advice from the Abergavenny Civic Society about how the task might be tackled.
TIME TO GET OUR ACT TOGETHER
Two years' ago CPRW joined the Shell Better Britain Campaign as a partner organisation and helped establish a Wales Steering Group.
It has tried to make the excellent support the Campaign offers more accessible to people all over Wales who are keen to improve their local environment.
The Campaign's UK Manager, PETER WOODWARD describes what has been achieved.
When pupils at Derwendeg Primary School near Hengoed in Mid Glamorgan went to release some tadpoles into the local stream, they found it badly polluted.
In fact the land around this former beauty spot had become little more than a rubbish tip.
It was time for action!
With the help of teachers and parents, they embarked on a major clear-up operation to restore the Cylla Brook to its former glory.
They wrote to local factories and the authorities, enlisting their support in putting an end to the stream's pollution.
The group received a grant of £300 from the Shell Better Britain Campaign towards the cost of plants and materials to create a picnic site and wildflower meadow.
The area has now been fully restored and is enjoyed by all the local community, as well as providing the perfect outdoor classroom for the children.
This is just one example of positive action by a group of people who care enough to do something positive to improve their local surroundings.
The Shell Better Britain Campaign exists to encourage and support such activity right across the United Kingdom.
There are two core elements of support offered to local voluntary groups by the Campaign — information and grants.
The Campaign publishes a free bilingual Wales edition of its ‘Guide to a Better Britain'.
The booklet contains advice on how to organise a local project, where to go for help,(there is a comprehensive list of useful organisations in Wales) and a section on helpful publications.
The booklet is revised annually and has become widely recognised as one of the best guides available for local groups.
The Campaign's Project Grants Fund provides seed-corn funding to help with the purchase of tools and materials for practical environmental improvement work carried out by local volunteers.
Last year 58 groups in Wales received grants of up to £750 towards practical projects ranging from the creation of a wildlife pond to setting up a community recycling scheme.
Information and cash are two very practical ways that the Campaign is helping encourage more people actively to care for their local surroundings.
This approach stems from a strongly held belief that voluntary action represents a major force for positive environmental change.
The Campaign also believes local communities should be empowered to make decisions about the shape of their own local area and directly involved in the process of protection, enhancement and management.
The origins of this philosophy go back as far as 1970 when Shell and the Nature Conservancy first devised a competition aimed at encouraging young people to come up with ideas to conserve their local environment.
Since then the initiative has evolved into a major community-wide campaign for action.
Today the Campaign is a partnership of 15 national statutory and voluntary organisations with Shell UK who all share a belief in supporting local environmental action.
In Wales the partners are the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales, the Civic Trust for Wales and the Countryside Council for Wales.
Core funding for the Campaign comes from (delete: the) Shell UK, while the Countryside Council for Wales provides additional grant-aid for activities in Wales.
But after 23 years of inspiration and support, what has the Campaign really achieved?
Well, over the last decade alone over 6,000 project grants have been awarded across the UK and there is an ever-increasing demand for information, currently running at 20,000 requests a year.
However, I believe this is but a drop in the ocean compared to the vast number of communities that could play some form of active role, however modest.
Of more importance perhaps, has been the marked shift in attitude shown by many environmental and community groups in valuing the type of activity promoted by the Campaign.
This positive momentum has accelerated over the last two or three years, though the Campaign is the first to recognise that it is only a modest part of a much larger movement.
There are certainly more support organisations active in Wales than in any other country in the United Kingdom, and there are some very fine examples of effective local enabling structures, such as the network of the county-based development officers working on behalf of the Prince of Wales’ Committee.
Yet I perceive there is still some way to go before voluntary and statutory bodies can claim to have made a serious break-through in mobilising action.
Perhaps I might suggest three stages that should be considered as a route to achieving this goal.
First, there would be much to be gained in promoting a more coherent debate about community environmental action in Wales.
Some misunderstanding exists at present about what it is, and what it is not, and of the processes that can encourage or suppress it.
There would be enormous value in sharing information about what different organisations are currently achieving in this area and the problems they are encountering.
This might also help break down some of the misconceptions that can grow up between organisations.
It would also be of great interest to learn about the distinctive experiences and initiatives taking place across the rest of the UK.
Second, there would be great advantage in trying to develop a somewhat more coherent framework or strategy to achieve the goal of enabling local action.
There are distinctive yet complimentary roles for all organisations to play.
These need to be recognised in order to ensure there are not gaps in the support offered, or needless duplication.
Perhaps there is a positive role here for the Countryside Council for Wales, since it is currently clarifying its policy in this area?
Third, I hope further partnerships can be forged between organisations in the delivery of more effective service at the local level.
There already exists much evidence of a willingness among a wide range of bodies to collaborate in achieving a result that is greater than the sum of their individual contributions, but there is more that could be achieved through genuine and lasting partnerships.
Surely the ultimate prize of motivating and supporting a wide cross-section of the communities of Wales to care for their local environment in a practical way is sufficient incentive for us to get our collective acts together?
PETER WOODWARD has been the UK Manager of the Shell Better Britain Campaign since 1988.
A graduate in urban and regional planning, he originally worked for the Urban Wildlife Trust in Birmingham and also spent a period as an environmental planning consultant.
If you would like to receive further information about the Shell Better Britain Campaign, write to FREEPOST, Newtown, Powys SY16 1BR or telephone .
Pupils from Derwendeg Primary School help with the Cylla Brook clear-up operation.
Bedwas and District Conservation Society in Gwent have been active in improving open spaces around their town.
St Clears Chamber of Trade and Commerce have been landscaping the approaches to the town in order to attract visitors and provide an amenity for local residents.
EDUCATION FOR SUSTAINABILITY
The importance of awareness-raising, education and training for environmental sustainability was endorsed by the world's leaders at the Earth Summit last year.
Education for Sustainability must lead to changes in the value systems to which we are currently wedded if we are to build a more sustainable society.
Many believe these changes will have to be drastic and immediate:
‘Education is critical for promoting sustainable development and improving the capacity of the people to address environment and development issues…
It is critical for achieving environmental and ethical awareness, values and attitudes, skills and behaviour consistent with sustainable development and for effective public participation in decision-making.’
— Promoting Education, Public Awareness and Training, Chapter 36, ‘Agenda 21’.
The recent Toyne Report ‘Environmental Responsibility, An Agenda for Further and Higher Education’, commissioned by the DoE and the Welsh Office states, ‘Everybody has some scope for doing his or her job in a more environmentally responsible way, and needs to understand the importance of this…but may well need more than this, either because they have been given specific responsibilities within their organisation, or simply because their organisation's environmental impact is heavily dependent on the way they carry out their day-to-day tasks, and on the decisions which they have to take.’
HRH The Prince of Wales encapsulated this aspiration at the Action for Wales Conference in Cardiff in 1991 —‘I believe the need for thorough and thoughtful environment education is, perhaps, greater than ever because increased environmental awareness and concern are only slowly leading to more environmental action.
I can't help feeling that we will only really start to make progress when we have a generation of decision-makers whose understanding of the issues is more intuitive.’
Earlier this year a newspaper headline screamed: ‘Schools rapped over environmental studies’.
An HMI report had said Welsh schools needed to do more to promote environmental good practice.
Fortunately there are excellent practical projects across Wales to learn from and published resources like Gwaith Maes.
The Curriculum Council for Wales'’ Curriculum Cymreig’makes clear the need for children to be aware of the cultural, historic, social and environmental issues which have, and are, shaping Wales.
CCW's Advisory Paper 17 will also assist governors, head teachers and teachers to see how studies in each statutory subject can enhance environmental education.
However Wales lacks a central coordinating agency to encourage environmental education — Education for Sustainability.
I firmly believe an Environmental Council for Wales (ECW) is needed to coordinate the resources and meet the needs of formal and informal education across the country.
This organisation should liaise with the Welsh arm of Local Government Management Board, which is leading the Local Agenda 21 initiative.
I would also recommend that:
every school and college should undertake an environmental audit of the curriculum, its grounds and buildings;
they should each adopt an environmental policy with clear indicators to allow the public to see how successfully they are implemented;
the Welsh Office, in liaison with the ECW, should draw up guidance showing how the new inspector for schools (OFSTED) will identify good practice in environmental education and its contribution to teaching and learning, and the ethos of the whole school;
in line with the Toyne Report, every Further and Higher Education institution, after consultation with its staff and students, should formally adopt and publicise by the 1994/5 academic year, a comprehensive environmental policy, together with an action plan for implementation;
the Welsh Office should commission by no later than the 1995/6 academic year, an appraisal of the progress which FHE has made in the development of environmental education, and should consider further action at a national level in the light of the results;
Welsh local authorities should take the lead role in responding to the objectives of Local Agenda 21.
the Countryside Council for Wales should be supported in its aspiration to widen the vision of future management of the Welsh countryside beyond current constraints, in the spirit of the Earth Summit.
There are many other areas one could consider, especially meeting the environment aspirations of special needs groups, and the implications of National Vocational Qualifications in the environmental sector.
I believe the process of awareness raising, education and training must be a seamless robe which achieves the objective of Education for Sustainability.
This means it must also achieve the marriage between environment and development, for if we believe in stewardship of the ‘property’ we have inherited and hold in trust for our successors, we must recognise the need to conserve and manage the high grade real-estate which is Wales.
TONY THOMAS is Director of the Field Studies Council and FSC Cymru.
FACING UP TO THE ENERGY CRISIS
The full scale of the environmental damage caused by the recent wrecking of the tanker Braer on Shetland's shores will take years to assess, but DAVID VICKERMAN believes some fundamental lessons from the incident have already been learned.
The Braer was outside a ten mile exclusion zone when its engines failed.
The subsequent disaster as the stricken vessel drifted on to the rocks, devastating bird life, and leaving an as yet unknown legacy in terms of aquatic pollution, was watched in horror by millions of people as events unfolded.
The clean-up will continue for many months while the outcome of the official inquiry will be eagerly awaited.
Meanwhile some fundamental questions are being asked.
For the incident has not only highlighted the risks of transporting oil by tanker past sensitive environments, but also brought the wider issue of UK oil consumption and energy policy to the fore once again.
Here in Wales concern is widespread about the potential effects of the development of the offshore oil and gas industry on fragile natural habitats, particularly those around Cardigan and Caernarfon Bays.
Although Hamilton Oil's exploration rig Sonat Arcade Frontier departed from the area off Bardsey shortly after Christmas, it has left in its wake a substantial lobby of conservationists, environmental activists and supporters which views the prospect of large scale industrial development as posing a serious threat, particularly to protected species such as the bottle-nose dolphin and other marine and bird life.
The risks are already considerable.
As the Western Mail pointed out in an article just days after the Braer tragedy, fragile marine inhabitants in Wales are at daily risk of a similar spill, since around 4,000 tankers a year ply their trade in and out of the giant Milford Haven refinery.
However careful the oil companies are, there is every chance a similar tragedy to the Shetlands could happen off the south or west Wales coasts.
With areas like Skomer, Skokholm, Grassholm containing such a rich myriad of wildlife, much is at stake.
But it is this very oil that currently keeps the wheels of British industry turning.
As environmentalists pointed out at the time of the Shetlands disaster, there is a degree of hypocrisy in expressing outrage at the spillage when such accidents are the price we seem prepared to pay for access to oil.
While we demand oil in such quantities to fuel our petrol driven lifestyles we cannot ignore the consequences, both short term and long term.
I believe we need to radically rethink the whole way we consume energy.
Take for instance our approach to transport.
Should we continue to pollute clean air, streams and rivers, and consume vast quantities of non-renewable fossil fuels for short-term gains at such high risks?
How can people's insatiable preference for cars that are more powerful and faster be reconciled with the need to protect the environment?
Car use is increasing at an alarming rate.
Moreover, the RAC's own research has shown that cars in the UK are now dirtier than a year ago, despite tougher controls on emissions.
There is concern not just at the impact of this expansion on the environment, but at whether, at the end of the day, the UK's £20 billion road programme will actually promote economic growth or create grid- lock.
The environmental transport campaign group Transport 2000 reminded us in its recent ‘The Rush for Roads’ report, that some of the poorest sections of society are being asked to make sacrifices for measures designed to promote economic growth.
The onus is surely on the proponents of this ‘rush for roads’ to prove that those sacrifices will not be in vain.
In Wales, declining standards of public transport, particularly in mid Wales with its poor bus and rail links, sadly leave people little option but to use private transport.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor believes his new roads programme ‘will be good for the environment’.
Yet, as Friends of the Earth's transport campaigner Roger Higman said recently, what his department claims as ‘good’ has caused and is causing, serious damage to the countryside.
Surely the best way to protect the environment is to invest in better public transport and build fewer roads?
Growing environmental awareness is leading more people to conclude that in order to survive greater credence must be given to the concept of sustainability.
As CPRW's Director emphasised at the recent Euro-conference on Sustainability in Cardiff, we now have ‘historic opportunities’ to plan a sustainable society and to ‘avoid the mistakes of the past’.
‘Failure to change the consumption patterns of relatively rich countries like Wales would break the fragile global consensus achieved at the recent Earth Summit, and lead to environmental disaster,’ he warned.
Here in Wales, we are pioneering environmentally friendlier alternatives to oil, coal and nuclear power in the form of wind power.
Years ago this was seen as the dream of purists and unworldly cranks, but it is now one of the big growth areas in energy policy, with Wales leading the way in the UK.
But even wind power, as heated debates at various public enquiries have revealed, is not without its critics.
It may be a wonderful alternative to fossil fuel but it brings its own problems.
These will be familiar to members of CPRW, which campaigned against Wales' first commercial windfarm at Cemmaes.
Aesthetically the giant turbines can pose problems, depending literally on your vantage point.
Because so much of Wales is of outstanding natural beauty, the siting rows of giant turbines on exposed hillsides is bound to cause problems.
But how do they compare with the damage caused by other energy sources?
British Coal's Opencast Executive is busy planning to extend its operations in Wales, despite suffering a setback with the recent Welsh Office decision to reject its plan for a massive opencast site at Pwll Du, near Blaenavon.
The Opencast Executive said the decision meant a lost opportunity to create 200 jobs with another 200 in service and supply industries, putting over £4 million of wages annually into the local economy over its proposed ten year life.
It believes the site would have produced fuel at prices that could have sustained jobs in local power stations, rather than forcing them to rely on imported coal.
Overall, British Coal has argued its operations generate some £30 million of wages annually in South Wales, produces cheap coal, and, once its work is complete, ensures the local community is provided with environmental benefits.
Critics, of course, argue that even with the best will in the world British Coal cannot replace much of what is destroyed in getting the coal out of the ground.
Clearly, the whole energy debate in Wales and beyond needs to be properly aired.
We are at the leading edge of the development of wind power, and must also have one of the most effective network of organisations, ranging from government bodies to the voluntary sector, involved in conservation and wildlife protection.
But there appears to be little sense of common purpose.
At a UK level there are initiatives such as the Department of the Environment's recently launched Energy Saving Trust to stimulate energy savings and ‘protect the environment’, but even the gentlest cynic must question the efficacy of such private sector bodies which depend upon bringing together regional electricity companies and British Gas.
The energy debate is not a simple one.
It must address all sources of power and the impacts they cause.
It must also ask whether we should concentrate more on actually reducing our demand for energy in the first place.
There is no simple solution to this complex problem.
But time is running out.
The wreck of Braer will not cause the oil industry to ground its plans to expand.
I believe there will be more disasters and, eventually, something on the same scale here in Wales.
We should take what lessons we have learnt and work out our options for an energy-efficient future.
One that does not destroy the very environment upon which we all depend.
DAVID VICKERMAN is Environment Correspondent of the Western Mail.
He was born and brought up in Cardiff.
FROM PERU TO PEMBROKE
It is sometimes said that few young people get involved in CPRW's work, but this is certainly not the case at our Annual Youth Environment Conference where this year, as ever, 100% of the delegates were under 21!
From the look on their faces during the opening session, it was plain they had imagined an ‘environment’ conference to be about rain forests and whales.
They were rather taken aback when they realised they would be learning about the way the planning system operates!
However, ‘think local to act global’ is one of the favourite mottoes of CPRW's staff in Welshpool, and Jenny, Tony and Heidi did their best to show that the environment means Pembroke as well as Peru.
The Conference was held in November at the Orielton Field Studies Centre, just outside the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park.
The theme this year was the conflict between development for tourism and the conservation of cherished landscapes.
Of course the national park was chosen to illustrate this tension at its most intense.
An introductory lecture on land designation and the planning system was followed by a history of the national parks movement from George Yeomans, Deputy National Park Officer.
The first evening heralded a debate on the burning of ‘Orimulsion’ at Pembroke power station chaired by Geoffrey Sinclair, of our Pembrokeshire branch.
Speakers were David Snow of BP Bitor (the company which imports and markets the fuel from Venezuela), Peter Taylor from the Oil Pollution Research Unit at Fort Popton, Dr Clive Morgan, also from Fort Popton but who was drafted in at the last minute to play the part of National Power Plc, and finally Gordon James of Narberth Friends of the Earth.
The debate got a bit heated as one might expect, and the students asked some penetrating questions which kept the panelists on their toes!
But the main aim of the three day course was to study four controversial planning applications.
These were examined in detail and the sites visited before the students played the role of a planning committee, deciding whether or not to give each permission.
Two of the developments, at Freshwater East and at Meadow Park Holiday Camp, Amroth, had already been determined, but the other two, the development of Lamphey Palace and an education centre at Castell Henllys near Eglwyswrw, still awaited decisions in real life.
For each proposal a group was given the task assembling all the arguments in favour of the development, while another, the reasons against.
They drew on government legislation, park plans, guidance from statutory bodies, such as the Countryside Council for Wales, and common sense in presenting their opposing cases to the full conference on the last day for a decision.
In the event, only the education centre got permission — all the others being refused.
Just for the record, they were also against burning Orimulsion at Pembroke, and, when given a choice of two possible solutions to traffic congestion in Fishguard, declined to take either of them.
The conference was supported financially by the Countryside Council for Wales and by CPRW's local branches who sponsored the students.
It would not have been possible without the cooperation of hard-pressed national park staff, BP Bitor, Govan Davies Estates, Mel Davies of Amroth, Mr Fairbrother of Lamphey, Friends of the Earth Cymru, and last but not least, the wonderfully good humoured Robin and Ann Crump and all their colleagues at Orielton.
TONY WALKER CPRW Assistant Director
1st June 1992
Dear 
Branch donation
I am writing to acknowledge safe receipt of the Branch donation of £250 for which we are extremely grateful.
I have notified our national Treasurer and I am sure that she will write on behalf of the Executive to thank the Branch for their support.
With best wishes
Yours sincerely,
APPENDIX 1
THE UK NATIONAL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT
The Department of the Environment's Draft Framework
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
Context: Brundtland, Rio, Agenda 21; UK's Environment White Papers; public consultations being this report; cross-references to Climate Change plan, Biodiversity plan, and forest principles plan.
What the UK understands by ‘sustainable development’.
Twin themes implicit in the term that this report will draw out throughout: ie.
the need to combine economic development with protection of the environment;
for the sake of future generations as well as our own.
This understanding of the subject matter contains an implicit weighting of the priorities.
Each section of the report will give greatest attention to environmental issues that score highly against the following tests of significance:
Questions of Survival — including global warming, the ozone layer, and the UK's aid and trade obligations to developing countries.
Protection of Human Health (directly or indirectly via ecosystems)— including most pollution of air, water and sea; contaminated land; hazardous waste, dangerous substances, GMOs & radiation; biodiversity to preserve genetic stock for future agriculture and medicine; and international obligations (eg reduction of trans-boundary pollution, movement of hazardous waste).
Conservation of Vital Resources — where enjoyment by future generations depends on our custodianship; eg. minerals; habitats and species that people value; amenity of the countryside, urban landscape, historic heritage whenever the irreversible decisions are taken; reduction of waste; recycling; and import controls on endangered species from overseas.
While the report would give greatest emphasis to sustainable development in the UK, it would also cover EC commitments and the UK's responsibilities to developing countries.
Unlike the annual Environment White Papers, a sustainable development report need not give space to quality of life issues where there are no long term implications, such as local issues of litter, the nuisance from dogs, noise, etc.
A separate White Paper could review these and report as usual on progress with commitments.
New commitments from the sustainable development plan would be incorporated in the White Paper's tables for subsequent monitoring.
SECTION II: STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
This would offer an overview of the environment — both as it is now and how it might become on present trends.
Sustainable development implies a long term perspective.
Where there are already target dates for environmental improvements, the report would show whether those might be achieved on present trends.
As a general rule it might be productive to give forecasts at the year 2012 — twenty years after Rio.
Chapters would be arranged broadly by environmental media.
Judgement is needed in assessing how high a value to place upon the protection of the environmental resources, and on describing the seriousness of any threat.
Some aspects of our environment may be prized above economic development, while others may be less highly valued and reasonably the subject of trade-offs.
Chapters should give particular attention to environmental threats that score highly against the 3 tests of significance in Section I.
Chapters, not necessarily in this order, on:
Atmosphere
Air
Water (including quality, availability of supply, marine)
Land (including soil quality, contaminated land, derelict land, waste and recycling)
Human health:(drawing on Cm 1986 ‘Health of the Nation’)
Toxic substances and radiation
Habitats and species (drawing on UK's biodiversity Plan)
Conservation of mineral resources
Land use and conservation of countryside, town and heritage
Developing countries' problems to which the UK should have regard, eg poverty, forests, biodiversity
Each chapter would draw on the recent ‘UK Environment’ statistical report and add it where possible and appropriate.
Research in the pipeline would be mentioned.
A summary chapter would highlight the main areas of interest and concern.
It would also include evidence of public opinion on the environment and of the public's priorities for action.
Section III: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
This section would explore the linkages between economic development and the environment.
It would describe, sector by sector, the pressures that economic activities exert — but also the positive contribution that can be made to the environment as a consequence of advances in those sectors and of the economic growth they produce.
Where economic activity and environmental protection pull in opposite directions, priorities have to be assessed: the three tests of significance in Section I should be considered.
Where environmental protection measures raise questions of equity in international trade, these should be recognised and discussed.
Chapters, not necessarily in this order, on:
Agriculture, forests and fisheries.
Industry
Energy
Transport
Recreation and tourism
Urban development pressures on land use
Overseas trade
[Others? the precise list will need substantial discussion.]
Each chapter would:
begin where pertinent with highlights of current conditions and trends from Part II on the state of the environment (although this means some overlap it should help the exposition);
analyse the impacts of that sector on the environment, both beneficial and adverse; where possible place values on them (ambitious, and perhaps not often feasible in the time available); consider whether policies in that sector contribute to sustainable development in the long term.
Using the tests of significance, identify activities in each sector with implications for global survival, or human health, or the conservation of vital resources; and
end with an outline of the policy responses in that sector to the demands of sustainable development.
Where appropriate this section would draw on the separate reports that are to be made under the conventions on climate change and biodiversity and the statement of principles on forests.
SECTION IV: POLICY RESPONSES
Section IV would give an overview of the policy responses of the UK to the environmental pressures identified above.
It should look not only at the responsibilities of Government, but at the contributions that others make: business, local authorities, NGOs and members of the public alike.
The report should constitute an action plan.
It would therefore report the progress being made with earlier commitments — from international agreements and from the UK's Environment White Paper process.
New commitments would be recorded, and taken into the anniversary White Papers for monitoring.
Chapters, not necessarily one per topic, to cover:
Research and the precautionary principle
Integration of policies and policy appraisal (in Whitehall, industry, EIA, etc)
Regulation or ‘command and control systems’
Economic instruments
Land use planning system
Expenditure (public, private sector and voluntary)
International agreements
Overseas aid, advice, technology transfer
Voluntary collaboration with industry, agriculture, etc
Local government initiatives
Public pressure, consumer demand and individual action
Education and publicity
Each chapter would show the place of a particular form of policy response, or independent activity, in the scheme of things; it would comment on experience to date and record new initiatives.
It should reflect Section I's criteria for selecting significant issues, and acknowledge areas where more is to be done and where new measures may have to be found in the medium or long term.
To some extent this section overlaps with the conclusion about policy in the different chapters of Section III, but provided the overlaps are minimised this structure should be clear and convenient to the reader.
SECTION V: SUMMARY
An overview of the report.
Draw out particularly the messages on selected main themes in the report.
These might be, for example:
The relationship between economic development and environmental protection: sometimes mutually reinforcing, sometimes pulling in opposite directions — the importance of effective assessment techniques and policy integration.
Our responsibility to future generations — the benchmark of 2012 — research — acting on the precautionary principle.
Public opinion, education, and individual rights and responsibilities — the consultations behind this report.
An action plan — making clear the Government's commitments and targets, both those established under White Papers and new decisions — action by other sectors also vital.
Monitoring and indicators — how new Government commitments will be followed up through the anniversary White Paper series — the development of indicators in key areas of concern.
International obligations — although the report is predominately a UK plan, it has also covered the UK's obligations as an EC member and as a developed nation towards the developing world.
APPENDIX 2
Eleven Principles for Sustainability
(From: ‘Putting Our Own House In Order’ published by the UK members of the European Environmental Bureau, 1992)
1
Wise and careful management and efficient use of non-renewable resources, such as primary energy sources including fossil fuels and minerals.
2
Developing the contribution made by renewable resources such as renewable energy and timber in environmentally responsible ways.
3
Demand management of all resources, ensuring the best use of scarce resources, moderating our demands on them and reducing consumption where necessary, in accordance with sustainable supply and capacity.
4
Protection and careful management of our native biodiversity, landscapes and cultural heritage.
5
Implementation of the ‘precautionary principle’ so that we anticipate problems and take action before they become acute.
6
Implementation of the ‘polluter pays’ principle so that producers and consumers pay the environmental costs of production and consumption.
7
Resource pricing to reflect environmental and social criteria.
8
Achieving effective integration of environmental objectives into all sectors of policy, especially through the use of advanced environmental impact assessment techniques.
9
Introducing policies in all sectors which work to prevent at source pollution and environmental damage, minimise the generation of wastes; avoid over-stretching the capacity of the environment to act as a ‘sink’ for wastes, and eliminate processes and products likely to present long-term environmental problems.
10
A commitment to full public participation in decision making and freedom of information in all sectors.
11
Apply these principles in all our dealings with other nations, especially in the fields of aid, trade, exports and imports.
2nd July 1992
Dear ,
STRICT PLANNING CONDITIONS ON THE PROPOSED OIL AND GAS TERMINAL
I believe you are aware that the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales has carefully examined the planning application made by Hamilton Oil Co Ltd for the construction of an oil and gas terminal at Point of Ayr, Talacre, Clwyd.
Although there are several aspects of the proposal that give us cause for concern, we have concluded that, on balance, there are insufficient planning grounds on which to justify opposing the development.
We have therefore sought to influence its detail in order to ensure the highest standards of protection are afforded to the surrounding natural and visual environments.
In this respect, we believe it is vital that comprehensive and enforceable planning conditions are legally attached to planning permission, should you be so minded to recommend that permission be given in your report to the Minister of State for Wales.
We have discussed the matter of planning conditions with Clwyd County Council and have examined the latest draft (dated 26th June 1992) of these conditions prepared by the council's officers.
Whilst we would like to reserve our position over any additional conditions that we or others may wish to propose in future, we support the County Council's conditions, as drafted.
We have expressed our wish to the council that we would like to be consulted over the detailed implementation of the conditions and sincerely hope that we will be allowed to play a constructive part in this process.
It remains for me to urge you, on behalf of CPRW, to ensure that comprehensive and enforceable conditions, based on those proposed by Clwyd County Council, are attached to planning permission for the terminal, should you be minded to recommend permission.
We would be grateful if you would record our views in your report.
Yours sincerely,
11th May 1993
Dear ,
THRESHOLD 21
I am sorry we have taken sometime to respond to this consultation paper, but it has had to take its place in the queue!
However, I received comments from members of our Executive and Branch Committees which helped in drafting our response.
It has now been endorsed by the Executive Committee.
I hope you find it useful.
We look forward to seeing how Council develops its strategy in light of the consultation.
Kind regards.
Yours sincerely,
THRESHOLD 21
Response by the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales to the consultation paper on future policies published by the Countryside Council for Wales.
Introduction
We are grateful for the opportunity to comment on the many important proposition for future policy and action by CCW contained in this paper.
In our 1989 paper ‘A Future for Conservation in Wales’, published following the announcement that the Welsh components of the Nature Conservancy Council and the Countryside Commission were to be merged, we welcomed the creation of an integrated agency devoted to furthering conservation in Wales, despite concern over the disruptive nature of the reorganisation.
We waited patiently to see how the new Council would emerge, and we are now delighted to have established a Partnership Plan between ourselves and CCW.
The current position and future expectations of the Council
We recognise the anomalies and obstacles with which CCW has had to contend, and support its efforts to weld an effective and influential organisation out of the raw materials at its disposal.
We see public consultation aimed at clarifying appropriate strategic policies for CCW as a logical step in its development.
We hope the exercise will provide the Council a clear context and direction for its work; one that we can give whole-hearted support.
We agree that the fact that a completely new organisation, with a unique combination of responsibilities, inherited statutory powers and duties designed for another era and a different institutional framework, does not make it easy for the Council achieve its aspirations.
Whilst it would have been sensible for the remit to have been reviewed at time the organisation was created, we acknowledge the political realities that existed.
We would still welcome a thorough reappraisal of the statutory objectives, powers and duties of the Council in order to ensure they are relevant to the challenges which lie ahead.
Like the Council, we place immense importance on the outcome of last year's Earth Summit.
We believe it is essential to build on the political and technical progress that was made in the agreement that environmental sustainability should be the ultimate goal for all human societies, including ours in Wales.
As a result, we see this objective and the strategy for moving towards it contained in ‘Agenda 21’ and the EC's Fifth Action Programme on the Environment, as the basis for assessing of the future role of CCW.
We have attempted to map out our vision of what must be done in Wales to move towards sustainability, in our response to the Government's proposed UK National Sustainability Report.
Since this addresses many of the issues contained in Threshold 21, we have enclosed it as part of our response.
We broadly agree with the analysis outlined in the preamble to Threshold 21.
It is clear that despite the package of protective designations and institutions created since 1945, there has been a net decline in the quality of the Welsh countryside and the wider environment for the reasons given.
We believe that any strategy which relies almost entirely on defensive measures as a response to the damaging symptoms of development, is ultimately bound to fail.
The outcome of the struggle between environment and development interests observed during much of the 1980s, still to be seen today, confirms us in this conclusion.
Therefore, while defensive measures must not be abandoned for the foreseeable future, we firmly believe sustainability will only be achieved by injecting an environmental imperative into the developmental process.
This is at the heart of UNCED's Agenda 21, the European Community's Fifth Action Programme and the UK Government's Environment White Paper.
It must also lie at the heart of all CCW's policy objectives.
Protecting and enhancing landscape quality
There were many historical and political factors which led to the development of two distinctive and potentially incompatible approaches to landscape and wildlife conservation in the UK.
Had a different set of factors existed it is possible a rather different approach may have emerged.
Nonetheless, there are important differences between landscape and wildlife, in terms of way their qualities can be measured, perceived and protected, which suggest they cannot easily be treated as one and the same.
Whereas wildlife conservation lends itself to a science-based approach, this is not really possible for landscape conservation, or the improvement of public access to the countryside.
Strong science-based strategies for wildlife conservation have emerged over the last one hundred years.
They may have been politically naive in character and open to attack, but their proponents desired to ensure that sound scientific knowledge under-pinned all actions to protect wildlife resources.
In this respect CCW appears to be no different, although we hope it will greatly strengthen political support in Wales for the need to conserve and use natural resources sustainably.
Perception of the well-being of landscape qualities is a rather different matter.
The last twenty years has seen the development of a number of semi-quantitative techniques that purport to measure these qualities, but however helpful they may be, most people agree that the subjective element of landscape appreciation is, and will remain, of fundamental importance.
In this sense, we are talking about ‘artistic’ rather than‘scientific’understanding, although it is no less important for that.
It may be tempting to think that the shortcomings of an aesthetically-numb society can be overcome by appointing an executive authority with powers to impose protection where necessary, but this is not likely to be a very effective approach.
We therefore believe CCW must concentrate on building broad public support for landscape protection and enhancement.
It will achieve the best long term results by constructing a consensus through education, promotion and partnership.
With regard to the propositions proposed by the Council, we support them all — including the seeking of a landscape management agreement power, although we envisage it would only be used sparingly.
We strongly support the creation of an all-Wales environmental farming scheme combining the best elements of all current and proposed schemes in a simplified format with integrated institutional support.
We are less sanguine about the prospects for simplifying the current range of protective designations, since each has validity and specific requirements, although we would support careful experimentation.
Overall, however, we do not feel the list of propositions sufficiently recognises the need to work in partnership with others, particularly local government, to achieve consensus on the need to protect Wales outstanding countryside.
It should seek a stronger role through the planning system as an adviser on landscape, wildlife and access, both on plans and individual proposals.
In so doing, it should emphasise the almost imperceptible gradation in landscape quality in some parts of Wales, between designated and undesignated areas, and the consequent need to make protection universal.
Wildlife and Habitat Management
We believe there is danger in giving too much weight to the need to establish a representative catalogue of the full range of habitat types found in Wales.
This is fundamentally a defensive approach reflecting an assumption that progress will inevitably erode biological diversity and quality, and the only way to prevent complete loss is to ring-fence a few of the best ‘sites’ for posterity while allowing development to take its course elsewhere.
There is now ample evidence this approach is failing.
Even the best examples of habitat types cannot exist in isolation like islands of richness in a sea of poverty.
Moreover, by adopting too clinical a scientific strategy, the spiritually enriching value in having an ecologically healthy and varied countryside for people with only a modicum of scientific knowledge, have been overlooked.
We would therefore suggest the following approach:
a)
CCW should continue to identify and protect the richest wildlife sites based on the best scientific analysis;
b)
however, the strategy should switch from defence to attack such that these sites (and others that may not qualify as the finest, rarest or most representative examples) are protected as sources of biological quality (Ffynnon Bywyd?) from which an impoverished countryside can be recolonised through schemes like ‘Tir Cymen’ and ESAs;
c)
their value as sources of human enrichment should be recognised and assigned greater importance; and
d)
monitoring their biological status and the processes of recolonisation should be more rigorous and the results given greater political significance.
Within this strategy the Council should develop and extend appropriate habitat management regimes both directly through ownership or leasing arrangements, but increasingly through a range of ‘partnership’ or ‘agency’initiatives.
We firmly believe the key to long term success lies in engaging as many ‘actors’ as possible in the process of habitat and species protection and enhancement, rather than in requiring one authority to perform a clinical, curatorial role.
We find all the propositions worthy of support, within the strategy outlined above, particularly the final one.
We are also anxious to see marine nature conservation strengthened.
Enjoyment of Countryside
We strongly support measures to control noisy recreational activities in the countryside, especially those that rely on mechanical aids.
We think it would help if this objective was more explicitly recognised in CCW's remit.
Although we accept that careful zoning in time and space can help to reduce the impacts of noise, we believe there is an urgent need to encourage attitudinal changes in society towards the acceptability of mechanically-aided recreation.
The burning of energy and the consequent production of pollutants just for frivolous enjoyment, does not seem to sit comfortably alongside the much more serious objective of sustainability.
We broadly support the notion that everyone should enjoy the right of access to the countryside, although we also believe that with rights come responsibilities.
The most immediate way in which this right of access can be given meaning is through the opening up and maintenance of the Rights of Way network.
Given the legacy of neglect this network has suffered in Wales, we support the priority now being given to it by CCW.
There needs to be a concerted and sustained campaign to open up and maintain the network, and CCW can, and is, doing much to make this happen.
However, while there may be value in strengthening its powers in this area, it must work closely with others in the public, private and voluntary sectors to ensure the network becomes more open and available.
There may be justifiable frustration at the low priority currently assigned to Rights of Way in county highway departments, but we think it may be better to ensure statutory responsibility remains within local government so that the interests of pedestrians, riders and cyclists can be greatly enhanced as part of a wider ‘greening’ of local transport policies.
We also believe there is scope to improve public access to the countryside beyond the Rights of Way network.
We are attracted to the idea that rights of access could be extended to the unenclosed uplands of Wales.
That is why we support the access options in ‘Tir Cymen’ and those proposed for ESAs in future.
We support the proposition that the provision of access beyond existing Rights of Way should be paid for out of the public purse.
Moreover, our support for the recommendations of the Common Land Forum is well known.
We believe that if real progress is made in extending public rights of access to the countryside and making these rights a practical reality, it may be possible to negotiate a more flexible approach in an atmosphere of trust.
In light of the above, we have some misgivings over the efficacy of some of the propositions (4) in Threshold 21, although those in (5) appear entirely appropriate.
Understanding the Countryside
We strongly support CCW's efforts to give greater impetus and direction to the provision of environmental education in Wales — this is badly needed.
However, once again, the Council may be assuming too great a role for itself in meeting this need.
We believe this is may be the reason it has failed, so far, to construct a politically credible strategy for environmental education, though there are signs this is now beginning to come together.
Having said this, we are in no doubt that CCW has a crucial ‘catalytic’ role to play in driving forward a major new initiative on environmental education.
In so doing, it need not re-invent the wheel.
We believe imaginative adaptation of pioneering work achieved in Scotland and England is the best way forward.
A partnership approach is also paramount.
We believe the private sector has an important role to play (see the section on Environmental Education in our response to the proposed National Sustainability Report).
With skill and imagination it may not be necessary to devote as much as 5% of CCW's budget in order to make significant progress.
The Welsh Countryside as a Human Environment
Much of what we say in our response to the proposed National Sustainability Report is relevant to the points made in this section of Threshold 21.
We warmly welcome the Council's intention ‘to widen the vision of the future management of the Welsh countryside beyond the apparent constraints — and in line with the spirit of the outcome of the Rio Conference in 1992’.
We would suggest the letter as well as the spirit of the outcome of the Earth Summit has great relevance for the Council's work.
Amongst the many implications of this outcome, we agree that there is an urgent need to safeguard and extend the skills needed to ensure sustainable use of the natural resources of the coast and countryside of Wales.
Many of these skills are of a traditional nature, but others are either wholly new or refinements of past practices.
Inspiration, education and training are all needed to equip present and future generations for the task of achieving sustainable use of the Welsh countryside.
Our views on the future for farming and forestry are well known and, we believe, strongly supportive of the approach being taken by the Council.
Less well known, perhaps, is our vision of sustainable development, production and consumption, matters that are addressed in some detail in the document referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23, above.
We have tried to set our sights high in terms of the response we believe is essential in the wake of the Earth Summit.
In so doing, we recognise that CCW has a vital role to play in the immediate future, but we also recognise that many other ‘actors’ must also play their part in moving Wales towards sustainability.
Moreover, we recognise the seminal changes we are seeking in the approach to development and ‘progress’ may well require fundamental institutional changes beyond that envisaged in Threshold 21.
It is difficult to be clear about what these might be, but we have attempted to sketch a vision of the future in our response to the UK National Sustainability Report.
We want to stress that this vision is designed to stimulate thought and debate.
It is not necessarily an ideal blue-print!
Given our emphasis on partnership throughout this response to Threshold 21, we strongly support all the propositions under (8).
Naturally, we believe voluntary bodies have a particularly important contribution to make, and hope that the Council will bolster its collaboration with Wales Link and all its member organisations.
Not enough, perhaps, is made of the value of this partnership in Threshold 21.
Sustainable Environmental Quality Control
We enthusiastically agree with the proposition that CCW can do much to define and help society achieve high standards of ‘sustainable environmental quality control’.
We have long believed the land use planning system is a vital mechanism for ensuring environmental protection and enhancement.
Its role as a regulator and director of development has recently been enhanced, partly in reflection of the contribution it can make to encouraging sustainability.
CCW must build on this positive achievement.
In framing its policies for the future, we hope that the Council will fully acknowledge the importance of the land use planning system, something which is not clearly enough stated in Threshold 21.
In so doing, we hope that it will take account of our responses on the proposed reorganisation of local government in Wales and the way this may weaken its strategic planning functions.
We would also commend to CCW the County Planning Officers' Society's recent pamphlet ‘Planning for Sustainability’ and the document ‘Planning for a Greener Countryside’, published by the old Countryside Commission for England and Wales.
The Way Forward
We strongly support the following proposal contained in this section of Threshold 21:
’ This Council and its partners, in the remainder of this decade must try to raise society's sights quickly enough to develop the corporate vision that brings about useful administrative change which commands wide enough public support.
Enough change for regulation to give way smoothly to sufficiently widespread positive management by public agency or private occupier in partnership to obviate the need for enforced protection.’
This must be the ultimate goal, though it is unlikely to be attained by the end of this century.
Protective designation is therefore likely to be needed for sometime to come, and will need both strengthening and transforming into positive schemes of practical management.
We believe this should take place in parallel with efforts to raise standards of environmental care in the undesignated countryside.
Skill will be needed if the status of protective designation is to be enhanced (scientifically and politically) while at the same time pioneering new approaches to the conservation of rural qualities.
We would support careful experimentation on this basis, and agree that ‘a substantial area of mid-Wales’ may well prove an appropriate and relevant test-bed.
Overall, we believe care must be exercised in moving towards a more comprehensive, integrated system of quality control.
Although there may be reasons for seeking ‘…without delay, powers needed to balance better (CCW's) composite duties’, we believe greater clarity and consensus is required over what system and institutional arrangements would be best for Wales in the 21st century.
An attempt should be made over the next few years to answer this question in the light of experience and experimentation.
We would not be surprised if it was concluded that a more thorough-going reform is required than that assumed in Threshold 21.
We look forward to contributing to this debate.
To all members of Montgomeryshire Branch:
26th November 1992
Dear ,
The relaunch of the branch took place at Caersws on Thursday 19th November and although the turnout was not as great as we had hoped, it was a very positive meeting.
We were pleased that we had a representative from the south of Montgomeryshire but it was a pity that no one from the Dyfi Valley attended.
However, amongst those who did come we had a good combination of past experience and new ideas.
The next meeting will be on Monday 7th December in Newtown and the agenda is attached.
At that meeting we hope to agree a manifesto setting out the policies which members think the Montgomeryshire Branch should adopt.
What do YOU think the branch is for?
What do YOU want it to do?
This of course leads on to— What are YOU prepared to do for the branch?
We will also be welcoming ideas for social events, walks, talks, fundraising etc.
Please, if you cannot attend write in with your suggestions and ideas.
Please give an indication of what you may be able to do yourself.
A form is provided overleaf but we would welcome longer letters if you prefer.
Without input from members, this branch of CPRW will be unable to play an active and effective role in Montgomeryshire.
We hope to see you on the 7th December, especially people from the south and west of the county.
The ball is now firmly in your court!
Yours sincerely,
DRAFT 1993 VOLUNTEER TRAINING PROGRAMME
This year's programme combines special help for CPRW's branch committee members, with guidance on difficult planning problems.
Courses on the latter are open to non-members who are actively involved with other voluntary conservation bodies.
The courses are free to CPRW members, but will cost non-members a fee of £10.
All applicants are required to make a £5 deposit per course.
This will be returned on the day.
CPRW members can claim a 10p/mile allowance to offset travelling costs (15p/mile if two or more travel together).
All courses include coffee, lunch and tea.
The programme is made possible through generous financial support from the Wales Council for Voluntary Action and the Countryside Council for Wales.
Beating The Developers
Sat. 20th March
Llandudno
A basic introduction to the planning system showing how to oppose the most common types of inappropriate development.
The location is convenient for members of our North Wales branches.
It is open to non-members.
Getting More People Involved
Sat. 17th April
Llandrindod
How to attract people to CPRW and get them and existing members more actively involved.
It will compare different methods of recruitment, identify opportunities for involvement and stress the importance of a programme of social events.
It is designed to help committee members involved in branch administration and development work.
Attending Public Inquiries
Fri. 23rd April
Newport
Reveals how public inquiries work and how to present a good case to the inspector.
Course leader, Martin Chick (University of the West of England) will advise on presentational skills.
Open to non CPRW members, especially people planning to attend the Usk Barrage public inquiry.
Convenient for our Gwent, Brecknock, Mid/South and West Glamorgan branches.
Cynllunio A'r Gymraeg
Fri. 14th May
Aberystwyth
A Welsh medium course introducing the planning system with an emphasis on how planning issues affect the Welsh language.
It is open to non CPRW members and should be convenient to the Welsh speaking communities of North, Mid and West Wales.
Influencing Local Development
Sat. 11th June
Llandrindod
Designed to help CPRW branch committee members who monitor local planning and development proposals.
It will examine good practice in tracking planning applications, liaison with planning authorities, and how to use CPRW's Index of Planning Policies in written submissions.
Running An Effective Branch
Sat. 18th Sept.
Llandrindod
Will help improve meeting and management skills and give advice on how to motivate volunteers in order to build a strong and effective branch.
Only open to CPRW members, it is primarily designed to help branch chairmen/women and secretaries.
Getting CPRW In The News
Thur. 13th Oct.
Mold
An opportunity to gain confidence in dealing with the news media.
This course is primarily designed to help CPRW branch committee members whose job it is to get local campaigning activities into the news.
It will provide practical advice on preparing press statements and successful TV and radio interview techniques.
Beating The Developers
Sat. 23rd Oct.
Cardiff
A basic introduction to the planning system showing how to oppose the most common types of inappropriate development.
The location is convenient for members of our South Wales branches.
It is open to non-members.
A Guide to Minerals Planning
Sat. 13th Nov.
Ystradgynlais
Designed to help those fighting quarrying and opencast proposals, the course will examine Government planning guidance and local decision-making procedures.
It is open to non-members and will include site visits.
Cleaning Up Waste Disposal
Sat 4th Dec.
Merthyr Tydfil
An introduction to new waste disposal strategies and the pros and cons of recycling.
The course will study various environmentally preferred alternatives to traditional waste disposal schemes.
The location is convenient for heavily populated South Wales, but accessible to southern Mid Wales.
MEMO: USK BARRAGE BILL — MEETING WITH THE PROMOTERS
To:
From:
29th June 1992
Further to Neil's Memo to you of the 24th June, I am sorry to say that Newport Borough Council came back to us saying that they could not meet with us on Friday 24th July after all.
The meetings have now been re-arranged and will take place on: WEDNESDAY 29TH JULY
I hope that this has not caused you too much inconvenience.
MEMO: INTERVIEW ON CPRW's ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING ON SATURDAY
To:
From:
24th June 1993
CPRW's Annual General Meeting will take place on Saturday at 2pm at Gregynog Hall (Residential Centre of the University of Wales) near Newtown, Powys.
I have attached a copy of the 1992 Annual Report, which you may be able to skim through.
This will be presented at the meeting.
The meeting will be chaired by our President, Lord Williams of Elfel.
Our Chairman, Dorothea Garnons Williams will present the Report, our Honorary Treasurer, Richard Livsey will present the Annual Accounts, and the meeting will subsequently be addressed by Michael Griffith, Chairman of the Countryside Council for Wales.
On Saturday morning there will be a meeting of our National Council which will be presented with a document called ‘Wales 2012’.
I have enclosed a copy of the executive summary to give you an idea of what this is about.
I don't want to go into great detail, but I would be happy to make reference to the document.
I'm sorry I can't boil all this information down, but I hope it helps you prepare a brief for Peter Johnson.
As always, thanks for your interest!
2nd June 1992
Dear 
CPRW Christmas Card
Some years ago now, my husband came to choose a painting from you and you made an offer to help CPRW in any way you could.
We have not forgotten this offer, although for various reasons we have not been able to develop an idea until now.
Although it is not original, and you have in the past done this for us several times, we would very much like to use one of your paintings for our 1992 Christmas Card.
If you would like me to come and discuss this further, please telephone me during office hours at this number () or at home on .
I have enclosed our new recruitment leaflet together with the latest issue of our magazine RURAL WALES from which I hope you will gain an insight into our new campaigning image!
I have also enclosed one of last year's cards from a painting by David Bellamy.
The cards are now larger than in previous years and we have found that this size proved very popular.
I do hope that you will be able to help us
Yours sincerely 
13th April 1993
Your ref.
MD/112
Dear 
Wales YFC Representation on Other Bodies
Thank you for your letter of the 8th April.
Wales YFC is an affiliated member of CPRW and the definition of such is ‘a corporate member whose objects appear to the Council to be similar to those of CPRW’.
The main policy making body of CPRW is its Council and each of our affiliated members are entitled to send a representative to meetings of Council although they are not entitled to vote.
We welcome the participation of our affiliated members.
Your representative at present is recorded as Mr Rhys Richards.
I have looked through the minute books from 1991 but can find no record of a Wales YFC representative having attended.
However, the papers will have been sent out and hopefully these have been of interest.
Council now meets three times a year on the 2nd Saturday in March, the fourth Saturday in June (on the same day as our AGM) and on the third Saturday in November.
All meetings are held in the Newtown area.
The format of these meetings has recently been changed and it is hoped that at the March and November meetings the administrative details will be kept to a minimum and that at least one major policy issue will be discussed in depth.
I have enclosed a copy of our constitution and some recent magazines.
I hope these comments are useful, please get in touch if you would like to discuss your representation in more depth.
Yours sincerely 