

Notes for my Nephews — 1.
My Zambian Airways flight flew low over the Victoria Falls, crossing the Zambesi gorge.
It is a natural barrier, not unlike the man-made Iron Curtain or the Berlin Wall; but it seems to divide men as fiercely.
So we left ‘black Africa’ behind us, and flew into the white ‘laager’— Rhodesia and the Republic of South Africa.
I looked down on those falls —‘the smoke that thunders’ as the Africans used to call them, with the white plumes of spray towering above the bushes and trees; and I thought of David Livingstone trudging, the first modern white man to find them.
I had visited his tomb in Westminster Abbey before starting on this trip, and read the words there, from the last entry in his diary: ‘Here in my solitude, I can only ask God's blessing on the men — whether British, American or Turk — who will help to heal this open sore of the world.’
‘Can South Africa change in time?’
The question was posed the other day by David Holden in the ‘Sunday Times’, returning from a visit here.
Whatever happens, he concluded, ‘we are surely about to witness the most momentous struggle for a country's conscience that modern Africa has ever known.’
Fear and faith battle in my guts.
Though I have been invited to come back to South Africa by friends both black and white, I wonder whether I am making a great mistake.
What can a lone, foolish widower from Scotland do to help?
This is my eighth visit to the African continent.
When I think of my past blunders here, I want to turn round at the airport and catch the next plane home.
But remembering the faith I have met, and shared, with men of all races, in the unfolding pattern of God's will, I take courage afresh.
I came here first in 1948 — the year the Nationalist Party took over power from General Smuts (they have held it ever since).
We were invited here to bring a Moral Re-Armament play, ‘The Forgotten Factor’, and take it round the land.
We did so for the next three years.
The play's story was about the change in men which can break deadlock and bring teamwork.
It had an industrial setting; but those who saw it in South Africa began to apply its idea.
As the ‘apartheid’ laws entered the statute book, we were led through the race barrier.
Black leaders like Dr. William Nkomo and P.Q. Vundla took our challenge.
They said, ‘It is more radical and revolutionary to change the white man's heart than to slit his throat.’
And in the squalor and injustice of the black townships, they led their people in this spirit, stirring the consciences of many whites and blacks alike.
Dominees of the Dutch Reformed Church, gold mining executives and trade union leaders, civic officials, began to take action to right wrongs.
The replacement of the ghastly ‘shanty towns’ by better housing throughout the country was one result.
From South Africa, I flew with Myra to Nigeria in 1954.
We were part of a group from many countries who went there in reply to an invitation from West African leaders.
They were then on the verge of independence.
The African film ‘Freedom’ was one fruit of those years.
The men and women who made it were among the friends who welcomed us to Nigeria and Ghana.
For twenty years since, it has spoken with the voice of Africa ‘for a hate-free, fear-free, greed-free world’.
President Kenyatta asked for it to be translated into Swahili; and members of his Cabinet paid tribute to its part in bringing a bloodless transition to self-government there.
Today it is being widely used in Papua-New Guinea, as they move to independence.
But for me the years in Nigeria were marred by serious blunders.
I was possessed by a passion for ‘results’.
I pushed and mishandled people.
Many of the characteristics of the white colonialist sprang to life, from a crazy ambition to achieve what I wanted — success and applause.
These, too, were the years when Nigeria was stumbling into the tragedy of the Biafran war.
The glowing hopes of her independence were dimmed.
In the middle of many clashes and difficulties were the men whom I had met, and to whom, if I had been a true friend, I might have given something of the faith and spirit which could have helped them find a better way for their people.
In 1959, when I visited America and had the chance to talk about all this with Frank Buchman, he said firmly to me, ‘You won't go back to Africa until you are fundamentally different, so different that no one recognises you.’
This advice I took seriously; and Myra and I spent the next ten years mostly in Britain.
During these years, Myra was found to have cancer.
You know how splendidly she fought that battle, and how blessed was her dying.
During those days, we often prayed for our friends in Africa; but it seemed unlikely that I could ever be trusted to return.
Just six months before Myra's death, a party came from South Africa to stay at Tirley Garth, where we were living.
Leading them was Dr. William Nkomo; and he stayed in the little lodge which was our home.
I accompanied that group of twenty, black and white, to Northern Ireland.
They carried an answer to division; as one Irishman said, ‘You people have brought us what we need in this colour-conscious land of Orange and Green.’
In my own heart, the fires of love and conviction about Africa, which had been burning low, began to blaze again.
The work that began for me then, with friends all over South Africa, led up to the Pretoria Conference last Easter, 1974.
There — breaking new ground in the capital of South Africa — more than 400 people, black, brown and white, lived and conferred together in one of the city's best hotels.
They came from 26 countries, including black African states like Kenya and Nigeria.
They spoke to the whole of South Africa and its leaders through wide coverage in the national press and radio.
Their theme, as given in the conference invitation, was: ‘Can some modern nation show the way to a change that goes deep enough to deal with hate and fear and greed?
Can this be South Africa's unexpected role in the modern world?’
That conference injected a force for change into the thinking of South Africa, at a moment when the country was ripe for it.
Soon, a series of unexpected statements were coming from Government spokesmen.
It is, of course, undeniable that they were made in response to events in Mozambique and Angola.
But they were not predictable.
When the S. African delegate at the United Nations declared that ‘any policy based upon the assumption that one race is superior to another purely on the ground of colour is indefensible’, the ‘Guardian’ commented; ‘Is this an abandonment of the fundamental theoretical basis of the State?’
Well, we shall see.
What beckons me forward is a faith in God's Hand in history, the conviction that He means these lands to speak to the world with an answer, and the decision to support in any way I can those — black, brown and white — in whose lives I see God's power working.
Such interventions into men's lives are proof to me that He has not abandoned Southern Africa.
Notes for my Nephews — 2
20th January 1975
‘So you're going out of the frying-pan into the fire?’
Dr. Abraham Nkomo said to me, grinning cheerfully.
I had just told him that on my arrival in South Africa I received a pressing invitation to Rhodesia, where I am now writing.
24 hours in Salisbury — and impressions, facts, encounters with people, black and white, all are buzzing in my head.
New buildings going up above broad boulevards; spacious parks and rose-filled gardens, under a sky dramatic with cloud patterns; the sense of a vigorous and tough-minded white community, with some at least eager to work out a new society along with the blacks.
Strong criticism of Britain.
(‘They've kicked us in the teeth so often’, ‘They tried to write us off like they did Kenya; but we wouldn't stand for it.’)
Meanwhile Dr. Elliott Gabellah, acting President of the African National Council — with whom I had the good fortune to breakfast, morning after morning, at the Caux world assembly last August — is conferring with Presidents Kaunda and Nyerere in Zambia.
They are discussing terms for the proposed constitutional conference, on which many hopes hang.
Dr. Gabellah, speaking at Caux recalled the days when he taught theological students.
‘Do you know what I taught them?
To tell God what they wanted.
And at times I commanded God myself, ‘This is what I want; will you do it?’
But I never listened to what God really wanted me to do.
I have found a power I can rely on, not the white man or the black man, but some power greater than white and greater than black.
That is the power that will solve our problems in Southern Africa.
Only that power will change men.’
To return to Dr. Nkomo.
As we sat in his home last week, I felt the warmth and the wonder of this black man's confidence.
Outside, the  monotonous rows of what his father used to call ‘match-box houses’ stretched in sprawling thousands.
This is Atteridgeville, a typical African ‘township’, outside the white city of Pretoria.
It is one of the settlements where according to the latest estimate, some nine million blacks live.
They embody one of South Africa's great wrongs — and one for which we British share responsibility with the Boers.
What Mr Vorster's government is going to offer these ‘urban Africans’ is a crunch-point of policy.
Without some major changes here, South Africa's fair words, and her external ‘new look’ will not carry conviction.
Tomorrow in Cape Town there takes place a confrontation which may show which way things are going to go: Mr Vorster is meeting the Chief Ministers of all the ‘homelands’.
He has asked for their advice on what to do about the Africans in the townships — Dr. Abraham and his neighbours.
Abie talked with us about these things.
He serves on the school board, as well as doctoring the people of Atteridgeville.
He knows, better than most, the needs and feelings of his people.
He is the son of the late Dr. William Nkomo, the African revolutionary leader whose story we told in the film ‘A Man for All People’.
Abie opposed his father, and Moral Re-Armament, until the old man died.
Then the son began to  reassess what his father had achieved and stood for.
Making the film helped him to do so, for he welcomed us, we needed his counsel, and we became friends.
Although we did not know it, we were the first white men he allowed into his home other than on business.
He also told us how he had nourished the fire of hate inside him, ever since as a child of seven he had been spat upon by a white man.
Two years ago he decided to shed hatred from his life.
He calls it  ‘a great transforming experience.
He made a commitment, between himself and God,—(‘No man asked me to do it’)— to take up his father's goal, ‘a hate-free, fear-free, greed-free Africa, peopled by free men and women.’
I asked him if he had any advice for me as I went to Rhodesia.
He sat quiet for a while.
Then he said ‘Be humble enough to fit into God's plan, not serving your own ego, nor the interests of any group; and keep healthy!’
Notes for my Nephews — 3
26th January
Sir Roy Welensky, who was Prime Minister of the old Central African Federation, returned last week from a visit to Zambia — his old home.
Kaunda invited him; and Sir Roy has been telling his friends how much his reception meant to him, from the man who was his bitter political foe.
Welensky is also said to have been much impressed by the calibre of the Zambian Cabinet, and by the obvious  advancement to women in the country since independence.
Changes are rushing on us.
The blacks are planning for them; the whites preparing.
I was taken to meet Gabellah, the African National Council leader, on his return from talks with Kaunda and  exiled Rhodesian leaders across the border.
Gabellah speaks confidently of the faith and unanimity of his men as they prepare for the constitutional talks.
The whites I have so far met have courage.
They say openly, ‘Of course, we won't like it.
Our standard of living must drop.’
When you look at the rose gardens, the black servants, the two-and-three-car garages, it is easy to feel cynical.
But you talk with a group of youngsters, one of whose friends has just been flown back from a border patrol paralysed for life; or to a big warm-hearted farmer who tells you, as he jokes with his grandchildren, how he sleeps with his rifle beside his bed and watches every road for landmines — and you see the other side of the coin.
I was glad to meet Alan Savory, the opposition spokesman — a young, cool customer, dark and striking.
It was at a cocktail party in the prestigious Monomatapa Hotel.
Over the glasses, many white dissidents met with a handful of black politicians.
Savory spoke of Ian Smith as caught between pressures.
South Africa, he says, must have friendly black neighbours to her North, and will see to it that Smith ‘settles’ with the black majority on terms that achieve this.
The economic pressure of starvation and crop-failures in Zambia and Tanzania make the black leaders eager to negotiate.
It is a familiar line of thought; but Savory argues it intelligently.
Six months ago he was the first to say publicly, ‘The Government will have to sit down round the table with the terrorists.’
For this he was hounded into the political wilderness; but now it is happening.
Peter Anderson, a seasoned Kenya farmer, has been in Salisbury this week.
He has just lost his farm — in a sale forced on him by the Kenya Government (‘Kenyatta's Chief Bodyguard wanted it for himself’).
Anderson came here on a visit after tidying up his affairs before leaving for Britain He is free from bitterness, and speaks bluntly of the change  of motive which must happen to white settlers in a country passing under black majority rule.
He told two senior Salisbury executives, ‘The answer to black hate and arrogance is not white superiority or sentimentality.’
He spoke from experience.
During the Mau Mau emergency, he served in the forests with the King's African Rifles.
Then he was chosen, with another senior officer, to run the Athi River Detention Camp.
Here the object was to ‘rehabilitate’ the ‘hard-core’Mau Mau men who had been captured.
Their first attempts were to win the prisoners' ‘Co-operation’ by bribing them with the offer of better conditions.
Anderson felt increasingly unhappy.
He realised that the ‘ co-operators ’ were often only men taking advantage of the system to get what they wanted; and that the men who refused to  co-operate were the better men.
At this point a Moral Re-Armament force visited Kenya, and Anderson got permission for them to address the camp.
The prisoners were herded together, the ‘ co-operators ’ in front, the hard-core under strict guard to the rear.
After a number of speakers, including black Africans from Ghana and South Africa, had addressed them, Peter Howard spoke.
Talking straight to the hard-core men, he said, ‘I want to apologise as an Englishmen for the way I have lived as a white man.
I mean to lay down my life that men like you can live in freedom to fight for what is right in the world.’
Anderson, listening, was shocked.
‘I resented what he said,’ he told us.
But he saw the reaction also of the Africans, who had never heard a white man speak in such terms.
Afterwards, Anderson said to Howard, ‘Everything I've been doing has been wrong.’
‘Maybe you have still to find the key to your own life,’ said Howard.
A few days later Anderson talked with three of the hard-core leaders.
He told them how Howard's words had shaken him, and said, ‘There were things we did with the Security Forces in the forests of which I am not at all proud.
I'm sorry.
And I want to work with you for a new Kenya.’
‘That's fine,’ said the Africans.
‘But we don't believe you.’
‘How can I make you believe me?’
‘Will you say to your own people what you have just said to us?’
Shortly afterwards, Anderson had the chance to do this.
The  Governor of Kenya and the Minister of Defence came to inspect the camp.
After their tour, Anderson and the camp commandant arranged for the white officials to meet some of the hard-core men.
One of them, a man who had stolen guns from the whites and delivered them to the fighters in the forests — spoke up.
He said, ‘I have learned that hatred and bitterness are destroyers, and cannot build the future.
I have been full of hate of men like you.
I mean to stop hating, but to go on fighting for what is right for my people.’
Anderson felt he must speak, and said, ‘We whites, by the way we have lived, are as responsible for the tragedy in our country.’
The Mau Mau men told him afterwards, ‘Now we believe you.’
This is the kind of experience that has equipped Anderson to work — often with former Mau Mau men — for the changes that alone can guarantee a free future in Africa, whatever happens politically.
Notes for my Nephews — 4
2nd February 1975
‘We whites are living here like the  aristocrats in Tsarist Russia while the blacks live in poverty,’ said a Salisbury citizen to me last week.
The only justification for staying here is to live for the most fundamental programme of change.
Rhodesia is a British creation.
To pretend otherwise is hypocrisy.
No Declaration of Independence, nor dissociation from Whitehall, can annul this.
Nearly every white man you meet here was born in Britain.
Scots names call out from the street signs and garden gates.
This is not South Africa, where the power is in the hands of the Afrikaner and it is possible — if not altogether honest — for the British visitor to remain critical and aloof from responsibility for what is wrong.
Being a British-made mess, Rhodesia challenges every Briton.
Sanctions and boycotts are not only questionable policies — driving a resourceful and desperate regime into shady deals with other countries.
They may be a dishonest washing of the hands of responsibility.
But before God's judgement seat of history, we remain responsible.
We British like to condemn apartheid.
But here we have built a society with a colour bar as real as South Africa's, and worse because it is not admitted.
It just goes on and on.
One of the African National Council leaders here told me, ‘I have yet to meet a Britisher I can trust.’
He was referring equally to Conservative and Labour politicians.
He went on, ‘We come to London.
You people say something to us that can mean four or five different things.
We think we have understood you.
We return to our people and tell them what we think we have agreed.
Then we get a message from Whitehall saying, ‘You have misunderstood us.
There is a comma in the agreement where you thought there was a full-stop.’
This kind of treatment is exactly what Welensky describes in his book, ‘4,000 Days — the Life and Death of the Central African Federation’.
It is what both white and black in this country have met in dealing with us, the British.
It is not a matter of politics; it is something in our character.
There is anger here about Britain's attempts to influence the present situation.
Last Thursday's ‘Rhodesia Herald’ carried a front-page banner headline: ‘Callaghan said to have told ANC (the African National Council): ‘Stall on Talks’’.
There is a cartoon of him jumping, with huge boots on, into the pool where Smith and the African leaders are fishing for the elusive salmon ‘Settlement’.
Unfair?
Hatty, Finance Minister in Whitehead's liberal Cabinet, London-born, is a thoughtful man who has given outstanding service; he was largely responsible for starting Marimba Township, where Africans working in Salisbury were enabled to build and own their own houses.
I asked him what we British could do to help.
His reply was, ‘Keep out.
Let us settle these delicate matters between ourselves.
It is easier for two parties to reach agreement than for three.
Perhaps Britain could encourage us to settle things by pledging her support once we've done so.’
Yet Britons who are humble enough to admit our mistakes may yet have something to offer here.
A British farmer from Kenya gave two senior Rhodesian  executives what they needed last week.
They said to him, ‘We just don't know what the Africans think.
We don't know how to fraternise with them.’
‘You can't make friends if you've got fear in your heart,’ said the Englishman.
‘I was afraid of the Africans because I thought they would take over my farm.
When I got rid of fear I found we could make friends.
Now the African who has in fact got my farm is my friend.’
‘How do you get rid of fear?’
‘That's a big subject,’ said the farmer.
‘It takes the power of Almighty God.
I gave my life to Him, and He dealt with my fear.’
These musings have made me burst into verse:
Brave men have built this land.
These fruitful farms, Born of their sweat and struggle, toil and tears, Have yielded, through all danger and alarms, Rich harvest of the years.
A harvest earned by many far from home, With memories of some old English place Or Scottish croft; and now that evils come, Let's look them in the face.
Because of cruelties of British taste Because of British half truths, deftly spoken, Because of British beastliness unfaced, High hopes lie nearly broken.
O break instead our British wills of steel Cast out the traitor in our hearts, and slay The coward in our guts; and turn, and kneel, And listen, and obey.
And then reborn, with men of every land, And lives washed free from fear and lust and pride, Build, to the pattern of God's Master Hand, The world for which Christ died.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces: 5
10th February 1975
‘They might as well be living in Timbuctoo in 1880!’
The thumping Fife accent of Professor Bob Craig exploded.
He was speaking of the unreal world in which some of his friends here seem to live.
A square-jawed bull-dog of a man, he is Principal of the University of Rhodesia —‘the only truly multi-racial university East of the Atlantic, and maybe the only multi-racial institution South of the Zambesi.’
Born in Markinch, Bob Craig loves St Andrews and its University as his second home.
As we talked of bejants and bunk-wives, my English companion Kit Prestcott listened baffled and bemused.
Then the Principal gave his mind to the arrangements for a Moral Re-Armament inter-racial international assembly, to which his university will play host next June.
He said to Kit, ‘You're in touch with the crunch-points in this country.
You're not only the man with the oil-can; you're making the machinery work.’
Last week-end, Bishop Abel Muzorewa, President of the African National Council of Rhodesia,— with Elliott Gabellah, Joshua Nkomo and Ndabaningi Sithole — conferred again with Kaunda and Nyerere in Dar-es-Salaam.
The ‘Rhodesia Herald’ raises hopes for constitutional talks between these men and Ian Smith.
It will take more than oil to make those wheels turn.
One evening Kit Prescott and I visited Bishop Muzorewa.
He lives in a comfortable house in Marimba Township, three or four miles out of Salisbury.
We drove through narrow, unlit roads, with black Africans walking dangerously in the black night to get there.
The Bishop pushed aside a mountain of paperwork to welcome us.
He was due to see Smith next day.
We prayed together before we left.
The Bishop led us, kneeling round his table.
‘O God, we need You in this country.
We need you.
We pray for your Design — Your way, not our way, for all Your children, black and white.
Thank You for bringing to this country men who are good listeners, who hear Your instructions and obey.’
A few days later I was touring the African townships.
My guide was a lady who has built clinics and social centres there, and taught African women how to look after their health.
The homes, sanitation, gardens, football pitches, churches seemed a degree better than most of South Africa's similar efforts.
Again unlike South Africa, many of the homes we saw are owner-occupied.
We passed one mansion with its own swimming pool and wide lawns, which cost £30,000 to build in 1965.
Its owner is an African millionaire who owns a fleet of buses.
In one nursery school there were 150 children, gaily dressed and full of beans.
Their parents pay $8.00 a term (about £5.00) to have them looked after by smart African ladies.
The average wage is said to be about $25.00 a month.
We visited a spotless kitchen, where the cooks were popping good vegetables into the soup.
On their own terms, successive governments here have done a respectable job of housing the African population.
My hostess, a supporter of the Smith regime, has poured her time and strength into the care of these people.
Her salty comments and broad English countryman's brogue were neither sentimental nor ‘do-goodish’.
What jarred was the pugnacious self-justification: ‘If the world condemns us, to hell with them.
Look at what we've done!’
That night a civil engineer — charming, sensible, honest — told me how Rhodesia has boomed since declaring her independence.
‘Thank God we're not tied to the ailing economies of the West.
We stand on our own feet.’
What did he make of the threat from Black Africa?
‘Nuisance-value only,’ said he.
Next day we lunched with a young politician known as the most outspoken  critic of Smith and the government.
He has denounced the internment camps in which villagers are put who are said to have aided the ‘terrorists’.
For this he has been smeared and victimised.
Though he says the courts here are subservient to the regime, he is now fighting a lawsuit he has brought against the Department of Lands.
We showed him two films, and gave him evidence of change in the motives of men affecting trouble spots and putting things to rights, socially and politically in many parts of the world.
‘I am wholly with you,’ he said.
‘But I don't believe in God.
You're talking to an atheist.’
A black student from South Africa who is working with us here replied.
He told him of the goal that has held him through three years in the University of the North — a campus from which student riots have spread through the country.
He described the frustration of the black student who can qualify for a M.Sc.
or a Ph.D.
— and then find no way to put his knowledge to use for his people.
‘The African in the townships can drown his frustration in beer.
The African intellectual cannot.
Such bitterness being emotional, stifles logical thought.
It can become epidemic; and thus grow into an ideology.
The only answer is a better ideology.
It is absolutely impossible without faith.’
The Rhodesian took the South African's point.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘We do need that.
We need a wisdom beyond our own.
I'd call it XYZ!’
We suggested a time of quiet, to catch any ideas that might come from this Source.
After a minute, he gave us a suggestion that had come to him, to reach the leadership of every political party here.
It may bear fruit.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — 6
19 February 1975
Confrontation or interdependence: a letter from Archie Mackenzie, British Minister at the United Nations, says this is the issue.
It is the choice in dealing with the oil producers, the Middle East — and in Africa
Today the papers, here and in South Africa, are hailing as a breakthrough the talks of Mr. Vorster and President Tolbert in Liberia.
The account of the conversations carries Vorster's case — able, urbane, sincere.
The limitation is easy to spot: the unspoken assumption that the industrial and economic wealth of his country belongs by right to the whites; and that any discomforts the blacks suffer are an unfortunate legacy of history.
There is no recognition that we, the white people, are wrong .
But the talks themselves may mean that some leading blacks and some powerful whites in Africa know that we do depend upon each other.
Two days ago, a Cabinet Minister here invited a black South African and me to morning tea in his office.
The South African is Billy Marivate, a recent graduate from the University of the North, the campus where student riots have flared and spread to the colleges of South Africa.
‘What do your people think of the political changes now going on?’ the Minister asked.
The African told him of the anger in the hearts of his generation.
Qualified academically to serve their people, they cannot do so because of racial barriers bristling in their way.
What they want is a change in the structure of society much more radical than political adjustment.
The Minister gave a reasoned exposition of his government's thinking.
The need, he felt was to be realistic; idealism was all very well, but what is necessary is a practical programme based upon mutual self-interest.
The whites, whom after all he represents, must be reassured that their interests will not be sacrificed.
We spoke of the realities of fear and hurt and hate.
‘The white people think they understand the African,’ said Marivate.
‘They inflict hurts on us.
We go silent.’
I spoke from experience of how a common commitment to God's plan can shake both black and white into reality —‘not the white man's plan, nor the black man's; not British or Rhodesian.
God has a pattern for South Africa.’
‘That is true,’ said the Minister.
‘But you cannot legislate for a change of heart.
That takes time and patience.’
‘Yes,’ said Marivate.
‘Time and patience.
And also effort.’
The Minister changed the subject.
‘Do you find these ideas make any progress at the university?’ he asked.
Marivate told him how and why he had stood firmly for Moral Re-Armament through his university course.
It began with a talk with William Nkomo, one of the most militant men in the African National Congress.
Nkomo had convinced him that the black and white people in South Africa are inter-dependent, that bitterness clouds honest thought, and that what is needed is a God-led, non-racial ideology.
‘If you stand for this in the university,’ he had said, ‘you will find the circle of your friends will grow less.
But don't worry — later they will turn to you.’
This is exactly what happened.
In many student crises Marivate sought God's guidance and spoke out.
Last year the student leaders were coming to him privately asking for his ideas.
‘It is the few with ideas who lead the many,’ he said.
At the end of an hour we suggested a minute of quiet, to see if God's wisdom would give us any such ideas.
Then we shared the thoughts that had come to us.
Marivate spoke last.
He said, ‘I am grateful to have found a man of such sincerity in your position.
But I don't think sincerity is enough .
It will need some more dynamic force to do what is needed.
It needs commitment.’
On the way home he said, ‘These sincere men think they know what to do for the black man.
Some of them think that because they oppose the Smith regime they are automatically right.
To me they are all the same.
They are all self-righteous.’
Earlier in the week Kit Prescott and I had a long, relaxed hour and a half with one of the top African politicians.
We spoke of the war in Eritrea, and the danger some of our friends are in.
‘I do not fear for them,’ he said.
‘Death is not so important.
My life has been threatened.
I forget about it.
If I am killed in doing what I feel is right, it may be part of God's plan.
I don't just mean that He has to remove me — but He may use it.
Christ was crucified; was that because he had done wrong?’
Then he told us: ‘A man came to my office and threatened me.
He said, ‘You are to blame for all that is going wrong.’
I asked him how.
He said ‘You are our leader.
The people follow you.
But you are not radical!’
I said, ‘All right.
When do you want to get rid of me?’
He pulled out a gun and said, ‘Now.’
‘All right,’ I said, ‘but I don't want you to spoil my shirt.’
I opened my shirt and bared my chest and said, Go ahead.’
The man turned and ran.
He is still on our committee.
But he can't look me in the face.
He knows I am not afraid of him; he is afraid of me.’
Later in the conversation, he said ‘I used to sit at my desk and fear — the unknown, or that we would all be killed.
But since my visit to Caux last year I have lost my fears.
They have offered me a bodyguard.
My colleagues have them — four men, day and night.
I would find that a nuisance!
God is my bodyguard.’
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — 7
Salisbury, 6th March
The Rev. Ndabaningi Sithole has been re-arrested.
The African National Council — one of whose leaders he is — have responded by breaking off the talks with the Smith government.
Political battle-lines have been hardening for the past three weeks.
Two Sundays back, I heard Sithole preach.
He took as his text, ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself’; and he gave Bible truth to a thousand people in the African township of Harare.
His vigour and passion impressed me.
As he shook my hand after the service, I said to him, ‘I'm glad to meet you.
I am committed to revolution too — for a hate-free, fear-free, greed-free world.’
He grinned.
Some say Sithole has become unbalanced.
(A senior African nurse told me this; and so did Miss Barbara Tredgold, sister of the former Chief Justice and a great champion of the Africans.)
He is accused of plotting to have his fellow ANC leaders assassinated.
He has suffered much; and certainly his statements to the press have been angry and bitter.
There are rumours that it was his African neighbours who wanted him locked up.
Wherever the truth may lie, it is a body-blow to the hopes of political ‘detente’ between black and white.
Some, on both sides, will be glad.
Others will not — like Brian O'Connell, shrewd head of the International Red Cross here (as well as of a big business house).
He said to us the other day, ‘This little country is the key.
If we mishandle things here, we will plunge the whole continent into blood.’
This week I visited a young M.P., a rising star of the Rhodesia Front, strong supporter of Smith, called Andrew.
Peter Nieswand used to go and interview him for the BBC, sitting as I did beside his swimming pool, looking across the lawn on to six miles of fine farm-land.
His soya crop may be the finest in the country.
He farms, fights on the border, and  politicks hard.
When he heard the radio news of Sithole's arrest, he said ‘Good!
Best news of the week!’
Andrew is a fourth-generation Rhodesian.
His great grandfather came here on the staff of ‘Mr. Rhodes’.
(Andrew speaks of Rhodes as if he might walk through the door; and in the corner of the living-room hangs a pencil portrait, autographed, of ‘The Founder’.)
His great grandmother, Madeleine, was a friend of Rudyard Kipling, and wrote poems which Kipling encouraged the family to publish.
Andrew read me several.
They are deeply-felt songs of pioneering days; for instance:
‘But I shall die where I have fought, and deem my lot is best;
We hold the hills, we made the roads, to North and East and West;
Our eyes have seen the promised land, our feet have crossed her streams —
And she shall rear a sturdy race, the Nation of our Dreams…
Here I have loved and greatly lived, and here by these grey stones,
My sunburnt sons, my Native-born, shall lay their father's bones.’
‘This is my country,’ says Andrew.
I have no other.
I am more a Rhodesian than Jack Kennedy was an American.’
He means that his family has lived here longer.
He told me what happened when Rhodesia unilaterally declared her independence ten years ago.
Harold Wilson threatened to bring them to their knees in ‘days rather than weeks, weeks rather than months.’
Andrew himself, as a member of Ian Smith's ‘economic committee’, took part in an international cloak-and-dagger operation to keep vital supplies moving through the British blockade.
‘I was a decoy,’ he said.
‘The British Intelligence followed me to Spain,’ he went on.
There they tried to kill me.
They poisoned me.
Fortunately I brought up the poison; but I still carry the effects of it.
It was a mistake — the man who did it was exceeding his instructions.
I never saw him again.
They put another man on to me after that.’
We spoke of Britain.
Still, through all that has happened, he feels the link.
The coat-of-arms of Sir Somebody hangs above the hearth; and Burke's ‘Peerage’ is in the book-shelf.
And he speaks with pride of his father, a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford.
‘But you British,’ he says, ‘have lost your will to govern.
We haven't.’
Men like Andrew do not want ‘detente’.
And no solution is possible as long as men are proud of their will to govern and are not themselves governed by the God Who cares for all races and all men.
The leftist world has no doubt that history is on their side.
But their idea, too, is Godless and partial, a shoddy second-best.
Surely, as Aggrey said, ‘Only the best is good enough for Africa.’
God's mighty instrument is the lives that are wholly given to Him for His purpose.
‘Lord, make me the instrument of Thy peace.
Where there is hatred, let me sow love…’
There are men and women, black and white, in Rhodesia whose lives are committed to that aim.
Pray God to purify and refine them, so that they can be sharp enough and strong enough to cleave like a great blade through the selfishness.
One young man, son of one of the national leaders here, said the other day, ‘I am giving my life to change Rhodesia.’
A month or two ago this young, sensitive man with his quick intelligence and humour, was in the courts for drug offences.
‘Christ came into my life,’ he says.
‘Now I expect God to change the whole country.
If we expect that much, it gives Him a chance to work.’
We are moving daily with him.
Notes for my Nephews and Nieces — No. 10
Bulawayo, 27th April
Your wicked Uncle has let things slide!
Thank you for various letters, telling me you read these epistles, and asking questions.
My last letter was an attempt to answer some of John's.
I have often thought, since writing it, how poor a picture it gave of the events and dynamic forces here.
Now Malcolm has asked for a bit more of my own feelings and thoughts in these epistles.
This is a chance to oblige.
In some ways I feel like a soldier in a front-line.
Politically we are on a razor edge.
You know that from the papers.
This week-end the African National Council's executive is meeting in Salisbury to decide whether to talk further with Smith or not.
The political leaders of black Africa, gathered last week in Dar Es Salaam, endorsed the Rhodesian ANC policy of ‘one more shot at settlement’.
If it fails, war is on; and Southern Africa can become a Vietnam.
But a Vietnam with a difference, for the whites, armed to the teeth and economically mighty, will fight as the South Vietnamese and the Americans never did.
Yesterday morning we sat at breakfast with a young farmer, who left the table to join his unit in the Zambesi valley where the guerilla war rages.
He went because he had to, leaving his farm for 28 days to live day and night in the bush, protecting the African villages from raiders armed with Chinese weapons.
His mother wept.
After he had gone, she prayed with us ‘for the brave young men on both sides.’
‘When two elephants fight, the grass is trampled,’ as the African proverb says.
It is the ordinary people who are hurt.
Last week we talked with an old friend, an African who is in charge of the welfare services for three towns.
His son worked in the Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation here, till an English lad, totally unqualified, came and was immediately employed above him.
That day the African quit his job, and the country — and is now in West Africa (his father does not know where).
As he left, he told his parents, ‘If I join the liberation fighters, you and I will know why.’
What does it feel like to live through things like that?
I feel for those people, white and black.
It makes me want to bring sanity into an insane land.
The other day I sent you the invitation to the MRA Assembly here in June.
The calling of this assembly is a response to the kind of experiences I have just described.
Black men and white men who care for the country, and for their children's future, are working at it.
I wish I could convey to you what inspires them to do it.
One of the top ANC men came back from the Dar Es Salaam talks and told us, ‘I am more than ever convinced that violence is not the way.
We have passed 57 resolutions about Rhodesia in the OAU; they accomplish nothing.
This MRA Assembly is the only way — an intervention by almighty God through men who listen to Him.’
Sir Humphrey Gibbs, the last Governor of Rhodesia, told us yesterday, ‘This conference is well timed.
People are looking for an answer like this.’
Preparing for this Assembly involves much more than booking a few halls and sending out invitations.
Every step is a chance to meet people, to give them the idea, the experience that can change their living and thinking; to be caught up in an effort to bring a fundamental change to Rhodesia — and that means, of course, matching one's own life to it.
It has carried me from the comfortable Salisbury suburb where a kind Scottish family have made me a home, to a rough Bulawayo farmstead.
The farmer and his wife want their area to take part in this revolutionary action.
We start each day as the farmer goes off to the milking, between 5 and 6 a.m.
We try to find God's plan, for this job is beyond us.
It often surprises me still (though I suppose it shouldn't) how ideas bear fruit which come like this in the early morning, when we sit quietly and catch the unspoken whispers inside our hearts and minds.
Today for instance.
My mate and I had been given a long list of names, of Bulawayo people we should meet.
But as we prepared for the day in the early dawn, with the birds tuning up outside our African ‘rondavel’ hut, we both felt impelled to reach the tough core of the Right-wing settlers, Smith's Rhodesia Front.
I wrote in my notebook the name, in capital letters, ‘WOLHUTER’.
He is head of the Matabeleland Farmers' Union.
Two hours later we were in his office.
With him sat two of his colleagues; leathery, beery-voiced,— total weight about 750 lbs.
‘What are you aiming at?’ they wanted to know.
‘The change in people which alone will make political change work.’
‘What people?’
‘Every kind of people.’
‘You mean US?’
‘Yes.’
So we were off to the races.
‘Change the bloddy terrorists, who burn our farms and rape our women.
Don't come to us.
We're as Christian as you are!’
A three-hour, blunt ding-dong.
Then they asked us for lunch.
We fought for them to come to the Assembly, where they could speak their minds and meet the Africans they never meet, and together listen to the Almighty Who might know better even than they what is best for the country.
At the end Wolhuter said, ‘I'm coming.’
That afternoon we were with an African business man.
He runs an efficient book business.
He told us, ‘Our people all want MRA to change the whites, not the blacks.
They say there is no white man that can be trusted.
‘A snake is a snake, whether he is big or little.’
So a white man is an evil man, whether he treats you nicely or not.’
He told us, ‘My temptation is to keep myself from getting involved with MRA.
It is safer.’
We finished on our knees, giving God our fears and committing ourselves to His battle for Rhodesia.
In a situation humanly desperate, with the race line hardening, there is hope.
The odds seem a thousand to one against it.
But for the sake of these people, whom I am learning to love, I'll give all I have for it.
The hope is simply that God in his mercy will deal with the cancer of hate, suspicion, fear and selfishness in the guts of men, black and white; and that He will lead us, as we obey Him, out of the political, economic deadlocks into sanity.
And your old uncle is having the time of his life, and wishes he could write better letters.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — 11
18 May.
Salisbury
I think you will have watched Ian Smith on the BBC last week.
We saw bits of the programme here.
He was at his most stubborn, and gave the predictable answers to the obvious questions.
I hear that it provoked an extremely fierce response from Sithole.
That we did not see!
The episode seems to be all-too-typical of the sterile exchanges to which politicians are driven by the ‘box’.
Kaunda is now reported here as talking of Rhodesia as becoming another  Phnom Penh (or however you spell it), or Saigon.
The prospect of the closing of the export routes through Mozambique and probably Botswana, is making the whites here very apprehensive.
My host, Alaister Mackenzie, a railway-man, knows better than most what this would mean.
Very reluctantly, he is beginning to think of moving with his family to South Africa, This is what many families are likely to do, unless there is an unexpected development.
I don't want to write a political summary — you get that, I'm sure, from the papers.
One development worth calling to your attention, though, comes from South Africa: Vorster's decision to give a measure of home-ownership rights to the ‘urban African’.
This is a step towards reforms at home; and such a step alone can make his ‘detente’ policies sincere.
He has taken it in response to the pressure and fight put up by the ‘homelands Chief Ministers’— Buthelezi and Co.
These men, you will remember, often come to our MRA assemblies, and told the British press last summer, ‘we are not apostles of apartheid; we are champions of change.’
One of them is coming to our Assembly here next month; and two others are sending top representatives.
We are delighted to hear of people coming to our Assembly from other African countries.
We have word from Kenya, Zambia, South Africa.
The first people have arrived — from Nigeria and Ethiopia.
Three countries can hardly be more unalike in their political and economic situation than Nigeria, Ethiopia and Rhodesia.
The men from Ethiopia tell of our friends, some in gaol, working undeterred by the terrible  coups and threats to bring fresh faith to their country.
They understand the cost of a revolution which has no bigger aim than the overthrow of the regime; it gets taken over by others who have such an aim, not necessarily theirs.
The two from Nigeria — a country whose public stance is outspokenly anti-Rhodesian — find themselves staying as guests with a leading member of Smith's party.
The welcome is of the warmest; and tonight they are showing him the MRA film ‘Freedom’, made in Nigeria.
Last week I wrote a background piece for a British publication on the coming Assembly.
It ended with a few paragraphs I'll quote:
‘All the world knows, from the UN to the OAU, that Rhodesia must change, must end the injustice here.
Many Rhodesians know it too, and want to hasten that change.
‘Last week I attended a house-meeting where the conference was being planned.
African nationalists and white politicians, housewives and students were putting their best thinking to the task and seeking the guidance of God together.
At the end of the evening, an African headmaster commented, ‘If we can multiply this kind of gathering all over the country, our political differences will vanish.’
‘At one minute to midnight in Rhodesia, responsible people here are backing the MRA move with time, effort and money.
What do they hope for?
That out of the assembly will come a nucleus of Rhodesians, black and white, as dedicated to God's ways as the Communists are dedicated to theirs; that lives will be changed fundamentally — and that such a miracle will inspire the fresh thinking which is desperately needed.
From a rebirth of trust, from a   essential, can flow.
‘With this conviction, Rhodesia — the cross-roads country — can become the place where men and women of all races choose the right road ahead.’
My next ‘Notes’ will almost certainly come after our Assembly is over.
Meanwhile, you can picture me in the thick of it.
I am particularly looking forward to giving a different kind of news to the press and mass media from here.
We have had requests for coverage already from the United Press International.
The Rhodesian TV is preparing to interview our people and give the news on several programmes.
Maybe something will be on the BBC!
Here's hoping.
Notes for my Nephews and Nieces — No. 12
Bulawayo 5th July 1975
Here we go again!
The past six weeks have been full.
I hope the Assembly Report has reached you.
You will know the work that goes into preparing even a short document like that; and we did it fast, so that the news could reach people while still hot.
Now it has gone to heads of state round Africa.
Mr. Ennals got one from the Prime Minister's son during his visit here on behalf of the British Government.
And thousands have sped all over the world.
I hope it gives you some idea of what happened.
The essence of the assembly was that 1,000 Rhodesians (including a number of opinion-leaders) of all shade of skin and opinion, met on the basis of finding God's plan and destiny for their country — and conferred with men and women from other countries whose experience could help them.
It all happened in Salisbury; and then we travelled with overseas people for meetings in other centres like Bulawayo, Gwelo, Wankie — with a day at the Victoria Falls.
Now I am surfacing ,and write from the home of a family in Bulawayo.
Dennis Rawson manages a Realcote Paint business.
He is one of thousands here who are wrestling with the economic difficulties.
Import of needed chemicals has been drastically cut; Building Societies are refusing loans.
So he is hit by loss of orders, and cannot find work for his employees.
The big new fact on Rhodesia's border is independent Mozambique.
Elliott Gabellah, vice president of the Rhodesian ANC, met us the day after he came back from the independence celebrations.
He had spent three days and nights without sleep — two of them, as he put it, ‘in the bush with Samora Machel’.
Machel comes from a Christian home.
‘I have not prayed for twenty years,’ he told Elliott, ‘and on Sundays I plan how to kill Portuguese.’
Machel in his speeches repeatedly talks of ‘the new man’.
He knows he cannot build his ‘new society’ in Mozambique without this.
But will he produce him?
He said once that he is going to close the churches and put maternity hospitals in their place where ‘the new man’ will be born.
It's a reflection, I think, on our Christian failure to live what we talk about —‘If any man comes to be in Christ, he is a new creature.’
And it is a challenge worth taking.
We designed the back page of our Assembly report for Machel to read; and Gabellah sent it to him with a strongly worded letter.
I'm sure you will not miss the significance of Gabellah and Alec Smith standing publicly together for MRA at our assembly.
In the present climate in Southern Africa, it took courage.
Day to day, a jumble of hopes and fears pour upon us.
In recent days, we have sat with Sir Humphrey Gibbs, the last Governor of Rhodesia under the British flag, on the porch of his farm.
He's like an old Roman consul snorting at the follies of the government.
He asked us many questions, and said as we left, ‘I wish I could be more active in helping you.’
Yesterday we had tea with a Rhodesia Front Senator who despises the Africans as ‘savages’ and blames the British for all Rhodesia's ills.
Bert Lewis, urbane and big-hearted, director of many companies, says ‘Things will change decisively before the end of the year — one way or another — and its hard to imagine it being ‘the other’.’
(He means that violence is coming.)
Opposition men tell us that the fighting on the border is escalating, and not being reported.
Establishment people say, ‘We've been through all this before.
We're not in the least worried.
Common sense will prevail .’
And Africans — ANC leaders and trades unionists tell us, ‘MRA has come at the right moment.’
and invite us urgently to come, with our films, to meet their people.
Our job is to shake and lift everyone we can out of his rut — to seek the wisdom and salvation of the Almighty before it is too late .
Some are doing so.
There is a stir on the campus of the University of Rhodesia, for instance.
A white professor has apologised to one of his black lecturers (who happens to be on the executive of the ANC) for ‘treating him as an academic lightweight’.
The two men are now bringing leaders of the two races to meet in the professor's home.
A young post-graduate student told his professor he had fiddled his statistics in his thesis, risking his recently-gained M.Sc.
The M.Sc.
is OK — but, more important, the student and his young wife have found a contagious courage to tackle the divisions and dishonesties on the campus.
Alec Smith has gone to the MRA World Assembly in Switzerland, where he is being joined next week by one of the ANC leaders.
Others from Rhodesia will go there through the next three months.
It was at this place last year that Gabellah found the touch with God which has carried him to his present leadership.
We need your prayers and support.
The future, politically and economically, looks quite too far gone for anything but a divine intervention to help.
My conviction is to stay here, to love this country (which I have found — in spite of its beauty and its sunshine — hard to love), and to give all I have to help these people find their miracle — for the sake of the rest of Africa.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — No. 13
Salisbury, 29 August
Spring in Southern Africa is a glory of blossoms — jacaranda , bougainvillea, poinsettia — against a background of brown, sun-baked earth and blue, sun-drenched skies; and war rumbling on the borders.
The Victoria Falls conference has come and gone.
President Kaunda and Prime Minister Vorster, suddenly arriving there in person, did all they could to push Smith and the ANC together.
But this log-jam is going to take some more than human effort, however sincere and weighty, to break through.
Political and economic pressures cannot do it.
It is a tangle of historic forces, compounded by present-day fear and pride and vexed by world ideological powers.
Tonight I sat in the tiny living room of a schoolmaster's house in Mufakose, one of Salisbury's African townships.
The mother of his five children told us, grieving, of the teen-age youngsters disappearing in batches of ten or twelve, without a word to their parents, to join the ‘freedom fighters’.
The press has reported that more than 1,000 schoolboys have done this.
Probably an understatement.
The boys go for training to camps in Tanzania, Zambia and some, they say, to China.
The Government has set a curfew on a  mile-wide strip the length of the frontiers with Mozambique and Zambia, with orders to shoot on sight.
But the boys keep going.
Last Sunday I talked with a white farmer whose land is in what Rhodesians call ‘the sharp end’, where the fighting is.
He had been out three nights last week.
‘We had one contact,’ he said, ‘and we killed one terrorist.’
The raiders were armed with Chinese mortars.
Landmines hidden in the dirt roads are the weapons the farmers hate most.
I looked at his young wife, Dawn, with her four young children visiting Salisbury for the week-end.
Her charming face was pale and drawn, though she talked bravely.
I could go on describing the people I meet here.
I lunched recently with Ian Anderson, the Scottish doctor who runs the ‘Candour League’— a racist Right-wing outfit which has attacked us publicly.
He works with the Duke of Montrose (‘The  dumb Dook’, some people call him here), mobilising the white backlash.
Charles Lazarus, the ANC's Jewish lawyer, poured out to me his story of the negotiations for a settlement as he has seen them.
He inveighed not only against Smith's stubbornness, but against the intimidation of the ‘Zanu mafia’ in Lusaka — and the horrid danger of inter-tribal massacre here, like Angola's.
The able, eloquent Allan Savory has become a friend.
His is almost the only unsilenced opposition voice.
He has a brave letter in yesterday's ‘Rhodesia Herald’, urging Smith to rethink: ‘Now, while Zambia and Mozambique under their respective leaders desire an amicable settlement of our black/white dispute, the Government would be well advised to drop hard attitudes on such points as the venue, and meet with the full nationalist team in a bid to reach agreement.’
But there is no political solution in sight.
The betting is that Vorster and Kaunda will keep up their pressures, and that another round of the boxing-match will come before long; but I see little hope there.
The complexities and tragic blunders make this land, despite its quite heavenly beauty, hard to love.
Every day is a fight; to master fear, and every selfish and shoddy thing in me that would stand in God's way.
I have a sense of anticipation.
It is a situation ripe for a miracle.
I do ask for your prayers.
Old Frank Buchman, who kept on this course through a long life of battle, used to tell me.
‘The only thing to do in a crisis is to change people’.
I have come to see what he meant.
(There is a ‘plus’ factor without which the best human efforts at settling disputes often fail.
I met the French and Moroccan men who changed and broke the deadlock between their countries that stood in the way of Morocco's independence; and in Nigeria we know that pioneer freedom fighter of Africa, Azikiwe, whose miraculous change of direction, and reconciliation with his political enemies, averted a Mau Mau uprising in the 1950's.
On the North-East frontier of India in 1969, where a ‘potential Vietnam’ was developing, political leaders were themselves astonished to meet at the MRA centre at Panchgani, changed, and worked out the formation of Meghalaya.)
So we have bent our efforts these last three months to speed people from Rhodesia to the MRA World Assembly at Caux.
It has stirred us to see the Africans raise their own fares, communally and by hard work.
There is a varied group at the assembly now — black and white, with government and opposition spokesmen.
Last Monday, as Smith and Muzorewa met in the railway carriage, an ANC man — a methodist minister, like Muzorewa, and close to the heart of the ANC — led the Caux Assembly in prayer for this land.
Then Alec Smith, the Prime Minister's son, spoke, pledging himself to fight for God's will in Africa and calling for a giving up of ‘pride and privilege, to save a continent’.
One of the  best-known Rhodesia Front MP's stood with them — with representatives of 35 countries, to pray for God's answer.
I hope my next instalment will not be long delayed.
Meanwhile, this brings my love to you all.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — No. 14
Salisbury, 11th November
Please forgive the long gap in these ‘Notes’.
Since I last wrote them, so much has happened.
The African National Council has split.
So, with less publicity, has Smith's team; at least, it has come apart at one or two seams.
In these weeks, I have had the chance to listen to Joshua Nkomo calling for majority rule now.
Ted Sutton-Pryce, the Minister in charge of Defence, has described to us how ‘the guerilla war is being won’.
Elliott Gabellah and Muzorewa's men have rejoiced with us over their vast political rally of 30,000 in Harare.
Stan O'Donnell, Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, privately dismissed this to us a politically meaningless; and made out his case that ideology in Africa does not count any more — economic need is deciding what happens.
So the political whirligig goes round; and the deadlock is almost complete.
Alec Smith said the other day, ‘There is no human solution.
The sooner we face that the better.’
I repeated this to the editor of the biggest Catholic paper of France, ‘L'Homme Nouveau’, who was here on a fact-finding visit.
Then I told him that our concern is to find and follow God's pattern; and that God is strongly at work here, with a strategy more effective than the politicians'.
I told him of the change in men like Alec Smith, Elliott Gabellah and Arthur Kanodereka.
I did not know how he would take all this; but at the end of the interview he rose and said, ‘I agree entirely with what you said at the beginning.
Human politics has totally failed.
But God's plan will advance through men like that.’
I mentioned Arthur Kanodereka.
He is the minister of the Methodist Church in Harare, one of the big African townships that border Salisbury.
He came to this charge after years in Mount Darwin, where the war is going on.
His sympathy went all the way with the African boys fighting in the bush.
For this he was thrice arrested and interrogated.
So, deeply anti-white and pro-violence, he came to the tinder-box of Harare.
It is in such places — like Soweto or Sharpeville — that riotings and shootings can start.
By a chain of accidents and coincidences he met us, and saw the film of William Nkomo's life.
He decided to attend our conference last June.
There he said, he was able ‘for the first time to talk seriously with white Rhodesians about the future of the country.’
He took three month's leave and went to our world assembly at Caux.
There he worked through the sessions with Alec Smith, the Prime Minister's son.
Alec and he became friends and team-mates.
When the men of the World Council of Churches in Geneva heard Arthur was at Caux they phoned him to come and tell them the truth about Rhodesia.
Arthur said he would come with Alec.
They protested; ‘But we want you to talk frankly.’
‘Listen,’ said Arthur, ‘I'm committed to a standard of absolute honesty.
I have nothing to say to you that I will not say in front of Alec Smith.’
They went together, and talked till 2.00 a.m.
After the Caux conference, in London, Arthur met many of the ANC ‘exiles’, and Rhodesian young men, black and white, who will not return to this country, because they hate the Smith regime.
With Alec, he gave them fresh facts.
Then he came back here.
His first public act was to preach in the biggest white church in this segregated city.
He brought two African choirs, with rattles and drums, and enlivened the Sunday evening service considerably.
From the pulpit, he apologised for his old hatred of all whites, and spoke of his new vision of God's multi-racial world.
He and the white minister, Fred Rea, took their stand side by side.
Now the political divisions in Rhodesia began to hit him.
Gabellah, Muzorewa's right hand Man — knowing Caux and MRA — asked him to serve on his executive .
Arthur accepted.
Then opposition broke out within his church.
Opponents spread rumours; gossips passed them on — that Arthur had misappropriated funds, that he had wrecked the church car; that he had insulted a senior white church lady, and so on.
To make things worse, he attended a meeting in South Africa without the permission of his Church Chairman.
It all hurt Arthur's pride.
It began to look to him like a conspiracy.
His passionate desire to serve his people was being held back, he felt, by the cautious machinery of old-fashioned church ways.
For a week he fought a battle inside his heart, Then he faced his pride; and apologised to the Chairman.
The Chairman has responded and admitted his side of the wrong.
Last Sunday's Service in Harare, which I attended, was a joyful affair, with Arthur preaching on how to put relationships right.
A divided Church, adding to the divisions in a divided land; or a Church led by a band of brothers (and sisters) as a healing force?
Already the young men in Harare have been coming to Arthur, knowing his record in Mount Darwin and sensing a kindred spirit; and he offers them a better way than stone-throwing and kidnapping tactics.
There have been ugly outbreaks in the other townships, but not so far in Harare.
He is working to get us invited, with the William Nkomo film, to Mount Darwin.
I have recently read Laurens van der Post's ‘The Dark Eye in Africa’.
As a white South African, he writes, ‘One of the most winning qualities of my black countrymen is that they have an instinct for faith and a preparedness to follow and to be truly led.
That is why it is so terrible that what we offer, by and large, is a limited liability Christianity which is little more than a modern social convenience and more convenient to the white man than the black.
We know less and less the meaning of the master passion of the spirit which once drove through Christian men.
‘The one primary and elemental approach to the problem (of Africa) is through the being of man….
There is no solution for the conflict in Africa, or in the world, unless there is first of all a change in the heart and understanding of man…
‘Already there  seems to me to be in existence a new kind of human being who is living ahead of the meaning of our time, knowing only that meaning has to be lived before it can be known.’
I feel, somehow, that that is my assignment.
It is a big job and a merry one; and our friends and comrades in it are the best in the world.
This does not stop me from wishing, sometimes, for a sight of you all, or for the feel of the cold, wet winds of Edinburgh!
One day!
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — No. 16
Bulawayo, 26th January 1976
War is now very near here.
The Smith-Nkomo talks continue in Salisbury; and the ‘Rhodesia Herald’ tries to make hopeful headlines out of them.
But in truth they mean little.
They are bogging down; and even if some formula is reached which both sides can sign, Joshua represents only a small minority of Africans.
If he signs, cries of ‘Sell-out!’ and ‘ Shame !’will resound, and the balloon will go up.
We hear that there are 10,000 massed on the Mozambique border ‘itching to go’.
It will mean a slaughter.
The Rhodesian forces are ready and waiting.
This may be what some of those egging the freedom fighters on want to happen.
It would make Sharpeville look like a Sunday School picnic.
Volunteers, experts and advisers — Russian-backed or Chinese armed — would pour in.
Liberation armies from Angola and Mozambique could march.
Just before Christmas, I found myself sitting with two friends in the consulting room of an African doctor.
He is in the leadership of the Muzorewa wing of the ANC, the  African majority.
He said to us, ‘I have reached the ceiling of my thinking.
I am no ‘moderate’.
The wrongs our people suffer must end.
But war is not the way.
Some people talk of ‘spilling blood’; but it is the blood of others that is spilt.
It is the innocent who are killed, the unborn children.
Some of my friends outside the country want to trap me.
They ask me, ‘Will the Smith-Nkomo talks succeed?’
If I say, ‘No’, they will take it as a signal for war.
If I say, ‘Be patient’, they will do their best to discredit me.
I am not going to let anyone use me.
But what am I to say?’
He asked us to call a group together, black and white, to meet with him for two days to seek God's guidance together.
This we have done.
Several lines of action became clear.
He and we are following them.
This call from the black side equips us with a challenge to put to the whites.
A senior man in the Ministry of Defence was telling us of the ‘battle for hearts and minds’ which his department is conducting among the people of the border villages.
It was pure anti-Communism.
Men like this see Rhodesia as a heroic last bastion against the Red hordes from the North, East and West.
We took an A.N.C.
leader to meet him.
This African talked of his own change of heart, his vision of God's multi-racial world, of which Rhodesia is a part; of how he himself had hated the whites, and had now shed his hate to work for what is right for all.
‘Ah,’ said the white man, ‘but I wouldn't say there is much hate in Rhodesia.
There is a mass of goodwill in the African townships.
Why, people wave at me in the streets!’
To men like this, we say: ‘These black leaders are risking their necks to hold back violence, to stave off war.
To succeed, they must have evidence of some change from the white side.
What can we tell them?
‘Anti-Communism in Southern Africa is the best recruiting sergeant for Communism.
It is seen, in the hands of white Rhodesians, as an excuse for keeping the status quo.
Communism, from Laos to Angola, is now seen as mere naked imperialism in the hands of China and Russia.
As an ideal it is dead.
As a moral cause it has lost every vestige of justification — except one: it still can claim to champion the victims of white supremacy in Southern Africa.’
If the whites in Southern Africa could see this, not as a threat but as an opportunity — if they could grasp the truth that by a change of will and spirit they could deprive the Communists of their best propaganda weapon — there still might just be time for things to move in a new direction.
The black response is so generous.
Another member of the ANC executive showed us this the other day.
Young, able, married and with a young family, he is manager of an insurance firm, having just spent three years in America.
‘Now I come back to my own country — and I can't even go into a Wimpey bar.’
We asked him what step Ian Smith and his men could take that would convince the Africans they mean business.
We thought he would say, ‘Majority Rule Now.’
Instead, he thought for a minute.
Then he said, ‘If they would only show they feel they need us.’
NOTES FOR NEPHEWS AND NIECES — No. 17
SALISBURY 29th February, 1976
Friends are sending us news-paper clippings from the British press.
They let us know the grim picture you are being given, of our situation here.
It is a time for faith.
‘Our strength is in the name of the Lord, Who made heaven and earth.’
A few days ago a farmer from Mt Darwin, the ‘operational area’, came to in lunch.
He had been arrested and roughly handled in an interrogation recently.
He told us that he has written to the officer in charge of his interrogation: ‘Since we met, I have met something new — these four things, absolute honesty, purity, unselfishness and love.
It is wrong of me to have hated you because you are white.
I am sorry.
I see that you were only doing your duty.’
So far, he has received no reply.
But he is giving fearless leadership in his deeply-troubled area, to both black and white.
Two young Africans have sent broad-sheets to their friends, dealing with the crisis.
Stephen is a cashier in a super-market.
He wrote to his fellow-employees: ‘It is unfortunate that business doesn't allow us time to talk.
Yet we are confronted with grave issues that need our total attention.
How long shall we be enslaved by hate, bitterness, fear and selfishness?
Because of these evils, we have failed to create a just society here.
There is only one way, which is God's way.
This works only with changed hearts.
You can try it.’
he then tells them how.
The other letter is from Melanie, a 19-year-old student teacher in the village of Umvuma.
She heads hers, ‘A Part in the Future of Your country.’
‘We are fighting the wrong issue in this country,’ she says.
Colour is far too small an issue.
It is no good just blaming the white people or the black people for the situation in our country.
No one behaves badly because he is black or white.
There are forces working to exploit colour, to divide people for their own ends.
Unless we change, the situation in our land, which is so explosive will actually explode and none of us will survive.
What then will happen to those ‘little’ things you want to cling to so much?
On the basis of absolute moral standards we will build a new society.
We ought to live on an ‘all-out’ basis and nothing else.
It must be ‘This one thing I will do because it is right.’
Melanie is a fighter.
She has just completed a year in the Gwelo Teacher's Training College.
There she took her stand for Moral Re-Armament; and ran into hot opposition.
Some of her fellow students accused her of selling out to the whites.
‘Prove what you say,’ said she when they threatened her.
They went into a huddle, and then told her, ‘We're not going to give you our evidence.’
‘In that case,’ she said, ‘I'm going on as before.
And you'd better come and see my next showing of a Moral Re-Armament film.’
They did.
She says, ‘I am not going to bow to bitterness.
If Africa gives way to bitterness, we will be destroyed.’
Many whites are scared.
Others are grimly determined to fight things through.
The call-up is drastic, with farmers leaving their crops, and businesses crippled as their men go.
Families suffer.
The radio and TV report the loss of life on both black and white sides, appallingly like a football score.
Our conviction is to live in the perspective of God's Africa — the true freedom for Africa, with freedom from bribery and corruption, freedom from fear and intimidation and bullying.
Whatever happens, in the war of politics, we live in the perspective of God's intervention.
Fred Rea, a veteran of forty years here, came in the other day.
He has often been outspoken in his differences with the government.
We surveyed the scene and then together sought God's word on it.
He came up with ‘Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord.’
We asked him where it came from in the bible, and he referred us to Exodus chapter 14.
Read it for yourselves;— Moses, brought to a halt in front of the Red Sea, with the Egyptians thundering over the horizon to destroy him, and the Israelites in rebellion, gives that word to his people.
Tonight the Minister of the big Methodist church in the township of Harare opened it for people of all colours and creeds to come and pray and find God's plan.
He issued a call: ‘Most of us know what we are against.
What are we for?
God's plan for this country is big enough to call forth all the loyalty, love, passion, sacrifice and patience of all of us, black, brown and white.’
As I write, I have just returned from this gathering.
The church was packed.
Blacks and whites prayed together, and listened together for God's guidance.
Leading the meeting was Henry Kachidza, the ANC Treasurer.
At the end he prayed the prayer of St Francis:
Lord, make us instruments of Thy Peace.
Where there is hatred, may we bring love Where there is malice, pardon Where there is doubt, faith Where there is despair, hope Where there is darkness, may we bring Thy light….’
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — No. 18
SALISBURY 27th March, 1976
Last Sunday, after the Smith-Nkomo talks broke down, we watched Ian Smith on TV, confronting the world's press.
With us were a former Minister of Finance, the head of a big Building Society, and their wives.
Smith looked strained and defensive, as he began to field the balls thrown at him by correspondents from American, Greek, Portuguese , French and British news agencies.
Keeping the pace firmly to a speed at which he could consider his answers, he relaxed as the hour passed, even smiled.
Bitterness towards the British Labour government showed early.
Then he handled some hot ones — on UDI, and the change in his ‘tactics’.
He even asked help —‘How can we find the way to deal with people who say one thing in private and another in front of their supporters?’
Then the ‘Observer’ correspondent rose and fired four questions rapidly at his most sensitive spot — his attitude to black majority rule.
‘Do you mean you are withdrawing your statement that there will be no majority rule in your life-time?’
You could see the Scots pride rise and the blood-pressure mount.
‘I do not believe in black majority rule — ever,’ he thundered.
‘Not in a thousand years!’
It hardly matters that this came in a setting of answers that were outlining Smith's much-changed thinking.
He had just said, ‘I have come to the point where I do not think of colour.
What I want is the best government for Rhodesia.’
And two days later, in a public statement, he was at pains to make clear that he does not believe in ‘White majority-rule’ any more than black.
But the damage was done.
The night after the broadcast I was talking with an African nationalist in the Harare township.
‘That remark,’ he said, ‘has created bitterness in a million African hearts.’
(What power resides in the hands of a journalist who wants his story, and knows how to needle his man till he gets it!
By the same token, one wonders what leader, in some of the countries so quick to condemn Smith, would expose himself to such a cross-examination?)
We live in days of obvious danger and tragedy.
The news bulletins repeat the numbers killed, and the ratio of ‘terrorists’ to ‘security personnel’, like a football score.
They call it the ‘kill ratio’.
The African leaders we often meet are perhaps more gravely concerned than anyone else.
‘Now time has run out,’ said one.
Another — a University lecturer — tells us how his students, both black and white, are coming to him, asking, ‘What is going to happen?
What are we studying for?
Are we to be killed by the Cubans or the Russians?’
White families are selling up and leaving; we know several.
They include the very type of people one would want to see stay behind and build the country.
Others, with a firmer faith in God, have decided to stay, whatever happens.
Well — it is easy to paint a gloomy picture.
The newspapers do it very competently; it is not the whole picture.
My faith and sights are on the lasting reality, the Zimbabwe of the future which will not be made by either the faithless or the fearful (and sometimes I have seen both); it will  obviously not be won by those who run away.
Men like Sir Cyril  Hatty will do it.
He came out to Rhodesia from London, the son of a butler; made his way here and became Minister of Finance under Welensky.
Now, looking out across the fertile fields he has cultivated out of bush, he says, ‘Doris and I are going to give whatever experience we have to whoever rules the country tomorrow.’
Bob Craig, President of the University of Rhodesia, is another stubborn builder.
Born in Fife, a former President of the St Andrew University SCR, he addressed a crowded audience in Harare the other day.
I was there, and heard him proclaim ‘Forgiveness’ as one key to a better future.
He spoke of his own need for forgiveness first.
I thought how much such a prescription would help in Northern Ireland.
He sticks to his post at the university — where he gets attacked as a liberal by the hard-line whites, and denounced by the violent blacks as he steers his genuinely multi-racial ship on its course.
He often tells me his motto: ‘It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful.’
He sees his university as an embryo of the future.
Talking during the week with a veteran of the ANC — a man who has opposed Smith publicly and privately for years — I was surprised to hear him say, ‘Whether the PM was right or wrong, we must assist him now to look into this idea of a change of heart.’
Another man who may surprise the gloom-merchants yet is Dr Elliott Gabellah, who has led the Muzorewa wing of the ANC inside this country during these months of political shouting and charade.
Others make more noise; but he may prove to have played a more effective part.
A couple of weeks ago he spoke to a seething crowd in Harare township, which included hundreds of his young African militants.
‘It is God's will that all men be free,’ he said.
‘I have seen countries where you substitute a white oppressor with a black one.
We will not do that in our country.
But if we have men who are not straight themselves, then you substitute one crooked man for another, regardless of colour.’
This was tough talk to these young men.
He went on to refer to Rhodes' phrase of ‘government in the hands of civilised men’.
‘Does colour imply civilisation?’ he asked.
They shouted, ‘No!’
‘In London,’ he went on, ‘you get as good devils as here.
It is a government by the people, perhaps governed by God — that is the government I would like…
‘When God wants something to happen, it will happen.
I have seen many children born.
(He is a doctor)‘Some women cry.
but when it is born everyone rejoices.
At this stage we have labour pains; but the child will be born.
Let us be ready for the birth!’
I don't want to go on stringing together stirring quotation.
All I know is that there are men here who have a courage and quality I'll put my shirt on.
It is still possible — despite the headlines and the threats — that this country may surprise the world.
We follow the to-and-fro in Britain, and in this upheaving world.
Just as in this country, politics seem powerless.
‘It all too big for politics,’ as a former Cabinet Minister said to us last week.
I want to live in such a way that I can help people find a faith.
The astonishing thing is that when I do, one sees a new society instantly emerging.
Notes for Nephews and Nieces — No. 19
Bulawayo, 17 May 1976
Kissinger and call-ups; D-notices and detentions; bombings and land-mine explosions; optimistic economic forecasts, and young families leaving — that is the background to this letter.
You read it in the papers, and see some of our friends — Allan Savory, Ted Sutton-Pryce and Co. — on the box.
As the Russian-Cuban and Chinese plans develop for Southern Africa, I have been spending much of the past four weeks working with a man who played a part twenty years ago in developing these plans.
His name is Les Dennison, and he is now Chairman of the Building Trade workers of Coventry.
For twenty-two years he was a card-carrying Communist, an activist in the cadre of the party.
As such, he recalls the sessions in the 1950's when the strategy for Southern Africa was thrashed out — to exploit the arrogance of the whites, the anger of the blacks, turning Marx's classic Class War into a race war.
Les left the party for what he calls ‘the superior ideology of Moral Re-Armament,’ and has worked with us for the past sixteen years.
He came here last year for our big assembly; and returned last month for a four-week visit, on his own conviction and at his own expense.
Friends in Britain helped him with his fare; his boss, when he knew what he was coming for, gave him unpaid leave.
He came, he told us, because his understanding of the ideological struggle makes him see Rhodesia as the most sensitive battlefield.
With Angola and Mozambique under Marxists' control, Rhodesia is needed to complete the red belt across Africa.
It is a goal worthy of Cecil Rhodes.
 Les taught me much.
Chiefly, by his total dedication.
Up every morning at 5.00 — 5.30 am, he starts his day with a study of the Bible, reading also Oswald Chambers' ‘My Utmost for His Highest’, and Frank Buchman's ‘Revolutionary Path’.
The BBC world service and the morning paper are under his belt before breakfast.
We went through days with him when he met African trades union seminars and black nationalist leaders; Cabinet Ministers; some of the most shell-backed Right-wingers and some of the most outspoken men of the Left.
He conferred with the Anglican Bishop (who had been in the same Japanese POW camp as he); and spent hours with a crowd of young Rhodesians, black and white, who are now in action with us.
Two encounters stand out in my memory.
One was in the home of an African student called (magnificently) Glorious Chombo.
Big, bearded and broad-shouldered, he is studying for the ministry, on a campus where black theology is preached and Christ is held to have advocated violence.
He had four of his comrades to meet us.
As Les and I walked into their tiny, barely furnished house, his wife greeted us, and his little girl held up her arms for me to lift her.
She sat on my knee as we talked.
At first, all was Christian sweetness and light.
Then Les began to tell of his experience of life.
He described how it felt to discover he was an illegitimate child, when his mother called him a bastard; how he left home at 14 to find work in the Durham coalfields — hating his parents, hating the world, ripe for enlistment in the class struggle.
Soon after, war came.
‘I was directed by the Party to join the forces,’ he said.
‘So I found myself heading for the Far East in the Service Corps.’
In Singapore he was captured by the Japanese.
At war's end, he was sent by the Party to the Midlands.
There he was one of the militants who started the strike-waves rolling in the car industry — the first ‘political’ strikes.
He worked with men like Jack Jones and Hugh Scanlon.
He spoke of his change of direction.
A fellow shop-steward, a quiet man called Stan Peachey whom Les had bullied and scorned because of his Christian commitment, said to him, ‘You talk about uniting the workers of the world, Les, uniting humanity?’
‘Too right I do!’ said Les with conviction.
‘If not in my life-time, in my sons’.’
‘How do you expect to unite humanity when you can't keep your own family united?’
Les hit him.
But it was a home thrust, for the Dennison family was breaking in pieces.
He had himself thrown out his oldest son Karl (named after Karl Marx), for marrying into the bourgeois class.
His second son had left, calling the home a ‘hell-hole’.
Vera, his wife —‘She had a terrible life with me,’ he told Glorious.
‘She was only waiting for the kids to grow up and then she said she'd leave me.
‘You talk of peace and brotherhood, Dennison,’ she said.
‘Your the biggest blasted dictator that ever lived in a home!’’
I won't go into all the story.
The crux is how Les found a discipline, a commitment, and a world ideology superior to his own.
Accepting it first as an experiment, he found a way — beyond his belief — to bring his family together.
He and Vera were married in church last year, with the children and grandchildren round them!
With this growing experience he has found a means to fight more effectively for social justice and the needs of his fellow-workers.
All this he told to Glorious and his friends.
In face of this realism, Glorious dropped his ‘nice’ mask.
He poured out his hate in a bitter torrent.
He talked of ‘the white man's Christ’, invoked to preserve what the white man has got; and of the ‘black man's Christ’— the Christ of suffering and sacrifice.
He told of the death of his father last Christmas, killed by a white man driving recklessly — and the Coroner's verdict of ‘death by natural causes,’ so no compensation was given to the family.
Les came back with equal honesty.
‘Every time you say ‘white man’ like that,’he said .
‘it goes through my guts.
It sounds obscene.
I was born white.
I'm proud of being white.
I want to be the kind of white man who can work with you to put right these injustices.’
After much frank and passionate talk we listened in quiet for God's guidance.
(Any African understands this and will do it without question.)
Glorious then said, ‘I know hate is wrong.
God has told us not to kill.
But when I let go of these weapons, how can I fight for my people?’
If we can answer that question — and I believe with Christ's power we can — we can turn the tide of war and tyranny here.
The other encounter was with a young white couple, Don and Penny.
An accountant in a big finance house, Don told us ‘For me, a ladder has only two rungs — the bottom one and the top one.
I'm going to the top!’
He and his wife live in one of Salisbury's spacious homes.
The scent of jasmine greets you as you walk through a creepered archway into the wide lawn.
They have two roly-poly little boys.
The effect of several talks with Les has made these two decide to use their home, their lives and all they have to create a new Rhodesia, a fair society.
Don has cleared up the way he diddled his income-tax returns.
Having lost his fear of the future and of black Africans, Don invited his white socialite friends to meet his new black friends in his home.
He also confronts the Rhodesia Front men — whom  his family know well — with a few fresh ideas.
An African nationalist commented to some of us the other day, ‘When we take over, we may get rid of a lot of white people — but we want Don and Penny to stay.’
SALISBURY 23rd May 1976
This morning the shooting of another farmer and his son is reported from the ever enlarging operational area.
Travellers from Bulawayo to South Africa have to go in convoy.
Two of our friends here are tempted to despair, for their son's farm on the border is in an area where the terrorists are increasingly active; the tobacco price is dropping; and their son, along with most of his neighbours, has to go into the army this week, leaving his farm unprotected.
You know how Kissinger's policy lines up with that of Russia as regards Southern Africa and particularly Rhodesia.
Last week the President.
John Wrathall, called the whole nation to pray for God's guidance.
It was a suggestion made to him by Sir Cyril Hatty.
The churches were packed, with crowds outside on the pavements.
At least in one case prayers were said for the brave men fighting on both sides.
In the Bulawayo Cathedral the Bishop prayed that our leaders might seek ‘what is right, not who is right.’
There are many signs that Ian Smith himself is seeking for this guidance.
Mrs Smith tells her friends how he and she pray now.
Jock Thompson, the head of Meikles Trust in Bulawayo, told us of a talk he had with him on the guidance of God.
The Rev. Gary Strong, one of the best methodist ministers here who changes lives has just issued a ‘Call to the Churches and Nations of Southern Africa’.
He did so after a long consultation with the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister's last political move was to include ten Africans in his Cabinet.
While the men chosen are the Chiefs who were already pro-government and the move is largely interpreted as window-dressing, it is more important than that.
When Smith was recommending it on television he said, ‘I wish we could get beyond colour as the criterion and choose to be governed by the best men for the job.’
He really meant it.
We were led into the closest touch with the African Doctor through this period.
He wanted to go to Caux  for much needed rest and perspective  others  warmly welcomed him.
On the day before they were due to leave however, two major political developments hit him.
He has stayed to deal with them, but still believes God means him to go at some point.
George Daneel came up from Pretoria.
In a four hour talk, the Doctor faced afresh his calling from God and took two vital decisions in the light of that.
We finished on our knees and he prayed, ‘Here I am Lord, listening and ready to obey.’
He told us how Christ had intervened in his life at his first visit to Caux.
‘He gave me six points for this country so clearly that I saw them as if on a black-board and could simply copy them down.’
We had the NWN report of those six points and were able to give it to him.
They are as fresh and relevant as when they were first given, stressing the changing of men, listening to God and reaching the leadership with this answer.
We put it to him to make these the basis of his leadership now.
He is in a unique position at this moment.
The vast majority of the black people follow his wing of the ANC (not Nkomo who only represents at best 20%).
At the same time, the very top white leadership understand correctly that the Doctor is opposed to violence, bloodshed and war.
(It is also true, however, that through misinformation and misleading press reports an alarming number of people increasingly think of him as a ‘terrorist leader’) He feels pressed by the black African leaders to the North who keep calling for him, to come and see them.
He is refreshingly determined not to be pushed around by these men any more than he is by the whites.
He said, ‘We are not going to exchange the oppression of the Smith regime for dictatorship from a black regime to the North.’
By contrast he expressed respect for Vorster's policies.
‘He does not meddle like Kissinger or Callaghan.
He helps us to set up talks like those at the Victoria Falls and then says ‘Get on with it.’’
The Doctor is still convinced that the solution must be worked out first within the borders of this country and not by people outside it.
Confidentially, there is a bid by the Government for his co-operation at the moment.
He is very much aware that it is accompanied by a veiled or growing threat of trouble if he does not co-operate.
At one point he said, ‘Why do these different people want me?
Who am I?
I never chose to be in this position.’
George immediately said to him, ‘There is Someone Else who has chosen you.’
The Doctor acknowledged it at once.
In his guidance, he accepted that his job is to make clear to the nation's leaders that God come first.
He is seeking the way to give moral and spiritual leadership from a position of identification with his own people's rightful longings.
He asked a question at one point, ‘What do my people want?
Is it simply the removal of discrimination?
Or do they now insist on taking over the Government?’
We write this so fully because we need and should value any guidance you can send us.
One feels that this is a man who could .
Also, with all the genuine turning to God by leaders and people — here, and perhaps even more in South Africa — this part of the world is surely meant to be a turning point in the ideological power struggle.
Meanwhile, we are preparing with our friends for a force to move around the country.
Lives have been freshly changed and a fine team of younger men and women, black and white, is now meeting regularly and in action in Salisbury.
Towns like Gwelo, Que Que and Bulawayo are preparing to receive them for MRA weeks and other functions to speak to the leaders and people.
People like Cyril and Doris Hatty, Richard and Jean Whidborne and Nancy Brereton are actively helping and will take part.
Our comrades from South Africa are eager to join once the moving gets going.
South Africa and here is one battle.
Today the young men and Arthur Kanodereka leave for two weeks in South Africa.
They will move through Johannesburg, Pretoria, Bophutatswana, Pietermaritzburg and the Cape.
With best greetings from us all,
Speech to Institute of Directors, Bulawayo.
19 June 1975
INDUSTRY AND IDEOLOGY
There is an issue deep in all our minds today as practical men, that has nothing to do directly with profits or production.
Nor is it merely a question of politics.
It is ‘What is going to happen on June 25?’
What will Mr. Samora Machel decide to do?
Will his ideology make him close the border, or will economic self-interest keep it open, at least for a time?
I cannot speak for Rhodesia.
But I do speak for us British.
We hate to face the challenge of ideology.
Karl Marx said long ago, ‘There is a plank in the mind of every Englishman —’(I don't know what he thought of the Scots)—‘beyond which it is impossible to penetrate with a new idea.’
I tell you honestly: the business men I have met in Bulawayo have deeply won my respect.
I take off my hat to you for many things — not least for the way you have kept the economy going these ten years.
But I am puzzled about one thing, here as in Britain.
Why are such decent men, of such ability and goodwill, now being overtaken by events?
What has been missing in our equipment, our foresight, our leadership?
You see at once that this is not a local issue?
The question I have raised is a world-wide one.
Why is freedom on the retreat?
Why, as Prime Minister Vorster said last Monday, is what is called ‘The Free World’ shrinking?
Why, as a senior British civil servant told me last week, is black Africa more and more convinced that Communism and not democracy, is the wave of the future?
It is in this setting that I want to try and talk about Moral Re-Armament.
Not as a movement.
One of the battles my friends and I have had since coming to Rhodesia has been to stay out of the little box into which some people would like to pop us.
It was a newspaper man who gave a more accurate and memorable assessment of MRA:
‘It's not an institution, It's not a point of view.
It starts a revolution By starting one in you!’
One gentleman I ought to mention to you in this connection — my friend Mr. Michael Barry tells me — is the writer in ‘Property and Finance’, which some of you may have read.
He wrote an article in this  month's issue suggesting that MRA is linked with the World Council of Churches and the Fabian Society.
Of course it's bunk.
‘Half the lies they tell about the Irish aren't true anyway,’ as the old Irishman said.
We have consulted our lawyers and hope the editors will publish an apology.
The very opposite is the truth.
We are aiming to straighten out the World Council of Churches on their Southern Africa policy.
In fact it was  a MRA  Churchman in Holland who proposed the motion last year that reversed the position of the Dutch Reformed Church on this matter, and removed their support from the WCC.
He carried his motion by 44 votes to 1.
As for Communism — world Communism as aggressively anti-God as it is, has always opposed MRA.
You may care to hear what Radio Moscow says about us.
In broadcasts monitored in London, they have told their listeners that ‘the centres and actions of Moral Re-Armament must be destroyed, because the absolute standards of honesty, purity, unselfishness and love which they present, taken singly or together, offer to the workers an alternative to the class struggle as a means of transforming society’.
They also have described Moral Re-Armament as a ‘global ideology, with bridgeheads on every continent, now in its final phase of total expansion throughout the world.
It has the power to capture radical, revolutionary minds.’
What then is an ideology?
It would take a better speaker than I, and a longer speech, to answer that question.
But it is to do with changing the course of history.
It is faith, militant to win the world.
As someone has said, it has three words beginning with the letter P — it is a philosophy armed with a plan and fought with passion.
The MRA international assembly held in Salisbury a couple of weeks ago dealt with these things.
The announced purpose was ‘to bring the change in people which will make political changes work’.
Over a thousand Rhodesians took part in the different sessions.
We were delighted to have a distinguished group from Bulawayo fly over for the opening, and some who stayed through the week.
I think they demonstrated by their presence that here at least, there is no plank in the mind; that a business man's business today includes these ideological facts, includes dealing with what is in the hearts and minds of men.
Three members of the Cabinet came to the Assembly, and six or seven of the ANC executive.
M.P.
's and Africans just out of detention attended the sessions together.
It was one of these African leaders who said: ‘In the war-torn North-East of Rhodesia, I saw white men killed and I saw black men killed.
When I was alone, I prayed for them both.
‘I have found Moral Re-Armament to be the only way for our country.
It has come at the eleventh hour .
This is the time of challenge.
‘I have been very bitter.
In my 17 years as a clergyman, I have hardly talked to white people.’
Then he went on —‘Here for the first time I talked about our country with a white Rhodesian.
We talked about the moral needs.
I said, ‘We will find a solution if we begin with ourselves.’’
One of the white Rhodesians he talked to there was Alec Smith, the son of the Prime Minister.
 Alec Smith told vividly of the change he has found — from the days not so long ago when he was a rebel against all organised society, and cherishing hate against certain specific people.
‘I have evidence,’ he said, ‘in my own experience, of how God deals with prejudice, and turns hate into love.’
And he turned to some of the people he had hated, and apologised.
Alec has a quick wit.
I was with him when a TV interviewer asked him, ‘Now Alec, tell us about your past.’
He replied cheerfully, ‘I think my past has been adequately covered by the media!’
And he proceeded to tell what he is doing now.
He has, as a matter of fact, resigned from a comfortable job, to work without pay for the moral re-armament of Rhodesia; and much of the leadership of the Assembly was due to him.
Speaking beside Alec Smith on this platform was Dr. Elliott Gabellah, vice-president of the ANC.
In the present climate in Rhodesia, that was an act of courage.
You may have read in the press what he said —though for some reason it was not reported in the RTV news coverage of the event.
I have perhaps strayed away from matters of industry.
I wish you could have heard the session of the Assembly on industry, and in particular the speech by Les Dennison, branch chairman of the plumbers' trades union in Coventry, England.
For twenty-two years, Dennison was a Marxist, a militant responsible for strikes which tied up Standard Motors and which you all know about.
Addressing the Assembly in Salisbury, he said:(See enclosed).
Finally, there is one point I must make — it concerns what some have called ‘the God bit’.
Some of my good friends here say to me, ‘We're all for what MRA is doing — in fact, you're preaching to the converted — all except this God bit.’
It is a basis misconception.
The God bit is the whole thing.
It was a wise statesman who once said, ‘Men must choose to be governed by God or they condemn themselves to be ruled by tyrants.’
That is not a pious, Sunday School motto.
It is the truth which is being demonstrated in 1975 in Vietnam, in Britain,— and it is the real choice that we face in Southern Africa.
May I illustrate it with a true instance of what one industrialist did, who took this challenge seriously.
His name was Heinrich Kost, and he was Chairman of the German Coal Board.
Everyone today knows of the ‘economic miracle’ in Germany.
Today the German mark is the healthiest currency in Europe.
But in the years immediately after the war, it was not so.
The Communists held 80% control in the mines of the Ruhr.
At this point, Kost met Dr. Frank Buchman, the initiator of Moral Re-Armament.
Kost said to Buchman, ‘In Hitler's time, he told us what to do and we did it.
If the Russians come, they will tell us what to do.
You  say you have an idea superior to Communism and Fascism — what do you tell us to do?’
‘I'm not here to tell you what to do,’ replied Buchman.
‘But I can tell you how to find out.’
And he told him how to listen to God — how any man who listens in the spirit of ‘Not my will, but God's’ can receive definite, accurate direction and instruction.
Kost went home.
A few days later, he phoned Buchman.
‘I know what to do,’ he said.
He asked for a MRA force to come to the Ruhr —‘and the place to begin is Moers,’ he said.
To cut a long story short — and I'd be glad to give the details to anyone who wants — it was in Moers that our force met the Communist Party leadership of the Ruhr.
An action followed which in the next few years captured many of those leaders with a superior ideology.
In those years, the Communist vote dropped from 80% to less than 10%.
This is history.
Chancellor Adenauer paid tribute to it.
But the starting point was the decision of Heinrich Kost to listen to God's instructions.
This is the experiment and experience I commend to any business man or industrialist who wants to meet the challenge of the ideological crisis of our times.
Before I sit down, I must bring you an invitation from Switzerland.
To take part in the world assembly for Moral Re-Armament, which meets there, in Caux from July 15 to September 14.
I ask you to consider it seriously for three reasons.
1.
Rhodesians will be welcomed and needed there.
The Swiss who are the hosts have made that plain.
There are, of course, no passport difficulties involved
2.
A delegation from this country — both black and white — is already planning to go, with men like Alec Smith, Sir Cyril Hatty and Dr. Gabellah.
Bulawayo should be represented.
3.
The Caux Assemblies provide a unique opportunity, for Rhodesians to meet leaders from other countries, whom often you can meet nowhere else, in a constructive spirit — for instance, men and women from black Africa.
6th July 1976
Dear ,
It was grand to be able to talk with you again with .
We pray for you every day, and think of all the decisions and plans.
We are seeking God's guidance about the time to go to Caux.
Many things point to the second half of August.
It is then that we expect the best group from Southern Africa to be there, including the Homeland leaders.
These closing weeks also are often the most valuable of the whole assembly.
The air-lines people tell us that flights are getting fully booked.
So we need to book our seats — even provisionally.
May I suggest that we try and secure bookings for you and for myself to travel on or about August 15th?
Of course, if  can get leave and accompany us, that would be best of all!
I shall try and reach you by telephone in the next day or two, and see what you think of this suggestion.
With letter I enclose clippings from the Gwelo and Que Que newspapers, telling of the first actions of the Mobile Force.
With every good wish from us all here,
Yours sincerely,


20th February 1975
Dear ,
Thank you for your latest letter, to  and me.
It warmed our hearts and fed our faith.
I enclose a letter which  sent me sometime ago.
You will remember ; but here is his story, as he told it to me on my last visit.
With his wife,, he grows tomatoes on the low veld of the North-East Transvaal.
He looks like what he is: a ‘back-veld Boer’, tough, Dutch, typical of the voting strength of the Nationalist Party.
He told me, ‘I got as much as I could out of my workers.
I thought of them as my property.’
He had known the Christian challenge as a younger man, but had fallen away from it.
Then he was invited to a week-end MRA conference.
He felt the challenge again, and decided he must leave.
He told  he had an important engagement and must go, on the Saturday night.
The ‘engagement’ was for a drinking party.
At the same time, he prayed in his heart, ‘Christ, don't let go of me.’
Driving to meet his friends, he found God saying to him, ‘You will go to the party.
But you will not touch a drop.’
That is just what happened.
His friends thought he was sick.
Then, driving home, God's voice said to him, ‘Now you must be honest with .
You must tell her all you've done behind her back.’
response was, ‘I can't and I won't!’
For two days he resisted and fought.
Then the word came to him, ‘, tonight you will do it.
And tonight you will die.
A new man will be born.’
That night he obeyed.
It was hard for .
She lay in silence for half-an-hour.
Then she said, ‘You are my man.
I can't forget what you've told me.
But I can forgive.’
Next morning, when he greeted his farm labourers with a ‘Good-morning’, they did not know what had happened to him.
They knew he was different.
Today they are my fellow-labourers in the Lord's  vineyard ,’ says.
A new life began for the  and for many.
He tells the latest fruit of it in the enclosed letter.
With warmest greetings to ,
Yours ever