

Part II
Endogenic processes and landforms
2 Global morphology and tectonics
2.1 Global morphology
2.1.1 The geoid
The Earth is only approximately a sphere.
As a result of the centrifugal force of rotation it bulges at the equator and its polar radius (6378 km) is 21 km shorter than its equatorial radius (6397 km); thus the Earth is more accurately described as an oblate spheroid.
Even this description, however, is not completely accurate as inhomogeneities in the distribution of mass in the Earth's interior produce further small but measurable irregularities on its surface.
These irregularities have been determined with great precision over recent years through the very accurate measurement of deviations in the orbits of artificial satellites.
The shape of the Earth determined in this way is known as the geoid and is represented by the surface defined by mean sea level over the oceans and the extension of sea level along imaginary canals across the continents.
As is evident in Figure 2.1 this surface shows many irregularities compared with a simple oblate spheroid; there is, for instance, a bulge of 76 m near New Guinea and a depression of some 104m to the south of India.
The significance of the geoid for the operation of geomorphic processes is that it defines the ultimate base level for denudation; any change in the geoid would therefore cause consequential changes in base levels.
This is an important issue in studies of sea-level change and is examined further in Chapter 17.
2.1.2 Global hypsometry
If the overall distribution of height of the Earth's solid surface above and below sea level is plotted as a frequency distribution its most obvious feature is the bimodal form of the curve (Fig. 2.2).
The two peaks in the distribution represent the continental platforms and the ocean basins.
Between these two maxima there is a lower frequency of depths representing the more shallow regions of the oceans.
At either end of the histogram are thin tails indicating that very little of the Earth's solid surface is found more than 5 km above, or 6 km below, mean sea level.
The extremes of the distribution mark the greatest elevation of 8.8 km above sea level (Mount Everest) and the greatest depression at more than 11 km below sea level (the Marianas Trench in the western Pacific Ocean).
Other features are more clearly revealed if the data are plotted as a cumulative frequency distribution indicating the proportion of the surface above any given height (Fig. 2.3).
This produces a hypsometric curve which shows the elevations of those regions lying between the continental platforms and the ocean basins and suggests that the true break between the continents and oceans lies not at present sea level but some 200 m or so lower.
As defined by present mean sea level the continents account for 29 per cent of the Earth's surface area and the oceans 71 per cent, but if the break of slope represented on the global hypsometric curve is used the figure for the continents is nearer 37 per cent .
2.1.3 Major morphological features
Although the global hypsometric curve provides a valuable statistical summary of the Earth's relief as a whole it is also necessary to identify the major components of global morphology that give rise to the curve (Fig. 2.4).
Beginning with the more familiar form of the continents we can distinguish between the continental platforms formed by plateaus and lowlands, and the major linear mountain systems known as orogenic mountain belts, or simply orogens.
One major mountain system cuts across central and southern Eurasia extending from the Alps in the west, through the Himalayas to the mountains of western China.
Another, formed by the Andes and the North American Cordillera, runs along the entire western margin of the Americas.
Other older and more subdued ranges include the Appalachians in eastern North America and the Urals in western Eurasia.
Extensive areas within continental platforms are formed of basement, a complex of metamorphic and igneous rocks of Palaeozic or Precambrian age.
In some localities, notably East Africa, continental platforms are traversed by rift valleys consisting of linear troughs formed by the subsidence of crust between parallel systems of faults.
The submarine extension of a continent is called the continental shelf.
This is bordered by a continental slope which inclines at an angle of around 3–6° towards the ocean basin and which is separated from it by a continental rise (Fig. 2.5).
The ocean basins themselves are traversed by a vast system of mid-oceanic ridges up to 1000km in width and tens of thousands of kilometres in length.
On average they rise some 2 km above the surrounding ocean floor but in a few localities, notably at Iceland, they reach above sea level.
Although the surface of the ocean basins is relatively uniform it is punctuated in places by volcanoes.
Some of these rise above sea level, but the vast majority are submarine features known as seamounts, or if they are flat-topped, guyots.
The greatest ocean depths are    achieved in oceanic trenches which are to be found both along some continental margins, notably western South America (Fig. 2.6), and in association with island arcs which are usually located close to the edges of continents.
The relief exhibited by the highest mountains and the deepest oceanic trenches, although apparently spectacular, is in fact trivial when compared with the dimensions of the Earth as a whole.
The maximum difference in altitude associated with the Earth's solid relief is about 20km, or only 0.31 per cent of the planet's mean diameter.
This is why substantial vertical exaggeration must nearly always be employed in the depiction of extensive areas of relief in cross-section (Fig. 2.6).
Only with the most dramatic topography can large-scale relief forms be clearly drawn with identical horizontal and vertical scales.
2.2 Earth structure
2.2.1 Seismic evidence
Studies of the way in which earthquake waves are transmitted through the Earth have shown that its interior has a concentric structure.
When an earthquake occurs the energy released is transmitted in wave form in all directions.
The velocities of earthquake (seismic) waves, together with the paths they follow, are determined by the properties of the material through which they pass.
Two major types of wave are produced and these travel at different speeds.
Primary, or P-waves, are the fastest.
They are compressional waves, the energy being transmitted by an initial compression of particles which is then passed on to adjacent particles.
This produces a sequence of zones of compression and expansion which travel away from the source.
Secondary, or S-waves, are shear waves and they transmit energy by an ‘up and down’ motion of particles normal to the direction of propagation.
The density and elastic properties of rock are both important in affecting the passage of seismic waves.
P-waves can be transmitted through any material (sound waves are of this type), but S-waves can only be transmitted through solids.
From the response of these waves as they travel through the Earth it is possible to build up a general picture of the properties of its interior.
Two major discontinuities in the variation of the velocity of earthquake waves with depth show that the Earth's interior can be divided into three zones; the crust, the mantle and the core.
The boundary between the core and the mantle is very sharp and is located at a depth of about 2900 km.
The mantle-crust boundary is marked by the Mohorovicic discontinuity (or the Moho as it is usually abbreviated).
Its depth below the continents averages around 35 km, but below the ocean basins it is only 5–1Okm.
The crust, therefore, is an extremely thin surface layer representing only about 0.5 per cent of the Earth's radius.
2.2.2 Mantle, asthenosphere, crust and lithosphere
The mantle is mainly solid and appears to comprise minerals of high density, rich in magnesium and iron.
The boundary between the mantle and crust represents a significant change in rock density but there may also be differences in chemical composition.
Detailed studies of the velocity of seismic waves in the upper mantle show that after the marked increase corresponding to the Moho at the crust-mantle boundary their velocity gradually becomes greater to a depth of around 100km, where a small, but  significant, decrease is found which continues to a depth of about 300 km (Table 2.1).
This layer of attenuated velocity is known as the low velocity zone and the reduction in seismic wave velocities is considered to be due to partial melting in this region of the mantle.
It partly corresponds to the asthenosphere, the plastic-like properties of which permits slow ‘flow’ of material in response to forces applied over long periods of time (Fig. 2.7).
Lubrication may be provided by melting between mineral boundaries, but molten material must only form a small proportion of the asthenosphere since it is capable of transmitting S-waves.
Compared with the mantle, the crust forms a very thin layer.
Beneath the oceans it is thought to extend to a depth of around 10–15km, that is to only 5–1Okm below the ocean floor.
Below the continents the crust is much thicker, averaging about 35 km but reaching up to 70km beneath some mountain ranges.
Of greatest significance to the creation of macroscale landforms is the boundary of the asthenospere with the solid mantle above.
The crust and the immediately underlying mantle created above the asthenosphere in fact appear to behave as a semi-rigid layer called the lithosphere.
Two types can be distinguished: oceanic lithospere is capped by thin ocean crust, while continental lithospere is capped by much thicker continental crust.
The thickness of the lithosphere itself shows considerable variety and the boundary with the underlying asthenospere is gradational and difficult to define precisely.
In addition to the analysis of seismic data, heat flow measurements have been employed to map variations in lithospheric thickness on a global basis (Fig. 2.8).
These indicate generally thin lithosphere beneath the oceans, especially in the vicinity of mid-oceanic ridges, and a marked thickening in certain continental areas, including Antarctica, North Africa, Brazil and north-eastern North America.
2.2.3 Gravity anomalies
Measurement of variations in the gravitational attraction at   the Earth's surface has provided much useful information about the characteristics of the crust and the lithosphere.
The force of gravity measured at the surface depends on the altitude of the location, the gravitational pull of the underlying rock and the attraction exerted by any areas of highland near by (this last effect being negligible except close to large mountain masses).
The reference point for the calculation of gravity anomalies (which are measured in milligals) is an international standard for the gravitational attraction at the Earth's surface which takes into account the effects of the rotation of the Earth.
Correction for altitude alone gives the free-air gravity anomaly.
To allow for the mass present in a mountain range above the reference surface the theoretical pull of the rock, based on an assumed average rock density, is subtracted from the free-air anomaly (or a correction is made for the presence of sea water if the point is over the ocean).
This gives the Bouguer anomaly which is the most widely used measure of gravitational deviations over the Earth's surface.
2.2.4 Isostasy
As all but the uppermost part of the mantle appears capable of viscous flow when subject to prolonged stress, the semirigid lithosphere, capped by continental or oceanic crust, can be viewed as ‘floating’ on the underlying asthenosphere (the most easily deformable viscous part of the mantle).
To attain hydrostatic equilibrium the position of the lithosphere adjusts vertically in accordance with its density and thickness.
The term isostasy (meaning ‘equal standing’) was introduced by the American geologist Dutton in 1889 to describe this state of equilibrium.
Until quite recently it was considered that it was the crust that attained equilibrium with respect to the mantle, but it is now known that isostatic adjustments also involve the rigid mantle forming the lower part of the lithosphere.
Nevertheless it is differences in the density and thickness of the crust that are largely responsible for variations in the isostatic adjustment of the lithosphere as a whole.
If it is in isostatic equilibrium one section of lithosphere will stand higher than another because it is of lower density (the crustal density or Pratt model), of the same density but thicker (the crustal thickness or Airy model), or through a combination of both a lower density and greater thickness (Fig. 2.9).
Continental lithosphere stands higher than oceanic lithosphere because continental crust is both of greater thickness and lower density than oceanic crust.
The great differences in elevation within the continents are, in most cases, related to variations in crustal thickness with areas at high elevations generally being underlain by deep roots of buoyant crustal rock (Box 2.1).
Bouguer anomalies are generally negative on land and positive over the oceans.
This would be expected from differences in the density and thickness of continental and oceanic crust.
Bouguer anomalies include a correction for altitude but only on the basis of an average crustal density.
The continents, particularly where elevations are high, exhibit lower than predicted (negative) gravity values because of the greater thickness of underlying crust of  relatively low density.
Higher than predicted (positive) gravity values occur over the oceans because they are underlain by thin and relatively dense crust.
When corrections are made to take account of these differences in crustal density the magnitude of gravity anomalies is significantly reduced.
Remaining discrepancies are termed isostatic anomalies, but why should such anomalies exist when the lithosphere is apparently free to attain isostatic equilibrium with respect to the asthenosphere?
One reason is that the lithosphere is not divided into small discrete blocks able to move freely up and down with respect to each other.
The lithosphere possesses a certain degree of rigidity so that the mass of any load (such as an ice sheet) placed on it is supported over a greater area than that covered by the load itself.
In other words the lithosphere experiences flexure, just as a springboard does when a diver walks along it.
This kind of behaviour, known as flexural isostasy, is especially important for oceanic lithosphere and for thick continental lithosphere with a high rigidity (see Section 4.2.3).
A second reason for isostatic anomalies is that the lithosphere is not capable of adjusting instantaneously to a change in load.
Although the great ice sheets which covered much of North America and northern Europe in the recent past had largely disappeared by 10000 a BP, the landsurface in these regions is still rising rapidly in response to the removal of this load.
A third reason for isostatic anomalies is that there are dynamic forces present in the sub-lithospheric mantle which are capable of actively dragging down or pushing up the lithosphere.
These forces also play a key role in the large horizontal movements experienced by the lithosphere which we will be examining in detail later in this chapter.
2.2.5 Crustal structure
Seismic and gravity data, together with direct evidence from the rocks themselves, allow us to identify the structural and compositional differences between oceanic and continental crust.
Oceanic crust has a mean density of about 3000 kg m -1 and is composed of layers of basic rocks, broadly basaltic and gabbroic in composition, with a thin veneer of sediments.
Over most of the ocean floor this sedimentary cover is only 1–2 km thick and in the vicinity of mid-oceanic ridges it becomes very thin indeed.
One of the most remarkable discoveries arising from oceanographic research  over the past two decades or so has been the youth of oceanic sediments and the underlying basaltic crust.
The oldest known rocks from the ocean floor come from the western Pacific, but these are only of Jurassic age.
This can be contrasted with the antiquity of rocks exposed over large areas of the continents which in some cases are more than 3000 Ma old.
Like the oceanic crust, continental crust has a layered structure, but one which is much more complex and less clearly defined.
A seismic boundary, known as the Conrad discontinuity, underlies some continental regions at a depth of between 10 and 30km and this divides the continental crust into upper and lower layers.
The upper crust is composed of rocks of a broadly granitic composition, with a highly variable covering ranging from unmetamorphosed sedimentary and volcanic rocks to medium- and high-grade metamorphosed sedimentary strata.
The composition of the lower continental crust is less well known but probably consists mainly of granulite, an intermediate to basic rock formed in very high pressure and temperature environments and containing mostly calcium-rich feldspars and pyroxene.
Another possibility is the presence of amphibolite rocks with an intermediate to basic composition since this would also give the seismic wave velocities recorded at this depth.
The earlier notion that the lower continental crust is largely basaltic in composition has received little support from more recent studies.
In addition to differences in the thickness and density of continental and oceanic crust identified from seismic evidence and the nature of gravity anomalies, it is possible, through a more detailed analysis of such data together with heat flow measurements and geological information indicative of the history of crustal stability, to identify several major structural regions within the continents and oceans (Table 2.2).
Most of these regions are also topographically distinct, but some, such as the continental shield, or craton, and mid-continent types, are primarily differentiated on the basis of their detailed structure and the thickness of their sedimentary cover.
The validity of any model of global tectonics must be judged by its ability to account for the distribution and characteristics of these major structural regions.
2.3 Development of ideas on global tectonics
Serious scientific attempts to explain the major structural and relief features of the Earth began only in the nineteenth century.
In 1829 Elie de Beaumont put forward the idea that the Earth is contracting and argued that compressional stresses set up in the crust as a result of the cooling of the Earth's interior would give rise to faulting, folding and thickening of the crust, and eventually to the formation of mountain ranges.
This proposal found support in the work of Lord Kelvin, the pioneer Victorian geophysicist, who attempted to calculate the age of the Earth from its probable rate of cooling on the assumption that it had formed as a molten offshoot of the Sun.
However, as the role of radioactive decay in generating heat in the Earth's interior (and thus drastically reducing the previously hypothezised rate of cooling) became appreciated the notion of a contracting Earth was rejected.
Various global tectonic models were proposed during the nineteenth and the first part of the twentieth century, with most attention being focused on the origin of the major mountain systems of the Earth's surface.
The majority of the models assumed that the  positions of the continents were fixed and that the ocean basins were ancient features.
2.3.1 Continental drift
The notion of continental drift is not new.
It was canvassed on a number of occasions in the nineteenth century, but its most influential advocate was Alfred Wegener who intially presented his ideas in 1912.
He outlined three main lines of supporting evidence.
First, he pointed out the ‘fit’ of coastlines now separated by thousands of kilometres of ocean, in particular those of South America and Africa.
He  reconstructed the present land masses into a single super-continent called Pangaea and suggested that this had initially split into two continents, Gondwanaland (Gondwana) to the south and Laurasia to the north, before further rupture and drift resulted in the familiar shape and location of the continents today.
Secondly, Wegener, a climatologist by training, referred to the global distribution of rocks characteristic of particular climatic environments, particularly ancient glacial deposits (tillites).
He maintained that the distribution of tillites and patterns of glacial striations produced by ice sheets during the Late Palaeozoic glaciation (now termed the Gondwana Ice Age) found in the now widely dispersed continental areas of southern Africa, Australia, South America, India and Antarctica indicated that these land masses were contiguous at that time and probably located fairly close to the South Pole.
He also pointed out, though somewhat less convincingly, that some geological structures could be traced from one continent to another across what are now wide stretches of ocean.
Wegener's third main category of evidence was palaeontological.
He argued that there were marked similarities between fossil terrestrial fauna and flora from Palaeozoic strata in the various southern continents and between North America and Europe, suggesting that during this era there was free movement over a single large land mass.
Fossils from more recent strata showed progressively less similarities with time in the different continents; this he attributed to the contrasting evolutionary paths of groups of animals and plants separated by continental drift.
The greatest obstacle to the acceptance of the drift hypothesis was not so much the nature of this supporting evidence (although alternative explanations were readily proffered) but rather the failure to find a convincing mechanism by which it could occur.
From an examination of global hypsometry Wegener had noted the concentration of large areas of the Earth's surface around two levels representing the continental platforms and the ocean basins.
He saw this as being compatible with the crust being made up of two layers, the upper one of relatively low density, the lower layer of higher density.
He suggested that tidal forces resulted in the lighter continental crust ‘ploughing’ through the substratum of denser crust underlaying the oceans.
This proposal was readily dismissed by geophysicists who were easily able to demonstrate that the Earth is far too strong to be deformed by such tidal forces.
Suggestions made by Arthur Holmes and others that continents could be moved by convection currents within the mantle were ignored rather than countered by opponents of drift.
While information about the Earth's interior and the ocean floors was so sparse, most geologists preferred the safety of the established doctrine of stationary continents.
2.3.2 Palaeomagnetic evidence
During the mid-1950s, at a time when continental drift was not seriously considered by most earth scientists, new evidence in the form of palaeomagnetic data from rocks again began to bring into question the notion of stationary continents.
S.K. Runcorn and his associates, working in Britain, conducted an intensive programme of data collection involving the measurement of remanent magnetism in rocks of various ages from around the world.
Earlier studies of such palaeomagnetism in France and Japan had shown that iron-rich volcanic rocks, such as basalt, record the magnetic field prevailing at the time they are formed.
As basaltic lavas cool through the temperature interval 500 to 450 °C (the Curie point) the atomic groups within the iron minerals they contain become aligned parallel to the magnetic lines of force acting upon them.
Once the temperature of such rocks falls below 450° C this magnetic orientation becomes ‘frozen’ into the individual minerals, only being subsequently disturbed by marked heating.
It was found that the palaeomagnetism of young rocks tended to be close to that expected from the present magnetic field, but older rocks showed marked deviations.
As a rough approximation the Earth's present magnetic field can be represented by a regular dipolar pattern (similar to that produced when a bar magnet is held beneath iron filings scattered on a sheet of paper).
If it is assumed that the Earth's magnetic field was of this form in the past, then it is possible to estimate the position of the magnetic pole for rocks of known ages (dated by radiometric methods) by measuring their palaeomagnetism.
On the basis of such measurements on rocks from Europe, Runcorn and his colleagues demonstrated an apparent movement of the magnetic pole over the past 500 Ma.
This phenomenon was termed polar wandering and is now thought to arise from the movements of the continents themselves rather than from any significant shift in the location of the magnetic pole itself.
After extending palaeomagnetic investigations to rocks from North America it was found that while these too showed an apparent movement of the magnetic pole the path of polar wandering appeared to differ systematically from that determined for Europe.
This discrepancy could be explained if North America and Europe had been moving with respect to each other as well as with respect to the magnetic pole.
Further work began to suggest that palaeomagnetic data supported the model of continental drift proposed by Wegener although there were initial uncertainties over the accuracy of the technique.
Palaeomagnetic data could indicate north-south movements (palaeolatitudes) but they could not give past longitudinal positions.
Moreover, the weakness of the remanent magnetism contained within volcanic rocks together with    various sources of error meant that large numbers of individual measurements had to be averaged in order to provide a reasonably precise estimate of past continental positions.
Consequently the palaeomagnetic evidence did not lead to an immediate resurrection of the continental drift hypothesis.
2.3.3 Global seismicity
Although the general distribution of earthquakes around the world had been known for many years, it was only with the establishment of a comprehensive network of seismographic stations to monitor underground nuclear weapons testing in the early 1960s that a detailed global picture emerged (Fig. 2.10).
Far from being randomly distributed, nearly all seismic activity is concentrated in relatively narrow zones.
This pattern coincides with a number of structural features, including mid-oceanic ridges, mountain belts, oceanic trenches and volcanic island arcs.
Looking in more detail, it is possible to classify seismic activity into four zones.
The first is located along the mid-oceanic ridges.
Earthquakes here are generated at shallow depths (less than 70km), and they coincide with the high heat flows and volcanic activity of the ridges.
The second category is closely related to oceanic trenches and their associated island arcs or mountain belts.
Such a zone extends more or less continuously around the western, northern and eastern margins of the Pacific Ocean.
The most notable feature of this seismic zone is the relationship between the depths of earthquake generation and their location with respect to the adjacent island arc or mountain belt (Fig. 2.11).
On their oceanic margin earthquake foci are shallow, but they become progressively deeper further away from the trench up to a maximum depth of about 700km.
This relationship gives rise to a dipping planar region of seismic activity, known as a Wadati-Benioff zone, inclined at an angle of between about 20 and 55.
A third area of earthquake activity extends as a rather diffuse belt from the Mediterranean region, through the Himalayas and into Burma.
The earthquakes here, which are associated with a long and complex mountain belt, are generally shallow and generated primarily by compressive stresses.
The final zone of seismic activity is confined to relatively small areas within the continents and is characterized by shallow earthquakes which are not associated with marked volcanic activity.
The most notable example is the famous San Andreas Fault Zone of California, where crustal movement involves large lateral displacements.
2.3.4 Sea-floor spreading
The idea that the polarity of the Earth's magnetic field has reversed through geological time was proposed early this century by Brunhes in France and Matuyama in Japan.
Measurements of remanent magnetism in a variety of volcanic rocks found on the continents had shown that some were magnetized in the opposite direction to the Earth's present magnetic field.
Further data on these geomagnetic reversals were collected and by the mid-1960s a chronology of reversals had been established through the radiometric dating of a large number of samples from all over the world.
The resulting detailed palaeomagnetic record showed that during the past 4 Ma the average duration of ‘normal’ fields (like the present one) had been about 420 ka and that of ‘reversed’fields a little longer (about 480 ka).
Periods of a particular polarity are termed epochs, with shorter phases of opposite magnetization within these being referred to as events.
Geophysical surveys during the late 1950s involving the measurement of the magnetic characteristics of the crust of the ocean floor indicated the presence of anomalous linear patterns (Fig. 2.12).
These magnetic anomalies were found to be hundreds of kilometres long and typically 20–30 km across, and it initially seemed that they were caused by alternating bands of weakly and strongly magnetized rocks.
No convincing explanation was initially produced to explain these features.
In 1962 H. H. Hess, of Princeton University in the USA, published a radical explanation for much of the geological data that had been accumulating over the previous decade or so.
This proposed that mid-oceanic ridges represent regions where new oceanic crust is being generated by the upwelling of hot mantle material.
He suggested that this new crust spreads laterally away from these ridges until it reaches an island arc or mountain belt where it descends into the mantle along the adjacent oceanic trench.
This  ‘conveyor belt’ view of the oceanic crust, which owed something to the earlier ideas of Holmes, was termed seafloor spreading by Dietz, another American geologist.
In 1963 Vine and Matthews, two Cambridge geophysicists, took up the idea of sea-floor spreading and linked it with data on the palaeomagnetic anomalies observed along mid-oceanic ridges (Fig. 2.12).
They proposed that these anomalies, which seemed to be arranged symmetrically on either side of, and roughly parallel with, the ridge crest, were not a result of variations in the intensity of magnetization, as earlier suggested, but rather a consequence of the direction of magnetization.
Positive anomalies represented underlying rocks with normal polarity, negative anomalies those with reversed polarity.
As new crust emerged at mid-oceanic ridges, they suggested, it became magnetized with the polarity of the prevailing magnetic field (Fig. 2.13).
Subsequently the widths of the linear magnetic zones were related to the duration of each successive epoch of normal and reversed polarity on the assumption that the ocean floor spreads at a constant rate away from mid-oceanic ridges.
The close relationship observed between the width of each magnetic anomaly and the corresponding time scale of magnetic reversals, which by now had been accurately established by the radiometric dating of terrestrial lavas, convinced many earth scientists of the reality of sea-floor spreading.
Further corroborative evidence was provided by the palaeomagnetic record of ocean sediments containing particles of iron-rich minerals which lay on the basaltic oceanic crust.
When the patterns of magnetic anomalies across mid-oceanic ridges were mapped out it was noticed that in several cases the parallel bands of similarly magnetized crust were broken by numerous offsets or displacements which seemed to be aligned approximately at right angles to the axis of the ridge.
Some of these displacements were very large, amounting to 1000km or more in places.
It appeared that these offsets marked some kind of lateral movement between adjacent sections of oceanic crust.
In 1965 J. T. Wilson of the University of Toronto proposed that these were not simple strike-slip faults, as had been previously suggested, but were an entirely new variety, which he termed a transform fault (Fig. 2.13).
During the late 1960s considerable effort was invested in establishing the history of the ocean floor, much of this involving the activities of the Deep Sea Drilling Project.
The chronology of geomagnetic reversals was extended back into the Mesozoic and this together with the dating of ocean floor sediments enabled the age of large areas of oceanic crust to be determined.
Little was found to be more than 150 Ma old.
2.4 Plate tectonics
By the late 1960s a number of lines of evidence were being brought together into a new, radical model of global tectonics.
Palaeomagnetic studies on the continents had indicated that continental drift had, in fact, occurred, while more detailed information on the Earth's crustal and sub-crustal structure had led many to accept the existence of a relatively mobile zone within the mantle (the asthenosphere).
Detailed mapping of the mid-oceanic ridges, together with magnetic and seismic surveys, had indicated that these were zones of crustal tension where new crust was being extruded from the mantle below.
The history of polarity reversals of the Earth's magnetic field recorded in this newly generated crust as it cooled indicated that, once formed, it moved away from ridges towards oceanic trenches.
On the basis of the much more complete seismic data available by the late 196()s it was being suggested that the inclined zone of seismicity (the Wadati-Benioff zone) associated with island arcs and active continental margin mountain belts could be explained by the existence of a slab of lithosphere plunging down into the mantle.
Analysis of motions associated with earthquakes generated in the Wadati-Benioff zone suggested that lithosphere was indeed moving downwards into the mantle along what became termed subduction zones.
This supported Hess's idea of crustal formation along mid-oceanic ridges and its reabsorption or subduction, into the mantle below oceanic trenches.
All these ideas were incorporated into the theory of plate tectonics which was more or less separately developed by a number of workers at about the same time in the late 1960s.
The outer layer of the Earth was seen as consisting of a rigid lithosphere, composed of several ‘plates’, which moved over the underlying more mobile asthenosphere.
Sea-floor spreading and continental drift were seen as involving these lithospheric plates rather than just oceanic or continental crust.
2.4.1 Outline of the plate tectonics model
The plate tectonics model proposes that the Earth's surface  comprises seven major, and at least a dozen minor, lithospheric plates composed of the crust and the upper, more rigid, part of the mantle (Fig. 2.14).
These plates are constantly in motion with respect to one another and to the Earth's axis of rotation, and the motion of one plate influences the movement of others.
Rates of movement range up to 100 mm a- 1 (100 km Ma- 1) and average around 70 mm a- 1 (70 km Ma- 1).
Much, though not all, of the Earth's tectonic, volcanic and seismic activity is directly or indirectly associated with movement between neighbouring plates.
The narrow zone marking the relative movement between two plates, which in most cases is fairly clearly demarcated by seismic activity, is termed a plate boundary, with the peripheral region adjacent to this boundary being referred to as a plate margin.
There are three types of plate boundary.
At a divergent boundary, such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, new crust is formed and attached to the upper part of adjoining lithospheric plates while new upper mantle is accreted to the lower part.
Plate movement is laterally away from the spreading ridge.
At a convergent boundary, such as the western coast of South America, two plates are in motion towards each other, with one plate slipping down below the other along a subduction zone.
The surface area of a plate is reduced at a subduction zone whereas it is increased along a spreading ridge.
Along a transform boundary, two plates simply move laterally past each other along a transform fault without any major element of divergence or convergence.
The most famous example of this kind of boundary is the San Andreas Fault System in California, USA.
At some localities three plates may come into contact.
Such a boundary is known as a triple junction, an example being the junction of the Pacific, Nazca and Cocos Plates (Fig. 2.14).
The upper layer of a plate is composed of either oceanic or continental crust or both.
There is a fundamental difference between the behaviour of lithosphere capped with oceanic crust (oceanic lithosphere) and that covered with continental crust (continental lithosphere) since only oceanic lithosphere can be generated at mid-oceanic ridges and subducted at oceanic trenches.
Oceanic lithosphere has a mean density rather close to that of the immediately underlying asthenosphere.
When newly formed along mid-oceanic ridges it is hot and thin and it probably has a slightly lower density.
However, as oceanic lithosphere ages, cools and thickens it becomes more dense than the asthenosphere and rests upon it in an unstable state.
Along zones of plate convergence, especially where these occur along the margins — of continents (such as along the west coast of South America), buckling of the oceanic lithosphere causes it to founder and sink into the underlying asthenosphere, thereby forming a subduction zone.
Alternatively, it seems possible that old, cold and thick oceanic lithosphere can attain a density sufficient for it to subside spontaneously into the asthenosphere.
This may have occurred in the western Pacific Ocean where the age of the lithosphere presently being subducted indicates that cooling over a period of about 180 200 Ma is required for this process of spontaneous subduction to occur.
By contrast continental lithosphere has a significantly lower mean density than oceanic lithosphere and its buoyancy with respect to the asthenosphere prevents all but limited subduction.
The two fundamental assumptions underlying the plate tectonics model are that the surface area of the Earth has not changed significantly with respect to the rate of generation of new oceanic crust, and that there is a lack of internal deformation within plates compared to the relative motion between them.
If the Earth's surface area has increased significantly, sea-floor spreading could occur without associated plate subduction, the rate of crustal formation at mid-oceanic ridges matching the increase in surface area.
There are, however, good reasons to believe that the Earth's radius has not increased significantly during the past 500 Ma or so.
Other evidence supports the idea of a lack of major deformation within plates, at least over plates composed of oceanic lithosphere.
Oceanic crust has a layered structure which shows remarkably little disturbance and this would not be the case if significant deformation had occurred.
In order for plates to behave in the manner proposed the lithosphere of which they are composed must be sufficiently rigid compared with the underlying asthenosphere for stress to be transmitted from one side to the other.
If this were not the case significant deformation would occur within plates rather than being concentrated along plate margins.
The movements of plates would be greatly complicated if they were to undergo significant internal deformation rather than acting as thin but rigid caps in motion around a sphere.
It is quite clear, however, that marked deformation does in fact occur within some continental regions which are thousands of kilometres away from the nearest plate boundary.
In the remainder of this book we will be using plate tectonics as a framework for the interpretation of the Earth's large-scale topographic features.
As will become apparent, however, there are several instances where it will be necessary to modify the basic model outlined in this chapter.
2.4.2 Classification of plate boundaries
In Table 2.3 each form of plate boundary is classified F according to the type of interacting lithosphere involved.
The most well-defined divergent boundaries are associated with mid-oceanic ridges, but they may also occur in an incipient form within continents as rift valleys comprising linear systems of faults associated with tension in the crust.
Some rift valleys are analogous to mid-oceanic ridges in  experiencing shallow earthquakes and volcanicity.
Convergent boundaries between oceanic lithosphere are marked by an oceanic trench, a volcanic island arc and a Wadati-Benioff zone.
Subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath continental lithosphere is also associated with a trench and an inclined zone of seismicity, but in this case volcanic activity occurs within the active mountain belt located on the continental lithosphere fringing the trench.
Where two continents collide neither experiences significant subduction but some crustal thickening occurs and a mountain belt is formed.
Transform boundaries, marked by transform faults, occur both as fracture zones along mid-oceanic ridges and as strike-slip fault zones within continental lithosphere.
Plate movements can be oblique as well as simply divergent, convergent or transform.
Oblique divergence is most commonly accommodated by transform offsets along a mid-oceanic ridge crest, while oblique convergence is resolved by the complex adjustment of lithospheric fragments along the plate boundary.
2.4.3 Plate motion
Plates vary greatly in area (Fig.2.14).
The Pacific Plate, for instance, underlies almost the whole Pacific Ocean whereas a number of minor plates within the continents have an area of less than 1x106km 2 .
Except where subduction zones lie adjacent to mountain belts on continental margins, plate boundaries do not coincide with continental coastlines.
Many continental margins are not separated by subduction zones from the divergent boundaries marked by mid-oceanic ridges.
For example, apart from its northern margin along the Mediterranean Sea, the African Plate is surrounded by divergent or transform boundaries.
This means that it must be growing in area and that, consequently, the total area of all the other plates must be declining if the ‘constant area’ assumption of plate tectonics is to be satisfied.
Moreover, since sea-floor spreading is taking place from both the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and the Carlsberg Ridge (in the Indian Ocean), one or both of these ridges must be experiencing movement with respect to the Earth's rotational axis.
If plates are regarded as rigid caps involved in relative motion around a sphere their movement can be analysed in terms of specific geometric controls.
In Figure 2.15A we can imagine a segment of the Earth's surface (ABE) which has split into two, the two halves (ABC and ADE) remaining in contact only at point A. Point A is the pole of rotation about which movement occurs, and the separation of originally adjacent points on each segment occurs along small circles about this point.
If we consider irregularly shaped areas on the sphere (X and Y), rather than the regular segments, these can be seen to move apart in such a way that their motion can similarly be described with respect to the same pole of rotation at A. The effect is clearly illustrated in the alignment of transform faults which mark the off-sets along either side of divergent plate boundaries (Fig. 2.15B).
These represent segments of small circles concentric about the pole of rotation with respect to which the diverging plates are moving.
A consequence of this is that the rate of spreading along a ridge will be a function of the sine of the angular distance from the pole of rotation; the greater the distance from the pole of rotation: the greater the rate of spreading (up to an angle of 90).
At convergent boundaries the rate of plate subduction is determined in a similar way.
By comparing the alignments of transform faults, the poles of rotation of the major plates have now been established.
Moreover, by relating this information to data on spreading rates, the directions of relative plate motions derived from the analysis of earthquakes, and palaeomagnetic evidence of continental palaeolatitudes, it has been possible to establish the direction and speed of present-day plate motions and what is probably a fairly accurate history of movements over the past 200 Ma or so (Fig. 2.16).
Since the mid-1980s a direct means of measuring present rates and directions of plate motion has become available.
This technique, known as very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI), can determine with great accuracy the distance between two points on the Earth's surface by using radio telescopes.
The measurement is derived from the very small difference in the time of arrival of signals received at different telescopes from a distant radio source (usually a quasar).
The accuracy of this technique has been steadily improving and measurements can now be made over thousands of kilometres to an accuracy of a few millimetres.
Preliminary results have confirmed that plates are moving in the directions, and at the rates, indicated by already acquired geophysical data.
These results are important for plate tectonic theory because they show that the Earth is not currently expanding as has been suggested by a small minority of earth scientists, at least not at a rate which is significant compared with rates of plate motion.
The 1990s will see further refinements to these measurements as the Global Positioning System becomes fully   operational.
This method of measuring distances between points on the Earth's surface is similar to VLBI but uses signals from Earth-orbiting satellites rather than extraterrestrial radio sources.
2.4.4 Mechanisms of plate movement
In spite of the wide range of supporting evidence for the existence of plate tectonics the question of what causes plates to move has yet to be fully resolved.
One idea is that lateral flow in the asthenosphere, arising from convection in the mantle, drags along the overlying lithosphere (Fig. 2.1 7(A-C).
Convection currents rise and diverge below mid-oceanic ridges and converge and descend along subduction zones.
Convection occurs when too much heat is present at depth to be conveyed upwards solely by   thermal conduction.
Temperatures increase and material begins to rise since it is less dense than the surrounding medium: cooler, denser material moves laterally at depth to take its place.
If, however, the medium is too viscous convection will be inhibited, or even prevented altogether.
Although our knowledge of the physical properties of the Earth's interior is at present far from complete, most geophysicists now support the idea that convection does in fact occur in the mantle; whether this convection is solely, or even primarily, responsible for plate movement is another matter.
Most of the dispute about the nature of convection within the Earth revolves around whether the circulation pattern involves all, or only part, of the mantle.
On the basis of certain assumptions about the chemical heterogeneity of the mantle and a postulated marked increase in viscosity with   depth, it has been argued that convection would be confined to the asthenosphere, that is to a maximum depth of about 300 km (Fig. 2.1 7(A)).
Some researchers, however, have suggested that 70() km may represent the lower limit of convection (Fig. 2.17(B)).
Recently the idea of whole-mantle convection has gained support, largely as a result of new estimates of the viscosity of the mantle below the asthenosphere.
It has been suggested that a hot layer at the core-mantle boundary, generated by convection in the mobile outer core, produces a circulating system extending up through the entire mantle (Fig. 2.17(C)).
An important point is that these large-scale convection cells fit in with the dimensions of plates.
Most convection models predict that convection cells have similar horizontal and vertical dimensions, although arguments have been presented against this idea.
As some plates have horizontal dimensions of thousands of kilometres it has been argued that convection cells of equivalent horizontal and vertical dimensions would be required to move them.
An alternative view is that convection involves a two-scale pattern consisting of large-scale convection in the upper mantle responsible tor plate movement superimposed on smaller-scale convection cells confined to the topmost 650 km of the mantle.
Although convection in the mantle has attracted considerable support as a likely cause of plate motion, it has  also been argued that flow in the asthenosphere may simply be a consequence of the drag exerted by the movement of overlying plates.
Such movement may be caused by at least three different mechanisms.
The injection of lava along mid-oceanic ridges, for instance, could push the adjacent plates apart and thereby contribute to plate motion (Fig. 2.17(D)).
Perhaps more significant is the thickening of oceanic lithosphere as it moves away from mid-oceanic ridges.
Such a configuration would tend to make a plate slide under the force of gravity downwards from a mid-oceanic ridge towards a subduction zone (Fig. 2.17(E)).
This would drag the underlying asthenosphere along and promote a compensatory upward movement within the mantle under mid-oceanic ridges.
Cool, thick, old oceanic lithosphere is gravitationally unstable as it is generally denser than the asthenosphere over which it lies.
Consequently a cold, dense lithospheric slab descending up to 700 km into the mantle at a subduction zone will tend to pull the remainder of the plate with it (Fig. 2.17(F)).
The low conductivity of lithosphere contributes to this effect, it being calculated that the centre of a descending lithospheric slab may be 1000 C cooler than the surrounding mantle at a depth of 400 km.
Warming occurs so slowly that the descending lithosphere retains its high density characteristics for a very long time.
Although there is still disagreement as to the relative significance of the various possible mechanisms of plate motion, recent assessments have indicated that the pull of descending lithospheric slabs is the predominant driving force.
This interpretation is supported by the relationship observed between the rate of movement of individual plates and the length of subduction zones along their margins.
Those attached to long subduction zones, such as the Pacific Plate, have been moving at comparatively high velocities (60–90 mm a- 1 ), whereas plates lacking extensive subducting boundaries have experienced slower rates of movement (below 40 mm a-1).
Further reading
Since the intention of this chapter has been to provide an introduction to global tectonics and the major elements of the Earth's morphology and structure, the suggested reading is mainly limited to texts which will be useful in providing more details on these topics.
For those readers with little or no background in geology there are a number of excellent introductory texts.
Two of the best are those by Press and Siever (1986) and Skinner and Porter (1987).
A more advanced coverage of the Earth's internal structure is provided by Brown and Mussett (1981) while Turcotte and Schubert (1982) give a thorough quantitative grounding in tectonic processes.
A continent-by-continent survey of the Earth's major morphological features is to be found in the book by King (1967)(although its treatment of tectonic processes and landform development has been superseded by more recent research).
Cogley (1984, 1985) and Harrison et al.(1983) contain detailed analyses of continental hypsometry.
An accessible summary of the properties of the mantle is provided by McKenzie (1983), while Pollack and Chapman (1977) discuss the use of heat flow data in the estimation of global variations in the thickness of the lithosphere.
A much more advanced treatment of the Earth's interior with particular reference to isostasy is to be found in the conference proceedings edited by Morner (1980).
The developments which led to the formulation of the plate tectonics model are charted in the collection of original articles edited by Cox (1973).
This incorporates all the classic papers including those by Hess, Vine and Matthews, and Wilson.
Clear introductions to each topic make this an ideal starting point for those interested in following the birth of plate tectonics.
A briefer historical survey is provided by Hallam (1973) who has also written an assessment of Wegener's pioneering contribution (Hallam, 1975).
For those with a deeper interest in the history of the plate tectonics revolution Le Grand (1988) is an important source.
An excellent guide to the study of plate motions, which has a strong practical bias, is that by Cox and Hart (1986).
There are a number of reconstructions of past continental movements available but the series of maps produced by Smith et al.(1981) is particularly useful.
The application of the plate tectonics model to problems of Earth structure and topography are considered in the following two chapters and guidance to further reading will be found there.
However, for those wanting a fuller account of the mechanisms of plate movement, McKenzie and Richter (1976) discuss the possibility of two scales of convection while Boss (1983) reviews research on the convection question.
The book edited by Davies and Runcom (1980) contains a number of papers on the various suggested mechanisms.
Finally, Van Andel (1984) and Molnar (1988) present brief but thought-provoking assessments of the current status of plate tectonics theory and highlight the remaining problems of the model particularly when applied to the continents.
Landforms and tectonics of plate margins
3.1 Convergent plate margins: general characteristics
The fundamental types of landform created at convergent plate margins are orogens and island arcs.
Two distinct mechanisms are responsible for their development into significant morphological features.
One involves collision and occurs where the motion of two plates towards each other brings into contact two continents, a continent and an island arc or two island arcs.
The other mechanism involves the effects of heating associated with plate subduction.
Such consumption of lithosphere can take the form of either subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath a plate capped by continental crust or the subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath a second oceanic plate.
The subduction of oceanic lithosphere is a steady-state process in that it can continue until a continent or island arc arrives at the subduction zone.
The west coast of South America provides an example of oceanic lithosphere subduction (Nazca Plate) beneath continental lithosphere.
The distinction between steady-state subduction and plate collision at convergent boundaries is due to the resistance of continental crust and island arcs to subduction, although it is possible that the latter can be subducted.
The collision of two continents leads to the eventual cessation of subduction, whereas other types of collision may cause a change in the location of the subduction zone.
The main types of convergent plate margin and their possible modes of development are summarized in Table 3.1.
They are classified into steady-state and collision margins and then further subdivided according to the nature of the crust on the interacting plates, the mode of plate interaction and the type of orogen or island arc formed.
Also listed are possible courses of subsequent development for each margin subtype.
3.1.1 Steady-state margins
Figure 3.1 illustrates the two types of steady-state margin.
Where oceanic lithosphere is subducted beneath another oceanic part of a plate the associated volcanic activity and produce an intra-oceanic island arc.
These are particularly extensively developed in the western Pacific Ocean.
Their typical arcuate plan form is probably due to the relationship between the angle of subduction and the Earth's curvature.
Some idea of the effect can be gained by depressing the surface of a table tennis ball with the thumb.
Subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath a plate carrying continental crust gives rise to a continental-margin orogen.
The Andes provide an excellent example and this type of orogen is sometimes referred to as an Andean type or Cordilleran type.
However, such an orogen may also form a continental-margin island arc if the continental crust behind the arc is below sea level.
This is the case with the Sumatra-Java part of the Sunda Arc in the East Indies.
3.1.2 Collision margins
A collision margin can take a number of forms, depending on the characteristics of the interacting plate boundaries.
The first type involves the collision of two continents which gives rise to an intercontinental collision orogen (Fig. 3.2), the most notable example of which are the Himalayas.
This type must begin with a continental-margin orogen on the overriding plate and be transformed into an intercontinental collision orogen when continental crust on the underthrusting plate reaches the subduction zone.
The changes experienced by  the leading edge of the continent on the subducted plate are dramatic since there is a conversion from a ‘passive’ continental margin (see Chapter 4) to an active plate boundary.
Eventually the subduction zone is converted into a suture zone as the two continental blocks are welded together.
A second type of collision involves the migration of an intra-oceanic island arc towards a subduction zone bounded by continental crust (Fig. 3.3).
Unless the island arc is subducted it will be accreted to the continental-margin orogen previously formed along the edge of the continent.
Subduction along the continental margin would eventually cease, but it would probably continue along the outer edge of the island arc as oceanic lithosphere would still be available for subduction there.
The resulting orogen would be a modified continental margin type.
Where a continent moves towards a subduction zone associated with an intra-oceanic island arc the consequences are rather different because of the resistance of continental crust to significant subduction.
The interaction can be accommodated in two ways (Fig. 3.4).
A possible example of such a continent — island arc collision is provided by northern New Guinea.
The collision of intra-oceanic arcs can also take two forms (Fig. 3.5).
Some of these plate boundary configurations and stages of development are largely conjectural since clear examples do not exist at the present day.
There is, for example, uncertainty as to whether island arcs can be subducted and whether the direction of subduction can be reversed, as illustrated in Figure 3.4.
3.2 Intra — oceanic island arcs
There are about 20 intra-oceanic island arcs located along subduction zones at the present day, the great majority being found in the western Pacific Ocean (Fig. 3.6).
Such volcanic island arcs must be distinguished from other volcanic chains, such as the Hawaiian Islands, which are located far from plate boundaries and have a different origin (see Section 4.2.1).
3.2.1 General characteristics and formation
At a subduction zone the downgoing oceanic lithosphere finds its topographic expression in the trench formed on the frontal side of the island arc (Fig. 3.7).
Much of the veneer of sediments resting on the oceanic crust of the downgoing plate will not be subducted since it is not firmly attached to the underlying crust and because it is not sufficiently dense to sink of its own accord into the asthenosphere.
Consequently it either accumulates in the trench or is scraped off the downgoing plate and forms wedges of sediment on the inner (arc side) of the trench.
As the plate descends frictional heat is generated between its upper surface and the surrounding mantle.
Heating probably begins at quite shallow depths but because the downgoing plate is cold virtually all of this heat is initially absorbed.
This is why low heat flows are recorded at the surface immediately behind the trench (Fig. 3.7).
At a depth of about 100km melting begins to occur along the edge of the subducted lithosphere and heat begins to be transferred upwards by rising pockets of magma.
The dramatic surface expression of this marked increase in heat flow is the formation of volcanoes along the arc although relief is also generated by the emplacement of large igneous intrusions (see Section 5.1) in the underlying crust.
The most common form of volcanic activity in this zone is the eruption of andesitic lavas, although there is a broad compositional range from basalt to rhyolite.
Fairly consistent patterns are evident in the location of the volcanic activity with respect to the fringing trench.
The volcanoes tend to be located between 80 and 150 km vertically above the Wadati-Benioff zone marking the position of the downgoing lithosphere.
This is related to the angle of subduction and the depth at which melting of the subducted lithosphere becomes significant.
With typical angles of subduction of 30–50° this means that there is a gap of some 75–175km between the trench and the arc of volcanoes.
The active volcanic belt may consist of a single chain of volcanoes or form a broad belt up to 150 km in width.
At any one time, however, volcanic activity is generally confined to a zone no more than 50 km across.
If we
3.2.2 Morphological and structural elements
If we look at intra-oceanic island arcs in more detail it is possible to identify several major morphological and structural elements that are common to many (Fig. 3.7).
The fundamental division is into the forearc, volcanic-arc and back-arc zones.
Beginning in the forearc zone and moving towards the volcanic arc the first feature encountered is the trench which rises to the outer-arc ridge.
This is located over the subduction zone and consists largely of thrust sheets of sediment and slivers of oceanic crust, known as ophiolite, emplaced by the subducted plate.
The outer-arc ridge is usually a submarine feature but in a few cases, such as Barbados in the West Indies and Middleton Island in the Aleutian Arc in Alaska, parts of it are exposed above sea level.
Between the outer-arc ridge and the volcanic arc a forearc basin may be formed.
The volcanic-arc zone itself may consist of two elements: the active volcanic arc and an inactive frontal arc located on its forearc side and composed of older volcanic rocks.
The whole entity is sometimes referred to as a magmatic arc.
In most island arcs only a relatively small proportion of the individual volcanoes actually rise above sea level.
A complicated pattern of basins and ridges hind the volcanic arc.
This back-arc zone may of a large marginal basin separating the intra-oceanic island arc from an adjacent continent, or it may be a more complex feature containing one or more remnant arcs, separated from the volcanic arc and each other by interarc basins.
All these structures are submarine.
A number of processes have been proposed to explain the formation of back-arc basins but no one mechanism seems to be applicable to all cases.
One favoured process is known as back-arc spreading and this has been applied to several such basins.
Japan, for example, is composed of relatively thick continental-type crust, some of it quite old (Early Palaeozoic), rather than the more usual modified oceanic crust of most other intra-oceanic island arcs.
This is difficult to explain unless Japan has been detached from the eastern margin of the Eurasian continent and has migrated eastwards.
The process thought to be responsible is broadly analogous to sea-floor spreading along mid-oceanic ridges.
Indeed, linear magnetic anomalies have been identified behind a number of island arcs; those behind the Scotia Arc in the southern Atlantic Ocean, for instance, indicate that spreading has occurred here over the past 7–8 Ma.
Back-arc spreading may be initiated within the volcanic arc because the high heat flux from below weakens the lithosphere.
If the lithosphere of the back-arc zone has a component of motion away from the volcanic arc relative to the underlying asthenosphere the arc may be split apart.
This eventually leads to the creation of a remnant arc from an active volcanic arc.
3.3 Continental-margin orogens and continental-margin island arcs
Continental-margin orogens and continental-margin island arcs are broadly similar to intra-oceanic island arcs in their tectonic setting.
The differences between them arise from the presence of continental crust on the margin of the overriding plate.
This influences not only the nature of volcanic activity and landforms produced but also the processes tending to initiate back-arc spreading behind the volcanic arc.
Continental-margin orogens are found along the western edge of South America (the Andes) and along part of the west coast of North America (the Cascade Mountains of Oregon and Washington, USA.).
The western part of the Sunda Arc in the East Indies is an example of a continental-margin island arc since its back-arc zone comprises drowned continental crust (the Sunda Shelf).
As with an intra-oceanic island arc the oceanward side of a continental-margin orogen is marked by an oceanic trench associated with the downgoing oceanic lithosphere (Fig. 3.8).
An outer-arc ridge, formed of wedges of deformed oceanic sediment and slivers of oceanic crust in addition to sediment originating from the adjacent continent, may undergo extensive vertical development and in some cases rise above sea level.
The Mentawai Islands off the west coast of Sumatra represent the highest parts of the outer-arc ridge of the Sunda Arc and this structure can be traced northwards as far as the Indoburman Ranges in Burma (Fig. 3.9).
Parts of the coastal ranges of Mexico, Peru and Chile similarly represent outer-arc ridges.
Volcanicity and magma emplacement, largely in  the form of large granite intrusions, characterize the volcanic arc.
This is usually located between about 175 and 275 km from the trench, a rather greater distance than is typically the case with intra-oceanic island arcs.
The sequence of continental-margin orogen development begins with the subduction of oceanic lithosphere at, or close to, a continental margin.
Frictional heat generated along the upper edge of the underthrusting lithospheric slab at depths exceeding 100km leads to the upwelling of magma in an expanding dome within the growing orogenic belt which eventually rises above sea level.
As the elevation of the orogen increases, the presence of hot, mobile rock within its core promotes gravitational spreading and sliding (see Section 7.3) through upwelling and lateral flowage into the more rigid outer crust.
Eventually granite intrusions are emplaced at high levels within the mountain mass and volcanic activity develops.
Extensive stretching of the crust above these granite intrusions produces a faulted terrain with active volcanoes.
Crustal thickening, due in large measure to the vast volume of granite emplaced above the subduction zone, is considerable in some continental-margin orogens.
For instance, crust up to at least 70 km thick occurs below parts of the Andes.
Some continental-margin orogens show evidence of deformation attributable to contraction in the back-arc region.
They appear to be jammed against the adjacent cratonic block and are known as contracted continental-margin orogens.
In other orogens, such as the coastal ranges of the north-west USA, this feature is absent and the term non-contracted continental-margin orogen is applied.
In contracted continental-margin orogens the back-arc region, known as a retroarc basin, is separated from the rear of the volcanic arc by a system of down-thrusted and folded masses of rock (forming a back-arc fold-thrust belt)(Fig. 3.8).
These features develop if the back-arc lithosphere behind the orogen is moving towards it relative to the underlying asthenosphere, since this convergence will probably lead to partial subduction of the back-arc lithosphere.
As the lithosphere carrying the rigid cratonic crust moves towards, and underthrusts, the continental-margin orogen, the stripping of its sedimentary cover gives rise to the back-arc fold-thrust belt.
This part of continental-margin orogens can therefore be viewed as a kind of subduction zone, albeit one that involves orders of magnitude less convergence that oceanic trench subduction zones.
The presence of anomalously thin crust, widespread extensional faulting and high rates of heat flow has led some researchers to interpret the Basin and Range Province of the western USA and northern Mexico as an area of back-arc spreading developed on continental crust behind the subduction zone along the Pacific coast.
The region, which as a whole has been elevated by 1000–2000 m, has a fault-generated relief of up to 4000 m comprising uplifted mountain blocks and intervening basins (Fig. 3.10).
Such back-arc spreading is analogous to that encountered behind some intra-oceanic island arcs.
However, the Pacific-North American plate boundary has undergone significant changes over the past few million years with the subduction of part of the East Pacific Rise spreading ridge and the evolution of a predominantly transform margin.
It is possible that these changes have been critical in generating the considerable crustal extension (possibly up to 100 per cent) calculated for the Basin and Range Province.
3.3.1 The Andes
3.3.1.1 General characteristics
The Andes constitute by far the most spectacular present-day example of a continental-margin orogen.
Stretching from the Toco Peninsula of Trinidad in the north to Tierra del Fuego in the south, they form a varied and complex mountain system some 9000 km long with elevations in excess of 5000m.
Three major divisions can be recognized (Fig. 3.11)(1) the Southern (Patagonian) Andes, extending from Tierra del Fuego northwards to the Gulf of Penas at latitude 47°S where the actively spreading Chile Ridge extends westwards into the Pacific;(2) the Central (Chilean-Peruvian) Andes reaching from the Gulf of Penas northwards to the Amotape cross structure at the Peru-Ecuador border where the northwestern trend of the mountain belt changes to a northeasterly orientation; and (3) the northern (Colombian-Venezuelan) Andes, extending from the Amotape cross structure northwards and then eastwards to eventually link with the Caribbean Arc.
Since the development of the plate tectonics model, the Andes have sometimes been regarded as representing a classic example of the orogenic consequences of the subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath an overriding continental plate.
This, however, is an over-simplified view as the current phase of uplift and volcanicity represents only the most recent episode in a complex history stretching back to the Mesozoic; moreover, the history of this vast mountain system differs greatly from one part to another.
In the range as a whole block faulting is significant and vertical movements predominate over thrusting and other effects involving laterally induced stress.
Any plate tectonics model of the Andes must in fact account for the uplift essentially in terms of vertical tectonics.
Another feature which has to be explained is the emplacement of massive granite intrusions of various ages which cover about 464 000 km 2 (about 15 per cent) of the surface of the range; this probably represents a volume in excess of 2x106km 3 — the greatest mass of granite intrusions on Earth.
They are concentrated in the Coastal Cordillera of the central Andes but also occur in the High Cordillera (Fig. 3.11).
Volcanic activity is localized within the range; in the high plateaus of the central Andes in the border area of Chile, Argentina and Bolivia where the range reaches its greatest breadth, layers of lithified volcanic ash from 500 to 1500m thick produced by explosive rhyolitic eruptions, cover an area in excess of 200 000 km 2 .
Quaternary lavas have erupted through these deposits to form over 900 volcanoes ranging in elevation from 5000 to 7000m (Fig. 3.12).:
3.3.1.2 Evolution of the central Andes
In the central Andes there has probably been more or less continuous subduction since the Mesozoic.
Consumption of the Nazca Plate along the nascent Peru-Chile Trench had begun by at least the Late Triassic — Early Jurassic and marked the conversion of the previously ‘passive’ continental margin (see Chapter 4) of western South America to an active convergent plate boundary (Fig. 3.13 (A) and (B)).
The start of subduction may have been associated with the initiation of spreading on the East Pacific Rise, but in any case it certainly preceded the splitting of South America away from Africa 135–140 Ma ago.
This early phase of plate interaction was probably marked by the development of a volcanic arc off the north Chile coast and was apparently contemporaneous with minor emplacement of granite intrusions in the Eastern Cordillera.
A major episode of mountain building occurred in the Late Cretaceous-Early Cenozoic to the east of the earlier orogeny (Fig. 3.13(C)).
This was the major period of emplacement of granite intrusions which resulted in the growth of the Western Cordillera.
A further consequence of this large addition of granite to the core of the mountain mass was the transmission of compressive stresses to the east where the Eastern Cordillera were folded and uplifted.
Between these two ranges a large structural basin was created which now forms the high plateau of the Altiplano.
The modem phase of orogeny began in the Miocene with volcanism and the further emplacement of granite intrusions.
A more active period of igneous activity in the Pliocene — Quatemary, involving massive emplacements of magma, caused intense folding and the formation of large thrust sheets in the Eastern Cordillera.
A series of high, narrow ranges was formed as the Eastern Cordillera were pressed against the resistant block of the Brazilian Shield to the east (Fig. 3.13 (D)).
This folded and thrusted belt probably represents the partial subduction of the western fringe of the Brazilian Shield, and the major change of the orientation of the Andes at the Amotape cross structure seems to be the result of the movement of separate basement blocks in the back-arc zone.
There appears to be a clear distinction between the causes of uplift on the western and eastern sides of the central Andes.
In the Western Cordillera evidence of tensional deformation indicates that crustal stretching has been associated with the emplacement of magma and volcanic activity related to subduction zone melting.
In the Eastern Cordillera, however, compressional stresses apparently generated by the growth of the volcanic arc to the west have caused crustal shortening, and uplift here is attributable to folding, thrusting and crustal thickening.
Nevertheless, for the Andes as a whole, compressive stresses arising from plate convergence have not been the major cause of uplift.
3.3.2 The Sunda Arc
The islands which make up the East Indies archipelago form a region of fascinating complexity.
For the present, however, we will confine our attention to the Sunda Arc comprising Sumatra, Java and the chain of smaller islands extending eastwards as far as longitude 123°E (Fig. 3.14).
To the west of this point oceanic lithosphere of the Indian Plate is currently being subducted below the Sunda Arc but to the east the Arc is in collision with the continental shelf of northern Australia (this is marked on Figure 3.14).
There is thus a transition from a steady-state boundary in the west to a collision boundary in the east.
Since the western part of the Sunda Arc is located on the edge of a block of continental crust (at present largely below sea level) it is a continental-margin island arc rather than an intra-oceanic island arc.
Across the Sunda Arc there is a distinct sequence of oceanic trench, outer-arc ridge, forearc basin, volcanic-arc and back-arc zone (Fig. 3.9).
The volcanic arc is located about 125km above the Wadati-Benioff zone representing the seismic activity along the downgoing Indian Plate.
This maintains a shallow angle of subduction beneath the outer arc but steepens below the main volcanic arc to about 60°.
Beneath Sumatra the subduction zone does not exceed a depth of 200 km, but north of Java it reaches 400 km and north of Flores, at the extreme eastern end of the zone of  steady-state subduction, it attains a depth of 700 km.
Sumatra is composed of old, thick continental crust comprising volcanic rocks of Permian, Cretaceous and Cenozoic age.
Recent volcanic rocks, including extensive sheets of volcanic ash, are predominantly acidic and intermediate in composition since the magmas have risen through continental crust.
By contrast in Java, where the crust is relatively young and thin, the volcanic rocks are mostly intermediate in composition and the large ash sheets indicative of highly explosive eruptions are scarce (see Chapter 5).
The outer-arc ridge of the Sunda Arc is of particular morphological significance.
Although it is from 1 to 3 km below sea level off Java, along most of the coast of Sumatra parts of it are exposed as the Mentawai and other islands (Figs 3.9 and 3.14).
The height of the ridge is apparently related to the amount of sediment being moved into the adjacent subduction zone where lithosphere is being subducted at a rate of about 65 mm a- 1 .
Large quantities of sediment are present on the ocean floor off Sumatra because of its position with respect to the Bengal Fan which represents the vast submarine extension of the Ganges delta on the Indian subcontinent some 2000 km to the north (Fig. 3.9).
3.4 Intercontinental collision orogens
Although crustal collisions may involve intra-oceanic as well as continental-margin island arcs, it is the convergence and eventual collision of continental crust that gives rise to intercontinental collision orogens (Fig. 3.15).
Such mountain belts develop when the oceanic lithosphere originally lying between two continents is eventually consumed.
The previously existing subduction zone is converted into a suture zone marking where the two continents are welded together.
An embayment of oceanic crust not consumed before the boundary becomes ‘locked’ is called a remnant-ocean basin.
A peripheral foreland basin is developed on the margin of the underthrusting plate roughly parallel to the strike of the suture belt, either on a remnant-ocean basin covered by a thick layer of sediment, or on true continental crust.
A retroarc foreland basin occurs on the overriding plate behind the volcanic arc previously developed in association with the earlier subduction of oceanic lithosphere.
3.4.1 General sequence of development
The initial impact occurs between the outer-arc ridge of the  overriding continental margin and promontories on the leading edge of the continent entering the subduction zone.
The first sections of the converging continental margins to collide suffer the most intense deformation.
Wedges of oceanic crust are thrust up on to the overlying sediments of the subduction zone and uplift ensues (Fig. 3.16).
Mountain ranges formed at the points of initial continental collision provide the sediment which accumulates in adjacent remnant-ocean basins (Fig. 3.16(B)).
On reaching the subduction zone this sediment is scraped off and stacked into thrust sheets.
Final closing of a remnant-ocean basin results in the thrusting of remaining sediments deposited along the continental margin on to the overriding plate and the crustal thickening produced leads to isostatic uplift (Fig. 3.16(C)).
Large-scale crustal shortening is often present in intercontinental collision orogens and this may be accommodated by folding (Figs 3.17, 3.18), or by the limited subduction of continental crust during the initial phase of collision following the previous episode of steady-state subduction.
There appear to be two possible mechanisms to account for this.
Since the mantle part of the descending lithosphere is cold relative to the asthenosphere it may be sufficiently dense to pull the lower part of the crust down if the upper part is detached.
Alternatively, subducted oceanic crust may be able to pull adjacent continental crust down into the asthenosphere.
Depending on the assumptions applied this process could lead to the subduction of several hundreds of kilometres  of continental crust; more likely, however, is rather more limited subduction, but even this could involve the complete consumption of peninsulas and microcontinents.
Partial subduction of the underthrusting plate continues until frictional forces and the buoyancy of the continental crust exceed the driving force of plate motion (Fig. 3.16 (D)).
Cessation of subduction is eventually followed by a halt to volcanic activity on the overriding plate.
Further thrusting may develop at this stage through sliding of large rock masses under the force of gravity along the flanks of the uplifted orogen (see Section 7.3).
Accumulation of sediment through the stacking of thrust sheets in the suture zone is probably the major cause of subsidence of the underlying subducted plate.
Plate descent itself does not seem to be a major factor as isostatic rebound does not appear to occur after subduction has stopped.
A peripheral foreland basin begins to develop as the continental crust of the underthrusting plate is bent just before entering the subduction zone.
After the phase of partial subduction and the accumulation of a considerable thickness of sediment, possibly up to 5000 m, the peripheral foreland basin may become a site of marked uplift.
Once the two continents have been welded together and active volcanism and tectonic uplift have ceased, a new plate is created in which the orogenic belt formed becomes an intra-plate feature no longer associated with an active convergent plate boundary.
A number of ancient suture zones representing previous plate collisions have been recognized but only a few of these, such as the Urals and the Appalachians formed 300 to 250 MaBP, are major relief features at the present day, most having been extensively eroded and covered by later sediments.
Such ancient suture zones may be identified by various lines of evidence such as contrasting pre-collision geological histories either side of the postulated collision zone, the presence of deep ocean floor sediments and associated volcanic rocks, and preserved remnants of andesitic lavas erupted from the continental-margin orogen located on the originally overriding plate prior to collision.
In inter-continental collision orogens major sustained horizontal stresses can be generated which give rise to recumbent folds.
Moreover, the back limbs of such folds may become detached along major thrust faults to produce nappes.
The classic region for these kinds of structures is the European Alps.
Here the convergence of the African and Eurasian Plates has led to the development of successive thrusts and nappes carrying huge masses of rock northwards towards   the European foreland (Fig. 3.19).
Horizontal movements along these major thrusts can exceed 100 km and rock thicknesses of several kilometres can be involved.
The thrust plane itself represents a zone of detachment (or decollement) along a bed of salt or other incompetent lithology.
However, detailed investigations of these structures suggest that much of this large-scale lateral movement is accomplished by the spreading or sliding of rock masses under gravity (see Section 7.3).
3.4.2 Pre-collision history and configuration of converging continental margins
Although it is possible to make some generalizations about the likely sequence of development of an intercontinental collision orogen, the pre-collision history of the active margin of the overriding plate and its subduction zone has an important influence on the subsequent evolution of an orogenic belt.
The margin of the overriding plate is constantly being modified by the subduction of oceanic lithosphere beneath it; volcanic material is added, sediments accumulate and the margin may be broken by strike-slip faults.
The most important of these variables is probably the heating of the plate margin since this will affect its thickness and strength.
Thick, strong continental-margin crust will be associated with either slow or recently initiated subduction since in neither case would there be sufficient heating for melting of the upper surface of the downgoing lithosphere.
A marked contrast in behaviour would be expected during continental collision between the very thick crust of the Andes, where relatively rapid subduction has occurred throughout at least the Cenozoic, and the Alpine region where the closure of the ocean separating North Africa and southern Europe has been more gradual.
The configuration of continental margins and the angle at which they converge also affects significantly the nature of the orogenic belt that develops (Fig. 3.20).
One plate may simply override the other, but another possibility is that a ‘flake’ of continental crust from the upper surface of the downgoing plate may be thrust over the adjacent plate for a distance of perhaps 100 km or more.
Separation of the upper third of the continental crust on a plate has the effect of reducing the overall buoyancy of the subducted crust by nearly one-half, and this in turn allows more subduction than would otherwise have occurred.
The eastern Alps have been suggested as an example of such ‘flake tectonics’ since this mechanism accounts for the existence of a ‘platelet’in the Alps which is much thinner than normal and dips in a southerly direction (Fig. 3.20(B)).
Such a structure is particularly likely to form where a promontory on the advancing edge of the continent on the subducting plate collides with the opposing continent well before the rest of the continental margin (Fig. 3.20(E),(F)).
Convergence associated with the continuing subduction of the remaining oceanic lithosphere along the plate margin would be maintained until the plate boundary had been fixed at a sufficient number of points to resist further subduction.
Salients of oceanic crust may be left along the suture zone and parts of the Mediterranean Sea represent remnant ocean basins formed in this way.
3.4.3 The Himalayas
3.4.3.1 Morphological and structural elements
The Himalayan intercontinental collision orogen extends in a southward-bending arc, some 200 250 km across, for over 2500 km from the Indus River in the west to the Brahmaputra River in the east (Fig. 3.21).
It is separated from the Trans-Himalayan zone and the Tibetan Plateau to the north by the structurally controlled valleys of the Indus and the Brahmaputra (in its upper reaches called the Tsangpo) and to the south it is bounded by the sediment-filled peripheral foreland basin of the Indo-Gangetic plain.
Distinct morphotectonic zones can be recognized across the orogen along its entire length, although their detailed interpretation is disputed (Fig. 3.22).
The two major ranges, the Lesser Himalayas and The Higher Himalayas, both of which exceed 8000 m in height, are bounded by three major linear structures: from south to north these are the Main Boundary   Thrust, the Main Central Thrust and the Indus-Tsangpo suture zone.
The belt of ophiolites following the Indus and Tsangpo valleys marks the boundary between the Eurasian Plate and the Indian Plate and to the north the presence of acidic volcanic rocks indicates the subduction of oceanic lithosphere prior to the collision of the Indian and Eurasian land masses.
3.4.3.2 Models of development
From the pattern of ocean floor magnetic anomalies it is possible to trace the movement of India northwards over the past 80 Ma or so (Fig. 3.23).
During the period 80 to SOMaBP it drifted rapidly at a rate of between 100 and 180 mm a- 1.
Subsequently, movement has been much slower at only about 50mma- 1.
This reduction in velocity seems to be related to the timing of the contact between India and Eurasia.
Collision along what is now the Indus-Tsangpo suture zone seems to have occurred from about the Late Paleocene until the Early Eocene, or possibly a little later.
Only limited continental subduction appears to have occurred at this stage.
Significant vertical uplift probably began in the Oligocene about 35 Ma ago and has continued to the present time, but at varying rates.
Although clearly an intercontinental collision orogen, the   present elevated form of the Himalayas is not a direct consequence of continental collision; rather it reflects developments that have occurred since the initial impact some 50 Ma BP.
Subduction of the oceanic lithosphere of the leading edge of the Indian Plate prior to collision may have been associated with the emplacement of large granite intrusions as well as volcanic activity in southern Tibet.
Little relative movement between the Indian and Eurasian Plates seems to have occurred between the Middle Eocene and Early Miocene, but isostatic readjustment of the presumably thickened crust resulted in a withdrawal of the sea on the adjacent Indian continental lowland.
The most significant development during this period was the formation of the Central Gneiss Zone, some 10–20km broad and dipping at an angle of 30–40° to the north and bounded to the south by the Main Central Thrust (Fig. 3.22).
The development of this zone appears to be related to the major underthrusting and associated metamorphism of local rocks that has apparently occurred along the Main Central Thrust some 100–200 km to the south of the Indus-Tsangpo suture zone.
This underthrusting began in the Early Miocene and contributed to the doubling of crustal thickness (up to 80 km in places) and the impressive subsequent uplift of the Higher Himalayas.
Detailed seismic evidence indicates that the underthrusting has been at an angle of about 15° over a distance of about 300 km; perhaps significantly this roughly corresponds to the average width of the Himalayas.
The precise relationship between the Main Central Thrust and the intense metamorphism of the Central Gneiss Zone of the Higher Himalayas remains somewhat uncertain.
Some researchers have suggested that the metamorphism preceded thrusting and in fact actually promoted it by locally weakening the crust.
Another interpretation is that metamorphism occurred at the same time, or post-dated thrusting, and that the frictional heating produced during thrusting contributed to the partial melting of the crust and the intrusion of granitic rocks.
A further explanation involves the decoupling of the crust from the underlying lithosphere along the northern margin of the Indian Plate and the exposure of the base of the crust to hot asthenosphere.
This could have led to the upwelling of magma, granite emplacement and isostatic uplift through the substitution of hot, low density mantle from the asthenosphere for the cold, dense mantle of the upper lithosphere.
A further consequence of this heating could have been a weakening of the upper layers of the crust and the formation of the northward dipping Main Central Thrust along its southern edge.
The extent of subduction of continental crust below the Himalayas is also in dispute.
At one extreme underthrusting is seen as proceeding for up to 1500 km at the base of the continental crust through the peeling off of the lower part of the lithosphere of the Eurasian Plate (Fig. 3.22(B)).
It is more generally accepted, however, that the buoyancy of the continental crust has limited the extent of continental underthrusting and that this is why the more recent Main Boundary Thrust dipping under the Lesser Himalayas has now taken over the role played earlier by the Main Central Thrust (Fig. 3.22(A)).
It seems likely that yet another northward-dipping thrust will develop even further to the south in a few million years.
Although the rate of movement between India and Eurasia fell markedly after their initial collision some 50 Ma ago, convergence of the two land masses since then may have amounted to as much as 2500 km.
This represents a major problem because such an amount of continued convergence between two continents after collision is not easily accomodated  within a simple plate tectonics model.
The extent of crustal shortening required implies a vast degree of underthrusting by continental lithosphere, extensive crustal compression, crustal deformation over an extensive area behind the suture zone, or a combination of two or more of these effects.
Critical to an evaluation of these various hypotheses is an understanding of the development of the high Tibetan Plateau lying to the north of the Himalayas.
3.4.4 The Tibetan Plateau
3.4.4.1 Morphology and structure
The Tibetan Plateau, located between the Himalayan and Karakorum ranges to the south, and the Kunlun and Altyn Tagh ranges to the north, is a roughly triangular area some 1000km from north to south and 1700km from east to west (Fig. 3.21).
The local relief is relatively subdued but the mean elevation is some 5000 m with isolated masses of probable volcanic origin rising to between 6000 and 7000 m; the Tibetan Plateau is thus by far the highest plateau of significant extent on the Earth's surface.
To the east the elevation falls and several major rivers such as the Mekong, Salween, Chiang Jiang (Yangtze) and Huang-He (Yellow) drain in an easterly and southerly direction from the Tibetan Plateau eventually reaching the Yellow and South China Seas.
The Tibetan Plateau has been an unstable area since at least the Late Palaeozoic.
It seems to have formed through the successive accretion of continental and island arc fragments (see Section 3.6) from then until the middle Cretaceous and at the time of its collision with the Indian Plate it was probably an area of relatively warm and weak lithosphere.
The presence of shallow marine sediments of Late Cretaceous age indicate that the region was below sea level at this time and it apparently did not emerge until the Early Cenozoic.
Late Cenozoic volcanism, which is extensive over much of the area, and low seismic wave velocities together suggest that the lithosphere below the Tibetan Plateau is still unusually hot and is therefore probably weaker than in adjacent areas.
The crust is now also abnormally thick (about 70km) but gravity measurements indicate that it is in approximate isostatic equilibrium.
3.4.4.2 Models of development
A number of explanations have been put forward to account for the thick crust and high mean elevation of the Tibetan Plateau which also help to explain the great crustal shortening indicated by the post-collision convergence of the Indian and Eurasian Plates.
One model proposes crustal thickening through large-scale underthrusting by the leading edge of the Indian continent (Fig. 3.22(B)), an idea first put forward as long ago as 1924 by the Swiss geologist, Emile Argand.
A major problem with the extent of underthrusting required (in excess of 1000km) is the very low angle of subduction that it implies (5° or less).
This contrasts with the observed northwards dip of the Main Central Thrust at about 15°.
Moreover, there is little seismic evidence for the intermediate and deep earthquakes below the Himalayas that would be expected if active subduction is, in fact, occurring.
Of the estimated post-collision convergence of up to 2500 km about 500 km could be accounted for by underthrusting beneath the Himalayas and southern Tibet, another 200 300 km by thrusting and crustal thickening in the various ranges bordering the northern perimeter of the Tibetan Plateau (such as the Pamir, Tien Shan, Altai and Nan Shan ranges) and perhaps a further 300–400 km by the crustal shortening arising from gentle folding within the Tibetan Plateau itself.
This leaves around 1400km of post-collision convergence to be accounted for, much of which might be explained by a doubling of the thickness of the Tibetan crust during the past 50 Ma from a ‘normal’ value of 35 km to the present 70 km.
But not all the remaining convergence can be explained by this process and it has been suggested that the rest has been accommodated by the lateral movement of blocks of continental lithosphere along east-west trending  strike-slip faults to the north of the Tibetan Plateau in Mongolia and western China (Fig. 3.24).
Between 500 and 1000 km of north-south crustal shortening could be accounted for by an equivalent amount of lateral crustal movement arising from the ‘ploughing’ motion of the Indian Plate as it moved northwards and displaced lithospheric blocks in the Eurasian Plate.
Supporting evidence for extensive east-west movement comes from the identification of a number of major faults clearly visible on satellite imagery, most notably the Altyn Tagh Fault (Fig. 3.25) which is comparable in length to the San Andreas Fault in California.
The amount of displacement along these faults is unknown, but several major earthquakes associated with horizontal strike-slip movements have recently been recorded.
The hypothesized eastward movement of China towards the Pacific would be expected because the continental lithosphere of Eurasia would provide more resistance to lateral movement than the subduction zones of the western Pacific margin.
Deformation of the weak Tibetan crust and flow in the upper mantle may have resulted from the north-south squeezing generated by plate convergence.
The Tibetan Plateau can perhaps be viewed as the ‘pressure gauge’ of Asia, with the pressure applied by the Indian continent against Eurasia maintaining its considerable elevation.
Moreover, the Tibetan Plateau transmits further pressure to the stable Tarim Basin to the north and this in turn pushes   northwards to produce thrusting and uplift in the Tien Shan range (Fig. 3.24).
The association of thrust faulting on the margins of the Tibetan Plateau with normal faulting in its highest regions has been interpreted as suggesting that it has attained its maximum elevation, and that consequently it is tending to grow outwards rather than increase in altitude.
This may be because lower stresses are required for the formation of new thrust faults on its margin than are needed to elevate the entire Tibetan Plateau.
Whatever explanation is applied to the post-collision convergence of the Indian and Eurasian land masses and the formation of the Tibetan Plateau, it is clear that it cannot be accommodated in any simple plate tectonics model.
To consider the hypothesized eastward moving segments of lithosphere in Mongolia and China as involving ‘micro-plates’ is to employ the term ‘plate’in quite a different sense from its original definition.
The apparent extension of the effects of the collision of the Indian and Eurasian Plates to much of central and eastern Asia, and possibly as far as the Baikal Rift (Fig. 3.21), in fact indicates that the consequences of plate interaction need not necessarily be confined to plate margins.
3.5 Oblique-slip margins
So far we have confined our attention to convergent margins where two plates are in motion towards each other.
We now need to consider margins where the movement is predominantly transform and plates meet along transform faults rather than at subduction zones or along collision boundaries.
However, it will have become clear from the preceding discussion that purely convergent or transform movement is unlikely to occur except along short sections of a plate boundary.
So-called convergent boundaries almost invariably have some element of lateral movement (see, for instance, Figure 3.20(F)), while most transform boundaries possess some convergent or divergent component.
It is more realistic, therefore, to think in terms of a continuum of plate boundary types related to various degrees of convergence and divergence.
Where a convergent or divergent margin has a significant transform component it is appropriate to refer to it as an oblique-slip margin.
Some idea of the variation that may occur along an individual plate boundary can be gained by considering the eastern margin of the Indian Ocean.
Here oceanic lithosphere of the Indian Plate is being subducted beneath oceanic and continental lithosphere of the Eurasian Plate (Fig. 3.9).
The Indian Plate is moving north-north-eastwards relative to the Eurasian Plate and the margin as a whole is one of low-angle oblique convergence.
However, when examined in more detail it is possible to identify significant variations along the margin.
For instance, although the forearc zone is predominantly one of convergence and compression, there are also transform elements, such as north of Sumatra.
In the volcanic arc, both in the Sunda Arc and to the north in Burma, movement is predominantly along transform faults.
These extend into the back-arc basin of the Andaman Sea where there is evidence of some divergent motion.
Where the transform faults occur on land they are associated with significant topographic features such as the valley of the Irrawaddy River in Burma.
In order to emphasize the pattern of stress in oblique-slip margins, the terms transpression and transtension have been applied to, respectively, the convergent and divergent varieties.
Although these two types of margin are associated with distinct types of landscape, they may occur in close proximity owing to the tendency of transform faults to contain offset segments or to have a sinuous form rather than being purely straight (Fig. 3.26).
Divergent oblique-slip   motion leads to extensional (normal) faulting and subsidence and if this is of sufficient magnitude a pull-apart basin may be formed.
Oblique convergence, on the other hand, generates compression and results in folding, uplift and the formation of a transverse orogen astride the fault.
Complexity is added to this simple relationship because the predominant direction of stress along oblique-slip margins may change through time as a consequence of adjustments to the overall direction of plate movement.
The San Andreas Fault System in California, for instance, changed from mainly transtensile in the Miocene to predominantly transpressive in the Pliocene.
Very complex patterns of fracture are characteristic of major transform faults and these give rise to local zones of compression and extension over comparatively short distances.
Because of the resulting close juxtaposition of areas of uplift and subsidence, considerable local relief can be generated.
3.5.1 The San Andreas Fault System
This situation is illustrated in classic fashion along the southern section of the San Andreas Fault System (Fig. 3.27).
Overall the fault system has a length of 1200km, but the average breadth of the fault zone is some 500 km and it forms a very diffuse boundary between the Pacific and North American Plates.
It is estimated that there has been about 1000km of lateral movement along the fault system over the past 25 Ma.
Of the large number of individual faults (Figure 3.27 just shows some of the major ones) only a few are currently regarded as being active, although others have been active in the recent past.
The individual faults which branch, join, bend and sidestep each other, give rise to numerous separate areas of uplift and subsidence (Fig. 3.28).
A major subsidence feature is the Salton Sea trough, an excellent example of a pull-apart basin.
Although it contains a considerable depth of sediment shed from the adjacent mountain ranges its floor still has a maximum elevation of just 74 m below sea level.
By contrast an east-west trending zone of compression to the north-east of Los Angeles has led to the formation of a transverse orogen, comprising the San Gabriel and San Bernardino Mountains and collectively known as the Transverse Ranges.
These attain elevations in excess of 3000m and much of this uplift has probably occurred as recently as the Late Quaternary.
3.5.2 The Southern Alps
The Southern Alps of New Zealand provide another example of dramatic uplift and mountain construction along an oblique-slip margin.
They run parallel to the Alpine Fault, a remarkably straight transform fault representing the boundary between the Indian and Pacific Plates.
It is estimated that the present net movement along the fault involves an average of 40 mm a- of transform motion and about 22 mm a- of orthogonal convergence (Fig.3.29).
Significant compression has only developed comparatively recently (the Alpine Fault was transtensile until the Pliocene) but has generated rapid uplift with the highest peaks in the Southern Alps now exceeding an altitude of 3000 m.
The compression has caused thrusting on an eastward-dipping plane along which the continental crust of the Pacific Plate is being heaved up (Fig. 3.30).
The western slopes of the Southern Alps are, in effect, an enormous self-perpetuating fault scarp; as rapidly as material is eroded it is replaced by  further uplift and crustal shortening against the Alpine Fault (see Section 18.2.4).
3.6 Displaced terranes
As our knowledge of both ancient and modern mountain belts has developed, it has become increasingly evident that not all the complexities observed can simply be explained by the collision of large continental blocks.
Many mountain belts situated along present or past plate boundaries contain numerous individual slivers of crust some of which, on the basis of palaeomagnetic and structural evidence, together with their assemblage of rock types, appear to have travelled great distances before arriving in their present positions.
Other crustal fragments, while appearing to be of more local origin, have, none the less, experienced significant horizontal displacement and rotation with respect to the plate of which they form a part.
These anomalous crustal fragments have been given various names-suspect terrane, allochthonous terrane-but we will use the term displaced terrane (Note that in this book the spelling ‘terrane’ is used to refer to structural units whereas ‘terrain' is applied in a topographic sense.)
Several recent studies have indicated the significant role played by displaced terranes in the morphology and structure of both intercontinental collision orogens and continental-margin orogens.
For instance, it has been estimated that over 70 per cent of the North American Cordillera is made up of displaced terranes (Fig. 3.31).
Most of these seem to have travelled thousands of kilometres and have been accreted to the North American cratonic margin during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic.
The terranes are of several types and include slivers of oceanic crust, fragments of intra-oceanic island arcs and slices detached from unknown continental margins.
Numerous displaced terranes have also been identified in the Alpine-Himalayan chain (Fig. 3.32).
Most of these are thought to have rifted away from the margins of Gondwana and moved northward before colliding with the southern margin of the Eurasian land mass and causing extensive deformation and thrusting.
Indeed, it has been suggested that much of the structural and morphological complexity of the Alps may be due to the accretion or partial subduction of such crustal fragments rather than the effects of simple collision of two large land masses.
Similarly, the morphology of the Himalayan orogen, in particular that of the Tibetan Plateau, may be partly attributable to the accretion of small crustal fragments prior to the main collision between India and Eurasia.
The composition of displaced terranes ranges from that of typical oceanic crust to significantly less dense granitic rock with clear continental affinities.
It has been suggested that such terranes are equivalent to oceanic plateaus, which   are to be found in the present-day ocean basins and which often rise several kilometres above the adjacent ocean floor (Fig. 3.32).
Many of these plateaus have anomalous crustal thicknesses of between 20 and 40 km and an upper layer 10 to 15 km thick with P-wave velocities in the range 6.0–6.3 km s-h These values are in the range of granitic rocks in the continental crust and so it is inferred that many oceanic plateaus (such as the Seychelles Bank) are drowned continental fragments originating from the edges of ancient land masses and destined to be swept towards a subduction zone in the future.
As these plateaus are more buoyant than normal oceanic crust they would tend to resist subduction and therefore be accreted to continents lying along plate margins.
The implications of displaced terranes for the investigation of the relationships between tectonics and landform development have yet to be assessed.
Nevertheless, the juxtaposition of terranes with often dramatically different lithologies and structural characteristics is likely to be a significant factor in the long-term development of landscapes.
3.7 Mesoscale and microscale landforms associated with faulting
Plate margins are invariably regions of active and microscale and mesoscale landforms directly related to crustal movements along individual faults often provide important evidence of the nature of tectonic activity at a broader scale.
Although it must be emphasized that fault-related landforms can be important in areas remote from plate boundaries it will be useful to consider them briefly here.
Faulting takes place through sudden, rapid movements over distances ranging from a few centimetres to several metres.
each individual movement being associated with an earthquake.
Here we will focus on the primary tectonic landforms created by faulting and leave the question of the mode of subsequent landscape development of faulted terrains until Chapter 16.
Both normal and reverse faulting can create a fault scarp, the initial angle of which will reflect the dip of the fault plane.
But weathering and slumping will very rapidly destroy the original form and reduce the slope to an angle of stability of typically between 20 and 40°.
Fault scarps will only be formed where a fault breaks the surface; they can either die out laterally or merge into a monocline (Fig. 3.33(A)).
Where faults die out laterally and are replaced by further offset faults an en echelon scarp can be formed (Fig. 3.33(B)).
Vertical movement along a fault may lead to the impoundment of streams if they are flowing towards the uplifted block, whereas if they are flowing towards the down-thrown side they will rapidly cut down through the fault scarp.
This leads to the formation of gullies separated along the scarp by characteristic triangular facets (Fig. 3.33 (B)).
Eventually the scarp will retreat from the original position of faulting and it may be buried by sediment.
A scarp formed  at the site of a fault through the differential erosion of two rock types juxtaposed along it or through the exposure by erosion of a previously buried fault scarp is termed a fault-line scarp.
It is important to distinguish such erosional features from true tectonic scarps since only the latter indicate recent or current fault activity.
Strike-slip faulting gives rise to an intriguing range of landforms at the micro- and mesoscale in addition to the major topographic features associated with oblique-slip margins (Fig. 3.34).
Where there is no element of convergent or divergent movement along a strike-slip fault it may generate no significant landforms.
If, however, faulting occurs across a gullied terrain the resulting offsetting of truncated gullies produces what are known as shutter ridges (Fig. 3.35).
Localized zones of compressional and tensional stress are common along strike-slip faults and they give rise to a number of distinctive landforms.
Divergence across the fault leads to subsidence and the formation of shallow, elongated troughs or sags, typically a few tens of metres across and a few hundred metres long, which, many contain a sag pond.
In the zones of convergence, on the other hand, compression generates positive topographic features through the formation of ridges and linear and en echelon scarplets.
Strike-slip faulting also usually leads to the displacement of stream channels (Fig. 3.25) and this feature is often useful in determining the magnitude and frequency of individual movements along the fault (see Section 16.3.2).
Further reading
The literature on the structure and tectonic development of plate margins is vast, but unfortunately very little of it takes a specifically geomorphic perspective.
An excellent summary is provided by Miall (1984, pp. 384–440) which, although focusing on sedimentological aspects, also has much relevant material on the morphology of plate margins.
Dickinson and Seely (1979) give a more specific treatment of forearc regions with excellent diagrams of their morphology, structure and evolution.
A good coverage of the major processes of orogenesis, containing a number of detailed case studies, can be found in Hsu (1983) and Schaer and Rodgers (1987), while Von Huene (1984) and Molnar (1986) provide useful introductory reviews, and Molnar (1988) considers the problem of reconciling the plate tectonics model with the problem of orogenesis.
More details on the complexities of convergent margins are contained in articles by Cross and Pilger (1982), Dewey (1980) and Uyeda (1982) while the possibility of the reversal of subduction polarity is assessed by Johnson and Jaques (1980) and Mattson (1979).
Various aspects of island arcs are discussed in the collection of papers edited by Talwani and Pitman (1977), with a more specifically geomorphic perspective being provided by Nunn (1988), Woodroffe (1988) and Yoshikawa et al.(1981).
Continental-margin orogens are considered in several of the references mentioned above.
Useful introductions to the tectonics and structure of the Andes are provided by Gansser (1973), James (1971) and Dalziel (1986).
Garner (1983) discusses the tectonic geomorphology of the Ecuadorian Andes and Jordan et al.(1983) consider the effects on Andean topography of variations in the angle of plate subduction.
The North American Cordillera, which has a tectonic history of bewildering complexity, has not been examined in detail in this chapter but various aspects of its evolution are considered by Dickinson (1976), Eaton (1987) and Smith and Eaton (1978).
The Sunda Arc is discussed by Hamilton (1979) in a comprehensive study of the whole Indonesian region, while Hamilton (1977) provides a more concise analysis.
Articles considering specific aspects of intercontinental collision include those by Burke et al.(1977) on suture zones, Molnar and Gray (1979) on the question of limited continental subduction and Sengor (1976) on the effects of the irregular configuration of converging continental margins.
There has been a surge of field studies in the Himalayan-Tibetan region since the late 1970s and this has generated a large body of published work.
General overviews include those by Allegre et al.(1984), Gupta and Delany (1981), Molnar (1984, 1986) and Tapponnier et al.(1986), and Selby (1988) provides a specifically morphological study of the Nepal Himalaya.
Two contrasting models of the evolution of the Himalayas are presented by Le Fort (1975) and Powell and Conaghan (1973), while the tectonic development of the Tibetan Plateau is discussed by Bingham and Klootwijk (1980) and Ni and York (1978).
The model of the Tibetan  Plateau uplift associated with the lateral displacement of lithospheric blocks is introduced by Molnar and Tapponnier (1975), but there is also a more accessible and well-illustrated version (Molnar and Tapponnier, 1977).
Oblique-slip margins are considered in detail in various papers in Ballance and Reading (1980); the introductory article by Reading (1980) is particularly useful as it presents a general review of sedimentation patterns in relation to topography.
The evolution of the San Andreas Fault System is concisely covered by Crowell (1974, 1979).
The Southern Alps have been the subject of a number of studies examining the relationship between tectonics and landforms; these include those by Adams (1985), Basher et al.(1988), Whitehouse (1988) and articles included in Soons and Selby (1982).
Berryman (1988) and Kamp (1988) examine landforms associated with oblique convergence in North Island, New Zealand.
Displaced terranes are starting to generate a significant literature and this has been reviewed by Howell (1985) and Schermer et al.(1984).
The large number of displaced terranes in the North American Cordillera are considered by Coney et al.(1980) and the possible role of oceanic plateaus in orogenesis is assessed by Nur and Ben-Avraham (1983).
Ollier and Pain (1988) draw attention to the neglected problem of how displaced terranes relate to landscape development in the context of Papua New Guinea.
Examples of specific studies of micro- and mesoscale fault-related landforms include those by Gerson et al.(1985), Nash (1981) and Wallace (1977), while Armijo et al.(1986) and Molnar et al.(1987) provide detailed examples of how such landforms can assist in the interpretation of major tectonic features.
4.1 Landforms and tectonics of plate interiors
We saw in Chapter 3 how a number of major morphological features, notably orogenic mountain belts and island arcs, coincide with convergent plate boundaries; a superficial glance at the Earth's morphology might even suggest that all significant sub-aerial topographic features are confined to such boundaries.
But the fact that the effects of plate interactions can extend for thousands of kilometres away from plate boundaries, as we have seen in the case of the Tibetan Plateau and central Asia (see Section 3.4.4.2), shows that this is certainly not the case.
Moreover, a closer inspection of global morphology reveals a range of major landform features which are located in the interior of plates and which are unrelated to even distant plate convergence events (Fig. 4.1).
Some continents, most notably Africa, have extensive plateaus which lie at elevations (2000 m or more) which far exceed the average height of the continental platforms.
Basins represent another major type of landform of plate interiors.
These are commonly 1000 km or more across and are either entirely enclosed and therefore drained internally, such as the Lake Eyre Basin of Australia and the Chad and Kalahari Basins of Africa, or they are breached by one or more major river system, such as the region drained by the Zaire (Congo) river system (Fig. 4.1).
Although volcanoes and associated volcanic landforms are clearly concentrated along plate margins, significant occurrences are also to be found in plate interiors.
On the continents some of this intra-plate volcanic activity is closely related to rift valleys which themselves represent sites of continental rifting where the crust has been stretched and faulted.
The break-up of the supercontinent of Pangaea, which began about 180 Ma ago (Fig. 2.16), created many new continental margins.
This event was of great significance for the development of landscapes on a continental scale because it led to the establishment of new base levels for continental erosion.
These margins exhibit a much lower level of tectonic activity than the active margins located along convergent plate boundaries and are consequently termed passive continental margins (or simply passive margins).
Where formed    by divergent plate movement they are described as rifted margins, but where the motion between two adjacent continental blocks has been transform they are called sheared margins (but note that the term rifted margin is often applied rather loosely to passive margins of any type).
Many, though certainly not all, passive continental margins are characterized by major escarpments (sometimes called great escarpments)(Fig. 4.2).
By any standards these are significant morphological features — the Great Escarpment in southern Africa has a relief exceeding 1000 m in places — and they typically separate distinct geomorphic environments.
Below great escarpments the topography is usually highly dissected, but inland on the plateau surface the relief is generally subdued.
Along plate margins the horizontal motion of plates is the primary force driving the uplift which occurs in orogens (although as we saw in Section 3.3 vertical movement resulting from thermal effects is of great importance in continental-margin orogens).
In plate interiors horizontal plate movements play a less direct role in creating landforms and it is the processes which generate the broad warping and vertical movements of the crust, that is, the mechanisms of epeirogeny, that are of most concern.
4.2 Mechanisms of epeirogeny
While we now have a reasonably good understanding of how interactions at plate boundaries give rise to major morphological features on the continents our knowledge of the tectonic processes operating in plate interiors is by comparision rather poor.
Numerous mechanisms have been suggested to explain the often significant uplift that has occurred in plate interiors but none seems to be applicable to all cases.
Although the various models defy any simple classification, for convenience we will consider them under the headings of thermal, phase change and mechanical models.
4.2.1 Thermal models
There are many occurrences of volcanic activity in areas remote from plate margins; the volcanoes of the East African   Rift system, such as Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya, the volcanic and associated hydrothermal activity of the Yellowstone region in Wyoming, U S A (Fig. 4.3), and the chain of volcanic peaks making up the Hawaiian Islands are examples from both continental and oceanic regions.
There are also anomalous areas of volcanism on, or near, mid-oceanic ridges; Iceland, for instance, is formed of unusually thick oceanic crust produced by very high localized rates of volcanic activity on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
Such an area of anomalous volcanism, which is not related to processes of subduction or normal mid-oceanic ridge spreading, is termed a hot spot.
In addition to volcanic activity hot spots are in many cases associated with significant crustal uplift.
The resulting hot-spot swells are typically several hundred kilometres across and may rise I km or more above the surrounding terrain.
Hot spots appear to be rather irregularly distributed over the Earth's surface (Fig. 4.4) but the real pattern is difficult to establish because of the problems of identifying specific hot spots and incomplete data in some regions.
Along mid-oceanic ridges and subduction zones it is often a problem distinguishing between ‘normal’ and anomalous volcanism.
Since it is also difficult in some cases to determine whether neighbouring centres of active volcanism are associated with one or more hot spots, estimates of the total number of hot spots vary significantly from around 40 to well over 100.
A hot spot arises from the presence of unusually hot mantle at the base of the lithosphere (Fig. 4.5(A)).
Such a sub-lithospheric thermal anomaly may be generated by a mantle plume, an upwelling of hot mantle originating deep in the Earth's interior, possibly at the core-mantle boundary; alternatively, it may be caused by localized heating at shallower depths in the mantle.
In either case the presence of hot mantle leads to melting at the base of the lithosphere and the lithosphere as a whole becomes thinner (Fig. 4.5(B)).
Since part of the lithosphere is replaced by hot mantle of lower density from the asthenosphere, the lithosphere as a whole experiences isostatic uplift.
As the change in density is the result of a change in temperature this kind of isostatic adjustment is termed thermal isostasy.
Eventually uplift may be sufficient to stretch the brittle overlying crust to the point where it fractures and a rift valley forms (Fig. 4.5(C)).
The time scale over which uplift takes place depends upon the way in which heat is transferred through the lithosphere.
Conduction of heat occurs only very slowly through rock, and if this is the only mechanism operating uplift will occur over a very long period — something of the order of 100 Ma.
In contrast penetrative magmatism, whereby hot and partially molten material from the asthenosphere forces its way up towards the surface, is a much more rapid mechanism of heat transfer and is capable of thinning 100 km thick lithosphere and producing uplift at the surface in only about 20 Ma.
As several million years are required for the transfer of a significant amount of heat to the surface of continental lithosphere, it has been suggested that hot spots are most likely to develop where the lithosphere is more or less stationary with respect to sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies as this would allow time for sustained heating to occur.
This idea has been applied to the African Plate which, according to some analyses of plate motions, appears to have been almost stationary with respect to the underlying asthenosphere for the past 25–35 Ma.
This period coincides with a well-established increase in volcanic activity in Africa and, less certainly, with a phase of uplift.
Although the idea of linking volcanism and uplift to sub — lithospheric thermal anomalies is attractive there are problems with this hypothesized relationship.
One difficulty is that there is evidence indicating that hot spots can migrate with respect to each other at velocities of up to 20 mm a k This means that both hot spots can move under ‘stationary’ lithosphere and that the lack of motion of the African Plate is   thrown into doubt because its past positions have been in part determined with respect to a reference frame of supposedly fixed hot spots.
4.2.1.1 Lithospheric vulnerability
For a more realistic analysis of the occurrence of hot spots and their associated uplifts we need to consider the thickness of the lithosphere as well as its velocity with respect to sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies.
This is because thick lithosphere will tend to be more resistant to the effects of heat conduction and penetrative magmatism.
By relating variations in the thickness of the lithosphere over the Earth's surface to variations in the velocity of plate movement it is possible to determine global variations in lithospheric vulnerability (Fig. 4.6; Box 4.1).
Lithosphere which is thin and slow moving is predicted to be the most vulnerable to penetrative magmatism and therefore the most likely to experience hot-spot volcanism and associated uplift.
On a global basis there is a fairly strong relationship between lithospheric vulnerability and the distribution of hot spots; few hot spots are to be found in areas of low lithospheric vulnerability whereas they are common in areas of high vulnerability.
When specific regions are examined, however, this relationship does not always seem to apply.
By carefully examining Figure 4.6 you can see that on the African Plate the relationship is, in fact, the opposite of that predicted with several hot spots located in areas of low lithospheric vulnerability.
There are several possible reasons for this including inaccuracies in the estimates of lithospheric thickness and the over-zealous identification of hot spots on the African Plate.
Nevertheless it is probable that factors other than lithospheric vulnerability, such as the actual global distribution of sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies, are important in influencing the occurrence of hot-spot volcanism and associated uplift.
4.2.1.2 Effects of hot-spot migration
One intriguing aspect of the effects of sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies on continental topography arises from the consequences of plates moving over such regions of unusually hot asthenosphere.
As yet there has been no detailed attempt to assess the possible effects of such hot-spot ‘migration’ on landscape development, but there is some evidence from the stratigraphic record of the movement of topographic swells across continents which may be related to the passage of hot spots or similar thermal phenomena.
For example, from about 160 to 100Ma BP, North America drifted over a hot spot which is now located near the Great Meteor Seamount in the eastern Atlantic Ocean.
Patterns of erosion, sedimentation and igneous activity recorded over the area during this period seem to be consistent with a migrating region of uplift related to the track of this hot spot.
On the basis of an estimated 10 per cent of the Earth's surface currently being part of a hot-spot swell it has been calculated that on average hot-spot epeirogeny should affect a particular area of crust about every 600 Ma.
We would expect the slow migration of hot-spot swells across continental interiors to have a significant impact on landscape development through, for instance, the disruption and diversion of drainage systems.
Geomorphologists have yet to assess this possibility, although the relationship between migrating hot-spot swells and landscape development provides an intriguing subject for future research.
4.2.2 Phase changes
A major problem with hot spots as a general explanation for uplift in plate interiors is that many elevated continental regions in such areas show no evidence of volcanism.
Large parts of southern and eastern Africa stand at over 1500m yet recent volcanism has been very localized.
This might be explained by sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies causing uplift without penetrative magmatism developing to a point where volcanic activity occurs at the surface.
Another difficulty with the hot-spot model is that unrealistically large increases in heat flow are apparently required to explain the magnitude of uplift recorded in some regions.
An alternative explanation of such uplifts involves the effects of density changes in minerals in the upper mantle.
Such phase changes occur when minerals adopt different atomic configurations as temperatures and pressures change.
The temperatures experienced by a mineral in the crust or mantle can be affected by heat flow from below while the pressure can be altered by loading and unloading of the crust above.
Consequently the depth at which particular phase changes (and therefore density changes) occur can migrate up and down within the lithosphere.
The surface above will rise or fall in response to the changes in volume brought about by these alterations in mineral density.
A number of possibly significant phase changes have been suggested but our lack of detailed knowledge of the abundance of specific minerals in the lower crust and upper mantle makes their evaluation rather uncertain.
A phase change, triggered by a small amount of heating at the base of the lithosphere, has been proposed to account for the uplift evident in a number of regions in plate interiors, including southern and eastern Africa, south-east Australia and the Transantarctic Mountains of Antarctica.
Each of these areas of continental lithosphere are thought to have overridden regions of hot asthenosphere associated with former mid-oceanic spreading ridges.
It is thought that this would have increased the flow of heat to the base of the lithosphere sufficiently to cause a phase change in the uppermost continental mantle after a delay of up to 70 Ma (the time taken for heat to be conducted from the base of the lithosphere to just below the Moho).
The conversion of eclogite, a rock with a density of 3400 kg m- 3, to basalt (density 3000 kg m- 3) is the kind of phase change envisaged.
If this is so a 11.25 km thick layer of eclogite would need to be converted to a thickness of 12.75 km of basalt to produce an uplift of 1500 m.
The attractiveness of this model is that it requires only a modest increase of temperature of around 100°C at the base of the lithosphere.
This seems much more reasonable than the very large increases of up to 1000°C which would be required to produce an uplift of around 1500 m by purely thermal effects.
A major problem with the model, however, is that it predicts a rather uniform and extensive pattern of uplift which does not accord with the typical morphology of continental plate interiors.
Africa, for instance, is characterized by areas of domal uplift, from 500 to 2000 km across and by a prevalence of high elevations along its continental margins.
4.2.3 Mechanical models
The most straightforward mechanical models of uplift are those that involve the isostatic adjustment that takes place when a load is removed from the crust (see Section 2.2.4).
The term epeirogeny was in fact first coined by G. K. Gilbert in 1890 to describe the isostatic uplift which occurred as a result of the evaporation of Lake Bonneville in Utah in the western U S A (leaving the much smaller Great Salt Lake of the present day).
During a period of high lake levels 15 000–25 000 a BP the load provided by the average water depth of about 145 m depressed the crust.
After unloading by evaporation the crust rose and shoreline features are now elevated up to 64 m above the present water level.
Far more spectacular examples of isostatic uplift are to be found in the areas of the northern hemisphere covered by great ice sheets during the Pleistocene.
Detailed records of post-glacial uplift have been established for such areas as the Fenno-Scandian Shield and the Canadian Shield from both raised and warped shorelines and gravity data.
Uplift of the central region of the Fenno-Scandian Shield began about   13 000 a BP and the total uplift since then has exceeded 100 m.
Though involving less spectacular rates of uplift, crustal unloading by denudation is a far more pervasive process which extends over long periods of time, in contrast to the rather transient effects of deglaciation and evaporation of lakes.
The latter two phenomena essentially restore the crust to its approximate elevation before loading by ice or water, but denudation can lead to continued uplift of the crust for as long as continental crust is sub-aerially exposed.
If isostatic compensation is local, that is if vertical adjustments of the lithosphere in response to the removal of a load are confined just to the area covered by the original load, then isostatic uplift simply reduces the rate at which a land-surface is lowered by denudation (Fig. 4.7(A)).
Such local compensation, however, cannot occur at the small scale because the lithosphere has a finite strength and so changes in load result in regional isostatic adjustments over a greater area than that actually affected by the change in load (Fig. 4.7(B)).
Such flexural isostasy (see Section 2.2.4) is a familiar phenomenon to geomorphologists who study the uplift and warping of shorelines as a result of crustal loading by nearby ice sheets.
In this case flexing of the lithosphere leads to the development of a forebulge at some distance from the ice margin which experiences an increase in surface elevation.
It is possible that a similar flexural effect is associated with great escarpments along passive continental margins.
In this case there is active erosion (and therefore unloading) along the escarpment edge but relatively little erosion on the plateau surface immediately inland of the escarpment.
Consequently it is possible that the slowing eroding plateau summit could actually increase in elevation as a result of the erosional unloading along the escarpment (Fig. 4.7(B)).
A similar effect can lead to the summits of mountains in orogenic belts increasing in elevation as the incision of deep valleys between peaks causes unloading of the crust.
The extent to which isostatic compensation occurs regionally through flexure, rather than locally, depends on the flexural rigidity of the lithosphere, a property which indicates its resistance to bending in response to a change in load.
Another proposed mechanism of epeirogenesis rests on the observation that continental lithosphere is in an unstable mechanical equilibrium because its mantle is denser than the underlying asthenosphere.
Consequently if some process, such as cracking or ‘erosion’ by mantle plumes, punctures the continental lithosphere as far as the crust the relatively dense mantle layer of the lithosphere could become detached and sink (Fig. 4.8).
This process has been termed delamination   and may be capable of causing epeirogenic uplift through the exposure of the cold base of the crust to hot mantle from the asthenosphere and the replacement of relatively dense lithospheric mantle by less dense mantle from the asthenosphere.
Two such delamination ‘events’ may account for the episodes of uplift of the Colorado Plateau in the south-west U S A. around 30 Ma and 5 Ma BP.
4.3 Continental rifts
4.3.1 Rift structure and location
Rift valleys are important landforms on continental crust in plate interiors where tensional stresses predominate in the lithosphere.
They typically have widths of 30 60km, but some are up to 100 km across.
Pioneers of rift valley geology such as J. W. Gregory were strongly influenced in their interpretations of rift structure by the apparently simple rift morphology that they encountered in areas such as East Africa.
The conventional image of a rift valley is of a broad, flat-floored and symmetric trough flanked by steep escarpments.
The most obvious structural interpretation of this morphology is that of a graben with the rift floor being formed on a downthrown block bounded by normal faults which create the steep escarpments (Fig. 4.9(A)).
But a closer examination of both the morphological and structural evidence shows that this model is inadequate.
In particular the application of seismic stratigraphy to the study of rift valleys during the 1980s has led to a considerable revision of ideas about their structure.
Seismic stratigraphy is a technique whereby seismic waves generated by.small explosions set off at the surface are reflected or refracted from discontinuities in the underlying sediments which represent changes in sediment properties.
Such changes thus enable discrete sedimentary units to be identified and subsurface faults to be mapped (see Section 17.2.2.2. for a more detailed explanation).
Seismic data which show the deep structure of rift systems have revealed a much more complex pattern of faulting than was suspected in the classic rift model, with the presence of listric as well as normal faults.
Most significantly, the structure of many rifts examined by seismic methods has been shown to be asymmetric with most of the downthrow occurring along a major boundary listric fault on one side of the rift.
Such rifts are said, therefore, to have a half-graben structure with the main boundary listric fault forming a footwall, and the opposing downwarped crust forming a hanging wall leading down from a roll-over zone (Fig. 4.9(B)).
The presence of an antithetic fault on the hanging wall margin can give the impression of a symmetric rift valley if it is exposed and forms an escarpment, even though the overall structure is asymmetric.
Further evidence contradicting the traditional symmetric rift valley model comes from observations of their morphology and surface structure.
Careful examination of fault patterns, for instance, reveals that major faults tend to occur on only one side of a rift along any one section of the valley.
Moreover, these major faults tend to be discontinuous and curved in plan and it seems that main boundary listric faults alternate along rift valleys and are separated by transfer faults (Fig. 4.10).
Some rift valley lakes, such as Lake Tanganyika, Lake Malawi and Lake Turkana in East Africa   have a slightly sinuous plan form which may reflect the structural control exerted by these alternating curved boundary faults.
Even a cursory examination of global structure and morphology shows the generally close relationship between continental rifts and areas of mid-plate volcanism and crustal doming and uplift.
The location of rift systems also seems to be closely related to the distribution of ancient structures representing zones of weakness between stable cratons.
The East African Rift System, for instance, parallels the trend of old mobile belts (regions of highly deformed rocks formed during early phases of folding and orogenesis) and tends to follow the margins of Precambrian cratons (Fig. 4.11).
Such ancient lines of weakness are apparently more readily activated than adjacent crust and consequently are favoured sites for later faulting and rift development.
Some recently active rifts, however, do cut across ancient Precambrian structures, suggesting that the stress pattern initiating rifting, as well as the position of zones of crustal weakness, is important in determining the location and orientation of continental rifts.
The major differences in rift characteristics relate to their position with respect to plate boundaries and the intensity of volcanic activity associated with them.
Some rifts appear to be clearly related to divergent crustal movements with lateral extension being normal to the rift axis.
The East African Rift System is of this type and its interpretation as an incipient site of plate rupture is further supported by its continuity with the divergent plate boundaries of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.
In other cases, such as the Dead Sea Rift, there is a significant transform component in the extensional movement and this feature can in fact be regarded as a large pull-apart basin (see Section 3.5).
The other main rift type is to be found orientated approximately at right angles to the strike of intercontinental collision orogens.
The development of this type of rift appears to be related to the crustal extension that occurs, as a result of continental collision, beyond the immediate collision zone itself.
Examples of this type are the Rhine Rift in the foreland zone of the Alps, and the Baikal Rift System which lies some 3000 km to the north of the Himalayas (see Section 3.4.4.2).
There are significant differences in the morphology and degree of volcanic activity associated with these two types of rift.
True intra-plate rifts, such as the East African Rift System, are characterized by prolonged volcanism and typically exhibit 1–2 km of down-faulting along the crest of substantial crustal upwarps.
In contrast orogen-related rifts, such as the Rhine and Baikal structures, experience generally less intense volcanism and much more marked down-faulting, amounting to 5–6 km in the case of the Baikal Rift.
In this kind of rift, however, the marginal uplift is either narrow or lacking altogether.
4.3.2 Rift formation
The commonly close relationship between rifting and crustal doming in rifts not associated with orogens suggests a causal relationship.
There are two possibilities: one involves active rifting in which rifting develops as a response to the tensional stresses induced in the crust by uplift resulting from upwelling of the asthenosphere (Fig. 4.5(C)); the other involves passive rifting in which rifting is initiated by extensional stresses in the lithosphere, and this permits the subsequent upwelling of hot mantle which in turn induces thermal uplift (Fig. 4.12).
Clearly the timing of uplift, volcanism and rifting is crucial in the assessment of the validity of the active and passive rifting models.
The typical sequence for passive rifting is rifting followed by volcanism, which may in turn be succeeded by uplift.
Active rifting, on the other hand, would be expected to begin with volcanism which is then followed by uplift before rifting itself is finally initiated; but in some  cases uplift seems to precede volcanism.
In practice some rifts seem to be of the active type whereas others seem to have been initiated by passive rifting, although in many cases there is no consensus as to whether specific rifts are active or passive.
4.3.3 Rifting and uplift in Africa
The domal uplifts and rift structures of Africa are at various stages of development and thus provide a useful basis for examining the evolution of rift systems.
Two major periods of uplift and rift formation have been recognized in Africa; a Jurassic-Cretaceous rifting phase between 180 and 130 Ma BP associated with the break-up of Gondwana and a more recent period initiated some 35 to 25 Ma BP and continuing up to the present.
There is some evidence in Africa for the idea that uplift may precede volcanism since the Adamawa dome in the Cameroon region, which rises to elevations in excess of 2000 m, lacks evidence of recent volcanic activity.
Volcanism and uplift without rifting is exemplified in North Africa where Neogene volcanic rocks are to be found on the Tibesti and Ahagger Plateaus (Fig. 4.1).
Domal uplifts with rifts cutting across them are particularly common in East Africa where the East African Rift System comprises a whole series of such structures (Fig.4.11).
The crests of the domal uplifts typically have three rifts meeting at angles of about 120°; this geometrical arrangement appears to arise from the way in which the tensional stresses within the lithosphere are most readily accommodated.
Eleven such triple junctions, each possibly associated with a separate hot spot, have been identified on the continental part of the African Plate and an intriguing problem is the way in which they may subsequently promote continental rupture and develop into spreading centres.
Spreading can apparently only occur when continental separation can be accommodated into the motions of the global plate system.
Where this is not possible rift development is halted, rifts become filled with sediment and any associated uplift subsides.
Although the triple junctions identified in Africa, including those along the continental margin as well as those in the interior, have variously evolved by spreading along one, two or all three rift arms, the most common sequence has been for one arm to remain inactive and form an aulacogen, with spreading occurring along the other two (Fig. 4.13).
Of the 29 rifts identified in Africa, five have led to continental separation and a further three have been associated with the movement of Madagascar away from the African mainland.
The two rifts in the Benue Trough in Nigeria went through a phase of opening followed by later closing, and of the remaining rifts ten became inactive before the spreading stage and nine are currently active and may spread in the future.
4.4 Continental basins
4.4.1 Basin morphology
In addition to upward vertical movements of the crust which give rise to broad upwarps or swells, downward movements also occur creating basins.
Basins located in continental interiors are sometimes referred to as intra-cratonic basins while those located along continental margins in intra-plate settings are called passive margin basins.
The latter are primarily submarine features and will not be discussed here although they are certainly an important component of passive margin development (see Section 4.5).
Areas of crustal subsidence usually form topographic features with minimal local relief because they become partly or wholly filled by sediment transported from surrounding highlands; examples include the Lake Eyre Basin in southern Australia, the Kalahari Basin in southern Africa and the Ob Basin in the USSR.
The volume of sediment that accumulates in a basin depends on the rates of subsidence, sediment supply and sediment removal.
Evacuation of basin sediments is primarily by rivers for basins with an outlet to the ocean (such as the Zaire Basin) but wind action is important in enclosed basins (such as the Kalahari Basin)(Fig. 4.1).
Basins in continental interiors are a few hundred to a thousand or more kilometres across and the sedimentary units, with which they are partially or completely filled, generally thicken towards the centre.
This sediment thickening indicates the role of sediment loading in sustaining basin subsidence but it does not explain how basins originate.
Continental basins generally seem to be long-lived features with a subsidence history often extending over a period of 100 Ma or more.
4.4.2 Mechanisms of subsidence
Basins form as a result of downwarping of the crust, as a consequence of uplift of the surrounding region, or through a combination of both of these effects.
Epeirogenic uplift and subsidence are closely related phenomena and a number of the mechanisms of uplift discussed in Section 4.2 may be relevant to crustal subsidence.
For example, while heating of the lithosphere may account for uplift, subsidence may result from lithospheric cooling.
In this case the connection between uplift and subsidence is especially close as there must first be a heating event for the subsequent cooling to give rise to a basin.
On its own heating and cooling of the lithosphere will not create a basin as the crust will simply return to its original elevation.
What is required is a mechanism for thinning the lithosphere during the heating phase so that when it cools and subsides a region of negative relief is formed.
One possible way of accomplishing this is through the erosional thinning of the crust when it is elevated during the period of uplift.
The amount of thinning and consequently the amount of eventual subsidence will depend on the depth of denudation that has occurred.
In most cases, however, this appears to be insufficient to account for the amount of subsidence observed.
If denudation is insufficient as a thinning mechanism then sub-crustal processes must be considered.
Phase changes provide a possible mechanism which could account for subsidence as well as uplift, depending on whether the crystalline transformations involved give rise to more, or less, compact mineral structures.
A further potential thinning mechanism which has received considerable support since the late 1970s is the stretching of the lithosphere as a result of sustained tensional stress (Fig. 4.12).
Lithospheric extension will promote faulting and an initial phase of subsidence associated with upwelling of hot mantle from the asthenosphere into the base of the lithosphere.
This is followed by a slower phase of subsidence promoted by cooling of this mantle material as heat is conducted up to the surface.
Irrespective of the mechanism initiating basin formation the amount of subsidence will be amplified by the weight of sediments which accumulate.
This is undoubtedly a highly significant process where sediment thicknesses of several kilometres occur.
It is also a major reason for the thickening of sedimentary units towards the centre of basins.
The initial depression will be the first to accumulate sediment and this will lead to a positive feedback cycle of further subsidence and sediment accumulation extending outwards from the initial focus of subsidence.
Because of the rigidity of the lithosphere, down-flexure may extend for 150km or more beyond the area of sediment loading.
While subsidence is maintained by sediment loading, the surrounding upland areas supplying sediment will rise isostatically through unloading.
Once initiated such a complementary system of uplift and subsidence is probably self-sustaining for long periods of time in the absence of major tectonic disturbance.
In enclosed basins water-loading by lakes may further contribute to subsidence, though their effect will be far more ephemeral than sediment loading as they are likely to undergo repeated phases of growth and desiccation due to changes in climate.
4.5 Passive continental margins
The sequence of uplift, rifting and continental rupture which leads to the formation of passive continental margins is of considerable importance in any attempt to understand the large-scale geomorphology of the present-day continents.
Moreover, passive margins have assumed great economic significance since the 1960s as their hydrocarbon potential has begun to be extensively exploited by the oil industry.
The break-up of Pangaea (Fig. 2.16) generated a considerable length of passive continental margins and analysis of the palaeomagnetic record of the continents and the subsequently created ocean floor has given us a fairly good idea of the timing of most of these rifting episodes.
A feature common to many, but certainly not all, passive  continental margins is a broad upwarp which separates the coast from interior basins.
Such upwarps consist of broad swells running parallel to the coast and are in most cases flanked on their oceanward side by a great escarpment.
When rifting leads to the rupture of a continent the original elevation of the landsurface above sea level prior to rifting inevitably creates some relief once a new base level is established.
But a number of passive margins appear to have experienced uplift either during or soon after rifting which has led to the development of continental-margin upwarps which stand higher than landsurfaces further inland.
Clearly models of passive margin evolution must be able to account for the development of these upwarps.
Our understanding of the vertical (as opposed to the horizontal) movements of the lithosphere during continental rupture is largely derived from the interpretation of the sediments laid down in passive margin basins.
Knowledge of these sedimentary sequences, which are now almost entirely located below sea level, has been greatly enhanced by the application of seismic stratigraphy (see Section 4.3.1).
Together with evidence from boreholes drilled through continental-margin deposits, investigations using seismic stratigraphy have shown that most passive margins support a wedge of sediment which becomes gradually thinner as it passes seawards from continental to oceanic lithosphere (Fig. 4.14).
Deposits laid down during the rifting phase are termed synrift sediments while those laid down on the margin once continental separation has occurred are termed postrift sediments.
Interpretations of these sedimentary sequences in conjunction with morphological and structural evidence has led to the development of numerous models of the tectonic evolution of passive margins.
4.5.1 Active rifting
In the active rifting model (see Section 4.3.2) rifts propagate between a series of domal uplifts formed above sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies (Fig. 4.15(A)).
This gives rise to a sequence of domes and intervening saddles which, as the break-up of the continent proceeds and a new ocean is created, are split to form a sequence of ruptured domes and troughs along the newly formed passive margins.
At this early stage of development these new continental margins are termed nascent passive margins (Fig. 4.15(B)).
As sea-floor spreading continues the margin ages and subsidence begins to predominate over uplift, at least along its oceanward flank (Fig. 4.15(C)).
Such subsidence eventually leads to the submergence of the oceanward part of the margin and the formation of a continental shelf.
Subsidence during this mature passive margin stage is driven by both thermal subsidence arising from the cooling of the margin as it moves away from the region of mantle upwelling    located at the site of rifting, and by the isostatic loading caused by the growing wedge of sediment accumulating offshore.
This sediment loading is coupled with isostatic unloading on the landward part of the margin as material is transported offshore.
Some models of passive margin tectonics assume that the isostatic compensation in response to these changes in load is local rather than regional, in which case no net uplift of the landsurface occurs (see Section 4.2.3).
But if the lithosphere along the margin has sufficient rigidity the resulting imbalance in load will be accommodated through flexural isostasy.
This will lead to a net uplift of landsurfaces along the least eroded part of the margin, that is, inland of major escarpments.
The magnitude of this effect is difficult to estimate, but it will depend in part on the flexural rigidity of the lithosphere.
Nevertheless, flexural isostasy provides a possible uplift mechanism for passive margins during their mature stage of development when the effects of the initial thermal uplift have diminished.
Unless the zones of sub-lithospheric mantle upwelling which precipitate uplift and rifting are in a line, sheared margins will develop along zones of transform plate motion linking offset domal upwarps (Fig. 4.16(A)).
Modelling by geophysicists indicates that a 200km diameter convective upwelling could produce a domal uplift about 1000 km across with a maximum elevation of around 1000 m.
Rift arms at triple junctions which fail to spread will form aulacogens striking at a high angle into the continental margin (Fig. 4.16(B),(C)).
The extensive series of domal uplifts traversed by the East African Rift System has been widely regarded as a clear example of active rifting with uplift preceding the development of rift structures.
Some recent work, however, has cast doubt on this interpretation and suggests instead that rifting may have been initiated before uplift.
The evolution of the nascent rifted margins of the Red Sea has also been interpreted both in terms of active and passive rifting mechanisms.
4.5.2 Passive rifting
The idea that simple extension of the lithosphere can produce the structural features observed along passive margins was first presented by D. McKenzie in 1978.
In this initial presentation of the passive rifting model it was assumed that the amount of extension was uniform throughout the lithosphere (Fig. 4.1 7(A)).
Calculations based on this assumption, however, indicated that any uplift would be confined to the region over which stretching occurs and that no uplift at all would occur if the thickness of the crust were less than about 20 per cent of the thickness of the lithosphere.
In fact this uniform extension model predicted that in most geologically reasonable situations subsidence caused by thinning of the lithosphere through stretching would outweigh any thermal isostatic uplift arising from the partial replacement of cool lithosphere by hot asthenosphere below the zone of extension.
Since this simple model was unable to explain the kind of uplift observed along rifted margins there were immediate attempts to modify it.
One way the model was altered was to assume that the  mantle part of the lithosphere stretches   by a greater amount than the crust during extension (Fig. 4.17(B)).
In this non-uniform extension (or depth-dependent extension) model uplift will take place because relatively dense lithosphere is replaced by warmer and less dense asthenosphere below relatively less stretched and thinned crust.
Uplifts of 1–2 km can apparently be produced if the crust experiences very little or no extension and the lithosphere is stretched by a large amount (Box 4.2).
Another modification of the model assumes that uniform extension occurs but takes account of the fact that stretching of the lithosphere is likely to occur over a long period of time, probably several million years.
In his original model McKenzie assumed, for ease of calculation, that the lithosphere is stretched instantaneously.
If we make the more realistic assumption that it takes a finite period of time then we have to take into account the fact that replacement of the lower lithosphere by hot asthenosphere during extension will lead to heat being conducted laterally into unextended, and therefore unthinned, lithosphere, as well as vertically into the overlying upper lithosphere (Fig. 4.17 (C)).
Depending on the amount of heat involved this mechanism could lead to a significant uplift through thermal isostasy due to the heating of this unthinned lithosphere.
Since this heat transfer will occur only slowly the maximum uplift of the passive margin would probably occur as long as 60 Ma after rifting; this contrasts with the non-uniform extension model in which uplift takes place concurrently with stretching and rifting.
A further approach to explaining the development of significant continental-margin upwarps as a consequence of passive rifting has been to invoke a process known as secondary convection.
In this model it is proposed that thinning of the lithosphere and its partial replacement by hot asthenosphere might allow convective upwelling to become established below the zone of extension.
It is envisaged that this active mantle upwelling would lead to a significant heating of the overlying lithosphere and could generate uplifts of up to around 1 km.
The difference between this model and active rifting is that the convective upwelling is a consequence, not a cause, of lithospheric thinning and rifting.
The secondary convection model has been applied to the Gulf of Suez at the northern end of the Red Sea.
Here significant uplift of rift flanks has occurred although there is convincing evidence (from the deposition of marine sediments at the time of rifting) that rifting preceded uplift.
The sequence of rifted margin evolution to be expected from passive rifting is illustrated schematically in Figure 4.18.
This figure is non-committal as to the precise mechanism likely to lead to the generation of passive margin upwarps as it illustrates secondary convection as well as non-uniform (depth-dependent extension) and the effects of lateral heat flow into unthinned lithosphere.
As is evident from comparing Figures 4.15 and 4.18, by the mature stage continental margins formed by both active and passive rifting tend to assume a similar mode of evolution, with subsidence, at least in the offshore zone, predominating over uplift as the margin both cools and is loaded by sediment shed from the adjacent land mass.
A further component of passive rifting that needs to be considered is whether a rifting event is accompanied by  abundant volcanism.
It has been pointed out that enormous thicknesses of basaltic lavas erupted during the early stages of rifting characterize some passive margins, such as those of eastern Brazil, western India and the south-eastern part of southern Africa.
A number of other passive margins, however, show no sign of such major volcanism.
This observation has led to the suggestion that whether a passive margin is volcanic or non-volcanic depends on whether the site of rifting happens to coincide with the location of a mantle plume and its associated hot spot.
Where rifting occurs over a mantle plume the sub-lithospheric mantle will be up to 200°C hotter than normal and large quantities of magma will be generated.
This occurs because rifting of the lithosphere allows hot mantle rock to move towards the surface.
The resulting reduction in pressure, or decompression, experienced by this material causes it to melt.
Some of the magma generated is erupted on to the surface to form enormous lava flows (see Chapter 5), but by far the largest proportion is accreted to the base of the crust, a process known (somewhat misleadingly) as underplating.
According to the underplating model the addition of volcanic rock thickens the crust and the resulting isostatic adjustment leads to the formation of a broad hot-spot swell up to 2000km across and an increase in surface elevation of up to 2000 m.
It is indeed interesting to note that the highest passive margins also seem to be those characterized by rift-related volcanism, just as the model predicts.
Although mantle plumes do not drive the rifting in this model, the surface uplift caused by underplating would assist the rifting process as diverging plates would tend to slide down either side of a hot-spot swell.
All the models of passive rifting discussed so far assume that rifting is more or less a symmetric process; that is, we would expect the opposing passive margins formed through continental break-up to have a similar structure and morphology because they have experienced a similar tectonic history.
But does symmetric rifting accord with the evidence?
We saw in our discussion of continental rifts (see Section 4.3) that asymmetric rather than symmetric rifting appears to be the norm, at least at the scale of individual rift structures.
Moreover, if we compare opposing passive margins there seem to be a number of cases where their morphology and structure are very different.
For example the western margin of southern Africa has a relatively narrow continental shelf and a well-developed marginal upwarp, whereas the opposing margin of the eastern coast of southern South America to which it was joined prior to the break-up of Gondwana has a very broad continental shelf and no significant marginal upwarp.
Another instance of apparent passive margin asymmetry is provided by the eastern margin of Australia, which has a marked upwarp which forms the Great Dividing Range, and the Lord Howe Rise which represents a now submerged fragment of continental crust which around 95 Ma BP. rifted away from eastern Australia studies of extensional terranes, such as the Basin and Range Province of the south-western USA, using seismic methods have revealed shallow-dipping faults which appear to extend through the entire lithosphere.
These have been interpreted as shear zones representing surfaces of lithospheric detachment.
If lithospheric extension occurs primarily along such detachment faults rather than by thinning throughout the entire zone of lithospheric extension, then we would expect opposing passive margins to display a marked complementary asymmetry (Fig. 4.19).
Such detachment models predict that two types of passive margin will be produced by continental rupture.
An upperplate margin is formed by crust lying above the detachment  fault while a lower-plate margin is developed on deeper crustal rocks lying below the detachment zone and which may be overlain by faulted fragments of the upper plate.
Upper-and lower-plate margins will differ significantly in their uplift and subsidence history.
As displacement occurs along the detachment fault the margin of the lower plate will be upwarped as the load previously exerted by the upper plate is progressively removed (Fig. 4.19(C)).
The predominant effect, however, will be subdue to the considerable thinning of the lower plate lithosphere.
The resulting continental margin morphology is likely to consist of a broad continental shelf and a rather modest amount of uplift inland.
The behaviour of the upper plate is quite different.
The pulling away of the lower plate along the detachment fault exposes the base of the lithosphere on the upper plate to hot, rising asthenosphere (Fig. 4.19(B)).
This substitution of less dense asthenosphere for denser lithosphere will result in uplift of the landsurface on the upper-plate margin.
Oceanward of this uplift zone, however, there will be subsidence since here movement along the detachment fault results in the substitution of mantle for less dense lower crust.
The coupling of this offshore subsidence and onshore uplift will induce a flexure of the margin which will accentuate uplift inland.
The resulting upper-plate margin morphology will comprise a broad marginal upwarp which drops abruptly down to a relatively narrow continental shelf.
Superimposed on all these models of passive margin rifting is the possible contribution to uplift and subsidence made by flexural isostasy as material is eroded from the margin and transported offshore.
As with the active rifting model this effect could generate uplift of the margin, even during its mature phase when other mechanisms are largely inoperative.
4.5.3 Passive margins: a key research focus
The modelling of passive margin evolution is still in its infancy.
A wide range of mechanisms have been proposed by geophysicists attempting to model the broad patterns of uplift and subsidence observed but modelling has run well ahead of empirical testing.
Figure 4.20 summarizes some of the key processes that appear to be involved.
To date relatively little attention has been paid to the detailed morphological evidence that might indicate which, if any, of the proposed models is applicable to any particular passive margin.
Nevertheless, it is impossible to underestimate the  importance of passive margins to an understanding of long-term landform development, a topic we will be returning to in Chapter 18.
It seems probable that many of the models outlined above will be found to be applicable to at least some passive margins, but much work remains to be done in this field.
This is especially true of sheared margins which have been neglected by geophysicists.
Their attention has been focused on rifted margins largely because of their potential oil and gas reserves.
4.6 The break-up of supercontinents
Discussion about the way continental rifts form and how, in some cases, they develop into sites of continental rupture and sea-floor spreading raises the much broader question of why supercontinents break up.
At least part of the answer to this question may lie in the contrasting properties of continental and oceanic crust.
Continental crust is only about one-half as efficient at conducting heat as oceanic crust, so if a supercontinent, such as Pangaea, covers a significant part of the Earth's surface heat will build up in the mantle below it.
After perhaps 80 Ma or so the increase in the temperature in the sub-lithospheric mantle below the supercontinent will lead to uplift, rifting and continental fragmentation.
New ocean basins are created which become wider through time but eventually subduction zones will become established, either along previously passive margins, or within ocean basins.
This establishment of subduction zones results in a change from continental dispersal to continental aggregation which eventually leads to the reassembly of a large land mass.
This idea of a repetitive sequence of continental fragmentation and aggregation is termed the Wilson cycle after its originator J. T. Wilson.
The average duration of each cycle seems, on the basis of geological evidence, to be very roughly around 500 Ma.
This is well beyond the time scale generally relevant to landform development but it is still important to be aware of how present landscapes, especially in plate interiors, relate to the most recent episode of supercontinent fragmentation.
For instance, dispersal patterns of the continents following the break-up of Pangaea show that the now separate continents have been moving away from Africa, which itself appears to have remained relatively stationary.
In other words Africa may have remained close to the region of major sub-lithospheric heating which preceded the breakup of Pangaea and this may explain why it has a high mean elevation today in spite of lacking significant orogenic belts.
Australia, on the other hand, has moved rapidly away from its original location on the edge of Pangaea and it has the lowest mean elevation of the major continents.
There is obviously much uncertainty in these broad generalizations, but geomorphic evidence has a key role to play in relating such global tectonic models to the geological history of the continents.
Further reading
The large-scale relationships between landforms and tectonics in plate interiors have received comparatively little attention from geomorphologists so the literature from this perspective.
is rather limited.
King (1967) is still useful for its descriptions of the continental landscapes of plate interiors although his interpretations of the tectonic processes involved have now been superseded by more recent work.
Ollier (1981) provides an introduction to several topics discussed in this chapter, and my own brief reviews in Progress in Physical Geography (Summerfield, 1986, 1988, 1989) try to relate some of the work by geophysicists to problems of landscape development.
The morphology of passive margins is discussed in general terms by Ollier (1985), and with respect to specific regions by Ollier (1982)(eastern Australia), Summerfield (1985a)(Africa), Ollier and Marker (1985)(southern Africa) and Ollier and Powar (1985)(India).
There is an extensive and rapidly growing literature on the tectonics of plate interiors, but unfortunately much of it is written from a geophysical rather than a geomorphic perspective and it is not readily accessible to readers lacking a good grounding in physics and maths.
Two general reviews of the field presented at an introductory level are Bally et al.(1980) and Burchfiel et al.(1980).
Both of these edited volumes contain a number of relevant and clearly written papers on a variety of specific topics.
A more detailed treatment of epeirogenic uplift is to be found in McGetchin and Merrill (1979); in spite of its general title it is almost solely concerned with the Colorado Plateau, but it does contain a brief but wide-ranging review of uplift mechanisms.
An interesting assessment of the differential uplift of the continents through the Late Cenozoic is provided by Bond (1978).
A clear introduction to hot spots is provided by Burke and Wilson (1976), while a more recent assessment of their global distribution is that by Stefanick and Jurdy (1984).
Hot spots as a cause of uplift are discussed by Crough (1983) and Gass et al.(1978), while Theissen et al.(1979), Summerfield (1985b) and Sahagian (1988) examine the relationship between epeirogeny and hot spot activity in Africa.
The important, but neglected, problem of the range of scales of uplift associated with thermal mechanisms is addressed by Le Bas (1980), and the idea of lithospheric vulnerability is presented by Pollack et al.(1981).
Crough (1979) explores the possible morphological consequences of continents migrating over hot spots and also cites a possible example from North America (Crough, 1981).
Turning to other possible uplift mechanisms, the phase change model is considered by Smith (1982) with particular reference to Africa and Australia, and by Smith and Drewry (1984) with respect to the Transantarctic Mountains.
The mechanism of delamination is described by Bird (1979).
Flexural isostasy is discussed by Karner and Watts (1982) and Watts et al.(1982), and at a more introductory level by Watts  (1981), but unfortunately these treatments focus on offshore subsidence rather than uplift inland.
Rift systems have been studied for many decades but have received renewed attention since the early 1970s because of their association with crustal upwarps and their role in continental rupture.
An accessible introduction is provided by Palmason (1982); this is an edited compilation containing a brief but stimulating review of continental rifts by Mohr (1982).
More recent ideas about the half-graben structure of many rifts are introduced by Frostick and Reid (1987) and examined in depth by Rosendahl (1987) and in Frostick et al.(1986).
The influence of pre-rift structures on eventual rift form is considered by Versfelt and Rosendahl (1989) and the relationship between rifts and domal uplift in Africa is discussed by Burke and Whiteman (1973).
Much of the research into the tectonic evolution of basins overlaps with work on passive margin development, and although written for students of sedimentology the book by Miall (1984) provides a valuable introduction for geomorphologists on both of these themes.
Bally and Snelson (1980) provide an extremely comprehensive review of basin types and origins and Turcotte (1980) presents one of the more accessible reviews of the geophysics of basin subsidence.
A good introduction to the tectonics of passive continental margins is provided by Scrutton (1982) while Courtillot and Vink (1983) and Bonatti (1987) look at the processes of continental rifting and break-up.
The extent and magnitude of uplift to be expected from active and passive rifting mechanisms are compared by Keen (1985), while Beaumont et al.(1982) and Buck et al.(1988) assess the patterns of uplift likely to result from different models of passive rifting.
The uniform extension model is presented by McKenzie (1978) and the idea of non-uniform stretching is clearly described by Rowley and Sahagian (1986).
Steckler (1985) proposes secondary convection as an explanation of the uplift in the Gulf of Suez region, White and McKenzie (1989) outline the underplating model, and the asymmetric detachment model of continental break-up is presented by Lister et al.(1986).
The eastern Australian passive margin is one region where there has been a fruitful interchange of ideas and data between geomorphologists and geophysicists, although this has not resulted in a consensus as to either the history of uplift or the mechanisms that have caused it.
Veevers (1984) provides a comprehensive background to the history of the eastern Australian margin while Bishop (1988) reviews the various models that have been proposed to account for uplift.
Lambeck and Stephenson (1986) and Wellman (1987, 1988) provide contrasting interpretations of the uplift mechanisms that have operated in the region.
Finally, the possible mechanisms underlying the cyclic fragmentation and reassembly of continents are discussed at an introductory level by Nance et al.(1988) and in detail by Gurnis (1988).
Both these discussions derive ideas from earlier work by Anderson (1982).
Landforms associated with igneous activity
5.1 Extrusive and intrusive igneous activity
Igneous activity involves the movement of magma (molten rock), or solid rock undergoing slow deformation, towards, or on to, the Earth's surface.
Extrusive igneous activity is more commonly referred to as volcanism and occurs where magma erupts on to the surface either as flowing lava, or as fragmental material thrown into the air by explosive volcanic activity.
Volcanism directly gives rise to predominantly constructional landforms, although not all volcanic activity results in the development of volcanoes since some types of eruption create extensive sheets of lava or fragmental material.
There are five major types of volcanic activity.
One very obvious form is the volcanism of island arcs and continental-margin orogens associated with plate convergence.
More extensive, however, are the vast sheets of basaltic lavas which have formed on the continents at various times in the past and are referred to as continental flood basalts.
Yet volcanism is predominantly a submarine rather than a continental phenomenon since the outpouring of magma associated with submarine eruptions far exceeds anything witnessed on the continents.
This submarine volcanic activity is of three types.
In addition to the volcanic activity marking the creation of new lithosphere at mid-oceanic spreading centres, there are also volcanoes in the ocean basins representing hot spots, as well as flood basalts covering large parts of the ocean floor.
Intrusive igneous activity involves the movement of rock bodies towards the Earth's surface.
Such rock bodies may be either molten, in the strict sense, or they may be solid and move very slowly at elevated temperatures and pressures through a form of plastic flow.
A rock body emplaced in the surrounding country rock in this way is called an intrusion or, alternatively, a pluton.
The formation of intrusions can affect the landsurface in two ways.
During emplacement the overlying strata may be significantly uplifted and deformed.
Secondly, the rocks of intrusions are often more resistant to erosion than the surrounding country rock so they frequently form prominent landforms once exposed at the surface.
The various types of igneous rock associated with different forms of extrusive and intrusive activity, and the different types of magma from which they originate, play an important role in influencing the ultimate landforms created.
Igneous petrology, the subdiscipline concerned with the classification and origin of igneous rocks, is a complex field.
None the less, for the purposes of understanding the development of landforms associated with volcanism and intrusive igneous activity, we need to appreciate a few key properties of igneous rocks.
Figure 5.1 presents a simple classification of   igneous rocks based on their mineral and chemical composition and on differences in grain size, or texture.
Igneous rocks can be classified on the basis of the proportion of silica () that they contain.
Aeid rocks have more than 66 per cent, intermediate rocks between 52 and 66 per cent , basic rocks between 45 and 52 per cent , and ultrabasic rocks less than 45 per cent .
The proportion of silica is roughly related to the relative abundance of light-coloured felsic minerals (quartz and feldspar) and dark-coloured mafic minerals (silicates rich in magnesium and iron).
The grain size of igneous rocks is strongly influenced by the rate at which they cooled when formed, and not surprisingly we find that intrusive igneous rocks nearly always have a coarser texture than volcanic rocks.
5.2 Volcanism
In addition to its importance in directly creating landforms, volcanism is also of geomorphic significance for other reasons.
The material erupted during episodes of volcanic activity can be dated by radiometric techniques and can   therefore provide a minimum age for the landsurface over which it lies.
Since volcanoes often have a rather regular, symmetric form when first created, their original form can often be reconstructed with some confidence even after significant erosion has occurred.
Together with radiometric age determinations of the most recent eruptive episode, such reconstructions enable estimates to be made of the amount of material eroded over a known period of time.
Volcanoes can thus provide important test cases for estimates of rates of denudation (see Section 15.4.1.2).
Since volcanoes composed of similar rock types are also found in a range of climatic environments they also provide the opportunity to compare the effects of climate on the rate and nature of denudation.
5.2.1 Distribution of volcanic activity
There are presently around 600 active volcanoes on the continents or exposed above the sea as islands.
A further several thousand extinct volcanoes on land are known from their form, structure or characteristic rock types.
But these totals are dwarfed by the immense numbers of submarine volcanoes in the world's ocean basins; at least 50 000 are known to exist on the floor of the Pacific Ocean.
Confining our attention here to sub-aerial volcanic activity, we have already considered some aspects of the distribution of volcanoes at the global scale in the three previous chapters.
Most present-day volcanic activity is associated with convergent plate boundaries and there is a considerable concentration of volcanoes in the island arc systems (Fig. 3.6) and continental-margin orogens bordering the Pacific Ocean.
Around 60 per cent of active volcanoes are, in fact, to be found around the rim of the Pacific Ocean, with a third of these concentrated in Indonesia (Fig. 5.2).
But volcanoes are also found in the interiors of plates where they are associated with hot spots and tend to occur either as clusters or lines.
Volcanic clusters occur both on continental and oceanic lithosphere, and are particularly common on the African Plate which apparently has a high concentration of hot spots (see Section 4.2.1).
Clusters range in size from fairly restricted features such as Tristan da Cunha in the South Atlantic, to much more extensive volcanic groups covering a considerable area such as the Azores in the North Atlantic and the Galapagos Islands in the eastem Pacific.
Active volcanism at any one time is normally confined to a limited number of centres within a particular cluster.
Volcanic lines are most abundant in the Pacific Ocean and comprise series of volcanic islands (or seamounts in the case of submarine volcanoes) which typically become progressively younger along a line and often terminate in an active volcano.
The Hawaiian Islands provide a classic example of a volcanic line, and the generally accepted explanation of this type of feature involves the passage of part of a plate over a sub-lithospheric thermal anomaly which, through the periodic generation of magma in the overlying crust sequence of volcanic activity at the surface (Fig
Within volcanic arcs individual volcanoes aligned along essentially straight lines over distances of up to 1000 km, the arcuate form not being evident at this   smaller scale.
In fact, volcanic arcs appear to consist of series of slightly off-set linear elements which have been interpreted as representing the subduction of discrete segments of lithosphere.
Volcanic lines and clusters also exhibit patterning at the regional and local scale with both radial and rectilinear arrangements being found.
Such patterns appear to reflect the way in which the lithosphere fractures as magma forces its way up to the surface.
In any one cluster the spacing of volcanoes is usually consistent and is generally close to the thickness of the lithosphere at that locality (Table 5.1).
The inference here is that the volcano spacing is controlled by fracture patterns in the lithosphere, with increasingly thick lithosphere exhibiting progressively more widely spaced fracture patterns through which magma is extruded.
5.2.2 Volcanic activity through time
The fact that volcanic activity is highly episodic in nature is evident even from the elementary classification of volcanoes into active, dormant and extinct.
Although widely used, these categories are often difficult to apply in practice.
Extinct volcanoes are those that have not erupted in historic time, whereas active volcanoes have been seen to erupt.
The term dormant volcano is applied during the period between eruptions to those volcanoes thought to be potentially active.
The most obvious manifestation of volcanic activity comes from the infrequent but spectacular eruption of volcanoes on land.
Such individual explosive events can indeed involve impressive quantities of material.
Around 10 km 3 of volcanic debris was hurled into the atmosphere during the famous 1883 eruption of Krakatau (Krakatoa) in Indonesia, but more than ten times this quantity was involved in the 1815 eruption of Tambora, another Indonesian volcano.
Going back into prehistoric time even these volumes were far exceeded by the eruption of Toba, yet another volcano in the very active Indonesian region.
When it erupted around 75 000 a BP an estimated 2000 km 3 of material was dispersed over a wide area of the East Indies.
Interesting as these figures are, they do not give an accurate indication of the average rate of volcanic activity over time.
Estimates based on volumes of erupted material in fact show that the discharge from volcanoes forming island arcs and continental-margin orogens averages a very modest 1 km 3 a- 1 This rate has no doubt varied somewhat through geological time as the rate of lithospheric subduction has changed.
It is, in fact, the much less spectacular, but more consistent, activity of volcanic centres related to hot spots that have more impressive rates of production.
The island of Hawaii alone seems to have a long-term average rate of construction of over 0.4 km 3 a- 1, while Iceland has sustained a rate of about 0.13 km 3 a- 1 during historic time, and a rather lower average of 0.06 km 3 a -1 over the past 16 Ma.
Although the volume of continental flood basalts amounts to around 1x1O7km 3 , the long-term average rate of accumulation is very modest.
There have been periods in the Earth's history, however, when this rate has increased dramatically.
It has been estimated, for example, that around 600 000 km 3 of basalt was erupted within just 1 Ma to form the Deccan flows in India.
On the basis of their vast volume, flood basalts on the ocean floor have erupted at a much faster long-term average rate than their continental equivalents, although the major contribution of volcanic material on the ocean floor comes from mid-oceanic ridge spreading centres.
These create between 5 and 6 km 3 a- 1 of new volcanic material (that is, new oceanic crust).
This production is, however, episodic as is illustrated by the volcanic record of Iceland, which is both a hot spot and part of a mid-oceanic ridge.
In the major eruption of Laki in Iceland in 1783 over 10 km 3 of lava was produced in just 50 days, and it spread to eventually cover an area of 370 km 2.
Rates of volcanic activity through time are especially critical in determining whether intra-plate volcanoes formed in ocean basins (as opposed to volcanoes associated with subduction zones) will reach sea level to form a volcanic island, or remain submerged to form a seamount.
Once it has been formed at a mid-oceanic ridge new oceanic lithosphere subsides as it moves away from a spreading centre and becomes cooler, thicker and more dense (see Section 17.6.3).
Consequently, if a volcanic island is to be formed the rate of growth of a volcano must exceed the rate of ocean floor subsidence.
Since intra-plate volcanicity is linked to effectively stationary sub-lithospheric thermal anomalies, there is only a limited amount of time available for a volcano to develop before plate motion removes it from its underlying region of crustal melting and source of magma generation (Fig. 5.3).
Dating of the volcanic rocks of the Hawaiian Islands has shown that each of the main islands was formed in about 1 Ma.
These volcanoes are large landforms which load the underlying crust and are partly isostatically supported by deep roots (Fig. 5.4).
Taking into account the volume of   erupted volcanic material lying both on and below the surface of the ocean floor, it can be estimated that a minimum construction rate of between 0.005 and 0.01 km 3 a- 1 is required for a volcanic island to be produced in 1 Ma on lithosphere between 20 and 40 Ma old.
The rate is lower on younger lithosphere underlying shallow ocean, but greater on older lithosphere underlying the deeper parts of ocean basins.
The Hawaiian Islands have attained elevations well above sea level so their rates of growth have been much higher, with 0.44 km 3 a- 1 being estimated for the island of Hawaii itself.
Interestingly, this is about ten times the rate of eruption of lava recorded over historic time.
The reason for this discrepancy is not known; it might be because there are short-term fluctuations in the rate of lava eruption and that recently the rate has been well below the long-term average.
An alternative explanation is that much of the growth of the island has occurred through intrusive igneous activity rather than the extrusion of lava on the surface.
A revealing comparison can be made between the growth of Hawaii and Iceland.
Hawaii has exhibited a much faster rate of construction, but its volcanism will be short-lived as it will be carried away from its magma source by plate motion.
Iceland, on the other hand, is located on a mid-oceanic ridge and consequently has not moved significantly with respect to its hot spot since the opening of the North Atlantic Ocean over 50 Ma BP.
It has accumulated a pile of volcanic material 10km thick and it has five times the volume of Hawaii in spite of a long-term rate of volcanic activity less than one-sixth as high.
5.2.3 Products of volcanic activity
Volanic eruptions can involve both lava which flows over the surface, and fragmented particles, or pyroclasts, thrown into the air by violent explosions.
All volcanic material which falls through the air is described as tephra, while pyroclastic flow deposits result from the rapid ‘flow’ of pyroclasts mixed with abundant hot gas.
5.2.3.1 Lavaforms
Lava is formed from magma by cooling and the loss of gas.
The behaviour of lava once erupted is significantly affected by its viscosity, that is, its resistance to flow (see Section 8.2.1).
This in turn is related to the composition and temperature of the lava.
Acid lavas, such as those composed of rhyolite, which are derived from magma with a high silica content, are the most viscous and are generally erupted at the lowest temperatures (Fig. 5.5).
They are consequently able to flow only very short distances before they solidify.
Basic magmas, however, which are predominantly of basaltic composition, have a much lower silica content and are erupted at high temperatures.
Their low viscosity consequently allows them to flow over considerable distances.
Low-viscosity basaltic lavas produce extensive flows, whereas acidic lavas tend to produce flows which are convex in cross-section, the degree of convexity increasing with lava viscosity.
Once erupted the rate at which a lava flow cools and solidifies also depends on its depth.
While a 1 m thick flow of basalt will   take around 12 days to cool from 1 100 to 750°C, the same amount of cooling will take 3 a for a 10 m flow and 30 a for a 100 m flow.
Eruptions of lava give rise to a diverse range of surface forms depending on composition, viscosity and gas content.
Pahoehoe has a smooth, ropy surface as a result of the partial solidification of a thin skin which is dragged into folds by continuing lava flow underneath.
Pahoehoe is formed when lava has a low viscosity, but when it cools, or loses some of its gas content, it is transformed into a much more viscous form.
This is called aa and its surface is composed of jagged, angular fragments resembling clinkers (Fig. 5.6).
Where there is abundant gas in erupting magma the resulting lava contains numerous gas-filled vesicles, or cavities, and has a sponge-like form known as scoria.
If such vesicles are extremely abundant pumice is formed.
This has such a low density that it can float in water and blocks of pumice may travel thousands of kilometres across the world's oceans.
Lava erupted underwater cools very rapidly with a plastic skin forming around lumps of still molten material.
These lumps can become somewhat rounded through rolling and they are piled up on top of each other to create pillow lava.
The shrinkage of lava as it cools produces joints.
These are usually irregular, but in extensive flows of basalt a highly regular hexagonal jointing pattern is sometimes produced giving rise to the kind of vertical columnar basalt outcrops which form the Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland, UK.
Such regular joint patterns appear to develop when the centres of contraction are evenly spaced.
The lines joining these centres represent the directions of greatest tensile stress in the lava flow as it cools, and the hexagonal joint patterns are generated by cracks forming at right angles to these maximum stress lines.
A common feature of some flows, particularly of the pahoehoe type, are lava tunnels or lava tubes.
These form as a result of the continuing movement of lava below a surface crust.
A main feeder lava tunnel often branches towards the terminus of a flow rather like the distributaries of a river delta.
A deep and often sinuous lava channel can form if the roof of a lava tunnel subsequently collapses.
In low-viscosity lavas features known as lava levees may also develop.
These consist of solidified fragments of lava which are piled up on either side of a flow by the hotter lava moving more rapidly in the centre of the flow.
5.2.3.2 Tephra
Tephra can be categorized on the basis of the size of the pyroclasts of which it is composed.
The finest material (< 2 mm across) is termed ash when freshly deposited, and volcanic tuff when compacted, while material of intermediate size (2–64 mm across) is called lapilli.
The largest calibre pyroclasts (> 64 mm across), which usually show some degree of rounding, are known as volcanic bombs.
Volcanic bombs become partially streamlined and rounded as they are thrown through the air or pass rapidly through the magma in the neck of a volcano when they are violently erupted.
Volcanic bombs can be composed of either lava, or of preexisting rock which has become incorporated into the magma in the neck of a volcano.
Most volcanic bombs are relatively small, being about the size of a football, but much larger bombs can be produced in very violent eruptions.
For instance, in one eruption of the Andean volcano Cotopaxi a 200 t volcanic bomb was hurled a distance of 14 km.
Volcanic eruptions invariably generate pyroclasts of a range of sizes.
The resulting tephra is deposited predominantly downwind and forms well-bedded deposits which become progressively finer upwards.
This size-grading occurs because the coarser material generated by an eruption is heavier and is therefore deposited first.
For the same reason large-calibre pyroclasts are concentrated close to the site of eruption, whereas ash can be dispersed over distances of hundreds, or even thousands, of kilometres.
Such ash forms a progressively thinner deposit as the distance from the site  of eruption increases.
In regions of highly active volcanism tephra can periodically blanket the landscape.
Since it can be dated radiometrically tephra provides a valuable stratigraphic marker and a means both of determining the minimum age of the landsurface on which it is deposited, and of recording the activity of particular volcanoes.
So valuable has the dating of tephra become that it has been given a specific name — tephrochronology.
In Iceland each major volcanic eruption has resulted in a layer of tephra being deposited, and in many cases these have covered much of the country.
Tephra horizons are also widespread in New Zealand where ashes of Late Quaternary age cover about half of the North Island.
5.2.3.3 Pyroclastic flow deposits
In some kinds of violent volcanic eruptions pyroclasts combine with large quantities of hot gases to form a fluid-like flow which is capable of moving very rapidly even over very low gradients.
The great mobility of these pyroclastic flows is attributable to the volume of hot gas present and the heating of engulfed air which renders the solid material highly buoyant.
An alternative term for such flows is nuées ardentes (literally burning clouds).
As a result of their great mobility pyroclastic flows can generate pyroclastic flow deposits, or ignimbrites, which cover a large area.
The ignimbrites of the Lake Toba region in Sumatra extend over 25 000 km 2, while those of the Taupo-Rotorua area in the North Island of New Zealand cover more than 26 000 km 2.
Although ignimbrites can be unconsolidated deposits, the pyroclasts are frequently so hot when deposited that the contained gas is expelled and the individual particles are welded together to form a compact, impervious rock.
5.2.3.4 Volcanic products associated with water
Magma contains up to 4 per cent water by weight, and some volcanic activity takes the form of eruptions of super-heated water and steam from geysers (Fig. 4.3).
Such hydrothermal activity is most common during the later stages of volcanism.
High concentrations of dissolved material, especially silica and calcium carbonate, are often contained in hydrothermal solutions, and on cooling this material is precipitated to form sinter.
Where volcanic debris is mixed with water a rapidly moving mud flow, or lahar, can be produced.
Lahars can be a direct result of an eruption, where for instance freshly ejected lava or pyroclasts melt ice or snow, or they can occur as a result of the destabilization of the unconsolidated volcanic debris on the slope of a volcano by an earthquake, or as a result of heavy rain.
In some cases lahars travel large distances and form thick deposits up to tens of metres deep.
The 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens, Washington, U S A, led to a lahar which flowed some 27 km down the valley of the Toutle River and filled the valley bottom to a depth of 60 m.
Equally catastrophic results can arise when volcanic activity occurs beneath a glacier.
This has been a relatively frequent event in Iceland and it can lead to the rapid melting of large volumes of ice and the release of enormous quantities of water, creating a cataclysmic flood known as a jokulhlaup (although such floods can also be produced by other means (see Section 11.4.1)).
5.3 Volcanoes
5.3.1 Types of eruption
Volcanic eruptions involve the rapid release of enormous quantities of energy.
A typical violent eruption from an individual volcano has an energy of between 10 12 and 10 15 J. This compares with the 10 16 J released by a one megaton hydrogen bomb.
But major eruptions involve much larger amounts of energy.
For instance, the 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens was equivalent to about 30 one megaton hydrogen bombs, while the cataclysmic eruption of Laki in Iceland in 1783 had an estimated energy of 10 20 J (equivalent to 10000 one megaton hydrogen bombs).
The initial form of a volcano is very closely related to the nature of the eruptive activity that produces it.
Eruptions can be of three primary types, each associated with a particular form of ejecta — exhalative (gas), effusive (lava) and explosive (tephra).
All volcanic activity involves the expulsion of some gas but major landforms are only formed through the eruption of lava or tephra.
None the less, gas is crucial in the actual mechanisms which control the kind of eruptive activity that occurs (Fig. 5.7).
Various attempts have been made to categorize types of volcanic activity on the basis of the nature of the material erupted, and the violence of eruptive events.
A simplified version of such a classification is presented in Table 5.2.
As magma rises towards the surface it exerts a considerable pressure on the overlying rock.
Of particular importance F is the pressure exerted by the gas (especially CO 2, SO 2 and water vapour) which is formed through the release of volatiles and by the conversion of ground water to steam.
The first manifestation of volcanic activity at the surface is normally the exhalation of gas from tensional fractures.
The character of the ensuing volcanism is largely a function of the viscosity of the magma which is, in turn, dependent on its chemical composition and temperature.
As the magma rises towards the surface the confining pressure drops and gas bubbles begin to form and move upwards.
In fluid magmas, such as those of basaltic composition, these gas bubbles can expand freely.
Consequently, on reaching the surface they have a comparatively low residual pressure and explosive activity is very limited.
This contrasts with the situation for a viscous magma such as rhyolite in which gas expansion is constrained in the lower levels of the magma column.
On reaching the surface the residual gas pressure is consequently   very high and this results in the violent bursting of gas bubbles in the magma and the generation of highly explosive eruptions which generate large volumes of tephra.
The emission of hydrothermal solutions, steam and other gases without significant quantities of fragmental material or lava can give rise to minor landforms.
Vents through which steam or gas are emitted are known as fumaroles or solfataras, while the precipitation of minerals such as silica and calcium carbonate around a vent can create a sinter mound.
Mud volcanoes are rather more impressive features which may attain elevations of up to 100 m, eruptions of mud arising from the heating of shallow ground water.
If the confining   pressure at the surface is reduced by some mechanism, such as the draining of a pool, steam may be generated and any overlying fine-grained sediments liquefied.
The complexity of some volcanic eruptions is illustrated by the detailed observations made of Mount St Helens in 1980.
After 123 a of quiescence, noticeable seismic activity began on 20 March, 1980.
A week later the first steam and ash began to erupt from a newly formed crater on the summit.
During April the movement of magma within the volcano was indicated by a bulge which began to develop on its northeastern flank; by 23 April this had grown to 100 m and was expanding at a daily rate of 1.5 m.
On 18 May a magnitude 5 earthquake triggered a failure of the bulge and a huge landslide crashed down the mountain.
This caused the instantaneous release of gas and steam which had been confined under high pressure and the whole northern flank of the volcano was removed by an enormous lateral blast.
Hot gas, steam and tephra devastated an area of 600 km 2 and pyroclastic flow deposits covered several square kilometres.
A vertical eruption carried volcanic debris to an altitude of 25km and overall the elevation of Mount St Helens was reduced by 350 m.
5.3.2 Volcano morphology
The form of a volcano is controlled by several variables.
The most fundamental is the type of magma present since this influences both the type of eruption and the nature of the erupted material.
Eruptions can occur through either fissures or vents, again depending on magma type.
Andesitic eruptions typically occur from a single central vent, while both basaltic and, to a lesser extent, rhyolitic eruptions are more often associated with fissures, in part because the major phase of expansion in these forms of volcanism occurs near to the surface.
The most violent eruptions in fact leave some of the least impressive landforms; in extreme cases these consist simply of a broad depression surrounded by a plateau of ignimbrite.
The eruption of highly viscous lava, such as that formed by the degassing of rhyolite or andesite, can create large domes which may reach a height of several hundred metres and a width of several kilometres.
Small domes composed of viscous lava may form within craters.
These can be either rounded tholoids, cylindrical plug domes or irregular cumulo-domes.
Highly explosive eruptions of gas-charged magma originating in the upper mantle produce small, shallow craters called maars.
A change in magma composition may occur during a single eruption as different parts of the magma chamber are tapped, but more significant compositional changes, often leading to the production of more acidic ejecta, may arise during the overall lifespan of a volcano as a result of chemical changes in the magma reservoir.
The duration of both an individual eruption and the overall lifespan of a volcano will also affect its form, and its size.
The length of single eruptive episode, which can range from a few days to several years, will depend on the eruptive energy available once the ground surface is broken.
The total active life of a volcano, possibly involving hundreds of individual eruptions and spanning up to hundreds of thousands of years, will be related to much more deep-seated processes associated with the heat source promoting crustal melting and magma generation.
Volcanoes are highly variable in their morphology and are therefore very difficult to classify satisfactorily.
Moreover, size itself is an important factor since greater quantities of lava or tephra do not simply produce landforms of a similar form but larger size.
Rather volcanoes can be said to have a morphological capacity representing the maximum size attainable by a particular type of eruption and associated ejecta.
For instance, cinder cones, which are composed entirely of tephra, are structurally too weak to attain a large size (Fig. 5.8).
Consequently all large volcanoes are composed of lava, or a mixture of lava and tephra.
This notion of morphological capacity is evident in Table 5.3 and Figure 5.9 in which the main types of volcanic landforms are classified and illustrated.
Once created, denudational processes can rapidly modify the original constructional form of a volcano.
The rate of this modification will be a function of the resistance to weathering and erosion of the volcanic materials laid down, the initial relief created by the volcano and the prevailing climatic environment.
The effect of erosion on volcano morphology is beautifully illustrated in the Hawaiian Islands where the degree of dissection of each island is proportional to the time elapsed since volcanic activity ceased.
The island of Hawaii itself is currently active and shows little sign of erosion (Fig. 5.10), whereas the island of Kauai, where most volcanic activity ceased around 4Ma BP, is deeply eroded and cut by spectacular valleys (Fig. 5.11).
hd 5.3.3 Basalt domes and shield volcanoes
The low viscosity of basaltic lavas means that extensive flows are more common than distinct cones.
Where lava erupts from a single vent a low exogenous dome may be formed from a succession of flows, but basaltic lava flows so readily that such features will only develop on nearly level surfaces.
Exogenous domes grade upwards in size to shield volcanoes which, together with plateaus formed by flood basalts or ignimbrite sheets, rank as the largest volcanic landforms.
The smaller versions range in height from 100m to 1000 m, but because their slopes typically have low gradients (usually < 10°) they may have basal diameters of 2–20 km.
The largest examples are to be found on oceanic lithosphere marking the site of hot spots.
The greatest group of shield volcanoes on Earth forms the island of Hawaii.
The two major volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea, have attained elevations of over 4000m above sea level, but they rise      more than 9000 m from the floor of the Pacific Ocean from a base well in excess of 200 km across (Fig. 5.12).
Nevertheless, these dimensions are dwarfed by the enormous volcanoes now known to exist on Mars, the highest of which, Olympus Mons, rises 26 km from the planet's surface (see Section 19.3.2).
5.3.4 Strato-volcanoes
More common than purely basaltic lava volcanoes are those comprising a mixture of tephra and lava.
Such cones are known as strato-volcanoes or composite volcanoes.
They often assume a highly symmetric form with slopes at, or close to, the angle of stability of the ejecta (Fig. 3.12).
Large strato-volcanoes invariably contain lava flows which help to support the weight of overlying tephra and in fact most contain a complex network of lava flows together with horizontal   and vertical igneous intrusions known respectively as sills and dykes (dikes)(Fig. 5.13)(see Section 5.5).
Rather than having straight slopes, strato-volcanoes typically have concave profiles.
Such a slope form has been variously attributed to the effects of lava flows emitted from the summit crater, the changing angle of slope stability in response to a change in the particle-size characteristics of the tephra ejected, and the effects of slumping.
But such a form can also be anticipated from the pattern of deposition of tephra as an ash cloud spreads out from the summit crater during an eruption over a wedge-shaped sector of the cone, the rate of ash fall-out being the reciprocal of the distance from the vent.
Although this effect may be instrumental in creating the characteristic concave profile, it is the subsequent formation of lava flows and development of intrusions within the cone that support the structure of the volcano and allow its form to persist.
5.3.5 Calderas
Calderas are sometimes simply defined as large craters, the lower size limit normally being a diameter of 2 km.
Although arbitrary, this size limit can be related to the idea of morphological capacity since craters below this size are normally a constructional component of strato-volcanoes, whereas those above are nearly always formed by subsidence and collapse following catastrophic eruptions.
Such explosion calderas formed by rapid collapse after the evacuation of underlying magma chambers are relatively common on the summits of large strato-volcanoes and should be distinguished from the subsidence calderas of large shield volcanoes which are associated with the non-explosive eruption of basaltic lavas.
Calderas created by violent explosions can be of enormous size.
One on the Yellowstone Plateau in Wyoming, U S A, covers an area of around 2500 km 2 and forms a large basin partly filled by massive sheets of ignimbrite.
Smaller, but still impressive, calderas are to be found at the summits of strato-volcanoes.
An example often cited is Crater Lake in Oregon, U S A. (Fig. 5.14).
Here a 600 m deep lake occupies a 9 km diameter crater (Fig. 5.15).
The frequent association of massive quantities of ignimbrite with large calderas suggests a genetic link.
A favoured hypothesis is that the persistence of a large body of magma allows it to become vertically stratified with the more viscous and gas-rich component accumulating towards the top (Fig. 5.16).
An unknown mechanism which causes the magma to subside leads  to a drop in pressure which promotes a rapid expansion of gas and tephra through fissures in the cone above.
This initial eruption further lowers the pressure in the magma chamber and more eruptions are generated.
5.4 Other extrusive igneous landforms
We have already noted how certain kinds of highly explosive eruptions can produce massive pyroclastic flows which create sheets of ignimbrite.
In some cases these can completely  cover the topography over an extensive area and form an ignimbrite plateau.
It is the eruption of low viscosity basaltic lavas, however, that is responsible for the construction of the most impressive and extensive volcanic landforms.
Basaltic magmas are normally expelled at the surface in a very hot and fluid state, and the resulting lavas are often able to flow over considerable distances.
Thus, in addition to forming shield volcanoes and domes, basaltic lavas erupting from an extensive regional system of fissures can generate flood basalts and create massive basalt plateaus.
Small-scale basalt eruptions can fill valleys and in some cases over-top interfluves: but large-scale flood basalts can completely bury a pre-existing topography as great numbers of superimposed individual flows build up a basalt plateau.
The Columbia Plateau, which covers 130 000 km 2 of the states of Washington and Oregon in the north-west USA, is composed of hundreds of separate basalt flows of Miocene age which in places reach a total thickness of 2000 m and have buried a pre-existing relief of more than 1500 m.
Even more extensive examples are the Deccan Plateau of India which covers more than 500 000 km 2 and the vast Parana Plateau which extends over some 750 000 km 2 of Uruguay and southern Brazil.
The location and age of these massive outpourings of basalt — Cretaceous to Eocene in India and Early Jurassic in South America — suggest that they were associated with the break-up of Gondwana (see Section 4.5.2).
The Early Jurassic Karoo basalts of southern Africa have been reduced by erosion to an area of 50 000 km 2, but originally they were probably ten times as extensive.
This is suggested by the widespread occurrence in southern Africa of thick dolerite intrusions which are contemporaneous with the Karoo flood basalts and which themselves have created significant thickening of the sedimentary sequences into which they are intruded.
Since highly fluid flows have an initial slope of only around 1° they form monotonously flat constructional landscapes.
Nevertheless the erosion of such landscapes can expose the successive lava flows which may then form low, but laterally persistent, cliff-like faces in which the hexagonal joint patterns that are sometimes developed in basalt are visible.
More generally, the great weight of basalt erupted at the surface may, in some cases, be sufficient to promote significant isostatic subsidence in the underlying bedrock.
5.5 Landforms associated with igneous intrusions
Igneous intrusions form through the penetration of country rock by a mobile body of igneous rock which need not be   molten.
If subject to stress for a sufficiently long period of time all ‘solid’ materials are capable of flow.
The length of time required for a solid to flow rather than fracture is known as its rheidity and the type of flow produced is termed rheid flow.
The rheidity of ice is a few weeks, that of salt about a year, but igneous rocks will only exhibit rheid flow after a stress has been applied for hundreds of years, in the case of deeply buried rocks subject to elevated temperatures, or tens of thousands of years for rocks at the surface.
Consequently, intrusions can be formed either by molten rock or by rock experiencing rheid flow.
Intrusions can be composed of a wide range of rock types, although very large intrusions with a surface exposure of over 100 km 2 known as batholiths, often have an acidic granitic composition (Fig. 5.17).
(Granite masses originate at depth and rise very slowly to the surface as diapirs over   millions of years.
The process involved is known as diapirism, and diapirs rise because the hot rock of which they are composed is less dense than the cooler surrounding country rock.
Diapirism involves both the moving aside of overlying strata and its partial reincorporation into the rising mass of rock.
Pods of country rock surrounded by intrusive material create roof pendants when subsequently exposed by erosion (Fig. 5.17).
Processes along continental-margin subduction zones often lead to the formation of massive granite batholiths which play an important part in orogenesis.
They frequently underlie and support the most elevated sectors of continental-margin orogens, as is the case in the Andes (see Section 3.3.1).
An important factor in the mode of landscape development on granite batholiths once they are sub-aerially exposed is the joint structure that they form.
Initially, three sets of largely orthogonal joints develop, but as the overlying rock is unloaded by erosion the release of pressure in the upper 100m or so of the batholith generates a secondary set of joints aligned roughly parallel with the surface.
These joint systems play an important role in the development of weathering forms (see Section 6.3.1) and of drainage patterns (see Section 16.2.2).
In contrast to the irregular form characteristic of acidic granite batholiths, large basic intrusions which typically have a gabbro-type composition are normally layered and have an overall saucer shape (Fig. 5.17).
Such intrusions, which rarely attain the dimensions of batholiths, are known as lopoliths and their layered structure tends to lead to the formation of series of outward-facing scarps as they are exposed by erosion.
Small intrusions occur both in association with larger forms, and with extrusive igneous phenomena.
They can be conveniently categorized as concordant or discordant depending on whether or not they cut across the bedding of the pre-existing strata (Fig. 5.17).
The form they take is a function of both the viscosity of the magma and the configuration of fractures and other lines of weakness in the country rock.
Where exposed by erosion even quite small intrusions can be significant features in the landscape, especially if they are composed of a rock type which is markedly more resistant to weathering than the adjacent strata.
Dykes are vertically discordant intrusions often composed of dolerite and they frequently exist in swarms.
They are typically 1–20 m across although much greater dimensions occur; the Great Dyke of Zimbabwe averages 6–8 km across     and is over 500 km in length.
In some cases curved concentric series of dykes radiate outward and upward from a common magma chamber at depth; such features are described as cone sheets.
As with other intrusions, dykes form either positive or negative features depending on whether they are more or less resistant than the surrounding rock (Fig. 5.18).
The most a really extensive small intrusion is a sheet-like form called a sill.
Sills can be hundreds of metres thick but 10 m-30 m is a more typical range.
If formed from viscous magma they are normally limited in lateral extent but where composed of basic rocks they may extend for thousands of square kilometres.
The vast series of dolerite sills which have intruded the Karoo sediments of southern Africa underlie an area of over 500 000 km 2 and probably constitute a total volume of in excess of 200 000 km 2 .
In this region, as in many others, the intruded rock is more resistant than the surrounding country rock and gives rise to prominent topographic features (Fig. 7.26).
A laccolith is a type of sill which has thickened to produce a dome which causes the overlying rock to be upwarped.
Perhaps the most noted examples of this kind of structure are provided by the Henry Mountains in Utah, U S A (Fig. 5.19).
These formed the topic of a classic study by G. K. Gilbert published in 1877.
Subsequent investigations have led to some revisions of Gilbert's original findings and it is now thought by some researchers that the laccoliths radiate from central discordant intrusions known as stocks (Fig. 5.17).
Uplift associated with the intrusion of these stocks has given rise to several peaks rising some 1500 m above the surrounding Colorado Plateau.
Further reading
There are a number of texts on the nature of volcanic activity and the development of volcanic landforms.
Excellent general introductions to volcanic processes are provided by Bullard (1976), Decker and Decker (1989), Francis (1976), MacDonald (1972), Rittmann (1962) and Williams and McBirney (1979).
Volcanic landforms are considered more specifically in the classic work by Cotton (1944) and in the more recent books by Ollier (1988) and Green and Short (1971).
Examples of more detailed analyses of volcanic landforms in particular regions are to be found in Soons and Selby (1982)(New Zealand) and Yoshikawa et al.(1981)(Japan).
Ollier (1988) discusses the various types of volcanic products and their associated landforms in some detail.
Spry (1962) considers the development of columnar joints in basalts while Walker (1973) examines the factors that determine the length of lava flows.
Self and Sparks (1981) contains papers on various aspects of tephra, and Fisler and Schmincke (1984) and Sparks et al.(1973) deal with pyroclastic flow deposits.
Factors controlling the global occurrence of volcanism are evaluated by Clapperton (1977) while more detailed analyses of volcano spacing are presented by Mohr and Wood (1976) and Vogt (1974).
Menard (1986) discusses volcanism with particular reference to oceanic islands.
The characteristics of the various types of volcanic eruption are considered in the general texts mentioned above.
For examples of particular eruptions see Self and Rampino (1981) and Simkin and Fiske (1983) on the cataclysmic Krakatau eruption of 1883 and the extremely detailed and fully illustrated collection of papers on the 1980 Mount St Helens eruption edited by Lipman and Mullineaux (1981).
Chester et al.(1985) provide a detailed analysis of Mount Etna, while Decker et al.(1987) present a comprehensive study of volcanism in Hawaii.
The catastrophic collapse of volcanoes is discussed by Francis and Self (1987) and the global occurrence of different volcano types is assessed by Suzuki (1977).
Landforms associated with intrusions are considered by Sparks (1971), while the classic work by Gilbert (1877) on laccolith structures in the Henry Mountains, Utah has been reassessed by Hunt (1953).
Ollier and Pain (1981) consider an interesting case of an apparent diapir of gneiss that has risen to create a major domal landform.
Part III
Exogenic processes and landforms
6 Weathering and associated landforms
6.1 The weathering system
Material carried to the sea by rivers, or transported by glaciers or the wind, experiences some degree of chemical decomposition or physical breakdown prior to being eroded.
Weathering is therefore an appropriate place to begin our look at the operation and effects of exogenic geomorphic processes.
Geomorphologists are concerned with the rates at which different weathering processes operate as a function of environmental conditions, and with the nature of the weathered material that is produced.
But they are also especially interested in how weathering gives rise to specific landforms.
This contrasts with, for instance, the soil scientist's interest in weathering which stems from a concern for the way it contributes to differences in soil characteristics and the release and movement of nutrients.
6.1.1 The nature of weathering
Weathering can be divided into those processes involving chemical reactions and the formation of new minerals (chemical weathering) and those that involve only physical changes (physical weathering).
Although the differences between these two types of weathering are distinct in theory, in practice they rarely operate separately; rather, the effects of one aid the operation of the other.
For instance, a rock shattered through physical weathering will be more liable to chemical weathering because of the increased surface area made available for chemical reactions.
Conversely, chemical weathering along microfractures in a rock will weaken it and help physical processes break it down more rapidly.
Weathering can be defined as the adjustment of the chemical, mineralogical and physical properties of rocks in response to environmental conditions prevailing at the Earth's surface.
For some igneous and metamorphic rocks formed at great depths and at high temperatures and pressures this adjustment can involve a complete transformation of their constituent minerals.
Weathering occurs through complex interactions between the lithosphere, the atmosphere, the hydrosphere and the biosphere, and gives rise to three major types of product.
Chemical processes lead to the release of compounds in solution and the creation of new mineral products, while physical processes cause the breakdown of the original rock into smaller particles.
Dissolved material may subsequently be reprecipitated or be reincorporated into other minerals, but the great proportion is carried by rivers to the ocean.
6.1.2 Water in rocks and soils
Water plays a vital role in nearly all mechanisms of physical and chemical weathering.
This arises in part from the fact that it is a polar solvent; that is, the covalently bonded H 2 O molecule has a positive charge at each end balanced by a negative charge in the middle.
The positive and negative parts of water molecules become attached,
I respectively, to the anions and cations of solids and free them by neutralizing their charge; water is thus a highly effective solvent.
A second significant property of water is its ionized state.
A proportion of H 2 O molecules are always decomposed into hydrogen ions (H +;) and hydroxyl ions (OH-)(a state known as dissociation), the concentration of H +; ions being expressed as pH.
This is defined as the negative logarithm to the base 10 of the H +; concentration in grams per litre.
At the standard temperature of 25° C there are  of H +; ions per litre of pure water, giving a neutral pH of 7.
Lower pH values indicate acidity (higher concentration of H +; ions), and higher values represent alkalinity (lower concentration of H +; ions).
It is important to bear in mind that a change in pH of one unit represents a tenfold change in hydrogen ion concentration.
Water may enter the soil or bedrock simply through percolation through interconnected voids between particles under the force of gravity.
But gravity is not the only factor controlling the distribution and movement of water in rock or soil, as is apparent from the ability of water to move laterally and upward as well as downward.
The most important mechanism whereby horizontal and upward movements of moisture can occur is the capillary suction which affects the water films attached to soil and rock particles.
This suction effect can be readily illustrated by imagining the rise of water in a thin (capillary) tube through surface tension effects.
If such a tube is placed vertically into a tank of water the level of the water in the tube will rise above that in the tank.
The rise is a result of the capillary suction which acts against the force of gravity.
The suction is relatively more effective in comparison with the effects of gravity in a thin tube because the circumference of the tube (along which the suction effect operates) is large relative to its cross-sectional area (to which the effect of gravity is proportional).
Interconnected pores in soils and rock possess a suction in a manner analogous to a capillary tube and this can be measured by the upward movement of water against the force of gravity.
Water in fine-grained materials with small pores experiences a greater capillary suction in just the same way that the height to which water rises in a capillary tube increases as the diameter of the tube decreases.
Capillary suction, together with the force of gravity, therefore influence both the movement and distribution of water in soil and rock, and the interaction of these two factors gives rise to four zones of moisture storage (Fig. 6.1).
Below the water table rock and soil pores are saturated; water movement is controlled by gravity and is subject to hydrostatic pressure, that is pressure exerted by the weight of overlying water.
Above the water table capillary suction provides an additional control.
A zone of capillary saturation exists immediately above in which the moisture content, which does not vary with depth, is present in the form of continuous films of water around particles with entrapped air between.
Above this zone the moisture content decreases upward to a point where the continuous film of moisture eventually separates into discrete droplets.
The two zones characterized by continuous moisture films are referred to collectively as the capillary fringe, the depth of which depends on pore size.
In materials composed of sand-sized particles this depth is just a few millimetres, but in clay-sized materials in which the voids are  or less across it can be tens of metres.
The rate of capillary movement in very fine pores is, however, so slow that the theoretical equilibrium height over which capillary rise should occur is rarely attained in such cases.
6.2 Chemical weathering
6.2.1 Chemical characteristics of rock-forming minerals
There are two main types of chemical bond existing between atoms contained in the compounds constituting the Earth's rock-forming minerals — ionic bonds and covalent bonds.
Atoms with eight electrons in their outermost (valence) shell are chemically stable, but all the elements with which we are concerned have either more or less than this stable number.
Those with one additional electron readily lose it and become positively charged ions (cations)(for instance, K +;, Na +;) and those with one less tend to gain an electron and become negatively charged ions (anions)(for example , F-, Cl-).
For other elements the loss or gain of two electrons similarly creates ions with a double charge (for instance, Ca +;, O 2 -).
Such ions are stable on their own but only form stable compounds when their electrostatic charge is neutralized by ionic bonding.
In those elements which gain or lose three or more electrons in becoming ions, adjacent atoms can share electrons through covalent bonding.
Some elements, such as oxygen, are able to form both covalent and ionic bonds.
This is a simplified picture because in reality most chemical bonds in the majority of rock-forming minerals are intermediate between ionic and covalent (Fig. 6.2).
As the bonds with oxygen are particularly important in rock-forming minerals Table 6.1 gives estimates of the proportion    of bonding of an ionic type for a number of common elements.
Although the relative dimensions of ions (indicated in Table 6.1 by ionic radius) can be used to predict the general form of crystalline compounds where the bonds are largely ionic (such as the cubic structure of fluorite (, Fig. 6.2)), most rock-forming minerals are built from complicated silicate structures with complex charge patterns (Fig. 6.3)
6.2.2 Chemical reactions: thermodynamics and kinetics
Although chemical weathering reflects the tendency for new minerals to be formed which are stable under conditions prevailing at the Earth's surface, the rate at which these stable forms are produced is often very slow.
This necessitates two complementary approaches to the study of chemical weathering: thermodynamics considers the ultimately stable forms by analysing the energy changes involved in chemical reactions, while kinetics focuses on rates and mechanisms of change.
The thermodynamic approach can be illustrated using a simple mechanical analogy (Fig. 6.4).
All substances contain various amounts of energy within their chemical structures in rather the same way that the ball in Figure 6.4 possesses a potential energy proportional to its height above some datum.
When chemical reactions occur energy is usually liberated as heat (although in some kinds of reactions heat is absorbed) just as the ball loses potential energy as it moves downslope.
This liberation of heat represents a net release of free energy ()(more strictly referred to as Gibbs free energy).
Whether a particular chemical reaction is likely to occur is related to the change in free energy involved.
This can be calculated by subtracting the sum of all the free energies of the reacting   substances from the sum of the free energies of the reaction products.
If the calculated free energy change is negative this indicates that the reaction will occur spontaneously; the larger the negative value the more readily the reaction will occur and the more stable the reaction products will be in comparison with the original reactants.
Unfortunately, weathering processes and products cannot be understood simply in terms of the formation of stable mineral forms since many minerals are abundant on the Earth's surface even though thermodynamic considerations tell us that they are unstable.
We therefore have to consider the kinetics of weathering by examining those factors which affect the late of chemical reactions.
A fundamental control is the degree of instability of the reacting system, or in our mechanical analogy (Fig. 6.4), how far up the slope our ball is located.
Another crucial factor is the concentration of reactants; in the case of a solution (such as soil water) reacting with a solid (such as a rock) this will be related to the surface area of contact between the water and the constituent minerals of the rock.
A fine-grained, permeable rock, for instance, will provide a much greater surface area than a densely cemented, massive rock.
Temperature is another significant factor; this is expressed in the Arrhenius equation which indicates that reaction rates approximately double for each 10° C rise in temperature.
Catalysts can also greatly speed up chemical reactions, as is illustrated by the familiar oxidation of iron.
In completely dry air this reaction proceeds very slowly, but with the addition of water as a catalyst the rate of oxidation increases dramatically.
A further important control is the intensity of leaching, the downward movement of water through the weathering zone which leads to the removal of soluble products.
6.2.3 Chemical weathering processes
6.2.3.1 Solution
Solution (or dissolution) is the simplest process whereby minerals can be decomposed and involves water acting as a  solvent.
The dissolution of quartz a crystalline form of silica) provides an example:
The equilibrium solubility of a mineral represents the extent to which it will dissolve in water; it is usually expressed in ppm (parts per million by volume) or .
Some minerals, such as halite (), are highly soluble in earth surface environments but others, such as quartz, have a very low equilibrium solubility and dissolve in pure water at an exceedingly slow rate.
Equilibrium solubility is affected by the temperature and pH of the environment (Fig. 6.5) while the rate of throughput of water is important in controlling the rate of dissolution.
This last variable is particularly significant as the film of water in direct contact with the mineral surface eventually becomes saturated with solutes, thereby hindering further dissolution.
Consequently the saturated zone must be constantly flushed by undersaturated water if dissolution is to be an effective mechanism.
Some minerals have a marked ability to absorb into their crystal structure through a reversible known as hydration.
This can be illustrated by the hydration of iron oxide: This reaction is significant in chemical weathering because it aids other chemical processes by introducing water molecules deep into crystal structures.
6.2.3.2 Hydrolysis
In addition to acting as a solvent, water may react directly with minerals through hydrolysis.
This involves the replacement of metal cations (most commonly K +;, Na +;, Ca2 +; and Mg 2 +;) in a mineral lattice by H +; ions and the combining of these released cations with hydroxyl (OH-) ions.
The effects of this process can be illustrated by crushing different minerals in pure water.
The resulting abrasion pH indicates the amount of exchange between H +; ions in the water and cations in the mineral, the increase in pH being due to the abstraction of the H +; ions from the water (Table 6.2).
The basic hydrolysis reaction can be illustrated by the of the silicate mineral albite (a sodium-rich plagioclase feldspar mineral kaolinite:
Note that some of the silicon is retained in kaolinite and that sodium is removed in solution.
This reaction leads to the production of hydroxyl ions and would make pore and surface waters alkaline, yet in most environments these waters are neutral to slightly acid.
Consequently, we can conclude that hydrolysis as such is not a realistic weathering reaction.
6.2.3.3 Carbonatian
The bicarbonate ion () is invariably present in weathering solutions and is easily the most abundant anion in most surface waters.
It is formed from the dissolution and dissociation of carbon dioxide in water in a reversible reaction:
Carbon dioxide is fixed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and enters the weathering system through the intermediary of respiration by plant roots and the breakdown of plant debris by bacteria.
Carbon dioxide is   consequently abundant in the atmosphere of soils, especially those characterized by high rates of organic activity; it may reach a concentration of 10 per cent(in comparison with 0.035 per cent in the free atmosphere).
The dissolution of carbon dioxide in precipitation provides an additional source of bicarbonate ions.
Surface waters are in fact weak carbonic acid solutions and we can write a more realistic reaction for the weathering of albite in which the release of metal cations (in this case sodium) is matched by the production of bicarbonate ions, a reaction termed carbonation:
In humid tropical environments, where organic activity is very high and leaching intense, we would expect silica to be removed in solution as silicic acid:
In humid tropical environments the leaching of metal cations from silicate minerals is controlled by the supply of acids; this not only involves carbonic acid, although this is the most pervasive, but also sulphuric acid and, more significantly, a range of organic acids.
Carbonation plays a particularly important role in the weathering of calcareous rocks.
Limestones contain a high proportion of calcium carbonate (nearly always in the form of the mineral calcite) and its weathering involves complex reversible reactions with carbon dioxide in the soil or subterranean atmosphere and carbonic acid in natural waters  (Fig. 6.6).
In the weathering of calcite, half of the bicarbonate is derived from the calcite itself: The factors controlling the efficacy of limestone solution are complex (Fig. 6.7) but the role of temperature is of particular interest.
Whereas the rate of chemical reaction between carbonic acid and calcite increases, as we would expect, with temperature, the equilibrium solubility of carbon dioxide decreases with temperature (at 20°C it is only half that at 0°C).
This has the effect that high   concentrations of carbonic acid can be attained in cold regions even though the rate of production of carbon dioxide by organic activity in such environments is relatively low.
The mixing of saturated waters with different equilibrium solubility concentrations can also cause further decomposition of calcite (Fig. 6.8).
The concentration of dissolved  in surface waters varies considerably.
Tropical waters are frequently found to be supersaturated with respect to the prevailing pH levels and the equilibrium concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide.
This suggests that the solution of limestone in such areas must be controlled by components other than carbonic acid and it seems likely that organic acids play a major role.
6.2.3.4 Oxidation and reduction
Oxidation is the process whereby an atom or ion loses an electron and thus acquires an increase in its positive charge or decrease in its negative charge.
Oxygen dissolved in water is by far the most common oxidizing agent.
The reaction can be reversed by reduction which involves the gaining of an electron.
Oxidation acts as a weathering process in two distinct ways.
Various elements, such as iron, titanium, manganese and sulphur can be oxidized to form oxides or hydroxides.
For iron this reaction is written: Iron usually exists in the bivalent ferrous state (Fe 2 +;) in most rock-forming minerals, but it can be converted by oxidation to the trivalent ferric form (Fe 3 +;) with the effect that the neutral charge of the crystal structure is upset and can only be regained by the loss of other cations.
This mechanism can lead to the collapse of the mineral lattice (as in the formation of the clay mineral vermiculite from biotite) and it also renders a mineral more vulnerable to the operation of other weathering processes.
The tendency for oxidation or reduction to occur is indicated by the redox potential (Eh) of the environment.
This is measured in units of millivolts (mV), with positive values registering an oxidizing potential and negative values a reducing potential.
Abundant oxygen is dissolved in most surface waters and the Eh is predominantly positive in weathering environments; that is, oxidation occurs spontaneously, though not necessarily rapidly.
However, in some localities, such as below the water table and in waterlogged soils, reducing conditions can prevail.
Eh also varies with pH, becoming generally lower as alkalinity increases.
This relationship can be seen clearly by plotting pH and Eh values measured in various Earth surface environments (Fig. 6.9).
Where a particular environment is located on such an Eh-pH diagram provides a useful indication of the nature of chemical reactions that are likely to occur.
6.2.3.5 Cation Exchange
Cation exchange is the substitution of one cation for another of a different element in a mineral structure.
This can occur with any mineral, but it is by far the most common in clay minerals which typically have rather loosely bonded cations on their surfaces which can be readily exchanged for cations in solution.
Each type of clay mineral has a different propensity for the exchange of cations which can be measured by its cation exchange capacity (c.e.c.) in units of milliequivalents per 100 g () of clay.
The mechanism is extremely important in the alteration of one clay mineral to another.
The two cations most readily absorbed on to clay minerals are H +; and Ca 2 +;, and the cation most easily released is Na 2 +;.
Cation exchange capacity is affected by the pH of the surrounding solution since under acidic conditions H +; readily replaces metal cations.
Where the environment is alkaline, however, metal cations are less easily detached even replace H +; adsorbed on to a mineral surface.
6.2.3.6 Organic processes
We have already referred to the role of organic acids in chemical weathering, the anions of which may be important in the removal of metal cations from silicate minerals and in the dissolution of carbonates.
However, it is the formation of chelating agents by organic processes that is of particular significance in weathering.
These are able to mobilize metal cations, such as Fe 3 +; and Al 3 +;, which are virtually insoluble under normal Eh-pH conditions, a process known as chelation.
Chelating agents can come from various sources, but most are organic compounds either secreted directly by organisms such as lichen, or formed through the decomposition of humus in the soil.
Although the effects of chelation are well known its detailed mechanisms are not.
It appears that a stable ring structure is formed between complexing agents and metal cations.
The structure may be subsequently broken down by microbial activity and the complexed cation precipitated.
The dark staining characteristic of rock surfaces in arid regions, which is also observed to a limited extent in more humid environments, appears to be primarily a result of biogenic processes.
Desert varnish (alternatively rock varnish), as it is termed, is composed of clay minerals, oxides and hydroxides of manganese and/or iron, together with detrital particles, which form a layer typically around  thick.
It probably takes many thousands of years for a characteristic black to brown desert varnish to develop, apparently through the action of bacteria which preferentially oxidize and concentrate certain elements especially manganese) supplied from dust and surface water.
6.2.4 Products of chemical weathering
6.2.4.1 The weathering mantle
Chemical processes assisted by the physical disintegration of the bedrock combine to produce a weathering mantle or regolith which, if differentiated into identifiable horizons, constitutes a weathering profile.
The interface between weathered material and unweathered bedrock is known as the weathering front.
The thickness of a weathering mantle at a particular locality represents a balance between the rate of bedrock weathering and the rate of removal of weathered material by denudational agents (Fig. 6.10).
Depths of weathering may exceed 100 m and exceptionally reach 300 m or more.
Thick weathering mantles will only form in regions of   minimal local relief where rates of erosion have been low for a prolonged period.
High rates of weathering are not a prerequisite for the formation of deep weathering profiles if the rate of removal of weathered material is sufficiently slow.
This observation is well supported by the presence of very great depths of weathering on the Russian Platform.
The general absence of deep weathering mantles in many regions of low relief in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere can probably be attributed to the effects of glacial scouring during the repeated ice-sheet advances of the Pleistocene.
Deep weathering profiles are widespread in the humid tropics, where high temperatures and abundant rainfall create conditions in which the potential for chemical weathering is great.
However, when the weathering mantle has developed to a depth of several metres the rate of water movement at the weathering front becomes very slow.
Consequently, under these conditions the rate of chemical decomposition at the weathering front is minimal, an effect which is clearly evident in the typically very low concentrations of solutes recorded in streams draining highly leached deep weathering profiles in lowland humid tropical regions (see Section 15.3).
The situation on mountain slopes in the humid tropics is, however, quite different as here high erosion rates lead to the rapid removal of weathered material.
Deep weathering mantles cannot develop even though the actual rate of weathering is probably very high as a result of the proximity of the weathering front to the surface and the associated rapid downslope movement of soil water.
We need, therefore, to distinguish carefully between potential rates of weathering related to climatic parameters, and actual rates of weathering related to conditions at the weathering front.
A further complication in the interpretation of regolith thickness is climatic change.
In presently arid central Australia, for instance, deep weathering profiles are to be found which have clearly been inherited from a previously more humid climatic regime.
Their partial preservation has been aided by the presence of siliceous crusts which are themselves highly resistant to weathering and erosion (see Section 6.5).
The physical characteristics of weathering profiles depend upon the rock type and its structural properties and mineralogy as well as the intensity and nature of the chemical weathering processes.
A number of geomorphic studies have focused on weathering profiles developed on granite under humid tropical and subtropical climates.
Although considerable differences exist in profile characteristics on other rock types and under different climatic regimes, deep weathering profiles on granite exhibit features which are common to many (Fig. 6.11).
There is typically a gradation over tens of metres from fresh bedrock, through weathering material incorporating corestones of relatively unweathered rock, to clay-rich horizons capped by a soil.
The mineralogical composition of the various horizons will be influenced by the mineralogy of the bedrock, the hydrological regime and, related to this, the intensity of leaching.
For instance, ferrous iron taken into solution below the water table where reducing conditions prevail may be drawn upwards by capillary suction and precipitated as ferric iron in the upper part of the profile.
Under a seasonally dry climate this leads to the formation of a characteristically red-coloured, iron-rich horizon overlying a bleached pallid zone which has been effectively leached of ferric iron.
In some weathering mantles original bedrock structures are preserved.
The term saprolite is given to this type of regolith and it reflects the operation of isovolumetric weathering, that is, weathering accomplished without any change in volume.
This is probably a very common phenomenon, but in many cases its occurrence cannot be proved either because the original bedrock lacked well-defined structures or because any such structures have been destroyed by organic activity.
6.2.4.2 Mineral stability and the formation of secondary minerals
The types and proportions of the various minerals in a weathering profile are usually quite different from the original bedrock.
Some minerals seem to survive more or less unaltered even after being subject to prolonged weathering, whereas others decompose very rapidly.
A classic study by S. S. Goldich published in 1938 showed a consistent variation in the stability in the weathering environment of common silicate minerals occurring in a range of igneous and metamorphic rocks (Fig. 6.12).
Goldich pointed   out that this weathering series closely matched Bowen's reaction series which listed various silicate minerals in terms of their order of crystallization from a silicate melt.
Olivine, for instance, is the most unstable mineral in the weathering series and crystallizes at the highest temperature in the reaction series.
Quartz, on the other hand, is the most stable and crystallizes at the lowest temperature.
Part of the reason for this relationship between susceptibility to weathering and temperature of crystallization appears to lie in the relative strength of the bonds between oxygen and the cations in each mineral.
But the structure of the bonding also seems to be significant, with minerals having few silicon-oxygen bonds (such as the neosilicates and inosilicates) generally being less stable than those with more bonds (such as the phyllosilicates and tectosilicates)(Fig. 6.3).
The relationship can also be viewed thermodynamically, there being a larger change in free energy accompanying the decomposition of an unstable mineral like olivine than a comparatively muscovite.
In addition to quartz, which can at prolonged weathering in most environments, the mineralogical composition of the weathering mantle includes a range of secondary minerals (Table 6.3).
These form by the decomposition of primary minerals and the incorporation of dissolved constituents into new mineral forms, by far the most important of which are clay minerals.
Clay minerals occur in a bewildering variety of forms; only the major groups are listed in Table 6.3.
In most cases they are formed through the recombination of silica, alumina and metal cations released during weathering into layered phyllosilicate-type structures (Fig. 6.13).
Other secondary minerals formed during weathering include those composed of oxides and hydroxides of iron and aluminium and, less significantly, of titanium oxide, as well as amorphous or finely crystalline silica.
The type of clay mineral produced during weathering depends on the composition of the circulating pore waters (specifically the concentration of dissolved silica and the type and concentration of cations), the mineralogy of the    bedrock, the intensity of leaching and the prevailing Eh-pH conditions (Table 6.4).
Primary minerals with an existing layered structure, such as biotite, can be fairly readily altered into a clay mineral (often illite which is similarly potassium-rich), whereas most other silicate minerals require a more fundamental reorganization of their crystal structure.
Thermodynamics can indicate which mineral species will be in equilibrium with conditions prevailing in the weathering environment; but the rate at which this equilibrium is achieved is often extremely slow and consequently it is    important to know what factors control the rate at which more stable weathering products are created.
The intensity of leaching is probably the major such kinetic control in most weathering environments (Fig. 6.14).
Clay minerals such as kaolinite, which have been stripped of metal cations together with iron and aluminium oxides and hydroxides, are prevalent in environments characterized by intense leaching since here the large throughput of water removes cations in solution and prevents their concentration in pore waters within the regolith.
Conditions of extreme leaching can even lead to a significant removal of iron and silicon to leave an aluminium-rich residue in the form of the mineral gibbsite.
Where leaching is of only moderate intensity, cations released during weathering can build up in the solutions moving through the weathering mantle and the formation of cation-bearing clays such as illite and smectite is favoured.
In arid and semi-arid regions leaching may be minimal and solutions in the weathering mantle can attain high concentrations of dissolved constituents.
This condition commonly leads to the accumulation of calcium carbonate at, or near, the surface, while under more extreme conditions of aridity soluble salts such as gypsum (), halite () and thenardite () may be precipitated.
The intensity of leaching is never uniform throughout an entire weathering profile since the throughput of water normally decreases with depth due to compaction and the downward translocation of fine particles which reduces the size of voids.
The resulting reduction in the intensity of leaching is usually reflected in mineralogical changes with depth (Fig. 6.15).
Clay minerals such as illite and smectite, which are readily altered in the zone of active leaching towards the top of a profile, may be relatively stable at lower levels where leaching is less intense.
Vertical differentiation in mineralogy in weathering profiles may also reflect the stage-by-stage alteration of primary rock minerals.
Smectite and illite may form preferentially near the weathering front only to be eventually altered to kaolinite, and perhaps gibbsite, as gradual lowering of the weathering front and erosion at the top of the profile effectively causes individual clay mineral particles to move up through the profile.
The relative abundance of dissolved constituents released through weathering reactions into surface waters can be compared to their relative abundance in the bedrock in order to provide information on the types of chemical reactions that are occurring.
A number of studies have attempted to rank the relative mobilities of the major constituents released during weathering, and although the precise order varies depending on the environmental conditions the generally agreed sequence is 
6.2.5 Factors influencing chemical weathering
It has long been recognized that five factors control the nature of soil development: climate, parent material, topoy, organic activity and time.
The factors controlling chemical weathering, and indeed weathering as a whole, can be viewed in a similar way.
Figure 6.16 illustrates the way in which the four environmental factors influence both the thermodynamics and kinetics of weathering reactions by indicating the conditions required for maximum rates of weathering to be attained.
These factors clearly operate at different scales.
Apart from montane environments, where climatic gradients are typically sharp, the effects of climatic differences on weathering tend to be most apparent at the continental and global scale.
Indeed attempts have been made to produce world maps indicating the distribution of different weathering products (Fig. 6.17).
Although there is a reasonably good correlation between the major climatic and particular weathering zones, the correspondence becomes very weak in more mountainous areas where topographic factors can become predominant.
This is   especially the case when the depth of weathering is considered; although a fairly systematic relationship with climate and vegetation is evident as a consequence of variation in precipitation and temperature (Fig. 6.18), this only applies in the absence of marked relief.
Temperature is an important factor in rates of chemical weathering, both through the direct effect it has on the rate of chemical reactions (see Section 6.2.2), and indirectly through its influence on rates of organic activity and hence the production of both soil carbon dioxide and organic acids — both critical components in chemical weathering.
As long as there is an abundant supply of water high temperatures tend to be associated with high rates of weathering, although this does not necessarily result in deep weathering profiles for, as we have already noted, where slope gradients are steep the products of weathering may be removed almost as soon as they are created.
Rates of weathering are potentially highest where temperatures are high and rainfall is abundant.
As indicated in Table 6.4 intensity of leaching, and hence the mineralogy of weathering deposits, is largely a function of temperature, precipitation and drainage.
Although the precise mineralogical composition of weathering mantles is influenced by bedrock mineralogy, the effects of variations in precipitation are often evident with the relative abundance of kaolinite, gibbsite and iron and aluminium hydroxides showing a positive correlation with mean annual precipitation (Fig. 6.19).
Vegetation influences weathering, as we have already indicated, through the release of organic acids and in the supply of carbon dioxide to soil waters.
Important to both these factors is the production of litter.
This varies enormously not only between desert and forest ecosystems but also between temperate forests with a typical range of  and tropical rain forests which produce .
Organic activity is closely related to climatic controls, but vegetation type also varies at a local scale as a result of topographic factors and soil properites.
Topography affects weathering largely through the way it influences the movement of water through the regolith.
Weathering rates and the intensity of leaching depend critically on the total throughput of water and this is likely to be far higher on a steep, well-drained slope than in flat terrain with poor drainage.
If drainage is too efficient, however, little water may be present in the regolith for much of the time and rates of weathering will consequently be reduced.
Parent material influences the nature and rate of weathering in two major ways.
Its mineralogical composition, particularly in terms of the proportion of unstable mineral phases present, will affect both the rate of chemical decomposition and the kinds of secondary minerals that are most likely to form.
Although we might expect bedrock mineralogy to exert a pervasive control over the products of chemical weathering this is not the case, at least at the broad scale, both because the rocks and minerals exposed at the Earth's surface are dominated by just two or three types (Table 6.5), and because prolonged weathering tends to lead to a convergence of secondary mineral types irrespective of parent material mineralogy.
The second factor is the physical nature of the parent material, especially its particle size and permeability, which influences the rate of weathering though not the weathering products.
The final factor of time is important because of the slowness of most chemical reactions at the Earth's surface.
There is always a significant lag between the establishment of a particular set of conditions in the weathering environment   and the adjustment of the mineralogical and physical properties of the regolith to these conditions.
Consequently, weathering profiles are rarely in full equilibrium with environmental conditions; in most cases the weathering mantle adjusts to long-term average conditions rather than to conditions at a specific time.
We always have to be aware of the kinetics of weathering reactions when looking at the mineralogical composition of weathering profiles.
As we shall see in Section 6.5, some weathering products show a remarkable resilience to changing environmental conditions to the extent that in some circumstances they can persist in the landscape essentially unaltered for tens of millions of years.
6.3 Physical weathering
Physical weathering encompasses a range of mechanisms, the relative effectiveness of which are not accurately known but clearly vary significantly as a function of environmental conditions.
The physical breakdown of rock is always associated with some kind of volume change and it is useful to categorize the various processes into those involving an overall volumetric change in the rock mass and those related to changes in volume of material introduced into voids or fissures in the rock.
6.3.1 Volumetric changes of the rock mass
As noted in Chapter 5 in the context of granite intrusions (Section 5.5), rocks formed at depth or located beneath a   thick overburden are under considerable internal stress.
As the overlying strata are gradually removed by erosion and these rocks reach the surface they undergo expansion or dilation — a process known as pressure release — which promotes the development of joints.
At the smaller scale micro-fissures and incipient joints related to the original pattern of mineral crystallization in the rock provide lines of weakness along which exfoliation (the spalling off of thin sheets of rock)(Fig. 6.20) and granular disintegration (the disaggregation of individual crystals or particles) can occur.
In some kinds of rock, such as granite, the creation of steep, bare rock faces can lead to significant lateral expansion into the valley side as well as vertical dilation and this may give rise to exfoliation domes (Fig. 6.21).
Insolation weathering, that is, the breakdown of rock as a result of volume changes arising from thermal expansion and contraction, is another potentially important physical weathering process.
Fluctuations in temperature experienced by rocks at the Earth's surface due to day-time heating and night-time cooling certainly cause them to expand and contract.
Nevertheless it has proved difficult to establish whether the resulting volume changes are sufficient to shatter rock, even in desert environments where diumal temperature ranges on rock surfaces can easily exceed 30 C. Since rock is a poor conductor of heat a thermal gradient is created when the surface is warmed.
The exterior of the rock consequently expands more than the interior and stresses are set up.
Data on bedrock surfaces in desert regions show that on dark rocks temperatures of 80°C can be attained by solar radiation and diumal ranges of 50°C are not uncommon.
Further (intergranular) stress might be expected to arise from the differential thermal expansion of individual minerals in a rock related to differences in colour, specific heat and coefficient of thermal expansion.
In spite of the abundance of shattered rock in hot desert regions and elsewhere, experimental work in the 1930s cast considerable doubt on the efficacy of insolation weathering.
Small rock samples subjected to repeated cycles of heating and cooling over temperature ranges well in excess of those produced naturally by solar radiation failed to shatter.
The presence of moisture was found to be necessary to promote chemical weathering and weaken the rock sufficiently for disintegration to occur.
Subsequently these conclusions have been challenged, it being pointed out that experiments involving the rapid heating and cooling of small individual rocks do not accurately re-create field conditions.
In particular, stresses set up in such samples can be relieved in all directions whereas stresses in bedrock are much more concentrated since the rock is confined both laterally and vertically.
The occurrence of scrub and forest fires provides another mechanism whereby rocks can be subjected to significant thermal expansion and contraction.
It is certainly important in semi-arid regions characterized by vegetation communities, such as chaparral (North America) and eucalyptus (Australia), which require fires for regeneration.
Such areas are frequently seen to be characterized by spalling rock outcrops and shattered boulders.
Chemical weathering frequently gives rise to minerals which are less dense than their precursors.
The associated volume increase can exert pressure on the surrounding rock and the weathering rinds produced peel off to expose fresh rock to further weathering.
The chemical processes involved are usually associated with hydration (see Section 6.2.3.1) and the addition of water plays a significant role in the physical breakdown of rock.
Such hydration weathering can occur simply through wetting and drying which causes expansion and contraction.
The process is most active in some clay minerals, notably those of the smectite group, which are capable of absorbing large quantities of water into their crystal structures.
A further hydration weathering mechanism, restricted to environments in which freezing occurs, is hydration shattering.
This can occur in very fine-grained materials such as clays which are capable of retaining significant quantities of unfrozen water at temperatures well below 0°C.
At these low temperatures the dipolar molecules of this supercooled water become ordered in such a way that a repulsive force is set up across voids.
It is thought that while this force is insignificant in large voids it can be sufficiently strong in the small pores in very fine-grained material to cause rock fracture.
Chemical weathering is also probably associated with the mechanism which so far has only been investigated on clay:rich rocks, and it may be restricted to such lithologies.
6.3.2 Volumetric changes within rock voids and fissures
Under this heading we need to consider two main sets of processes: the effects of crystal growth and expansion, primarily of ice and salt, and the stresses induced by biological activity.
The latter are induced by both fauna and flora.
Earthworms, for instance, ingest and excrete huge volumes of soil, as so graphically reported in a classic study by Charles Darwin in the last century.
The resulting mixing of the soil, or bioturbation, probably averages about a 5 mm depth annually over the more humid parts of the continents.
Other soil fauna contribute to this effect, with termites being particularly significant in moving large quantities of soil in the tropics and subtropics.
The growth of tree roots and their penetration and enlargement of incipient rock fractures can contribute significantly to the break-up of rock which may have experienced relatively little weakening through chemical alteration.
Large tap roots can penetrate rock to a depth of several metres and the process commonly works in association with other mechanisms, particularly ice crystal growth.
It is also likely that chemical weathering is enhanced in the vicinity of roots where carbon dioxide concentrations are likely to be higher and where the extraction of metal cations is occurring.
Although such organic activity can be significant, especially locally, it is the physical processes of crystal formation and expansion that are of more fundamental importance in rock weathering.
6.3.2.1 Frost weathering
In arctic and alpine environments the surface is often seen to be composed of a layer of angular rock fragments commonly described by the term felsenmeer and attributed to the operation of frost weathering.
This process, which is also referred to as frost shattering and frost wedging, involves the breakdown of rock or other solid materials as a result of stresses induced by the freezing of water.
Early explanations of frost weathering alighted on the simple and seemingly obvious effect of the 9 per cent volume expansion which accompanies the phase change from water to ice.
Under ideal conditions it was estimated that ice formation could exert a maximum pressure of around 200 MPa (at which point the freezing temperature is -22°C), but it was appreciated that this theoretical maximum pressure could never be attained under natural conditions, not the least because it far exceeded the tensile strength of most rocks (around 25 MPa).
Even to build up moderately high pressures sufficient to shatter rock it was realized that a closed system was required in order for the pressure not to be relieved by the expulsion of water into adjacent voids.
Such a closed system might be produced if freezing proceeds rapidly from the surface downwards since initial ice formation at the surface can then seal in water contained within pores in the rock.
Subsequent experimental work has failed both to clarify fully the exact mechanisms involved in frost weathering and to define precisely the climatic conditions under which the process is likely be most effective.
It has been suggested that a freezing rate of at least 0.1 °C per minute and temperatures of -5 to -10°C are required for rock shattering to occur.
Most experimental studies have emphasized the importance of rapid freezing, a minimum temperature of -5°C, the frequency of freeze-thaw cycles and the overriding significance of the moisture content of the rock.
This last factor is crucial since if a rock is not saturated ice formation will simply cause the expulsion of water into air-filled cavities, thereby inhibiting a build-up of pressure.
Some theoretical work, however, has questioned the importance of water freezing in sealed cracks and the frequency of freezing events, suggesting instead that crack growth will be greatest when the temperature ranges from approximately to -15°C.
Other experimental studies have supported the idea that frost weathering is likely to be more effective in alpine and marine arctic environments, where freeze-thaw may occur diurnally, than in polar regions where freezing and thawing are predominantly seasonal phenomena.
Uncertainties about the efficacy of volume expansion on freezing in rock shattering have encouraged the examination of other possibilities.
One of these is the pressure exerted by ice-crystal growth, the idea being that this is directional and that if the direction of growth is resisted by the wall of a void or crack then pressure will be exerted which may be sufficient to wedge the crack apart.
As applied to the crystallization of ice this mechanism is largely conjectural at present since little experimental work has been undertaken to estimate the pressures likely to be generated.
A further possibly important mechanism in rock breakdown associated with freezing, at least in very fine-grained lithologies, is hydration shattering (see Section 6.3.1) and it is likely that some of the effects of physical weathering previously attributed to frost weathering in fact result from this process.
6.3.2.2 Salt weathering
Salt weathering involves three major processes: the precipitation of salt in voids and the expansion of salt crystals through either hydration or heating.
It is most active in arid environments where rates of evaporation are high relative to precipitation, and consequently surface and soil waters can become saturated with respect to a variety of salts.
Although frequently associated with hot desert regions, the effects of salt weathering have also been observed in high-latitude arid regions such as Antarctica.
Moreover, the high salinity of sea water makes it likely that salt is an active weathering agent in coastal environments (see Section 13.3.1.1).
In inland areas salt is derived from a number of sources.
These include surface and soil waters containing cations released during bedrock weathering which have subsequently been concentrated by evaporation, precipitation with a high salt content (especially in regions near coasts), saline ground waters and saline deposits blown inland from the coast or originating in inland saline basins.
A number of salts are found in the soils of arid regions but only a few are generally quantitatively significant —,,,,, and KCI.
When saline solutions in rock pores become saturated as a result of a temperature change or evaporation, salt crystals begin to form and considerable pressures are generated.
Whether these lead to rock fracture will depend on both the stresses produced by crystal growth and the tensile strength of the rock.
Salt crystal growth in unconsolidated sediments can cause considerable ground heave, and where salt solutions enter desiccation cracks various types of patterned ground may be formed (Fig. 6.22).
A second cause of stress arises from the capacity of several common salts to absorb significant quantities of water into their crystal structure.
Such hydration expansion commonly occurs in response to changes in relative humidity which, since they are closely related to temperature, may be diumal.
The importance of thermal expansion, the third mechanism of salt weathering, has yet to be fully evaluated.
Its possible significance derives from the observation that the coefficients of thermal expansion of many salts are greater than that of most rocks.
Sodium chloride (common salt), for instance, can expand by up to I per cent under the very large diumal temperature ranges typical of continental deserts.
The rather specific environmental requirements of salt weathering mean that its action is spatially highly variable.
It is likely to be intense in west coast deserts, such as the Atacama (Chile/Peru) and Namib (Namibia), where frequent fogs supply both salt and moisture.
It is also active in areas adjacent to nearly enclosed seas in hot deserts, for example the Red Sea, where both humidity and salinity are high.
Other favourable environments include the margins of salt-covered basins, along river channels and in other areas of low-lying topography where shallow saline ground waters can be drawn to the surface by capillary action.
Different salts also vary significantly in their efficacy as weathering agents, and several laboratory investigations have indicated the particular effectiveness of sodium sulphate.
This can be attributed to its various physical properties.
First, it experiences a large increase in volume when hydrated (from  to ,).
Secondly, it has a high equilibrium solubility so that large quantities can be precipitated from a given volume of solution.
Thirdly, its equilibrium solubility is particularly sensitive to temperature, reaching a maximum at 32.3°C.
This is within the range of diumal temperature change in many hot deserts and precipitation will occur as the temperature rises   or falls across this value.
Finally, crystallization occurs preferentially along a single crystal axis and large pressures can be generated within rock fractures.
6.4 Lithology and weathering forms
Just as variations in the physical and mineralogical properties of bedrock can influence the mineralogical products of weathering so different lithologies give rise to a range of weathering forms.
On most lithologies landforms related directly to weathering tend to be minor features, but on rock types such as limestones, in which a large proportion of the products of chemical weathering processes are removed in solution, major landforms can be produced.
In this section we will focus on weathering forms in limestone, although it should be pointed out that similar weathering forms can develop on other lithologies.
6.4.1 Karst weathering forms
Karst is the German form of a Slovene word meaning ‘bare stony ground’ and is used to describe limestone terrain characterized by a lack of surface drainage, a discontinuous or thin soil cover, abundant enclosed depressions and a well-developed system of underground drainage including caves, all features attributable to the solubility of limestone.
Limestone is defined as a rock which contains at least 50 per cent, which nearly always occurs as the mineral calcite.
Other carbonate minerals include aragonite (a rare form of ) and dolomite ().
Rocks in which more than 50 per cent of the carbonate content occurs as the mineral dolomite are given the rock name dolomite.
The term karstification is used to refer to the process of karst landscape development.
Karst landforms are classically exemplified by the landscape of northern Yugoslavia and a number of terms used to describe karst landforms originate from this region.
The term pseudokarst is applied to landforms in non-carbonate rocks which are morphologically similar to those characteristic of limestone terrains.
In most cases pseudo-karst develops as a result of processes analogous to those operating on true karst; such is the case on some pure siliceous rocks subject to prolonged weathering where the slow dissolution of quartz creates karst-like forms.
In other cases quite different processes can give rise to topography  superficially resembling true karst, an example being the creation of ‘underground drainage’ through the formation of lava tunnels in volcanic terrains.
Karst scenery is not entirely, or in many cases even primarily, a product of weathering since fluvial processes play a crucial role in its development.
Nevertheless, it is appropriate to consider here those components of karst topography that owe much of their origin to weathering processes.
Karst landforms related more specifically to fluvial activity are discussed in Chapter 9.
The fullest development of karst scenery is attained where the limestone is relatively pure (in excess of 80 per cent), very thick, mechanically strong and massively jointed (so that water flow is concentrated along joints rather than passing through the mass of the rock).
In addition a humid climate is required together with sufficient relief for extensive vertical water flow down to a regional water table deep below the surface.
In the karst region of Yugoslavia there are pure limestones up to 4000m thick and part of the area is more than 2000 m above sea level.
Although chalk is a very pure limestone it is mechanically too weak to allow the development of large underground cavities.
Similarly, thin beds of limestone do not permit the development of underground drainage while in arid regions there is insufficient water for significant limestone weathering to occur.
There is an extensive vocabulary of special terms to describe karst landforms which can be confusing to the uninitiated, and even to the expert.
6.4.1.
I Minor forms
The German term karren and the French term lapies refer to the small-scale solutional forms developed on limestone.
(Note that the terms ‘solution’ and ‘dissolution’are used widely in discussions of karst landforms, but this is just a form of shorthand since, as was discussed in Section 6.2.3.3, limestone weathering involves complex chemical reactions.)
There is no English equivalent for these terms although some specific forms have acquired local names.
A   bewildering variety of karren have been described and the most important of these are classified and described in Table 6.6
Several factors influence the form of karren.
Probably of most importance is the presence or absence of a cover of soil or vegetation during its formation.
This is probably because the solution process operates differently on covered and bare surfaces.
On covered surfaces soil and vegetation maintains a continuous presence of moisture on the rock surface while organic decay increases the quantity of organic acids and the abundance of carbon dioxide; both increase the aggressiveness of the water percolating on to the rock surface.
(Aggressivity refers to the propensity of water to dissolve calcium carbonate.)
The resulting solutional forms tend to be rounded and less sharp-edged than those formed on bare rock.
A second factor is lithology.
Karren are best developed on relatively massive and uniform, mechanically strong and impermeable limestones in which there is a sharp contact between soil and rock.
Chalk, for instance, is too porous and mechanically weak for karren development.
Climate is also important since adequate moisture must be present for effective solution.
In arid climates there is generally insufficient surface water, whereas in periglacial regimes frost action may be so effective that solutional forms have little time to develop.
Snow patches, with their enhanced concentrations of CO 2 , which experience seasonal melting may, nevertheless, be favourable environments for karren development.
Time is the final significant factor since karren developed under a relatively humid climate may survive for a period after a change to a more arid climatic regime.
Moreover, forms developed under a soil cover may subsequently be exposed by erosion, in some cases promoted by human activities such as forest clearance.
The role of organisms in directly creating both erosional and depositional microforms on limestone has probably been underestimated.
Micro-organisms may be instrumental in many commonly observed microforms in limestones, but the precise nature of their role is as yet poorly known.
The terms biokarst and phytokarst are used to describe forms attributable in large part to organic processes.