

SEVEN
It was one of those shows that deserves a cliché — a landmark.
And the reason it was a landmark was because nothing in the show itself was a cliché.
What it was, though, was a series of firsts.
It was the first show to confirm Kenneth Williams as a star.
There was no doubt about it.
Acting and clowning around and singing and laughing in Share My Lettuce, Kenneth Williams was a British star.
For once, however, let's not dwell totally on Ken.
There was also a bespectacled Cambridge undergraduate, aged twenty-two called Bamber Gascoigne — later to be best known for his TV quiz show success University Challenge.
He wrote Lettuce and had put the show on in Cambridge before it had come to London.
There was also another young man with theatrical ambitions who wondered if they would ever he satisfied, even though he had produced The Wit To Woo.
His name, Michael Codron.
He produced the show.
But then there was also the ingenue, a young girl with all the sparkle of a Guy Fawkes night fireworks display, who appeared in one scene in a straw boater and what looked very like a parson's dog collar and had everyone in the audience drooling — just as they had on Broadway where in New Faces she had had her break a few months before.
Her name, Maggie Smith.
She co-starred in Share My Lettuce with Ken.
Audiences were thrilled, box office cash registers jingled and careers were made.
Even so, not everything about the show appealed to everyone.
John Lambert wrote in the Daily Express that Maggie Smith was a ‘rare commodity — a very funny girl whom most men would like to get serious with.
But it's a pity she did not have a better showcase for her talents.
A nibble is quite enough of this lettuce.’
Mr Lambert then pointed out that there were thirty-two items in the show.
‘I laughed out loud at three, smiled at four and felt sour at the rest.’
Then there was this final paragraph: ‘The one other consolation is a waspish young man called Kenneth Williams.
He is funny and would be funnier if he were less affected.’
On the other hand, the.
Sunday Express was less equivocal.
‘Maggie Smith and Kenneth Williams are two good reasons why you should take  a look at a small brittle show called Share My Lettuce…
Kenneth Williams, the main prop of the show is a young man with a face which twists into grimaces of anguish and leers of terrible delight at the minutest provocation.
He is one of the few comedians who, when someone truthfully observes, ‘I say, you're sitting in a dustbin’, can make the classic reply, ‘Oh, so I am’ sound like an hilarious joke.’
By this time, Share My Lettuce had moved to the West End and the Comedy Theatre.
The show, said the Sunday Express, ‘is no food for ponderous thought.
It is young, bright, light, a thin thread of turns strung together in the manner — but not with the mastery — of Cranks.’
Cranks was another revue that had become a sort of watchword for the kind of show this was.
Share My Lettuce was much more of a commercial success than it was a critical triumph.
The audiences didn't appear to have the reservations of the critics.
For Michael Codron, it marked the start of an outstanding production career — which had seemed to bode so ill for him during the run of The Wit To Woo, a play that had no happier associations for him than it had for Ken.
The Cranks comparison was constantly being made.
In The Times, an anonymous critic wrote: ‘Resourcefully fey and lyrically frivolous, the new ‘diversion with music’ at the Lyric, Hammersmith — Share My Lettuce erratically follows in more familiar (and more varied) idioms the new directions in revue signposted by Cranks…
Share My Lettuce boasts an original if rather undernourished droll in Kenneth Williams (remember him as the alarming brat in The Buccaneer?
His face-pulling, sidling humour has a family relationship with the hands-on-hip simpering beloved of pseudo comedians who, when in doubt, ‘camp it up’, but Mr Williams assumes a stage personality which is elegant, faintly macabre and immensely funny, a curious blend of music hall fairy and the awful child.’
The show was very much about young people and their attitudes to life.
There were sketches about parties, about dating, about jilting, and what youngsters told to their tape recorders, a novelty indeed in 1957.
Ken had one of these new toys himself — and invited Annette Kerr to come and ‘perform into it’.
The News Chronicle's Alan Dent was convinced that Ken was the show's ‘mainstay’(the Sunday Express said he was the ‘main prop’)‘an impish sprite who does many unaccountable, inscrutable and impish things’.
Ken may have been well into his thirties now, but he still saw things very much as he did as a youngster, as though the editor he had played in The Buccaneer had been reincarnated into the Kenneth Williams starring  — and now there was no other word for it; that was precisely what he was doing — in Share My Lettuce.
In another letter to Annette, he wrote about love and its problems.
He recalled the movie Member of the Wedding which he described as ‘the ONLY adult film I have ever seen which made a serious attempt to analyse the idea of adolescent loneliness being the prelude to alone-ness.’
In that, he was really laying on line precisely what he felt and what he enjoyed.
Ken wasn't lonely, but he was a loner.
That was how he liked life — chatting with people at work, going home to see mother (and, of necessity, father, but he tried to avoid that when possible now) and confining social contact to those he really wanted to be with, when he wanted to be with them.
He was usually satisfied with writing his longish philosophical letters to people like Annette and only occasionally now, Val Orford.
He told Annette that he understood Chekhov's philosophy —‘That in the loving is the escape from loneliness.
That nobody can really stand being loved in the ultimate sense.
That it is never reciprocal in that sense.
That the lover knows this and understands that love is a solitary thing, the value and quality of any love is determined solely by the lover himself or herself.’
The value and quality of Ken's performance was no secret.
Bamber Gascoigne, who had never seen him at work before his show, told me: ‘He was absolutely wonderful in it.
He brought to it a very quirky individual.’
He also enjoyed him off-stage.
As he added: ‘I had never been with anyone who was always so very, very funny.’
Ken was as always a perfect raconteur during his off-stage moments while in Lettuce.
About this time, there was a family funeral — with all the mock solemnity and grandeur of a cockney day out.
One of Ken's aunts had come up in the world and arrived at the cemetery wearing a fur coat which was donned purely and simply to impress the other members of the family.
Ken's clan didn't take kindly to that and rounded on the woman, who sought some kind of defence.
She found it in her wreath.
‘What are you grumbling about?’ she demanded.
‘I gave the Gates of Heaven Ajar, didn't I?’
Where she came from, the Gates of Heaven Ajar were the finest tribute, floral or otherwise, that she could offer.
Ken told the story as though it had been scripted for him for Hancock's Half Hour.
If Hancock himself had been around, he would have doubtless squirmed as the audience laughed their heads off.
At one stage in the show's run, he wouldn't have been alone in the squirming department.
Michael Codron would have joined him.
That was the day in October 1957 that Ken spent the afternoon rehearsing  a new routine.
When he finished he went home for a rest.
‘Just 40 winks,’ he told himself.
The problem was that the 40 turned into something more like 400.
The audience were in their seats for the first of the two evening performances.
Five minutes went by.
Then seven.
Then ten — and the manager came on stage to say that the star, Kenneth Williams, had been taken ill.
Since the understudy was off with flu, there could be no show.
People could either have their money back or tickets for another evening.
Ken, of course, wasn't ill, but the management had no way of knowing.
They tried phoning, but there was no reply.
He had been so tired that he couldn't hear either the telephone or his alarm clock.
Ultimately, he dashed out of bed and caught a cab to the theatre — where he arrived thirty minutes after what should have been curtain time, to see his erstwhile audience walking away, dejected looks on most of the faces.
Fortunately, Charlie wasn't in the audience that day.
Had he been, he would have made Michael Codron's chastisement seem like a love paean.
The second show of the evening went ahead as though there had been no problems.
At the end of the performance, Ken was presented with a whole batch of new alarm clocks — on stage by his fellow performers.
A watch and clock manufacturer had seen the PR value in Ken's predicament and cashed in — as indeed did the Comedy Theatre's box office.
Ken was even invited on to television news to talk about it.
What Ken, as technically-minded as ever, didn't notice was that all the clocks had been set to go off in the middle of the night — which, needless to say, they all did.
Part of the success of the show was, in its way, Ken's own success.
He showed his ability to adapt his performance as either the whim took him or as he was taken by circumstances.
A first-night mishap had turned into one of the funniest sketches in the whole show.
This was the ‘Wallflower Waltz’ number — in which the girls in the show, led by Maggie Smith who sang wistfully about none of them having a dancing partner, while the men on stage waltzed with sheets of chiffon floating down from the flies.
Ken was one of the men — but that night, his chiffon failed to appear.
He spent the rest of the number trying to latch on to the ‘partners’ of all the other male dancers.
None of the people on stage knew what was happening, the girls continued to sing their plaintive song and the other men danced on with their own pieces of chiffon, hoping that Ken would go away and disappear for ever.
But he wasn't in the disappearing business.
As he tried to grab hold of the beautifully-lit see-through material held by the other men in the show, he called out, ‘Give me a bit!
I ain't  got a bit!
Give us a bit!
You've got my bit!’
The girls continued to sing, ‘Wallflower waltz, where we sit around the walls…’
Meanwhile, the audience were all but collapsing in their seats, as Kenneth danced around like, as he put it, ‘a demented fairy, asking for a bit’.
After the show, Michael Codron ordered the number to be performed exactly the same way for every performance thereafter.
Codron felt the same way about Ken as Bamber Gascoigne had felt — and knew he had cast the right man in the right sort of roles.
‘He just made one laugh so much,’ he told me.
‘There was something about him that made me know he was the best revue star we had.’
He was more than that by now.
Hancock's Half Hour may have finished for him, but there was another big radio show on the way.
He had just made a pilot for what was hoped to be a series called Beyond Our Ken — although the Ken in the title was not he but one of the most respected performers on radio, Kenneth Horne.
Simultaneously, he was working on a TV series, Dick and the Duchess and in Share My Lettuce at night.
There was no suggestion, however, that anyone would be allowed to think they were sharing their Williams.
For him at that moment, the show was not just the thing, it was the priority.
Michael Codron had reason to be grateful that it was, especially when in January 1958 it transferred for a third time — or even a fifth, if the pre-West End runs at the Theatre Royal Brighton, and the original Cambridge version, were taken into account — to the Garrick Theatre.
Business was so good a new home had to be found when the Comedy had to go on to other previously arranged bookings.
Ken and Codron had got together professionally in the first place because of what he called their ‘Grill and Cheese relationship’.
The Grill and Cheese was the first-floor restaurant in Lyons Corner House at Coventry Street, in between Piccadilly Circus and Leicester Square.
The Corner Houses were London institutions.
They were huge baroque establishments set up by J. Lyons and Co., as a sort of poor-man's Cafe Royal — several different kinds of restaurants and cafeterias under one roof.
One entered the building — and there were other Corner Houses at Marble Arch and the Strand — via a large marble hall where the overpowering, but pleasant, smell of the delicatessen on sale there mingled with the warmth of Lyons tea being brewed all around.
Downstairs was the brasserie where a palm-court orchestra would play selections from the shows of the day.
Up on the first floor, in the Grill and Cheese, Ken would hold court for his various theatrical acquaintances — although few of them were really close friends.
It was the talk of the trade that Ken would be outrageous there on certain afternoons of the week, telling about his great aunt and the Gates of Heaven Ajar or pulling one of his fellow actors down to his own idea of size.
Michael Codron had been going there as part of the Kenneth Williams set since the time he worked for the Jack Hylton organization.
Codron had gone up to Cambridge to see the show and knew then that it would be worth bringing to London.
He also judged that Ken would be excellent as that ‘main prop’ the critic was to write about.
‘I thought he showed great courage in agreeing to be in what was after all an undergraduate revue.’
What he should also have realized was that, although the play had been a flop, The Wit To Woo demonstrated to Ken that the producer was a man to be trusted.
For Codron it was very much a turning point.
‘Had it not gone, I was about to give up the idea of being a producer in my own right.’
As it was, the show had ‘gone’ very well indeed.
‘I had done two shows with spectacular unsuccess.
I was looking for something in my own handwriting.
Knowing Bamber Gascoigne, I went to see the show and knew that it really was my cup of tea.’
It established one other thing, Ken was now one of the producer's best friends, in fact, the only actor friend whom he had.
But Ken had friends a-plenty, even if he didn't always recognize them as such.
One night two men very big in British film comedy came to see the show.
Their names were Gerald Thomas and Peter Rogers.
They had a movie idea they wanted to try out and there was a part in it for Ken if he wanted it.
If he wanted it?
One short discussion with Peter Eade convinced him that want it he did.
The film was going to be called Carry On Sergeant.
No one could have any idea to where that was going to lead.
EIGHT
Nobody thought that much of Carry on Sergeant.
It was a very low-budget British picture, shot at Pinewood studios in black and white and sought to do little more than provide an entertaining hour and a half or so, with a topic to which a great many people could relate — National Service.
It was the dying days of the citizen Army, the young men who were reluctantly called up to serve their Queen and country — to learn how to fire a gun, to march in step and to use contraceptives when they took out the girl from the NAAFI on Saturday nights.
There were all sorts of jokes about National Service and this was going to be one of them — the barracks filled with misfits who no more wanted to wear a khaki uniform than they felt like taking poison (which some of them thought was what they were given three times a day in the cookhouse).
The real success formula became evident from the very beginning a mixture of good humour, innuendo, cliché, double-entendre all mixed together in a cauldron of what was plainly goodwill and a desire for a good time.
All the ingredients would be there in Carry on Sergeant and although most of the stock characters would come later, the basic idea was evident from the first ever laughs for a ‘Carry On’ film in 1958.
Already, the lavatory jokes and the sickroom banter were there — well, of course they were.
Going to see the doctor meant taking your clothes off.
Hattie Jacques was the army doctor.
Sex appeal?
In a way, the fat lady doctor turned sex on to its head and in those prepermissive days when no woman appeared on screen showing more than a couple of inches of cleavage, it was enough.
There was also Kenneth Connor, another mainstay of the team.
He played a part that was made to measure, a scarf-wearing, nose-blowing hypochondriac who Dr Jacques was to put firmly in his place.
Of course, there had to be the barrack weakling.
Charles Hawtrey played him and repeated the part in almost every ‘Carry On’ film that followed.
And then there was Ken as James Bailey, the egghead who knew more  about everything than anyone else and never stopped saying so.
It was all beneath his dignity, this business of charging around with rifles in your hand and going on parade.
Terry Scott played a sergeant (and then disappeared until quite a bit later in the series).
There were also all the stock characters in an army unit who stayed on when the Pinewood machine swept into the sequel business.
Bob Monkhouse — already established as a leading comedy writer and just moving into performing — playing the poor wretch called up on his wedding day and Shirley Eaton as the NAAFI girl who would come back for just one more ‘Carry On’.
The plot in any ‘Carry On’ film was never terribly important, not when there were the opportunities to give words double meanings that even the  scriptwriters sometimes hadn't thought of.
In Carry on Sergeant, the story was probably more important than in most of the other components of the series.
Here we had a poor suffering sergeant — he suffered a very great deal every time a new ‘shower’ like this lot came his way — just on the verge of retirement.
He dreamed of going out in glory, winning the best-platoon prize — a dream that appeared to be shattered when he saw Ken and his barrack mates arrive.
The Sergeant was played by William Hartnell, best known as the first of TV's Dr Who.
Even he got a few of the good lines, none better than when a malingerer produced a succession of ‘chits’ excusing him one arduous duty after the other.
Looking at the man, he says, ‘You're nothing but a pile of chits.’
That went down very well indeed among the squaddies of 1958.
Hovering in the background to it all was the commanding officer (played by Eric Barker, also to be seen in a few of the other early ‘Carry On’ films) and his instruction that was so familiar to every ‘sprog’who ever put on a uniform, ‘Carry on Sergeant’.
No one, least of all Peter Rogers and Gerald Thomas, had any intention of its forming the foundation stone for one of the most successful series that the British film industry ever spawned.
‘You don't go out of your way to make a series,’ said Peter Rogers, who produced the entire batch.
‘It was a piece of luck really — and quite an accident.
You only make a series by public demand.’
Carry on Sergeant may have been made on something of a shoestring (or maybe it should have been an army bootstring) with Ken making no more than £800 for his work, but efforts were made to get it all remarkably accurate.
Part of the location work was shot at the Queen's Barracks  in the heart of the Surrey countryside at Stoughton.
It became a rule of the ‘Carry On’ outfit that everything had to be filmed within spitting distance of Pinewood — and there were real sergeants to carry on the business of teaching them what life in the Army was like.
To Ken, it was all too reminiscent of his own life in the Army, but he enjoyed the filming.
It made a nice change from Share My Lettuce to which he switched every evening.
But in May 1958 even that show came to an end — a London bus strike was killing business, which also gives some idea of how long ago that was.
Today so few  theatregoers travel by bus that it would take more than a strike of the red giants to kill anything on stage.
Nothing, however, seemed to kill Carry on Sergeant.
The two men behind the project, Gerald Thomas who directed and Peter Rogers, were as surprised as the audiences.
They were also as pleased as the audiences.
As Gerald Thomas told me: ‘Our success appeared to be based on the demise of the British music hall, the slightly lavatorial humour that appealed to father and son alike — and to the fact that people knew what they were getting, like Heinz baked beans or Lux toilet soap.’
Pat Williams told me she thought they were' a load of tripe', but it was tripe that brought people into the cinemas for more than two decades and Ken became the staple part of a diet for which at one time the public seemed to have an insatiable appetite
Because both Rogers and Thomas had seen Share My Lettuce they knew he would be good for the part of the supercilious National Serviceman.
‘But he came to us through normal casting,’ said Rogers.
‘We wanted a certain type and Betty White, our casting director, said there was this young man in revue we ought to have a look at.’
They did have a ‘look at’ Ken in Share My Lettuce and concluded that she was right.
What appealed to both partners was that by doing so well in the revue, Ken had become an established comedy actor — not comedian, but comedy actor — and that was the kind they were looking for.
They didn't want to have to break in a newcomer.
In 1958 Ken's star was rising faster than anyone who had known him could have thought possible.
But by joining the ‘Carry On’ team he was not necessarily doing himself a great favour.
In Peter Rogers's words, ‘He lost the ambition to go outside.’
He certainly had it in the early days of Carry On Sergeant.
Ken himself would have gone along with Michael Codron's judgement of being the finest revue actor of the day — not realizing that revue was about to go the way of music hall.
He did have the ambition to do more serious  work, as he had in Saint Joan and he had done in those early days in rep, but suddenly, he had got sucked into a formula that became a very comfortable rut indeed and, surprisingly for those who thought they knew him well, he didn't want to find a way out.
‘Kenny wasn't an ugly bugger but he was no romantic lead,’ said Gerald Thomas.
‘He was a good actor limited to the parts he could play, but he wasn't an attractive man.
So comedy was his forte.’
He was also, as Peter Rogers put it, ‘a bit of a show off’, discussing art and the world scene in an off-screen moment that was as different from a ‘Carry On’ routine as Moby Dick had been from Peter Pan.
He also played cards with other members of the crew as they sat in their canvas-backed chairs waiting for the cameras to roll.
The success of Carry on Sergeant did dictate that there would be another ‘Carry On’ as soon as the finance and the equipment and the cast could be assembled.
After the first success, that could never be in doubt.
There was also another stage show planned.
Meanwhile, the pilot of Beyond Our Ken was listened to by the BBC mandarins, who decided they liked a great deal about it and decreed it would definitely become a radio series.
Ken was a veritable factory of show business activity.
His own brand of performing was taking on a very definite shape.
Suddenly, he became synonymous with that new word ‘camp’ and he revelled in it.
It couldn't have come at a better time.
The Hancock Half Hours seemed to be finally at an end and both Ken and his public were ready for something in which ‘Stop messing about’ would mean something more than an admonition to an actor to concentrate on his script.
The strange thing — and the rewarding thing — about these events was that they coincided.
At the same time as a new, totally devoted audience had been found for a different kind of comedy film, an equally devoted public was on hand for his radio show.
It is in a way, of course, unfair to call it Ken's radio show, Kenneth Williams's, that is .
It belonged almost in its entirety to Kenneth Horne, around whom the show was built, but there was enough left over for the supporting players, Betty Marsden, Hugh Paddick, Bill Pertwee and Ken, all of whom built up their  own individual following.
It was a vastly different audience from that for the Carry On films, a more sophisticated group who followed Ken from Hancock and wanted more of the voices he had introduced, much to Hancock's growing distaste.
Ken himself always said that it was a modernized version of the kind of radio entertainment that Tommy Handley had brought with his famous wartime comedy series, ITMA (‘It's That Man Again').
That was an over-simplification  and did neither of the shows full justice.
Ken produced some of his standard characters that were to become as closely identified with him as was ‘Stop messing about’— which didn't disappear totally from the airways.
Much to his evident surprise, he was invited back to do another Hancock series, but by then the show was in its death throes and Ken no more wanted to be a part of it than Hancock wanted to have him.
He was reduced to saying one or two lines, then disappearing.
Ken, never the most modest man about his talents, finally declared himself mortally offended and after four episodes was out for ever.
He was proud of the fact that he could switch from serious drama to the comedy of radio and the ‘Carry On’ film.
Beyond Our Ken was a different situation entirely from Hancock's Half Hour, partly due to the fact that its leading character was a totally different sort of personality.
Kenneth Horne was a professional entertainer who neither looked nor sounded the part.
He was also a highly successful businessman, the extremely active chairman of two public limited companies, so he didn't need the money that radio brought him.
One could therefore have been forgiven for wondering if he took it all totally seriously.
He did, which accounts for the show's huge success.
His demeanour however, was closer to the big businessman than the professional comedian, so there was always the lingering suspicion that he was really the benevolent boss who made the directors laugh at board meetings and probably did conjuring tricks at the weekend.
The fact that he appeared for every show wearing an immaculate double-breasted blue suit with a carnation in his lapel only served to further that reputation.
You had to be in on the script meetings and the rehearsals to realize that underneath that company executive exterior lurked a funny man who took it all very seriously indeed.
Horne had first made his name on radio in the days when most people still called it the wireless — on another wartime show which supposedly told everything you ever wanted to know about an RAF station.
This was Much Binding In The Marsh.
Horne and his aide Richard Murdoch were both RAF officers when the show had its debut.
It was so hugely successful that it was still being broadcast long after they were both demobilized.
Kenneth Williams was a marvellous prop for Kenneth Horne and like all good props, sometimes it seemed as if the whole thing would collapse without him.
When he played the old rustic Arthur Fallowfield, radio audiences all over Britain — to say nothing of those listening to the BBC's various overseas services — sat up waiting for the virtually immortal words, ‘the answer lies in the soil’.
And that answer fitted every question he was asked, as did his response to any poser that could be put to him ‘thirty-five years’.
Then there was the traffic jam.
Ken in a car, joining the taxi driver and the lady motorist and the cockney labourer stuck behind faulty traffic lights.
‘You've been listening,’ announced Ken in a pointed BBC accent, ‘to an excerpt from Forever Amber.’
In one episode of the show he played a cloakroom attendant marrying a ladies’ lavatory superintendent.
‘You might call it’ he said, ‘a marriage of convenience.’
And there was the pair, Rodney and Charles.
Ken playing Rodney, Hugh Paddick as Charles, two frightfully, frightfully Mayfair types, doing ridiculous things together like dressing up as red Indians when they took a canoeing holiday.
Ken enjoyed the show.
He also greatly enjoyed Kenneth Horne, although his memory of the show in his autobiography was somewhat limited.
He recalled, however, enjoying Ken's warm-up to the audience before a show's recording —‘For those of you who are not familiar with the studios, remember the Ladies is on the right and the Gents is on the left — no I'm sorry, the Gents is on the right and the ladies is…oh, what does it matter?
You'll make a lot of new friends.’
Ken also gratefully remembered Horne's kindness.
Once when Williams was ill, Horne called at his flat and dropped through his letter box details of a holiday plan which he though might do him some good.
He didn't stay for Ken's thanks.
Things like that were not forgotten in a hurry.
A great deal of the success for the show was due to its writers.
Barry Took, who wrote the first forty shows of the series with Bernard Merriman, remembers it all with an affection that is certainly not confined to the money it bought him.
They had appeared together, Ken and he, in an early BBC TV show hosted by Gilbert Harding, but the first time they really worked together was on Beyond Our Ken, a show that he remembers somewhat less affectionately than the later Round The Horne.
‘It was rather cliché-ridden,’ he told me.
It didn't prevent it being a huge public success.
Part of that was undoubtedly due to Ken.
‘He was easy to work with; wonderfully professional.
He was a Stradivarius among performers; a perfect instrument on which you could play anything.
He wasn't a composer as such but a great translator, not just a violin but also a violinist, an Itzhak Perlman of actors.’
He was conscious that this loner of a man lived only for his work.
But he was aware of Ken's sexual problems, just as he had confessed then in those letters to Val Orford and Annette Kerr.
‘He had a tremendously guilty conscience about his desires.’
Ken once told him that he greatly envied his ‘Carry On’ mate Charles Hawtrey.
‘He can sit in a bar and pick up sailors and have a wonderful time.
I couldn't do it.’
He was aware of his fastidiousness in his living habits and his health concerns which only got worse and worse.
Meanwhile, the Kenneth Williams show business operation went rolling ahead like a steam locomotive.
Peter Eade had never been so busy in his life, answering telephone calls, personal visitors and piles of letters that came with scripts for Ken's attention.
If success is measured by the thickness of the pile of scripts on offer — and to many people it is then Ken was very successful indeed.
He took part in a television series starring Billie Whitelaw called Time Out For Peggy, playing a verse writer for a greetings card manufacturer, and in a Margaret Rutherford TV play, The Noble Spaniard He also had two more demanding projects — pantomime and a second Carry On film.
Like Kenneth Horne, he had to take his work as seriously as though he were about to play Macbeth — and he did, every trouser-dropping, each double-entendre reciting, any nasal-sounding ‘stop messing about’ moment.
Meanwhile, Ken was back on the London stage once more— with the role of one of the ugly sisters in the London Coliseum's production of Cinderella — which, despite his and other interpretations was not quite a pantomime.
For one thing, the score was by Rodgers and Hammerstein who had never seen a pantomime in their lives — such things were totally unknown on the other side of the Atlantic — and wrote music and lyrics for the show which fitted very well indeed in their repertoire that began with Oklahoma! and went on, via such epics as South Pacific and The King And I, all the way to The Sound of Music.
The other difference was that Prince Charming was not, as convention dictated, played by the principal boy who, of course, was always a girl, but by the singer Bruce Trent.
So there was much about it that was like a Broadway musical.
On the other hand, there was Cinderella herself played by Yana, an enticingly beautiful singer of the day whose hit, ‘Climb Up The Garden Wall’ made many a man feel like doing precisely that.
Buttons was played by a young Tommy Steele and Ken was Portia, a sister so ugly that he almost frightened himself every time he looked in the mirror.
His face was rouged and he wore voluminous skirts covered in electric light bulbs — powered by a huge battery strapped to a leg.
Reaction to the show was encouraging and word of mouth most rewarding of all.
People were constantly coming to see Ken in his dressing room.
One night, Noel Coward beat the familiar trail.
Ken remembers part of the story of that visit in his autobiography — but only part.
He recalls with pride.
‘The Master's’ praise for his ‘dreadfully vulgar’walk and his assessment of Ken's ‘wonderful’performance.
He also remembers telling the older man that a lot of his best lines were cut —(Coward's injunction — put them back in again, if only gradually, which, he said, he knew that he would do anyway).
What Ken did not tell was that he was sitting on a chamber pot when Sir Noel walked into the dressing room.
He always had a deep mistrust of other people's lavatories and, indeed, would never allow a visitor to his own flat to use his.
When he moved into a theatre, his own toilet went with him.
He was at this time already suffering from an ailment from which he and his friends would suffer until the end of his life — piles.
The affliction was a subject for after-dinner conversation whenever he felt like talking about it, which was almost every time he ever had a conversation.
There is nothing on record to show that he and Coward discussed the affliction at the time of their Coliseum meeting, but they probably did.
They also no doubt discussed the album of songs by Sir Noel that Ken had just recorded for HMV.
Ken was nervous of cutting a disc.
He said that he didn't sound like ‘The Master’ and was frightened of upsetting him, but the label checked with the composer and the approval was granted.
It wasn't easy for him.
As he said, he not only had to learn the very complicated lines but also how to copy Coward's abdominal breathing techniques.
In the end, he achieved ‘Mad Dogs and Englishmen’ and ‘Don't Put Your Daughter On The Stage, Mrs Worthington’.
At times — but only at times — he sounded more like Coward than Coward did.
He even had the temerity to do an ad-lib at the end of the ‘Mrs Worthington’ number.
To the injunction against the daughter going on the stage, he added…‘or your son’.
‘The Master’ did not complain.
Nor did most people who heard the record — some of them were tempted to buy it after seeing Ken in Cinderella.
The newspapers confined themselves to the show itself.
‘Whatever money can buy this show has set out to buy,’ wrote John Thompson in the Daily Express.
As a pay-off to his review of a production that relied ‘too much on spectacular effects’, he wrote: ‘Kenneth Williams makes a most malicious Ugly Sister; a nice professional performance this.
But all that money has not bought enough magic.’
Magic, however, seemed to precisely describe the success of the ‘Carry On’ formula after the Sergeant film.
Carry On Nurse was the first sequel, the first picture to demonstrate that the Carry On Sergeant formula could be transferred.
Moving it from the training camp ground to the hospital ward was the most commercial and seemingly the most obvious — course to be taken.
There was always such a lot of scope in hospitals, certainly far more than in the Army sick room.
There were bed-baths and nurses — nurses who if they didn't yet seem to be bursting out of their brassieres, were certainly stretching their blouses to danger point.
Hattie Jacques was the matron, a part so suited to her size and manner that the very occupation of hospital head nurse might have been created for her, let alone the role in ‘Carry On’ films.
Ken played a role very similar to his Sergeant part, the snooty intellectual thrust into a society not of his choosing — this time the ward he shared with the likes of Kenneth Connor and Leslie Phillips.
Shirley Eaton looked fetching in her nurse's uniform and a young probationer nurse was laying the tracks for a totally new profession for herself as the overemotional wallflower among the blossoming beauties of the hospital.
She was a youngster called Joan Sims.
This was officially based on a play called Ring For Catty, about life in a TB sanatorium, although once the ‘Carry On’ formula was applied any resemblance between the two was almost purely coincidental.
The amazing thing about this second ‘Carry On’ was not so much that it succeeded at all, but that it outgrossed the first in the series.
Even more surprisingly, this little black and white indictment of the National Health Service did almost as well in the United States as it did in Britain.
Peter Rogers knew he had hit a gold mine, even if it didn't always seem to the performers that he was totally on their side.
Like the time he told an actor who demanded funnier lines because he was a comedian —‘your secret is safe with me’.
Rogers always seemed as unlike a comedy film producer as Kenneth Horne differed from the conventional idea of comedian.
He speaks with a public school accent and looks every inch the business executive he, of course, is.
His ingredients for success were the same as those of practically everyone connected with the series.
While the films were being made, they represented the most important work any of them could ever.
Audiences felt much the same way.
To them, the Kenneth Williams voices and the Kenneth Williams faces, the flared nostrils and that snide look that had become as much a trademark as the ‘stop messing about’ sounds on radio were instantly recognizable.
People seeing ‘Carry On’ films found it all as natural as those who a generation earlier had greeted the squeal of bobby soxers for Frank Sinatra or, before that earlier the sight of Al Jolson in blackface.
That was stardom and Kenneth Williams was a star, even if his appeal was mostly on home territory.
The success of Carry On Nurse in America didn't alter the fact that the fans were mostly in Britain and the Commonwealth, but the mail poured in from places as far apart as Kenya and Hong Kong.
Perhaps the audiences realized that in that film, Ken was stretching even his normal acting powers.
It was the first acting venture in which he was called upon to perform a love scene.
He worried about that, but even if it had succeeded simply because it was just another of the ridiculous and unbelievable antics in a ‘Carry On’ film, succeed it did.
Certainly, he never looked for one moment as though there were a dose of castor oil beneath his nose.
His partner was the curvaceous Jill Ireland, who made it all seem no less exciting to her than would have been an embrace from Gregory Peck.
It was, of course, long before her marriage to Charles Bronson and her ultimately unsuccessful battle against cancer.
Ken was undoubtedly happy with himself.
He left the set that day looking for all the world like a nine-stone weakling who had just thrown sand in the face of the beach bully.
Surprisingly perhaps, Jill, the extraordinarily feminine beauty, and Ken, who spent so much of his life these days camping himself, became great friends.
‘They got on so well together, it was amazing,’ Gerald Thomas told me.
Thomas was by now the delight of his cast who appreciated his avuncular style, so different from the more urbane Peter Rogers.
This was not the only ‘Carry On’ film that year.
Carry On Teacher was the second in 1959 and the third in the series.
In this, Ken played a drama instructor caught up in the then current controversy over corporal punishment.
The script had him deliver a line that was in sharp contrast to most of the seemingly right-wing reactionary statements he was making whenever a camera wasn't turning or when a curtain was not up: ‘Extraordinary theory — you bend a child double in order to give him an upright character.’
Most of the other characters in the film were upright to their now expected formulae; Joan Sims, Charles Hawtrey and Kenneth Connor were members of the staff room — led by the formidable-as-ever Hattie Jacques, as the maths mistress who wore her gown and mortar board as much in this film as she had worn her matron's uniform in the previous one.
Leslie Phillips played a psychiatrist and the part of the headmaster  was played by the popular radio comedian Ted Ray — making his only ‘Carry On’ picture (he would have made more, but Associated British who had him under contract but had never used him, refused to allow him to make them).
Ken now was ready to go back to stage revue, as though he wanted to translate some of the craziness of ‘Carry On’ to that more sophisticated theatre public.
The answer was the most successful of all his shows of that kind, Pieces of Eight.
NINE
Pieces of Eight marked a new self-confident Kenneth Williams who had only occasionally revealed himself until then.
The star was also the boss.
Not in the employer-employee sense, but as the man who was able to walk on stage, argue with the director and get his own way without having to have Noel Coward behind him before he would reinstate lines that someone else had cut.
Revue was on its way out.
There could be no doubt about that, the public taste was already showing signs of wanting something else on stage.
The intimacy of television meant that this strange animal that liked to subtitle itself ‘intimate revue’ had to be breathing its last.
That did not mean that it wouldn't go out in style.
It was still bright, highly professional and while it still had a very little life, Kenneth Williams was its king.
‘He was the best revue star we ever had,’ said Michael Codron.
‘And it's a great pity that revue died — and virtually died with us.’
It opened at the Apollo Theatre in September 1959 and was widely acclaimed.
Charlie Williams took his number 14 bus to Shaftesbury Avenue, looked at Ken's name in lights and had he heard anyone say anything against ‘the boy’ would have had no difficulty in punching him one.
Not that Ken appreciated it.
Lou was still the goddess of Marchmont Street, his confidante, his regular companion.
Charlie was an embarrassment who was safely left ignored in a corner of his life that he didn't really have to reveal if he didn't choose to do so.
He was much more concerned with what the critics would think of it all.
They gave Ken the best reviews he had had to date — and the best he could possibly wish for.
Bernard Levin praised Ken's ‘malicious brilliance’, which was praise indeed.
The Evening Standard wrote of ‘the genius of Kenneth Williams’, so more could not possibly have been said.
‘It is Kenneth Williams's evening.
A good deal of expendable material is saved by this small urchin actor who can deafen the upper circle with a single sniff of disapproval and apparently rearrange his features at will.’
And if that were not enough, the paper's critic went on: ‘His performance is continually kept from affectation by underlying cockney savagery; he releases in us all the longing to put out tongues, chalk on walls and pull faces behind the back of authority.’
Patrick Gibbs of the Daily Telegraph liked him almost as much.
Gibbs described the show as a ‘bright, lively little entertainment, especially clever in the way it picks a middle path between the demands of sophisticated and popular taste.’
It was one of the only revues to take music seriously.
The producers cared about the songs as much as about the sketches.
As much care was taken getting the tunes right as getting the set for the cricket scene organized.
Ken, as that star, received star treatment from this reviewer of the revue — which incidentally got its title from being a company of eight performing at eight o'clock each evening.
‘The specialist in nonsense,’ he wrote, ‘was Kenneth Williams.
As an insistent talker in a railway carriage who was carrying a viper in a cardboard box or as a thin man bewailing his bad luck at being unable to apply for the job of fat man at the fair, he provided great amusement largely by the assumption of odd accents and the pulling of extraordinary faces.’
Perhaps the best part of the show was the ‘If only…’ sketch in which he reflected on what might have been.
Ken also played a man selling luminous leprechauns and a newspaper seller talking inconsequential nonsense to the proprietor of a coffee stall.
That sketch was written by Harold Pinter and he played it straight the way Pinter wrote it, with the nuances that Pinter intended, the pauses in the right place.
They were all things to which the audience could relate and the more they related the more they laughed — which gave instant satisfaction not just to Charlie Williams and Lou (who, of course, thought that everything her Ken did was wonderful) but to Michael Codron, the producer and the young man who wrote it all — Peter Cook.
Actually, it was Cook who killed off the revue form.
His Beyond The Fringe was so innovative that nothing could follow it.
Codron told me that one of the most potent memories he had of Pieces of Eight was the ‘violent love-hate relationship’ Ken had with his co-star Fenella Fielding.
She was in some ways, a female Kenneth Williams, an eccentric who could emote facially and vocally in a way in which Ken had established himself the master.
Ken's equally eccentric behaviour towards her became evident early  on in the out-of-town try-outs in Brighton, Liverpool and Oxford.
‘He was very ruthless,’ Fenella told me.
‘When we were out of town, he terrified me, absolutely put the fear of God into me.’
Sometimes it seemed that the fear of God or of some other supernatural force was well inside of Ken, too.
As Michael Codron recalled: ‘You could never say that Kenneth was ever happy.
But I never saw him depressed.
He got very angry quite often-when actors were not doing what he thought was professionally required of them.’
In a more relaxed moment — and there were not many of these Ken told Fenella that he always felt ‘obliged to go much more out on a limb than most people.’
It was as though he were making up for inadequacies of which he was aware but which he tried to pretend were not there.
But they were obvious to most people, even though they were magnified by those who didn't know him well.
This became clear to Fenella during the Liverpool run.
They walked together across a cobbled square.
Ken was in his usual attire of raincoat over flannel trousers.
Fenella was dressed entirely in black, a black sweater over a black skirt, black stockings and on top of the outfit a black hat covering all her hair.
She looked like a refugee from one of those films that at the time constantly glamourized the Paris left bank — like Audrey Hepburn in Funny Face or Juliet Greco in so many roles.
She admits she was outlandish in her appearance, a walking exaggeration.
But she was also beautiful and had a marvellously expressive voice.
She was also totally heterosexual.
That was, of course, not what people automatically thought of Ken.
As they walked across the square, the cobbles echoing the sound of their feet, someone threw a stone — then two, then three.
A gang of boys were using Kenneth Williams as a mobile target.
‘I don't remember what he did,’ she told me, ‘so I suppose he didn't do anything.’
And charitably she added: ‘To this day, I don't know if it was because of what he looked like or because of what I looked like.’
As she says, the way she dressed wasn't exactly usual for Liverpool in those days.
Fenella was an old Kenneth Williams fan.
She used to regularly get tickets for Hancock's Half Hour radio shows simply for the chance to see Ken at work —‘Men used to fight to escort me to the broadcasts.’
It was the popularity of the show rather than herself she had in mind, although her own extraordinarily sexy form in those days could  just have had something to do with it.
She told me she worried about working with him in the show.
‘He had a very low boredom threshold.’
One evening, he took her into a side room at the theatre to emphasize just how bad and terrible and boring he thought it all was.
He particularly disliked a sketch by Pinter and Cook which Fenella describes as ‘beautifully written’— but Ken thought it was rubbish.
‘We've got to revitalize and ad-lib it,’ he told her.
She admits that she trusted him totally and went along with his judgement — a fact, she tends today to regret somewhat.
‘But he was very single-minded then and the fact that something was very good already did not mean he could not improvise.’
And because people knew he was going to do so, they came back night after night to see how things were changed.
‘It became a kind of cult,’ she remembered.
‘Sometimes the whole show was a mass of ad-libs.
But if he were tired, we'd go back to the original which was terrific.’
The love-hate relationship was obvious to her as well as to Codron and the others around them.
‘He wanted me to be good,’ she explained, ‘but not too good.
So it became a tussle between us.
He either wouldn't give me a line or would say my line himself.’
Such behaviour is not guaranteed to foster good relations between two self-respecting performers and neither did it between them.
The tennis game to which Ken had likened comedy was now a ping-pong match between two equally determined performers, neither of whom wanted to allow their ball to fall to the floor.
‘Sometimes, though,’ she confessed, ‘it was wonderful — bliss because he was so good.
He, however, always called the shots.’
Simultaneously with doing the evening performances — two on Saturday, at five and eight — he was recording episodes of Beyond Our Ken and making the latest ‘Carry On’ film — Carry On Constable- and it began to show with the way Pieces of Eight proceeded.
The cult followers who came every night started getting a little disappointed — Ken was following the script which the tougher the regimen became more and more rigid.
‘If he were tired,’ said Miss Fielding, ‘he would put me in the driving seat — except that my part wasn't written for that to happen.
It seemed to me he was trying to turn an apple into an orange or an aeroplane into a horse.’
As she added: ‘He was a genius and geniuses tend to be kind of childlike.
But he was pleased when I did take off at his command.
Like a baby, he did what he wanted to do.’
At those times, they got on well together.
She kept on his wavelength by talking about the subjects that pleased him most — and these frequently  concentrated on the state of his behind.
‘I used to initiate talk about his bum by my own behaviour,’ she admitted to me.
‘I was taken to squeezing people's behinds.
I used to stand in the wings and feel his bum.’
Sometimes, he complained about his front, too.
Ken arrived on stage in a flying scene — an entrance which Fenella  Fielding remembers as ‘stunning’.
He flew on to the stage on wires attached to a harness which, she said, ‘is terribly painful for chaps.
He always used to complain about it.’
There were times when he was just plain outrageous.
I remember myself calling at his dressing room during the run of Pieces of Eight.
He was by now active in Actors Equity, a member of the council, and there was a running sore in the profession — about the state of theatre green rooms.
‘Things are terrible,’ he told me.
‘Come on, have a look.’
Instead of going into the green room, we went to the girls' dressing room.
‘Come on have a good look while you can.
They've all got nothing on.’
Not that ladies in the theatre bothered very much about that.
Fenella's complaints continued to be mostly about the way he treated her on stage.
‘He would make up chunks of speech for me.
Then he'd pinch my lines which, of course, I couldn't repeat, so I'd be left speechless.’
Even today, she doesn't think he was being cruel in doing that.
‘I think he was more self-centred than evil.’
The real crunch came, however, in the sketch that regularly brought the roof down at the Apollo.
They both played spies —‘spies who meet up in that ludicrous wonderland of revue’.
She herself was dressed in sequins from head to toe.
He wore a black suit and a black hat.
‘Each of us was complaining about the spies’ equipment with which we had both been issued.
He was saying that I had a better disguise than he did.
We both had death pills.
I would die first — leaving him to die on stage while I went off into the wings.’
One night, he refused to allow her to die.
He wouldn't feed her the line that would enable her to end her days peacefully in public view.
That was the night the love turned into all hate.
‘Instead of trying to outdo him, I stopped still — and said, ‘Last one dead is a Cissy.’
I died — and walked off in the dark.’
To Ken that remark was like a public statement impugning behaviour on his part that was still completely illegal.
‘It wasn't long before I wished I had never said that.
He was shaking.
He was like a piece of jelly, like someone who had no bones.’
He wasn't just mortally offended.
He was embarrassed more than he had ever felt in public before.
It was one thing behaving in his limp  way whenever he himself felt like doing so.
It was quite another having someone else call those kind of shots.
‘You called me a homosexual in front of the audience,’ he proclaimed, those nostrils now flared in genuine anger.
‘Why?’
She replied that she had no such intention.
It was the kind of thing that children at the time said constantly in the playground.
He was not to be mollified.
‘He didn't speak to me for months.
I asked the management to release me from my contract.’
They begged her not to take it so much to heart and pleaded with Ken to regard it all as a joke not to be treated seriously.
Plainly, she had said something that was too close to his real personality for comfort.
It was something that he took very much to heart, but to this day, she doesn't see it that way.
‘It had nothing to do with his homosexuality,’ she maintains.
‘It was an excuse.
He didn't like to be bested.’
They talked sex, the way he talked about it to many people with whom he grew close in a working relationship.
He told her he didn't have sex of any kind.
‘Because it allows me to be single-minded in my work.’
Before long, he agreed that it suited his single-minded purpose to make peace with his co-star.
They didn't discuss the matter again.
Needless to say, what Ken wanted mattered.
Without him in this show there would quite frankly have been no show.
He was having an increasingly similar role to play in his other work, even though in the ‘Carry On’ pictures he was just one of a team and in Beyond Our Ken was playing second fiddle to the other Kenneth.
There was a great deal of respect for what he did.
As Hugh Paddick told me: ‘We respected each other 's work.
I liked him enormously.
I knew him very well.
I think I knew him better than he thought I did.’
After a while, there was almost a telepathy between them.
‘I think the success of our ‘Hello Rodney, Hello Charles’ routine was that it never sounded rehearsed — which I suppose it wasn't.
It was like the old-time variety acts who just came in with their music, performed and went away again.’
They never read the scripts until they walked into the narration room for what was supposed to be the rehearsal.
Ken would start off telling us about his week and then go into the same — what I would call bumhole jokes, always the same about the problems he had with his bum.
But even though week after week the jokes were the same, we always laughed.
We read our lines together for the first time — but never as we would do them on the actual recording.
‘Ken was such a brilliant bloke that if he had an idea of how to  deliver a line, he'd try to find a way to block it.
Not in an evil way at all, but if you gave him half a chance he'd hammer you into the ground and stamp on you.
But he could be pricked like a balloon.’
Answer him back, recalls Paddick, ‘and he would crumple.
He would be so apologetic!’
Ken tried to make friends if he thought he'd upset a colleague whom he did respect or value.
On one occasion he asked Paddick out for dinner.
‘I thought he meant at his place, but, of course, he never invited anyone to his home for dinner.
So we went to a restaurant in the King's Road.’
That evening revealed a petulance Hugh Paddick had not known before, but which would become quite familiar to the few Williams intimates.
They arrived at the restaurant, were shown to a table, handed menus and started a reasonably convivial conversation either about Ken's rearend, the radio show or about Pieces of Eight which finally closed in the autumn of 1960.
Suddenly, a fact struck Ken that did not please him at all.
He had become aware that nobody recognized him.
For a star that was like notice that he was totally washed up.
Ken's method on such occasions was to raise his voice — on the theory that if nobody recognized his face, they wouldn't fail to relate to the sounds he was making, the variety of Kenneth Williams voices, alternately cockney, Oxford and the sing-song that went with most of his radio characters.
He did all but say, ‘Stop messing about.’
It worked — but too well.
As Hugh Paddick remembers: ‘People then came up to him and asked for his autograph.
After a few minutes, he had had enough of this — and we had to get up and leave.’
Even that didn't alter the respect they had for each other.
Hugh Paddick recalled an event during the Beyond Our Ken period when this became very apparent.
In this sketch, Ken was supposed to be shot dead.
The script called for a pistol shot, the thump of Williams falling to the ground and Paddick left with the last line.
When it came to the actual recording, there was the sound of the pistol shot — followed not by the thump but by Ken wailing as only Kenneth Williams could wail.
‘Oh…ooohohooo-o-o.’
Those familiar with the Williams repertoire will recognize the notes that his voice produced.
As Hugh Paddick recalls, he waited for every possible noise that Ken could produce — and it went on and on — and then there was silence.
‘I couldn't talk over him.
I couldn't top it.’
What he did was wait…and then say, ‘Was that it?’
The ‘oos’ and ‘aahs’went out on air and so did Paddick's riposte, ‘Was that it?’
Following that episode, Kenneth Horne used to scribble on his script before any similar sketch, ‘You're not going to do one of your dying bits, are you?’
But Ken's opinion was valued — even if the advice he gave was not always accepted.
When it was suggested that Bill Pertwee might be a useful addition to the cast, Ken was consulted and took part in the audition, such as it was.
At that time, Pertwee — later to be most famous as the air-raid warden in Dad's Army — was by far the most successful ingredient of a summer show at Eastbourne.
Kenneth Horne and the producer Jacques Brown, went with Williams to the South Coast to see the show, The Foll De Rolls — the whole purpose of which was to view Pertwee at work.
By this time, there had been six Beyond Our Kens, but Horne and his producer thought another comic input was necessary.
Ken was not at all happy.
But he went along for the ride, hoping he could put his spoke in and cancel the idea.
He felt like a little boy suddenly told by his mother to share an afternoon at the cinema with another child.
‘What do you want him for?’ he asked, using his mock-Cockney voice — was this the real Williams sound?
No one ever knew — in a very serious bit of comedy indeed.
After sitting in the stalls and watching the summer show, the other two were convinced that they had good reason enough to want him.
Despite Ken's protests, Pertwee was appointed as a ‘utility man’, an actor who could do anything when it was required, a couple of lines here, a longer speech there.
He stayed for the life of the series.
‘But Ken was making it very clear to me from the very beginning that I was not going to get away with anything,’ Pertwee told me.
‘It didn't bother me really.
Despite what he was saying, I liked him anyway.
I also liked his work very much indeed.’
Not even the Williams petulance — and when it was there, Ken was very petulant indeed — could stop him seeming very, very funny.
The show was recorded at the Paris theatre in Piccadilly.
Rehearsals were held every Wednesday morning.
‘All I can say about them is that they were a real joy,’ Bill Pertwee remembers.
Ken's mother remembers them equally affectionately.
Lou went along with him for every show, with a place always reserved for her in the front row.
She laughed with everyone else in the audience and the cast frequently laughed at her, too.
Sometimes she was so funny that  it seemed she ought to be given a show of her own.
But Ken would have outpaced her.
He wouldn't have allowed her to grab his spotlight, even on radio.
But he could be generous, even to potential rivals.
When Pertwee's act, after six or seven weeks, started expanding, Ken watched him anxiously.
He did well at it — and Ken was the first to congratulate him.
The Cockney voice came out again.
‘Ooh,’ he said, smiling and flaring those nostrils once more, ‘very nice…very nice.
Yes.
Very nice, wasn't it?’
But there was always a reserve about him.
‘I don't think you could ever call Ken a friend.
I don't think he was anyone's really close friend.’
It was true.
It was difficult to be part of the life of a man who was as much of a loner as at any time.
The only person he would allow into his innermost secrets — and then only occasionally — was Lou.
But Pertwee was allowed one privilege that was reserved for very, very few.
He went to Ken's flat — with Kenneth Horne; neither of whom would be allowed to use the lavatory.
Ken was about to move by then.
He hated the noise of Endsleigh Court and for a time shared the flat of a friend — mistaking his haemorrhoid cream for toothpaste.
But, as he was to say, it gave him a chance to hear about a convenient ‘bum doctor’ in Harley Street.
The specialist gave him a series of injections which didn't exactly help him feel happy.
Nevertheless, on the whole audiences didn't get to notice.
In fact, he was very much the resident funny man in what was already a very amusing show indeed.
It was Ken who did the warm-ups for the audience, telling jokes he wouldn't dare come out with on the air.
He had by now developed a routine that would never vary — a peculiar Kenneth Williams walk, prancing up and down stage with his bottom sticking out.
That, naturally enough, was quite appropriate.
Most of his jokes turned on his posterior and the various crises for which he was having to see whatever proctologist he was currently consulting.
Cinemagoers meanwhile got to see more of the ‘bum’ than he intended.
There was one scene in Carry on Constable when virtually the whole male cast — Ken, Leslie Phillips, Kenneth Connor included — had to show their behinds and to have make-up applied.
The scene was in a shower room being used simultaneously by the policemen in the film — at the very moment that Woman Constable Joan Sims entered by mistake.
They were all supposed to grab towels and run for their lives.
But as Kenneth Connor told me, ‘What she actually saw was the first full frontals ever on view during the making of a British  film.
In the first take we all ran totally naked off the set — Ken, nostrils flaring as camp as ever — into a whole group of girls who had heard it was going to happen.
There we were, stark naked, and there was every girl working at the place, gathering around like pigeons at St Martin-in-the-Fields.’
Connor told Ken that looking at him was like ‘seeing a mouse in a bag of oats’.
Most people on the set thought the incident was funnier than anything seen in a ‘Carry On’ film before.
Gerald Thomas allowed himself to add: ‘I don't know what all the fuss is about.’
Leslie Phillips speaks affectionately of Ken at this time.
‘It is not difficult to have vivid memories of him,’ he told me.
He had worked with him before during one of Ken's repertory experiences, this time at Salisbury.
At Pinewood, he was a different man altogether.
‘He never stopped being funny.
He was an extraordinary person, quite extraordinary.
Unlike most entertainers, he had a great many facets.’
What Ken hated most of all when working was being alone — in total contrast to the facet of the man who wanted no company at all when he wasn't fully employed.
Leslie Phillips remembers him, sitting on the canvas chair bearing his name, waiting to be called before the cameras.
‘He would sit and look around until he had an audience — then he'd start.’
They were filming in the street, on Ealing Broadway when Ken jumped on to the back of a van.
He started to tell stories, to sing.
People gathered around him like a Pied Piper.
That was one of the sides of Ken that Leslie Phillips saw.
Another was his ripostes to people whom he found less than entertaining — or important.
‘He had a strong tongue,’ Phillips remembers.
‘He chose his friends very carefully.
He didn't suffer fools gladly.
But if he ever thought he'd upset you he was quick to apologize.
Once he thought he had upset me, he ran after me.
He couldn't bear to think that he had.’
Ken would go on upsetting people and then apologizing for his actions.
One of those who saw it all happen was a young actress called Sheila Hancock.
TEN
Ken was as busy as ever now.
Radio.
Another ‘Carry On’ film — Carry on Regardless, which seemed to offer nothing new and might have died a death at the box office had it not had those magic first two words in the title which by now assured a box office hit.
And after the huge success of Pieces of Eight, there was a sequel to that, too — One Over The Eight, which opened at the Duke of York's Theatre in April 1961.
Ken wasn't as happy with this one as he had been with its predecessor.
On the whole, neither were the critics.
Clive Barnes — later to become one of the ‘Butchers of Broadway’, as critic for the New York Times wrote: ‘Although One Over The Eight is described as a ‘new revue’ do not for a moment be fooled.
This gay, trivial and frequently tedious little extravaganza seemed as old and dated as last year's calendar.’
And he went on: ‘The wit was without barbs, the humour without sting and even worse, often without point.’
But there was a redeeming feature.
As he said: ‘Except for one thing nothing more need be said.
That thing is the performance of the show's star Kenneth Williams, who triumphantly rose above his material in a positive feat of levitation.
Whether as an ever optimistic bird-watcher, or a gentlemanly hairdresser, Mr Williams with his ice-cold face and tortured vowels, was a delight.
Yet for all his diabolical skill, he can no more make this revue than one swallow can make a summer.’
The cliché at the end of that piece could not diminish the success Ken had achieved.
And he let the others in the cast know it, including that young actress, Sheila Hancock, who was soon to become the major star she now is.
They had met socially before the show went into rehearsal, seemingly all over Britain.
The first run was at Stratford-upon-Avon, a place that was used to a different kind of theatre entirely, and ended at what was regarded as the graveyard of intimate revue, Blackpool.
He made her laugh at those dinner parties and other gatherings where they had been together.
On stage, and in the rehearsal room, he was something very different.
‘He was pretty terrifying.
I was just a novice and he was fairly frightening, not giving an inch until he had sounded you out.
He was particularly difficult with women.
He would try to break you.’
That was how he behaved day after day in rehearsal and night after night on stage.
‘The break came,’ she recalled, ‘one night when I answered him back in an ad-lib.
I took him on and we did a massive improvization on the spot and he began to respect me.’
The sketch was one where he played a man contemplating how different life might have been had there not been a world war.
Ken said that the war clouds were looming.
Except that he made it ‘loo-oo-oo-ming’.
Sheila picked it up.
‘Yes, the gloo-oo-my war clouds were loo-oo-oo-ming.’
As she said, ‘The audience didn't know what the f — we were on about and it went on for simply ages, but Ken could be very indulgent with that sort of manic streak.’
That was the point that she knew that the barrier had been broken.
‘He liked you to stand up to him and give as good as he got.
He could come on very strong.
‘He didn't suffer fools gladly.
But when he loved you, he gave his love completely.
But he couldn't tolerate incompetence.’
He suspected everyone around him of that incompetence until he had a contrary situation proved to him.
‘It was a difficult show for him,’ Sheila Hancock recalls.
‘It wasn't an easy show for him and he was very conscious of carrying it all the way.
I was cast opposite him but I was nothing like the draw he was and we had had a dodgy time on tour.
But then, it was wonderful.’
Their relationship continued on that sort of basis outside the theatre too.
Both served on the Equity Council.
‘He veered to the right, I veered strongly to the left and we had many a set to.’
Ken's answer when he knew he had met his match was to say: ‘I'm going to put you in my diary.’
One of the many rows between them at Equity meetings was over actor's pay.
Ken said that many performers ought to pay managements for the privilege of working on the stage.
That was a red rag to a bull, especially one called Sheila Hancock.
‘How bloody ridiculous,’ she countered.
‘He didn't really mean it,’ she now recalls.
‘That was the thing about Ken.
He could row one way one minute and if he found you agreeing with him, he would take the opposite argument on principle.’
It was difficult to get through to him.
‘But he was touched by the love people showed him.
I used to give him the odd cuddle and I used to give him lifts home on my bike.
I had a Lambretta at the time.’
Home for Ken was now the Park West block of flats off the Edgware Road, a far more posh environment than any he had been used to up to then.
But he kept it as spartan as all his previous homes.
He padded his bedroom — literally like a padded cell — so that he wouldn't hear the noise of traffic outside.
His living room had just a couple of chairs and a radio set and some books.
No pictures on the wall.
No television — that box killed conversation.
‘I've got all the comforts I need,’ he told his sister Pat.
‘I've got chairs to sit on.
If guests come, I've got chairs for them.
I've got a comfortable bed to sleep on, a desk and a comfortable chair.
What more do I need?’
‘I thought he was bloody mad,’ Pat says.
He was rarely home, even Pat only went to his flat three or four times.
‘He would say if you want to get me, you would have to get me at eight o'clock in the morning.’
‘I was occasionally admitted to the inner sanctum,’ Sheila Hancock now remembers.
I just sympathized with him.
I always thought he was a lonely little chap.
He liked people who had a family, which was why he enjoyed being with Gordon Jackson so much.
He liked hearing about their families, although he never was part of that.’
He also liked to be around children.
‘He was always wonderful with my kids.
He was rude to them, but great fun.’
Sometimes, he would tell the Hancock children, ‘You're very spotty today.’
or, ‘You're mother's a total failure.
I trust you'll do better.
She was early promise never fulfilled.’
As she recalls: ‘Most children would be very hurt to hear that.
But mine just thought he was terribly funny.’
Another performer in One Over The Eight who took to Kenneth with the greatest of affection was Lance Percival, soon to make a national name for himself with the top TV satire show of the Sixties, That Was The Week That Was.
Ken had been at the auditions that Michael Codron organized, when he was looking for a feed for Williams.
He didn't know Ken was there until he heard a cackle coming from the back of the stalls.
People who knew the Williams cackle, from the NAAFI in Singapore, through repertory in Birmingham to Shaftesbury Avenue, could identify it anywhere.
The job was his.
It was the beginning of a good relationship which survived the tour — and if that tour could be survived, it bode well for their friendship.
‘He was absolutely fine.
He was very straightforward and kind.
I had no trouble at all.
But I know that he made it very hard for Sheila.
She was the female lead and therefore a rival.
I was no rival at all.
‘I learned my lines and did all right.’
What was more, he coped with Ken's ad-libs.
‘I got to know after a time that he ad-libbed because he got bored with his lines.
In the end, you just couldn't recognize the script.
It wasn't that he was bored with the show, he was bored with his lines.
He just got inventive.
But he would come back to the right cues, so I could cope.’
Ken appeared to need very little to cope with his life.
He laughed with other actors, was outrageous in restaurants, shouting orders to waiters who could never be sure if he was being serious or playing another part.
Away from what most other people would regard as glamour, he retreated to that padded cell off the Edgware Road.
By this time, Lou and Charlie had moved too — the business had been running down for a long period and there was no point in staying in a flat over a shop that didn't exist any more.
The mental torture of that for Charlie would have been tremendous.
They moved to a flat in Kensington that Ken financed for them — to the point that he made Carry On Regardless solely to recoup some of his losses.
Lou wasn't at all happy there, but she was in good health and that was the only thing that Ken bothered about.
He seemed to have resolved his sexual hang-ups for the time being and was content with his lonely existence.
When the Daily Telegraph thundered on to his front doormat, he could get up and do the crossword over the pot of tea that served as his breakfast.
With all these things going well, Ken seemed as happy as possible although Michael Codron could find no reason to amend his belief that Ken could never be happy.
But he rejoiced in his success.
When Roy Plomley invited him to be his guest on Desert Island Discs, he thought that his cup runneth over.
But he was no more comfortable on the radio programme than he would have been on the real desert island.
He found the whole conversation stilted and turgid.
He wasn't even let off the hook when it was all over.
Stanley Baxter wondered whether choosing Michelangelo's famous male nude, ‘The Boy David’ as his luxury item was quite the choice a man with Kenneth's reputation should have made.
But he survived it.
Plomley didn't regard the show as one of his greatest successes and no one else seemed to remember it.
Something more to put down to experience, and his friends were kind.
It wasn't easy for him to make new friends, particularly outside of whatever cast list he was currently a part, but occasionally it happened — as during the run of One Over The Eight.
An American came to see the show one night and was practically addicted to it.
As a result he became addicted to Ken.
The man was a visiting Texan who was in Britain as manager of a fellow countryman, a concert pianist.
He had been recommended to see Ken's show, took a box for the evening and couldn't stop laughing.
In fact, he laughed so loud and so often that One Over The Eight practically came to a halt.
‘This was the only time I ever saw Ken himself break up and get stuck,’ remembers Lance Percival.
It was during the sketch in which Ken played a hairdresser.
He laughed so much that his laughter became the centre of attraction in the theatre.
Even Ken couldn't keep his mind on the action.
‘This guy laughed so much that everything came to a stop.’
As a result, Ken and the Texan became firm friends.
Meanwhile, Ken was happy to do good turns to anyone who wasn't a threat.
He invited Gerald Thomas and Peter Rogers to come and see the show — mainly so that they could watch Lance Percival at work.
As a result they offered him small parts in the next two films in which Ken would star.
They were not strictly speaking, ‘Carry Ons’ but you could have fooled the audiences.
Only the title was missing from this story about life in a music academy — perhaps that was the reason; ‘Carry On Student’ or even ‘Carry On Musician’wasn't guaranteed to have the customers rolling in.
But it was  produced by Peter Rogers, directed by Gerald Thomas and in addition to Ken and Lance Percival, there was also Leslie Phillips and Eric Barker (returning to the team after Carry On Sergeant), Sid James and Liz Frazer, who had been introduced to the series in Carry on Regardless and would be as much part of the set-up as Ken himself.
There was also James Robertson Justice who had starred in the ‘Carry Ons’ direct ancestors, the Doctor In The House series.
Twice Round The Daffodils was ostensibly a more serious subject — about life in a TB  sanatorium and caused a modicum of controversy among people who thought that tuberculosis was not a matter for ‘Carry On’ style laughs.
As the Daily Express noted: ‘Much as I disliked this film and its cheap exploitation of suffering and illness, I must concede that it has been made with the dead-on professionalism that is characteristic of the other ‘Carry Ons.’’
Nevertheless, somehow Rogers and Thomas got the message across that TB was hardly the scourge it once had been and there was really no reason not to laugh at those who were generally prepared to laugh at themselves, although there were serious moments too.
‘I just thought that Ken was right for the part,’ said Gerald Thomas.
‘I knew he would get the humour and the pathos just right and I was proved correct.
I was very happy with him in that part.
I have never not been happy with him in anything he has done.’
Sheila Hancock was in that film too, as was Nanette Newman, both of whom told me how Ken would while away his time discussing the medical advances of which apparently the medical staff in the picture were not aware.
Ken's reading always was advanced.
Jill Ireland renewed her cuddling relationship with Williams and Donald Sinden, Donald Houston and Andrew Ray were among those who spent a great deal of their time wearing bathrobes and dressing gowns, hopping in and out of bed — for strictly medical reasons, of course.
Ken, however, was more than once seen to go into his bed and fall fast asleep — undoubtedly the pressure of working in the theatre at night and recording Beyond Our Ken on other mornings proved too much and was reminiscent of another time when he fell asleep.
Ken's friendships and the way he established them continued to surprise those who were on the periphery of his activities.
What, for instance, would Ken have in common with Andrew Ray, who was then just twenty-three years old (Ken was now forty) and who made known and very clear the attraction he felt for a pretty girl?
‘I do, though, think he found me attractive,’ Andrew told me.
‘There was a scene in the showers and when it was over, Kenneth came up to me and said, ‘Oh you ought to have seen all the people gathering around you’.
We all had swimsuits on, we weren't stripped naked.
I do think that Ken fancied me, and he actually said he thought I was beautiful.
But I was never aghast at it.
It never came out in any really sexual way.’
That may be difficult to comprehend, but Andrew Ray thinks he understands it.
‘Maybe Kenneth fancied quite a few of his friends in some ways, but it never came out physically.
I think Kenneth had a strong sexual imagination and I am sure that a lot went through his mind, but J don't think it went further than that.’
‘I never thought there was anything strange in it at all,’ he told me.
‘We both spent most of our time working on the film, walking or sitting about in our dressing gowns and we had a great time together.’
The great time was continued outside of Pinewood, too.
For years, they would meet at Lyons Corner House, have lunch and then spend the afternoon at the cinema.
‘We'd buy the Evening Standard, look in the amusement pages and he'd say, ‘What do you fancy?
Oh look — that's all right for time.’
Afterwards, we'd go to the Quality Inn for a poached egg.’
Sometimes, they went to the National Gallery together.
Ken's favourite  picture was ‘The Incredulity of Thomas’— which showed St Thomas sticking his finger into the wound of Jesus.
‘It is an amusing portrait as Ken pointed it out to me, discussing the intricacies of the brushwork as well as the subject matter and its religious significance.’
They would talk politics.
‘Ken, of course, was fairly right-wing and I was of the opposite persuasion.’
He would go to Ray's house for dinner.
He liked the way Andrew cooked.
‘I don't think he liked my daughter Madeleine very much.
I think it was simply because she was a little girl and he couldn't get on with her.
He wasn't openly hostile towards her, but I think he had a natural reaction against the sex.
But he adored little boys and when my son Mark was born, he became his godfather.’
On the other hand he was kindness itself to Andrew's mother-in-law.
Ken took her around London, with Andrew, and they walked arm-in-arm through the Strand, saying ‘Come on girl.’
It was better than when Andrew took his then girlfriend, now his wife, to the cinema with them.
‘He was so furious, he hardly spoke to me at all.’
On another occasion, the two were walking through a West End street when a voice behind called out: ‘Hi, Andrew!’
It was one of his friends, an Italian singer named Tony Dalli.
Ken froze.
‘Don't answer, don't turn round,’ he instructed.
Andrew did as he was told — and regretted it.
‘I just had to accept that was him.
He had so many wonderful sides to him I had to accept that this was just another one.
It was a pity that he could be so hurtful.’
Once, Andrew Ray told Gordon Jackson about the hurt.
‘That's just Kenneth,’ Jackson told him.
‘We all know Kenneth.
Just ring him up and have lunch with him the next day and it'll be all right.’
And,’ said Ray, ‘it always was.
He was right.’
Actually, the relationship between Ken and Gordon Jackson was a very strong one indeed.
‘I think,’ said Andrew Ray, ‘he saw the kind of man he would like to have been had he been straight.
He admired his responsible attitude towards his own family.
A good responsible, straight man.
Time and again he would talk about Gordon, but only respectfully.’
The relationship with  Stanley Baxter, Ray believes, was different.
‘I think there was much more of a sense of rivalry between them,’ he told me.
‘I even detected a love-hate relationship.
He loved Stanley, and thought that he dared do things he wouldn't dare do himself.’
Sometimes, Andrew's hurt brought on by Ken was deep indeed.
‘I remember being in a mood once when he told me, ‘You'll go mad some  day’.
That was very brutal and hurtful when I felt down.
But that was a small side of the personal relationship.
Most of it was helpful and extremely kind.’
And they had one particularly favourite occupation.
‘We'd go to the public gallery at the Old Bailey and listen to the trials.
Ken particularly used to enjoy the murder trials — not for any morbid curiosity, but for the drama unfolding.
We would then discuss them and the barristers, as if we were criticizing a play.
We used to say that the counsel gave some very tacky performances that wouldn't stand up to cross-examination from Michael Denison (star of the 1948 law courts drama, The Blind Goddess).
‘For some cases, we'd come back day after day, and chat to people in the queue.
I remember a big insurance scandal in which someone was bumped off and another case where a dustman was having sex with his two daughters.
Ken loved them.
He'd read books about murders and we talked about them for years.
I remember he was fascinated about the Nilson murders, the man who cut up bodies and melted them down in his garden.’
But it was the show business aspect of the trials that appealed to him.
After the hearings, they would walk through Fleet Street and its environs.
‘It was then that I got to realize Ken's great knowledge of London and of history.
He really should have been an Oxford don or something.
I had always been interested in history, but Ken with his great command of English was able to explain it and put life into it, particularly when talking about his hero, Charles I.’
After the walking tour, they would go and have tea together.
Sometimes, they would meet for lunch at the Grill and Cheese at the Corner House, where Ken regularly gave a private performance for the other people waiting to be seated.
‘What yer gonna have today?’
Ken would ask in his best Marchmont Street tones, ‘Gonna have the fillet?’
Ken would see Andrew to his bus to Victoria where he'd catch his train to Brighton.
On the way, men working in a gang on the building site they passed would call out to him, ‘Hello, Ken,’ they would call.
‘How yer doin' mate?’
He would reply in their own language.
‘All right, mate’ he'd call.
‘You all right.’
But the real matiness of Ken came a short while later.
Andrew also saw the other side of Kenneth Williams, Williams the depressive.
He was down and sometimes it seemed as if nothing was going to shake him out of it, apart from a laugh at someone else's expense or a shared moment of despair.
‘I had had those moments myself, so I could appreciate them,’ says  Ray.
In fact, Andrew attempted suicide not long after the film was completed.
Ken was among the first to rush to his bedside in the psychiatric ward of the Middlesex Hospital.
‘He came to see me several times and even brought Gordon [Jackson]along too.
‘He was always very supportive and helpful.
Depending on how I was, on my own mood, he could be very funny.’
In the end the Middlesex authorities asked Andrew to leave — so many show people like Ken and Diana Dors came to see him that the noise along the corridors was unbearable.
‘It was constantly party time,’ he recalls.
‘I got hauled up before the chief psychiatrist because of the champagne that was flowing.’
Andrew was particularly concerned about work and about going into new things.
Ken encouraged him to do Shaw and ran over the lines with him until he felt he had got it.
For about nine years, they saw each other constantly.
‘I would ring him and he'd answer the phone almost immediately.
It seemed as if he would answer it before it rang and we'd arrange to go out.’
But then the time came for the friendship to end.
Ken himself was seeing a psychiatrist because of his own depressions.
‘He told me,’ said Ray, ‘that I wasn't doing him any good, two depressives together.
He wrote me a letter.
‘My doctor,’ he said, ‘has told me that because we are both very depressive types of people, perhaps because we know what life is about that I shouldn't meet people who were the same way as I am and get depressed about things.’
I was very, very sorry, but I just left the letter around and didn't see him for about three years.
It was just the way he was at that particular time.
I wasn't hurt.
I just understood Ken.
We both knew only too well because of the business we were in and the sort of people we were what could happen.’
Whatever was wrong with Ken at that time, Andrew Ray is convinced it wasn't sex.
‘I don't think it was a problem for him.
He never had any long-term physical relationships as far as I know.
I think it was all in Kenneth's mind and I think Kenneth's hang-up about his backside and his obsession with cleanliness would have made physical love very difficult for him.’
But there was evidence that Ken did attempt it, even if he never went through with any serious kind of sexual activity.
‘I believe he did have an occasional Guardsman home,’ said Ray.
‘They would always be pick-ups.
I think he might have tried, thinking that he must fulfill this sexual desire that he had in some way.
But I don't think anything happened.’
There was a story he told about the man who came to his flat and said in a gruff voice, ‘Come on then — let's get on with it then.’
Ken was so put off that this potential sexual-encounter never went any further.
Andrew Ray recalled: ‘There were various things about Guardsmen that came up in conversation.
He once told me, ‘You can't trust them you know.
They'll always steal something, you know.
You'll usually find that the toothpaste's gone or something.’
Andrew is fairly convinced about the Guardsman theory.
‘I know that if Ken had had any kind of sexual relationship it wouldn't have been with anyone he knew well.
It would have been a casual thing and not with anyone who was camp, like him.
It would have been with someone butch, a Guardsman or a man on a building site.
A real man.
I think that appealed.’
He would make comments about them ‘in the same way you or I would comment on a pretty girl and a wonderful pair of knockers’.
Ken's more serious side was, as far as his fellow performers were concerned, more obvious in the books he read.
‘I remember during One Over The Eight,’ said Lance Percival, ‘he was reading about the French Revolution and that's all he would talk about.’
In fact, it got quite unnerving.
Other actors were trying to think of a way to get a laugh while Ken was more concerned with the fate of Robespierre.
‘He came out with bits of information that were never of any use to anyone: But Ken could turn any conversation into an erudite discussion — and also make jokes about them.’
Ken was constantly outrageous —‘but outrageous for the sake of being so, rather than deliberately trying to upset anyone.’
He was, though, still unwilling to put up with people who he felt were beneath his intellectual level.
He could also be terribly rude.
That was clearly illustrated during the run of One Over The Eight.
A stage-hand upset him and he replied with a withering flow of invective, the kind for which he was not generally known.
As Lance Percival tells the story, it was not a pleasant occasion.
A new stage-hand stood watching Ken's routine as a bank robber armed with sticks.
He had to say, ‘Stick up your sticks’— from behind a flat.
Ken was disturbed to know that he was being watched during a live performance, even by a man who was providing an audience out of sheer admiration.
Ken broke off the routine in mid-flow and went back behind the flat.
He glared at the stage-hand.
‘Why don't you fuck off you cunt,’ he told him — and went back to work.
The stage-hand was destroyed.
But memories of Ken at this time still tend to revolve more around  the fun.
He could also still imitate anyone with whom he came into contact, although his days of giving his impressions of Winston Churchill or Nellie Wallace (nobody would know who Nellie Wallace was in 1962) were by now over.
In fact, Lance Percival came to a conclusion as long ago as when the One Over The Eight show was still running that Ken wouldn't have minded if his comedy days had been over, too.
But there was a living to be made in comedy which he still did so well and he got on with it.
In fact, it was a correct judgement and one that would remain valid for the rest of Williams's life.
Always at the back of his mind was a serious actor trying to break out of the ‘Carry On’ mould, but while he was wanted for nothing more, says Percival, he was ready to go on showing that he was better than anyone else.
‘He was actually a very quiet, introspective person.’
Carry On Cruising followed at the not inappropriate speed of knots.
Lance Percival was in that, too.
‘I remember we had a preview on a ship in Southampton.
I think that was the nearest we ever got to going to far-away places.
Peter Rogers's idea of location was behind a tree, two and a half miles away from Pinewood.’
Wherever the film was being shot, Ken was ready to take the lead — and not give it away.
‘If you could film all Ken's words and actions when no cameraman was supposed to be looking, you'd have another ‘Carry On’ film.
He was outrageous between takes and everyone else there was his willing audience.’
As he also said: Peter Rogers and Gerald Thomas were delighted to pour champagne down people's throats between takes — they weren't paying anyone very much — to listen to Ken's routines.
Whether he had prepared them in advance, of course, we'll never know.’
What Lance Percival also says is that he will never know the depth of Ken's sexual feelings, although others have produced stronger evidence.
‘He was the most neutral man I ever knew.
I was with him constantly for a whole year and in that time I never saw him with anyone, man or woman.
I would defy anyone to be able to define Kenneth perfectly.
Everyone has a different angle, but I don't think anyone knew him properly.
He made an absolute mastery of hiding himself behind the personalities he created.’
ELEVEN
Nobody will ever know for sure how much Ken tried to rid himself of the camp, ‘Carry On’ image.
What is much more certain is that it was a huge release for him, a safety valve by which the loner could open up, expand and express himself.
But at the age of forty he was at last beginning to wonder whether the image he created for himself in his twenties could stay with him for ever.
After a year of One Over The Eight,(‘Kenneth Williams is the best of the genre,’ wrote Robert Muller in the Daily Mail) Ken left the cast and his part was taken over by Kenneth Connor.
It would last for another six months, but by the time it ended, intimate revue was finally dead.
There would be no more shows of the kind.
He himself had other plans, although for the moment he was keeping them fairly close to his chest.
Lou continued to be the nearest he had to a first and real love and she still went to all the broadcasts and visited Pinewood for every film, sitting on her own canvas chair, sometimes by herself, frequently with her sister Daisy, of whom Ken himself was still very fond.
Charlie was taking a lot of the pressure off her now.
Pat, divorced, but living her own distinct life, was an executive with a computer company in London, a new feature on the industrial scene but already well established.
She found her father a job — as the internal postman.
The fact that Charlie managed to run a book on the side only contributed to his contentment and stability.
Ken, meanwhile, believed he had found a play that suited his temperament and talents better than most of the things on which he had been working to date.
In fact, he was so happy with the idea that had come to him from the writer, Peter Shaffer, he began the serious rethink of his career which friends like Lance Percival had been thinking for some time was overdue.
For one thing, he was not going to make the seventh ‘Carry On’ film, Carry On Cabbie.
Peter Shaffer had written a two-part play called The Private Ear and the Public Eye.
The role he proposed for Ken was too good for him to pass up.
Ken agreed to play Julian Christaforou, the Anglo-Greek detective, the public eye in the second of the two plays after a dinner.
Ken had chosen the restaurant, but was frightened of being pestered by fans, so asked the head waiter to produce the screens.
That way, he would be left alone without worrying why no one was asking him for an autograph.
The schizophrenia of Kenneth Williams was thus complete.
‘He was two people,’ recalls Shaffer today.
‘The public and the private literally.’
Maggie Smith would be the female lead in both halves, but Ken didn't come on until after the interval.
He worried about that, at first, until Shaffer persuaded him that he could make enough of the dialogue at his disposal, through the sheer weight of the quality of his performance.
He had wanted the part of the young boy who couldn't make it with his date in the first play, but he was a juvenile no more and Peter Shaffer had to convince him that it wouldn't work.
He was enthralled at playing with Maggie Smith again.
She was no longer the ingenue who had wowed audiences on Broadway with New Faces.
Her part in Share My Lettuce had done as much for her own theatrical career as the show had done for Ken, and she was embarking on a series of films that would make her an international reputation.
She and Ken were a pair, soul brother and sister.
In a way, she brought him down to earth.
But, like Ken, she had a devastating wit and the repartee between them was a joy to listen to.
They talked about the director Peter Wood.
‘In a way,’ recalls Richard Pearson, who played Maggie's husband, a dull businessman, ‘he kept the director in his place’.
Maggie's then boyfriend — and later husband — Beverley Cross, became a close friend of Ken's at the time, too.
‘I thought he was a very amusing and extraordinary person, unique, extremely amusing.’
With the change from revue complete and the rest from ‘Carry On’ beginning, Cross took it upon himself to ‘bully him’.
He kept telling him to go back to being a serious actor.
‘I kept saying that he ought to be in Shakespeare and not waste his time.’
Cross took him to Stratford to see the Bard's work, ‘but he wanted the comfort of the BBC and the ‘Carry Ons’ '.
Cross now admits that he thought Ken was ‘probably too eccentric for Shakespeare’.
But he also noted the occasional whiff of nostalgia as he contemplated the ‘what-might-have-been’ as far as classical theatre was concerned.
He did talk about his time as the Dauphin in a way that made people fairly sure that if the Stratford management had come to him with an offer, he would have grabbed it.
On the other hand, there were friends who thought that the Shaffer  play was just the sort of thing that Kenneth Williams needed to do.
Andrew Ray told me: ‘I often saw Kenneth and some of the things he did and thought to myself, ‘What a waste!’
I realized what a marvellous actor he was when I saw him in this and only wished that he hadn't relied so much on the funny voices and hidden behind the easier way out of doing the characters that he could do so easily — and it was easy for him.
It was much harder to show a side of your nature and your soul as an actor as he did in The Private Ear and the Public Eye.’
But he did also want to put his all into this new play with Maggie Smith that seemed to offer so much.
They conspired with each other.
When they both protested, seemingly in vain, at having lines cut, they came up with their own solutions they would accept the cuts, but make do with them badly.
In fact, they were so bad in the one matinee performance in which they were tried out, that the original speeches were reinstated by the time the curtain went up at the Globe Theatre that evening.
Maggie Smith once said about him: ‘Kenneth taught me how to recognize the one word in a sentence which would turn it from a commonplace statement into something wildly funny.’
Then, they had the perfect solution to the problem of audience laughter.
Should they stop because the people out front were drowning everything coming from the stage?
They decided between them that that would make the apparent spontaneity of their performances artificial.
They talked nonsense until there was sufficient calm in the stalls and circle to allow them to continue with the lines as written in the script.
Richard Pearson played Maggie Smith's husband in the play, the dull businessman.
He was eight years older than Ken.
‘But, strange as it may be to say about someone who was younger, I learnt a great deal from him.’
Ken was, he said, a ‘fine technician’.
He discovered just how good during the three weeks that elapsed between the signing of contracts and the opening.
Most of the rehearsal time was reserved for the first play and Ken and Pearson would do much of their own rehearsing together.
At first, there were slight disagreements between them.
The main one was that Kenneth wanted no time between speeches.
He wanted to give Pearson the cue and hear him respond absolutely instantly, sharply.
‘That wasn't the way I was used to playing a part.
I liked to think before saying my lines.
But the director was all for it, too, and as Kenneth pointed out, we didn't wait between talking naturally in our private conversations.
I had to accept that was right, although at first it seemed rather  artificial to me.
But he was very experienced in that.’
Once or twice, Ken argued with him and said: ‘There was a pause there.
You weren't in on time.
In our regular conversation, we talk over each other.’
Towards the end of the play's run, he got more indulgent with Pearson.
‘You can pause all you like,’ he told him.
‘I'm not going to spoil a friendship over a pause.’
It was as if , the actor now thinks, he hadn't wanted to complain all along, but his professionalism wouldn't allow him not to say it.
The one-act play began in Pearson's office, with Ken — a funny little gnome-like figure — up a library ladder looking at a book, while Pearson walks in holding his briefcase and bowler hat, humming Ravel's Bolero.
He had to do a double take, bumping into a filing cabinet.
Pearson protested about that.
‘I don't do double-takes,’ he insisted, but Ken said, ‘I'll teach you.’
Both audiences and critics seemed to like what they saw and heard.
Ken and Maggie were in for a long run.
Beverley Cross said that it was an admiration of one performer for another ‘and also he had such a soft spot for her after that year in Share My Lettuce.
He was immensely encouraging to her.
He admired her enormously and she did what he wanted to do — went into the really serious theatre while he stayed the same.’
Sheila Hancock told me she remembered Ken being very proud of the play.
Her memory did not let her down.
Everyone connected with the play felt much the same way.
Peter Shaffer has only the fondest memories of a performer who appears to have been a playwright's delight.
He was convinced from the beginning that Ken was perfect for the role of the slightly dotty but romantic detective in the white raincoat, a man who existed on a diet of macaroons he produced from out of a black Gladstone bag.
Peter Wood, the director, and H.M. Tennent, the producers, were of the same mind.
‘We all thought that if he would do it, it would be a wonderful idea,’ said Shaffer.
He knew he wasn't going to regret the move from the moment they all assembled for the first rehearsal.
‘He was a marvellous rehearser and a marvellous precisian.
He was a man who wanted to speak the text exactly as written.
No improvizations.’
Which was not the way he had usually behaved.
Just occasionally, he would allow himself an ad-lib.
In one scene he had to take a handkerchief out of his pocket, and in the process shower Maggie Smith with nuts.
Sometimes, he would add lines like: ‘You've  got to pick them up from the carpet, or they'll tread in.
They'll tread in-n-n-n.’
In contrast with One 0ver The Eight in which he constantly said his ‘gloo — oo-oo-m’ words or would take a word like ‘now’and repeat it excessively, he behaved with total seriousness in this; a different character entirely.
But then, as Shaffer remembers, ‘he was a very paradoxical figure, Kenneth’.
The solitary figure in private life contrasted with the man he describes as giving a ‘firework display’ in public.
‘There was this public person, acting that part — sometimes the hysterical story teller and raconteur plunging into that great bath of imitation, nostrils flaring and eyes sparkling, and putting on those extremely funny lofty voices.
The other person was a man who could actually speak for hours about his reading, which was extensive.
His views on religion and philosophy — some of his views were very contorted.’
Ken was also a good listener.
He did hear what other people said to him —‘although with somewhat less relish than when he spoke himself.
But he did listen.
He was a good listener — and he was egged on to be a performer by his listeners.’
‘I think in some ways he was a very despairing man.’
He knew of Ken's depressions.
He saw them, although the ones he witnessed were different from the black clouds he had heard about.
‘I found him sometimes in a sort of energized depression’, said Shaffer.
‘He would verbalize his sadnesses, throw his arms about as he told elaborate stories concerning people who had upset him at the time, even when going into sad tales about people who were important to him.
But as Shaffer remembers: ‘He could be talking about a death and get himself very worked up about what he was saying, very passionate about whatever made him worried or angry.
But what was coming out was pure comic monologue.’
‘Part of him would be very pleased that you were laughing at him.
The other part would not be pleased because really he meant what he was saying.’
The principal frustration at the time was with Charlie and Lou — mainly with Charlie, however, as was predictable.
Ken had mortgaged himself to the hilt with the flat in Brunswick Gardens, Kensington and after one interminable row following another, he told his parents to leave the flat.
They did — and then came back again.
The row became a one-man show for Shaffer and the others assembled instantly as an audience for Kenneth Williams.
As Shaffer added: ‘What distinguished him was the energy he always demonstrated.
At his best, he was one of the funniest storytellers you  ever heard.
At his less than best he was like a child showing off.
Because he was so vastly entertaining, you took those times with the others.’
Not everyone was always quite so generous.
Kenneth Williams resorted to so many different voices which sometimes gave the impression that he wasn't always sure himself which one was going to come out.
Just occasionally, one could be forgiven for thinking that the dummy had overtaken the ventriloquist.
But Peter Shaffer himself was delighted with the public Williams the public voice as well as the Public Eye.
‘He was unique and startling with this inexhaustible energy and the most violent precision of timing.
People adored him.
They were mesmerized by him and he drove the comedic tension forward at a great rate.’
The last few minutes of the play were, Shaffer told me ‘simply an object lesson in comic timing.
When he assumed the role of the accountant and conducted the whole conversation with someone at the other end who was trying to make an appointment, he was brilliant.’
The brilliance of that moment was underlined by the fact that Williams, playing a man with a particularly sweet tooth, was eating a sour grapefruit without sugar at the time.
Having made the appointment with the stranger, he asks casually: ‘And do you think you could bring a canister of demerara sugar with you?’
‘One is always grateful for that kind of comic genius who takes your script and plays it for everything that's in it,’ as Shaffer told me.
He and Shaffer got on well together and became firm friends.
‘What he liked about the play was that he enjoyed speaking it.
He liked the elaboration of the language.
He was very funny in it.
Very exact.
He didn't like any kind of sloppiness on stage.
He liked to be exact.
He was always so tidy.’
The play had an out-of-town try-out in Oxford.
Shaffer drove him there from the Park West flat.
‘I only entered the flat for a brief moment.
I may even have just called for him and stood at the door.
But I could see there was something monk-like about the space there.
I could see a sort of Army bed.
It was so austere.
There was such a paradox between the baroque personality of Mr Williams and this extremely Carthusian background against which he lived.’
His taste in furniture was in some ways mirrored by his choice of restaurants.
He still favoured Lyons Corner House, although by now he had graduated from the Grill and Cheese to the Seven Stars.
Now these were perfectly fine eating establishments that served wholesome food on crisp white table cloths, but were not the usual sort of house favoured by top stars.
Ken, though, liked it enormously and it was very close to the Globe.
On matinee days, Ken would take other members of the cast to the Kardoma restaurant in Piccadilly for a poached egg.
‘He'd say let's go and have a poached,’ Richard Pearson told me.
‘Or he'd have minced meat on toast.
He had very plebian taste — although he'd say he didn't.’
They would go for walks in the area.
‘We'd go to Wellington Place.
Ken knew all the statues and who they were of.’
After the play, he and Maggie Smith and Peter Shaffer would assemble at the Seven Stars for a late dinner.
‘He hated people staring at him,’ Shaffer told me.
‘So we ate several meals there behind screens.’
Like other people, Richard Pearson recalled the attraction that simple, conventional family life held for Ken — the bachelor who was so very confirmed in his status was most of the time frightened of anything else.
'I don't think he would have trusted himself to be married,’ the actor remembered for me.
But he used to go down to Pearson's house in Beckenham, Kent and spend time with his children, Simon and Patrick.
‘He was attracted to me because I and my life were so very ordinary.’
They talked religion.
Ken was a great fan of the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Ramsey, and talked about him a great deal.
‘He wasn't a church-goer, but very religious.
He was, funnily enough, a marvellous impersonator of bishops.’
On one of his visits to Beckenham, Pearson told him about a little girl neighbour, a Downs Syndrome child, who loved seeing Kenneth Williams in films or on television.
Ken wrote her a letter — and then several others followed, although he never met her.
He and Pearson had first met in I960 at the BBC Television Centre.
‘He was very generous about Harold Pinter's The Birthday Party in which I played.
He could be very kind to another performer.
On the other hand, he could be very acerbic.’
He would visit his home, making faces at the Pearson children as they hung out their bedroom windows looking for him.
‘He came in a hired car in those days.
Very grand.
In later years, I'd take him to the station and he'd get a train home.’
Then he'd write long letters to Richard, telling precisely how long the train journey took and describing colourfully the other people with whom he shared the carriage.
It was easier going to the house — he and Richard's wife Pat used to swap wartime evacuation stories with each other and then they would play verbal tennis, making conversation out of the spoken lyrics of Forties' songs — than going to the theatre to see other actors, as they sometimes did together after the run of Public Eye.
‘He wasn't much good as an audience.
He would shuffle around in  his seat and then be highly critical, but he always knew what was going on.
On the other hand, talk to him about a book — like one that Gordon Jackson lent him — and he would go overboard about it.’
With a good book, Ken could be alone.
In a theatre he frequently took refuge in a lavatory — not to solve his omnipresent bowel problems necessarily but to escape from autograph-hunters.
On the other hand, had he not thought they would be there, he wouldn't have gone into the building at all.
But while he was in the Shaffer play, there was no time to see other actors at work.
Ken was in The Private Ear and the Public Eye for a year — Maggie left slightly earlier to play in May, May.
Afterwards, he and Peter Shaffer lost touch.
‘I had the sense he was rather sad,’ the writer now remembers.
‘I loved him.
Within the limits of his absolutely individual personality he was genuinely and truly extraordinary.’
The only people who did keep in touch with Ken for more than a block of years in which they were extremely close, only for it all to fade away, were Stanley Baxter and Gordon Jackson.
There was, though, always Lou, to whom Ken had introduced the delights of a theatre that she had hardly known existed.
‘He was everything to her,’ Richard Pearson, like so many others, noted.
‘But he could be sharp with her too — boss her around.
But she loved it.
She was a wonderful foil for him.’
Andrew Ray also experienced that sharpness between them.
‘I think that the relationship wasn't entirely healthy.
He loved and worshipped Louisa.
But there were times when he was very hard on her.’
He himself was very much aware of the differences in the relationships between Ken and his mother and that with his father Charlie.
On one occasion he went with Ken to visit Charlie and Lou in their basement flat in Kensington.
‘He treated his father with such disdain, it was almost as though he weren't there.
He was almost ignoring his very presence.
I had the feeling that he thought that his father didn't look after Lou well enough.’
By this time, there was concern as to whether Charlie was capable of looking after himself.
His bookmaking activities in the computer company were even reasonably harmless signs of his eccentricities.
He had never got over having to give up the shop, caused as much by growing bronchial problems as by falling business.
By now there were more serious difficulties affecting Charlie's behaviour that became considerably more alarming.
It hadn't been an easy decision for him in any regard.
Pat had come to him and asked to be able to buy the shop — not with any money she had  available at that time, but on a never-never basis, letting him have a share in the takings until the value of the business had been reached.
‘Go and sod yourself,’ he told her.
Moving to Kensington unnerved him.
As the years went by, things got worse and worse.
‘He got under Mum's feet,’ said Pat.
But that was also just a minor problem.
So he got the job as the postman, yet even that didn't stop him behaving strangely.
He would take off for days and no one would see him.
Even his mother, Grandma Williams — who was ending her days boasting to people in the pub about her famous grandson, telling distant relatives who suddenly appeared out of the woodwork about him and regaling the family with stories about her strange neighbours — became scared of him.
When he hired a taxi to take her to Eastbourne for the day (the same man who took a bus to the theatre, rather than pay for a cab) she jumped out at the lights near Oval cricket ground because she was so disturbed by his erratic behaviour.
Once he came into Ken's dressing room, asking for ten pounds to buy dinner at a nearby restaurant — this, from a man who never ate out in his life.
Pat told me of her other' schemes for making money which, of course, never came to anything.
‘I'll make your fortune for you, girl,’ he kept telling her.
‘He used to go into the bathroom and lock himself in there for hours.
Then he'd come up with one mad scheme after another, like buying a sack of pigeon food and selling it to people in Trafalgar Square.
When I used to say, ‘Oh yeah’, he'd reply, ‘Don't be cheeky, you're not too old to get a clip round the ear.’
She was in her thirties at this time.
‘He would go into the most terrible tantrums, all of this totally out of character.’
He also designed a bed that could be raised up and down and told Pat to go to the patent office with the plan which would make them both a fortune.
She tried to tell him that hospitals had been using such beds for years, but he just went into another tantrum.
Later, when he was lying ill at the Brompton Hospital, Pat went to visit him.
She was greeted from one end of the ward to the other by a stream of swearing and other abuse.
The bronchial attacks got worse.
In the middle of a Saturday night in October 1962, he woke up and was unable to get back to sleep.
He rolled himself a cigarette and started coughing.
He coughed so badly that he found his way to the bathroom and took some Liquafruta cough syrup.
The problem was that it was NOT cough syrup, but a hefty dose of Thawpit cleansing spirit that had been put into the medicine bottle, probably because it was the left-overs from a bigger can.
He took the dose and immediately collapsed, rolling around on the floor in a kind of agony that most people could not contemplate.
Lou heard him in the throes of his pain.
‘He could hardly walk,’ she said as she remembered trying to pick him up.
Immediately, she sent for an ambulance and he was taken to the Mary Abbots Hospital in Kensington, where he died soon afterwards.
He was sixty-two.
The family persuaded Ken not to attend the inquest at Hammersmith Coroner's Court, in the hope that the name Charlie Williams wouldn't mean anything to the Press.
Seeing Ken there would automatically bring attention from the National Press.
The coroner heard it revealed for the first time — none of the family knew it — that Charlie had had a stroke a few months before, which explained the strange behaviour.
A verdict of death by misadventure was recorded.
Peter Eade escorted Lou and Pat to the court.
Ken was momentarily saddened by his father's death.
Grandma Williams was hit most seriously of all by it; the death of her first-born was a crushing blow and she died herself soon afterwards.
But he couldn't invent a love that had never been there and he felt that Lou would be better off without him.
After the cremation, Ken instructed his mother and sister: ‘No tears now.
Come on.’
They obeyed the order.
The funeral was held in the morning of 23 October, so that Ken could appear on stage in The Private Ear and the Public Eye for a matinee that day.
‘How that boy could go and do a comedy show that afternoon, I'll never know.
Neither of us really liked Charlie,’ Pat told me, ‘but we were upset.’
‘To tell the truth, it was not a happy marriage.’
Lou says.
After the funeral at Golders Green Crematorium, the entire Williams clan — including cousins neither Pat nor Ken had seen for a quarter of a century — assembled for drinks, ‘a real old Cockney wake,’ as Pat put it.
The final tribute was, in fact, worthy of a ‘Carry On Funeral’ film.
Ken had brought in an old army chum who was now in the catering business, to handle the more convivial aspects of the occasion.
This man transported his gear in an old ambulance.
Ken tried to rid himself of the guests, so that he could get away to the theatre, by telling Pat to call him to an imaginary telephone call.
Before anyone had a drink, Ken called out his apologies and the guests left, leaving behind just the immediate family and Lou's sister, Alice, and her husband, who ran a pub in Hornsey.
After Ken went, they drove off to Hornsey in the ambulance and stopped first for a Chinese meal — much against Lou's wishes; she doesn't like Chinese — followed by a session at the pub.
After that, the day of the funeral ended with a jolly old knees-up.
Ken, meanwhile, was living a more abstemious existence on stage.
They left at two o'clock in the morning, with Lou repeating constantly, ‘Oh, you'd never guess I've buried my Charlie this morning.’
Ken himself would never have participated in such carrying-ons.
The only drinking in which he took part was to have the occasional gin and tonic to which he kept adding more and more tonic.
He was also a snob, as Pat readily admits.
Snobbery does not, however, seem to have influenced his friendships.
While working in Public Eye Ken cemented his already strong relationship with Maggie Smith and Beverley Cross.
When he finally left the cast in 1963, that friendship seemed as strong as ever.
‘He adored Maggie,’ Pat told me.
‘And we all went to their house in Kensington for Christmas a couple of times.’
He would go to Maggie's home but wouldn't spend the night, although frequently invited to do so.
He didn't like the country and used to say that the birds kept him awake.
When Beverley, who had written the hits Boeing Boeing and Half A Sixpence, suggested that what Ken really needed was a good holiday, the two of them took off together for Greece.
It was not perhaps the easiest of vacations that Beverley now recalls.
‘I was there more as a minder than anything else,’ he explained.
The first of two holidays they spent together was on a cruise ship, the SS Romantica which took them to the Greek Islands.
There were the predictable problems with sanitary arrangements.
Ken complained about the state of the ship's lavatories.
‘I just told him to shut up and make do,’ Cross told me.
‘My job was really to keep a distance between Kenneth and other passengers,’ he said.
‘Of course, if no one recognized him, he got rather upset.’
Others had noticed that before.
‘But he was a good companion even if we had trouble with the bowels.’
The following year, they went on to Turkey and Venice.
‘He was very interested in going to Constantinople, for instance.
But three weeks was about it.
My patience was getting totally exhausted.
I never got cross, but he wanted an audience and I was prepared to be one.
But three  weeks was just about it.
It went a long way.’
He was aware of one thing about Ken on these trips: his concern about a lack of education which he made up for with his voracious reading.
Cross didn't experience any of the Williams depressions.
‘He got a bit upset when the bowels didn't work and let me know it,’ he recalls.
‘But I suppose it was a very superficial friendship really.
I do remember affectionately those little jaunts that we did together.’
Later Ken stayed in France, near where Beverley Cross had a home.
Again, he was in an hotel, although not the kind he would normally care to frequent.
When he got back, Pat asked him if he had had a good holiday.
‘Holiday!
Holiday!,’ he stormed.
‘That was no fucking holiday.
I didn't get a wink of sleep.’
It turned out to be the main dropping off point for the Tour de France and was at its noisiest when most civilized people were asleep.
But the friendship with Beverley Cross continued unabated.
I asked him if he thought that perhaps he was a steadying influence on Ken.
‘I would like to think so,’ he said, ‘I would like to think that was so.’
Ken liked cruises and frequently took Lou on them, too.
He would also go to Tangier to be close to his friend, the Hon George Borwick, who was married to a South African diamond multi-millionairess and was a member of the baking powder business.
‘But he wouldn't even stay with George Borwick.
He didn't like staying in anyone else's home.
At Tangier, he would stay at an hotel nearby.’
He used to say that staying with friends was the best way to kill a friendship.
TWELVE
The name Kenneth Williams undoubtedly represented box office in the mid-sixties.
If it also represented self-confidence, Ken would have been a happy man.
As it was, the arrogance that he showed others in his business was mirrored by the doubts that he felt about himself.
When Ken was in a bad mood or turned on people who regarded themselves as close friends, it was mostly a reaction to the way he saw himself — a failure to be what he wanted to be most.
All the bravado about earning his living, enjoying comedy and making the faces cut little ice with those who knew his capabilities.
He lacked the self-confidence to do more.
When an offer came in 1963 for a play that was as different from a ‘Carry On’ as a lunch at the Grill and Cheese was from one at Le Caprice, he hesitated — and went on holiday.
Robert Bolt, the eminent playwright who had produced A Man For All Seasons and had just seen his screenplay for Lawrence of Arabia completed, wanted Ken for a Puck-like part for his forthcoming play, Gentle Jack.
Ken would be starring in the play opposite Dame Edith Evans, who was admittedly close to the end of her remarkable career and hadn't yet lived down that famous interpretation of hers in the film of The Importance of Being Earnest.
Of all the roles she had played in the theatre, of all the great works that had come her way, she was fated to be remembered mostly for how she pronounced the rhetorical question, ‘A hand-bag?’
There would be other eminent actors in the play, people like Michael Bryant and Timothy West.
Instead of feeling encouraged Ken hedged.
In his autobiography, he explains that this was a play ‘more concerned with philosophy than drama’.
Jack was a ‘wood god’.
He wasn't sure that a god of any kind would make asides to the audience, let along speak in Middle English and quote Wordsworth.
His doubts only increased when he performed another job, midway to finally making up his mind about the Bolt play.
He agreed to narrate Gogol's Diary of A Madman for the film animator Richard Williams.
He found the whole thing depressing, to the point that he says in Just Williams that he wrote ‘The madness screamed up inside me.
So many  awful thoughts — this terrible sense of doom hanging over me.
I wonder if anyone will ever know about the emptiness of my life.
His problems were complicated by the fact that the director was constantly demanding more than Ken felt able to deliver.
He, of course, did deliver and was able to record in his diary finally that he felt in such a buoyant mood that he could fly.
Things were helped by the fact that he was moving home again — this time to a flat in Farley Court over Baker Street station, close to the London Planetarium near Baker Street.
The other home was still too noisy.
Even worse, his fans had got to know where he lived and were pestering him.
His next-door neighbour was Sir Adrian Boult, the conductor, but there is no evidence of their being neighbourly in any accepted sense of the word.
The flat looked down on the dome of the Planetarium.
Ken meanwhile was beginning to look down on a great deal of what he had been asked to do professionally.
He wanted to expand his opportunities.
Maybe the successful completion of the recording sessions, coupled with the move, persuaded Ken finally to agree to do Gentle Jack — if only for three months.
The play opened at the Queen's Theatre at the end of November 1963 to less than rapturous applause.
The company had already anticipated that.
The try-out in Brighton had been something less than brilliant and Michael Bryant was not impressed by Ken.
‘He wasn't my sort of actor,’ he told me, ‘I don't want to say more.’
Timothy West, on the other hand, is more forthcoming.
West, who played the village idiot in the play, experienced many of Ken's doubts and those of the audiences.
‘We became quite friendly,’ he recalled.
‘I liked him for that.
I thought it was very nice of him to have made friends with me.
After all, I was a very junior actor at the time.’
Totally divorced from that friendship is his assessment of Ken as an actor.
‘He was very, very good in it,’ he told me.
‘At times, very chilling.’
There was the speech he made asking people to listen to his point of view.
Ken was brilliant in it, especially the parts where he moved from medieval English to Anglo-Saxon and then to just some noises.
The trouble was that very few members of the audience at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, understood either what he was saying or why they had spent the money on going to see him in the first place.
The cast actually thought that thanks to Kenneth Williams they had achieved something significant.
That illusion was quickly dispersed, however  — largely as a result of a walk down one of the crooked alleys that mark Brighton from most other seaside towns.
As Timothy West tells it, this was a moment as chilling as any Ken was able to conjure up in the theatre.
Two elderly women approached him.
Ken was in one of his usual moods trying to get his mental computer working — does he ignore them brusquely or does he make one of his faces and willingly sign an autograph?
It didn't come to that.
One of the ladies pointed her umbrella at him.
‘Mr Williams,’ she said, ‘I think you owe us some money.
We came to see your play last night and we were absolutely disgusted.
We were not expecting anything like that.’
It was clear, notes Timothy West now, precisely what it was that they were expecting-as he says, ‘a combination of ‘Carry On’ and ‘Beyond Our Ken’.’
But that was no reason not to accept these women's judgements.
As Timothy told me, ‘Whereas I was happy to laugh the whole thing off, Ken took these two old ladies very seriously.’
He had to think about what they said if not their demand for a refund.
It measured up to precisely what he felt himself and he decided to put it to a higher power.
Ken asked to see Robert Bolt and demanded the speech to be cut.
As a result it was cut down.
‘But,’ says West, ‘it lost its magic and disturbing quality — and from that time on, he began to respond much more to what the audience expected him to be — and much less to all the original feeling he had shown for it.’
Lance Percival was in the audience the night that Ken descended on the stage from a rope, curled up his lips, flared his nostrils and in the snide voice he had used a hundred times in the Hancock shows slipped in a ‘Hello’ that had the Williams fans rolling.
Percival said that he was aware of Dame Edith's not being too pleased about that.
In fact she called him to her dressing room after the performance and all but ordered him to leave his normal persona behind.
After all, she didn't say anything about a hand-bag.
There are, even today, all sorts of varying views on Ken's theatrical performances and how seriously he took his opportunities to rid himself of the cliché Kenneth Williams image.
His sister Pat is convinced that he thoroughly enjoyed Gentle Jack despite all the things said about it and about his own performance.
‘He liked it because it was a limited run and he was able to expand his performance,’ she told me.
Timothy West believes that he didn't take the opportunities that were  offered to him far enough.
Quite intuitively, he told me: ‘Had he stuck to what he originally put into the part, he would probably have had a totally different career over the next twenty years or so.
I thought that was very tragic.
I was struck by the fact that he was a person of very little confidence.
‘He crumbled over those two little old ladies he met in Brighton, and didn't being to take the chance that had been offered to him.
A great shame.’
Ken had another function while in Brighton.
It wasn't enough for him to have to learn a series of speeches that no one else was expected to begin to comprehend, but he was also deputed to be Dame Edith's guardian angel.
Their rooms at the Royal Albion Hotel were just a few doors from each other and it was Ken's job to see that she always had her mug of cocoa before going to bed — and indeed that she was warmly tucked up at the right time for a lady of her years and responsibilities.
She, too, was unhappy about the play — to say nothing about the fact that all too few people carne to see her in her dressing room, a circumstance that was startling to her, even though she didn't react in the way that Ken himself would have done.
There were no depressions from her or tears that her days were over.
She just thought that people were remarkably ill-advised in not coming to offer her love and devotion, especially in a town that had residents as diverse as Lord Olivier and Dame Flora Robson — and Dora Bryan.
So Ken's function was also to show her how admired and loved she still was.
She believed him, as well she might.
One evening, Ken told Timothy West, she assured him: ‘You're a very nice boy to stay up with me and chat about things every night — and I wouldn't be surprised if the right little lady doesn't come along soon.’
There were times when Ken was enjoying himself-with Dame Edith and with the part.
He dreamed up mad little schemes that both gave him a great deal of pleasure and helped him to avoid some of the inevitable boredom of an out-of-town tour production.
It was the time of the mods-and-rockers’ invasion of the seaside towns.
Ken would invent scenarios for himself that those with him thought funnier than anything he did on screen or on the radio.
‘Look,’ he would say as they sat in one of those cafes with the plate glass windows looking out on to the beach and the sea, ‘there's a rocker over there.
If I go and tell that mod over there that he's insulted his tie and then I go and tell the rocker that the mod's been rude about him, we'll get them burning  down the pier.’
His mouth watered at the prospect.
He talked to West about his sex life and his inclinations.
‘He talked quite freely at a time when very few people did.
Actually, I think he did quite a lot for gay understanding, to not wrap up those characters he played at all.
I suppose he did a great service by making people laugh with those outrageous characters rather than at them.’
That, however, was also part of the paradox of Kenneth Williams.
Nothing about him was straightforward.
While at the same time as not merely coming out of the closet about his sexuality — in fact, by hardly admitting there was a closet there at all— he was also locking so many of his innermost thoughts away.
‘There was,’ said Timothy West, a ‘dark quality about him that he didn't let people see very much of.
He could have developed that and it would have been tremendously useful to him.
I am sure that the talent was there.
It seemed to me that various things he did could have gone into other directions, but some kind of self-protective mechanism of his just pulled him back and he did what he knew.’
It was not a good time for him in many ways.
Timothy West saw some of those dark Williams depressions descend from over the horizon.
These were mainly after the move from Brighton to London.
The notices were poor and Ken cocooned himself in one of those invisible cloaks that he believed protected him from any contact with the outside world.
The ostrich dug his head in and believed that there was nobody out there who could notice — and if they did, what did it matter?
Suddenly the ebullient performer was no more.
Until the two old ladies with their umbrellas shattered his dream, he had walked through the streets of Brighton as if it were his own kingdom, doffing his flat cap to passers-by who couldn't help hearing him coming from two blocks away.
After that experience, he slinked from the hotel to the theatre.
In London, he was no more able to show himself.
His fellow performers saw him only in the wings.
He left at the end of the evening and that was it.
‘He sort of closed himself off,’ said Timothy West.
‘people who knew him very well must have had quite a hard time with him, he was so depressed.
But to people like me, well we just couldn't talk to him any more.’
Herbert Kretzmer wrote in the Daily Express that he heard a voice call out, ‘Rubbish’— to which he himself responded: ‘Though I find this kind of boorishness both repulsive and depressing I am bound to state that the solitary heckler was probably articulating a mood felt by many.
The applause was tepid.’
Ken saw the reactions to the play as reactions to himself-reactions that he didn't like.
The fact that nobody wrote and said that he was brilliant and was a genius convinced him that it wasn't Robert Bolt who was at fault or the director Noel Willman, but himself as an actor.
He wasn't helped by the fact that Stanley Baxter told him he thought he was inhibited in the part.
Timothy West has his own feelings on the subject.
‘The play suffered not from wrong direction, but from wrong production,’ he maintains and firmly lays the fault at the door of the H. M. Tennent organization.
‘Tennents did it in the wrong way.
In the first place, they shouldn't have cast Dame Edith, who played the lady in the house where the whole thing takes place.
It should have been played by some very good supporting character actress.’
Instead, she was allowed to dominate the play, instead of Ken, or instead of Michael Bryant, around whom the action took place, the character who was being pulled in all directions.
One day at rehearsal, to cheer up Dame Edith, the producers gave her £1,000 to go to Hardy Amies so that he could design a new wardrobe for her.
That sort of expenditure, instead of encouraging the rest of the cast to believe that the management had faith in the production, only served to dispirit them, thinks West.
The sets were lavish, the lighting very romantic.
‘But it was a hard, argumentative, dark play, ahead of its time.
It didn't get its chance.
It didn't get a go.
It was an attempt to produce a play of classical dimensions in a modern idiom, which in 1963 was a brave thing to do.
It should have been something that the Royal Shakespeare did and not Tennents trying to turn it into a West End night out.’
Binkie Beaumont, the head of Tennents, was fond of Ken and wanted to give him a star vehicle — his part was bigger than those of Dame Edith and Michael Bryant put together.
But they were all swamped by the fripperies of the play and by Dame Edith who, as Timothy West says, ‘didn't have the faintest idea whether she was coming or going’.
She was also very deaf.
Whenever Ken had to speak to her he had to shout.
‘If that's my cue you're giving me dear,’ she told him in rehearsal, ‘you'll really have to speak much louder.’
Unfortunately, as we have seen, the people who spoke loudest were the critics.
Ken waited for the reviews anxiously, as he always did.
He booked the second floor of the Ivy restaurant near the theatre and there Lou and Pat, and his closest friends of the moment, would drink endless  cups of coffee until the first editions of the paper came out.
On the first night of Gentle Jack, Ken knew what they would be like.
His sister knew, too.
She went back to the dressing room immediately after the final curtain came down, to pour a few trays of drinks ready for those who would come back to congratulate as they would commiserate.
There were dry gingers and tonics prepared for the whiskies and gins which everyone hoped would drown the star's sorrows.
That night, there was little to mitigate his depression.
‘He came back to the dressing room in tears,’ Pat remembered for me.
‘What do you think?’ he blubbed.
‘How did it go?’
‘I always told him,’ she said, ‘that he was fabulous — because I genuinely thought he was.
I said, it would run for years.’
Ken cried as he washed the make-up off his legs, hauling them into the sink and then washing them in basins he had on the floor.
‘You don't wash your feet and put them on the dirty floor, do you?’ he asked as he got ready for the guests who would  soothe the painful passage towards the critics.
But he couldn't quite wash away the concerns he felt.
And he didn't feel any happier as the weeks went by.
All he could feel was that he was out of his depth.
The play ended in January 1964, just a couple of months after the opening.
When an offer came for another ‘Carry On’ film, he grabbed it.
THIRTEEN
Most people involved with the ‘Carry On’ films regarded Ken's participation in them as totally professional.
They were glad to have him in the gang and he was delighted to be among them.
He regaled them with his philosophies on life and on all the things he had read the night before.
If Pinewood studios had been in need of a resident historian — and the days of historical dramas emanating from that studio seemed themselves to have been consigned to history-Kenneth Williams would have fulfilled that role.
He was a happy and contented member of a new kind of club, and since the last thing Ken wanted to do was join a club, it was a measure of his new triumph that he became part of this one.
He was liked, not to say loved, by members of the team.
He made friendships that were lasting.
And although none of the critics called him a genius for playing in them, none argued about the extent of his talent either.
He knew he was worthy of better.
His friends knew he was capable of more.
His sister Pat still called them ‘a load of tripe’.
When she asked him why he ‘wasted’ his time doing the pictures, he replied simply: ‘It pays the income tax.’
As Pat told me: ‘One film a year and he paid all his tax.
Two and he had jam with it, too.’
Tax was always a concern with him.
He paid it in the same spirit that he washed himself-obsessively.
His father had kept two sets of books — following the advice of an accountant who was a friend of a friend.
In the end, Charlie had had to find £300 to keep the Inland Revenue happy.
Ken was determined not to get involved in that sort of thing.
He could have waited a year before he paid the tax but he always paid it immediately.
In fact, usually, he never saw the cheques he got for the ‘Carry On’ films.
They would go straight to his agent, who would deduct his commission and the rest went to pay the tax man.
Peter Rogers, who produced all the movies, told me that he said that as long as he had enough money to keep himself and his mother he was happy.
Pat always had tremendous faith in her brother's business acumen.
‘He was an extremely good businessman.
He always had an agent and an accountant.
He didn't worry about money,’ she told me.
‘In fact, I never knew he had any — at least during the ‘Carry On’ years.
We never discussed it.’
To him, the ‘Carry On’ films represented a kind of rest cure.
He told Pat, she remembers, ‘I'm not going to break my back eight times a week in the theatre.’
But she worried about the image the films made for him.
‘I know the words he came out with were those of other people, the writers, but they were written with him in mind.
Why did he always go for those parts, those double entendres?
I wish he hadn't.’
Val Orford told me he felt much the same way.
‘I didn't like the way he camped everything up.
He was so different in real life,’ he maintained.
To Gerald Thomas, who experienced a lot of Ken's problems — mainly his sexual difficulties, the director remembered for me; his dissatisfaction with a part of his life which was neither fulfilled nor which he even wanted fulfilled — Ken was ‘a child, a child who was always showing off’.
Certainly, there is not the slightest suggestion that he was unhappy about the choice he made.
The ‘Carry Ons’ allowed him to go home to read in the evenings, to sit playing his classical piano records in the still sparsely-fitted flat at Farley Court, an apartment even more spartan than his previous homes, complete with whitewashed walls.
He also had time to record his radio shows and to think about the scripts that still mounted up in Peter Eade's office.
If he had regrets, they were unconnected with his work.
‘I've never learned to play the piano,’ he said in the early Sixties.
‘I've always wanted to.
I've never seen the fabulous city of New York and I've never finished reading The Rise of The Dutch Republic.’
By the time the eighth ‘Carry On’ film went before the cameras when Gentle Jack was drawing to its conclusion, he was established as the honorary patron of the club.
And it was one that was admired far outside the sort of people who were generally believed to be ‘Carry On’ fans.
The critics were noticing the films.
One wrote:(The pictures)‘do not and cannot surpass themselves.’
There was a round table always set aside for the ‘Carry On’ team in the baronial hall that served as the Pinewood restaurant.
Ken always had a plate of mackerel served for him.
If it was hot and fresh, Ken was a happy man.
If he were not, there are stories still told of the Williams temperament.
But on the whole, the table was the centre of a convivial  spirit not totally common in the film business.
‘Not everybody chose to go there,’ Joan Sims recalled, ‘but it was wonderful for us all to be there.’
Carry on Jack had nothing whatsoever to do with the Jack he had played on stage.
It was also fairly remarkable because, apart from Ken and Charles Hawtrey, the only links with the previous pictures in the series were the producer Peter Rogers and the director, Gerald Thomas, of course.
Replacing either of them — and they ran the series as a sort of family business the Marks and Spencer of movie comedy — would have been professional suicide.
Ken's roles were not to change.
No one was allowed to think that his origins were less than upper middle class, to say nothing of aristocratic.
It would have been impossible to consider that the captain in his white tights and blue tunic with all the gold braid in this story of piracy at sea had spent his infancy so close to the Caledonian Road.
The black and white Carry On S– Spying (A notice in the entertainments programme for the British Embassy in Moscow read: ‘13 Aug 8 pm.
Club opens.
8.30 Film, Carry On Spying.
Espionage comedy.’)
was even more true to form, with Bernard Cribbins cementing the debut he made in Carry On Jack, but with the addition of Eric Barker, Charles Hawtrey and Jim Dale (who was to appear in a number of the series).
Most significant of all, this 1964 picture starred the woman with the most notable breasts in British movie history, yet who always managed — if only just and with the aid of her equally pretty hands — to keep them to herself, Barbara Windsor.
Miss Windsor was always much more intelligent than the all-bust-and-bum dumb blonde image she had created for herself.
Ken appreciated it and for almost a quarter of a century afterwards they would be close friends.
In fact, the friendship was very quick in cementing itself.
Soon after their first meeting, Barbara met her husband-to-be Ronnie Knight and announced that she was going to Madeira for her honeymoon.
‘That's funny,’ said Ken, ‘I was thinking of going there for my holiday.’
He did, together with Lou and Pat, staying at the same hotel as the newlyweds.
No one appears to have recognized any difficulties with that.
As she told me: ‘I had no question about saying straight away after our first picture together that Kenneth Williams was the one I would choose to spend time with on a desert island.’
She took no account of the problems with his bowels or of other difficulties in the anal region or of his depressions.
It would have been enough simply to hear his stories.
She was to say that she always knew his moods.
When he arrived on the set all hunched up with his head down to his waist, she knew  there were going to be problems on the way.
When they went out to a restaurant together, he would always complain — very loudly so that the proprietor would know who he was and so there would be people around about whom he could fuss were pestering him for his autograph.
When the meal was over, however, he would usually lick his lips and say, ‘Mmm, quite nice here, isn't it?’
Most people on the ‘Carry Ons’ seemed to think that it was quite nice having Ken around, which assuredly had a lot to do with his love of the series.
It was a typical loner's situation — the depressive who, though wanting to be alone, worried about having no one around and was so grateful to feel wanted.
‘We were all so close,’ Peter Rogers told me, ‘that it was like talking about members of our own family, especially Ken.
He was a very earnest, very intelligent gentleman — and very much a gentleman, whom I never thought of as particularly ambitious.
He didn't want to go into any other kind of films.
He was just a happy member of the team.’
For that, Rogers will be eternally grateful to Betty White, the casting director who first suggested him.
While other members of the cast were betting on horses, doing their football pools or playing cards, Ken would be the centre of a small circle that also included Hattie Jacques, Joan Sims and Kenneth Connor, doing the Times crossword.
In fact, according to Gerald Thomas, it was always a toss-up as to who was the most popular character on the ‘Carry On’ lot at any one time, Ken or Sidney James.
Sid James hadn't made a picture since the one that was without the Williams credit, Cabby, but he was soon to be almost a fixture on the set, playing parts as stereotyped as Ken's.
Peter Rogers, however, is adamant that neither of then could be called the real star of the ‘Carry Ons’.
‘We always said, no one is going above the title.
The title is the star of the series.
For that reason, there was no single star.’
There were more difficulties with Carry on Spying.
Harry Saltzman, the producer of the James Bond pictures, objected to both  Charles Hawtrey's being called Agent 001 and to the name Charlie Bind.
Peter Rogers gave way on the first count but was unmoved by the second.
Later in 1964, there was yet another picture for the team, the third that year.
Carry On Cleo, in colour, seemed more adventurous than the others.
Even the togas in this spoof on the Julius Caesar- and Cleopatra story —.
‘The eunuchs are on strike.
They are complaining about loss of assets’— looked as though they hadn't come out of the  Bermans and Nathans mothballs.
Ken played Julius Caesar in a picture that, with no apologies, was intended to cash in on the fame of the Elizabeth Taylor Richard Burton fiasco of the previous year.
More apologies were needed, however, to the board of Marks and Spencer — the slave market was called ‘Marcus et Spencius’.
In the end, no one took it too seriously and no apology was officially made.
The company did have some copyright problems with the Cleo story, however.
A judge decided that the poster advertising the film was much too close to the one used for the original Cleopatra.
One, showing Sid James looking like a sphinx, was substituted instead.
In all, it was good, respectable ‘Carry On’ material.
Sid James, Joan Sims, Kenneth Connor, Charles Hawtrey, Jim Dale and Ken linking up for once with Sheila Hancock in this epic which seemed to satisfy everybody.
‘Ken loved to shock,’ Sheila Hancock recalls.
Once at this time, she shocked him.
They did a charity concert together and Ken, caring as little as at any time in his career, started ad-libbing.
He went on and on about his mother.
Finally, Sheila, standing on the stage, wondering when she was going to regain her part of what served as a script, said, ‘Silly old cow!’
It was more than Ken could take.
‘He was outraged,’ she recalled for me.
‘How dare you talk about my mother like that!’
He took it seriously at first, affronted that anyone could say anything about anyone so close to him, but before very long, he saw the funny side.
But, as she remembered, he would tell that story time after time, particularly to the ‘Carry On’ lot ‘and with glee’.
‘He was a sort of out-front version of me and I identified with what he did a lot.
You get very fed up with people being sycophantic, toadying to you, as a symptom of success.
When someone comes along and gives you a mouthful, not maliciously but to put you right, boy do you like it!’
She saw some of his problems and how he was affected by them.
She used to go to him and say, ‘Are you all right?
Do you want to talk about it?’
He was never very forthcoming, she said.
At the same time, he needed to have someone to ‘come along and set up a boundary.
In a way, Kenneth was retarded.
He needed still to have Mummy come along and say, ‘No!
That's enough.’'
A few months after that, the ‘Carry On’ factory produced Carry On Cowboy from its assembly line, with Ken playing Judge Burke and the busty Joan Sims as Belle —‘My intimates call me Ding Dong’.
She defied much of the casting formulae employed with the ‘Carry On’ concept.
Sometimes, Joan was the dowdy, make-up-less wallflower with curves that looked more like sacks.
At other times, she was stunningly beautiful.
Looking back on the almost thirty-year-long era of the series, one does not automatically think of these essential mammerial features of the femme fatale when talking about Miss Sims.
Think of breasts and it's always Miss Windsor and her efforts to keep everything hidden.
Yet in Carry On Cowboy and, later on Carry On Henry, Joan Sims's cleavage was imposing indeed.
In Carry On — Follow That Camel, her shape under a crisp white satin blouse was guaranteed to send even Kenneth Williams, as the German commandant of the French Foreign Legion battalion, crying for his Mutter.
He normally didn't like wearing uniforms in films, but wore them with aplomb.
Ken did, however, fight against playing in drag.
‘He was too embarrassed by it’, says Gerald Thomas.
Ken didn't have to put on drag in Carry On Screaming, the first of three 1966 releases, but in Carry On — Don't Lose Your Head, he did get to wear a woman's frilly corset which didn't go all that badly with the curled wig he wore as Citizen Camembert, the ‘big cheese’ of the French Revolutionary secret police.
By the time Follow That Camel went before the cameras as the third ‘Carry On’ picture that year — filmed ‘on location’with Camber Sands on the then almost freezing Sussex coast, doubling somewhat unconvincingly for the North African desert — the distribution company for the ‘Carry Ons’had changed from Anglo-Amalgamated to the Rank Organization.
It took a little bit of deft footwork to satisfy themselves that the first firm would not object to Rank using ‘Carry On’ in the title.
By the time the news came through, the preliminary advertising had already gone into production, but before long, it had become Carry On — Follow That Camel.
Rank wanted to be sure of an international market for their newly acquired product.
Their answer — to bring in an American star.
The choice was not altogether fortuitous.
Phil Silvers had made an institution for himself out of the rank of an army sergeant.
But Nocker, the part he played in Camel was no Bilko, even though he threw his weight around just as though he were head of the transport squad at Fort Baxter.
He succeeded in getting up everyone's nose, particularly the flared nostrils of Kenneth Williams who saw a foreigner — in the Foreign Legion  — usurping his position as the mentor of the team.
But there was the required amount of glamour in the movie, largely through the introduction of Anita Harris, who had been both hit pop singer and dancer before moving on to the ‘Carry On’ lot.
Her first day there confirmed the differences between the regulars and the outsiders.
The team were sitting round in a semi-circle when she was introduced to them — although no one gave her a chair, or at least one with her name on it.
‘The loudest voice of all was that of Mr Williams — followed by Phil Silvers.’
She was conscious of one undoubted fact: ‘He was directing all his conversations to Joan Sims at this time, so I felt as though I were being talked at, rather than talked to.’
By now, Joan Sims and Ken seemed birds of a feather.
‘I admired Kenneth for his tremendous wit,’ says Joan today.
‘He had a fantastic brain and could keep you amused for hours — and not just amused.
He was very erudite.
In fact, I don't think I knew what the word ‘erudite’ meant until I met Kenneth.
I often thought I should like to have been taught by someone like him.’
Despite the joy she had out of being with him on the ‘Carry On’ set, she for one thought that he was wasting a great deal of his time.
‘He wasn't wasted on the series.
He was one of the people who actually made the series, but I have to say that I never thought his career was channelled in the right direction.
Kenneth deserved so much better.
He was such a very, very talented man.’
‘It's a terrible thing.
If people associate you with the ‘Carry On’ films, they don't think of you as anything else.
I would like to think of him as something else.’
That was not to say that she herself thought of the films as being an easy option.
‘They were very hard work,’ she told me.
‘I think it is true that much of the time we spent together we were going over our lines early in the morning in the make-up room.’
Most of the pictures were made in something like six or eight weeks.
She remembered him as a very private person.
‘I wouldn't have liked to have known more about him, even though Hattie Jacques and I had the deepest philosophical discussions with him.’
There was, she recalls, ‘a sort of madness that overtook him.
He was a very religious person.
He could be demonic — like the time someone fresh came to the ‘Carry On’ team, who wasn't quite as professional as he would have liked.’
The matter reached its peak at the round table over lunch.
Ken saw the newcomer and refused to sit down.
‘It was difficult to know which way the cat was going to jump,’ she told me.
And there was a time when he practically destroyed Joan herself on the set.
Lance Percival was there to hear Ken look at Miss Sims as she arrived on that boundary between the action and the production.
They were sitting in their chairs behind the cameras.
Joan arrived on set, freshly made up, her new costume fitted.
Ken looked at her.
‘My God,’ he told her, ‘you look awful.’
Nevertheless, she can now put moments like that totally behind her.
‘I loved him and he loved me,’ she told me.
‘He was a very unique person and I saw him more deeply than I think other people did.
I got to know the man behind the voices that people heard.
When you saw Kenneth the real person he was very wonderful.
Sometimes he drove you mad.
But I loved him.
He was a gentleman.
If you sent him a present, he would reply immediately in that beautiful handwriting of his.’
When they first met up on a ‘Carry On’ set a couple of years before no one knew how strong that love would be.
To Gerald Thomas, however, she confessed the strength of the love.
Ken, the loner and the camp actor who had never actually admitted his homosexuality, proposed marriage to Joan.
‘But there won't be any of that dirty stuff,’ he told her.
‘Yes,’ she admitted to me, ‘it's true.
He did propose, but it just wouldn't have worked.
I had not had very successful relationships with people up to this time and I said no to him.’
She admits that she thought about it seriously enough.
‘Kenneth and I would have been a marvellous companionship, but…’
She wouldn't finish that sentence.
And she added: ‘I saw Kenneth in many, many lights.
Like me, he was a very private person.’
And she repeated: ‘Yes, I loved him — and he loved me.’
Ken sincerely believed that a separate-bedroom marriage would be the perfect relationship with someone for whom he cared so much.
But it offered little to Joan.
After that, they didn't meet socially that often.
At Christmas, Hattie Jacques would have a party and Ken and Joan were among the ‘Carry On’ team who would share the festivities and her very ample food selections.
‘Hattie had the wonderful ability of taking people under her wing.
She was mum, sister — everything to all of us.’
She also had the privilege of visiting the Williams home.
One day, Joan had the brave notion of asking for an invitation — or  rather inviting herself.
She and Hattie said they were coming around for a cup of tea.
‘Kenneth was so astonished with this, I can't tell you.
But we did get our cup of tea.’
Funnily enough, she doesn't think of Ken in terms of humour.
That is not to say that she forgets the outrageous moments.
There was the time, for instance, when they had a love scene in Carry On Up The Khyber in 1968.
Ken was in the midst of one of his severe pile problems and kept saying, ‘I'm in such agony, I've got to blow off.’
But in the picture, he played the elegant Khazi of Kalabar.
Joan was Lady Ruff-Diamond.
‘He, to put it bluntly, broke wind in the middle.’
Miss Sims, on the other hand, broke up.
She told him: ‘Kenneth how on earth can we make love if you keep farting?’
Ken looked at her, shocked.
‘Valentino used to fart,’ he told her.
‘Yes,’ she replied, ‘but that was in the silent films.’
The all-talking, all-colour films continued to receive more praise than perhaps could have been expected.
The exception was Camel.
The Evening Standard said: ‘It is something worse than totally unfunny.
Even its efforts to be indelicate are dull.’
Anita Harris, who followed Camel with Carry on Doctor in 1968 — playing a nurse who looked more sexy in her cap and apron than she had as a belly dancer in the earlier film — suffered from being the butt of Ken's jokes in both pictures.
‘He was awfully fond of ribbing people,’ she recalled.
‘I think it was just a mental exercise for him, his way of having fun.’
But at other people's expense.
Until he was sure that she was a professional actress, she was simply a new target, a figure of fun.
‘I guess in a way, every comment from him was facetious.
And that took a long time getting used to.
I don't think it was bullying, simply in the old phrase, taking the Michael.’
He would make disparaging remarks about her goose pimples.
He looked at the copper bosom covers she had to wear as a belly dancer — and then at the less than fully-endowed nature of Miss Harris's bust and said cuttingly, ‘Which way up are they supposed to go?’
The solution was to bring what she now calls ‘some false bravado into play’, to answer him back, giving the impression of a strength and security she really didn't feel.
‘I knew there was a soft side to him,’ she told me.
‘I could tell that from the warm way Joanie Sims and Hattie Jacques spoke about him.’
Then she added, as an afterthought which has subsequently been confirmed, ‘I think he was actually in love with Joan.
In fact, I am certain that he was.’
Anita Harris decided to try to play the game according to Ken's own rules, or at least give it a try.
She pretended not to care, answered him back, and Kenneth Williams melted.
She might not now think of this as the action of a deflated bully, but the symptoms are classic.
‘Basically, I was very naive.
I was a convent-educated girl and he teased me mercilessly with a string of sexual connotations.’
In the queue for the Pinewood cafeteria, the loudest voice would be Ken and his innuendos.
Few were allowed to escape.
‘Oh look how your dumplings are wobbling,’ he called to her and her tray shook along with the dumplings.
‘In there, though,’ says Anita Harris, ‘there was such a marvellous talent and a marvellous brain.
His use of the English language made me respect him.
Even if he was trying to show off, I still respected him.’
As she said, for someone who was so lonely to be able to come to the studio at five o'clock every morning — picked up in a studio car, Ken had decided long ago he would never drive — and then play a very strong character, was worthy of that respect too.
‘You have to be a very special person.’
Ken did, however, help Anita — with the ruby in her navel that kept falling out every time she did her belly dance.
She tried double Sellotape, but every time her belly went in, the ruby popped out.
Ken announced that he had a solution.
‘What about some of that eyelash glue, duckie?’
It worked.
The ruby in her belly button stayed put.
But she adds: ‘You don't get a fondness, a bond in a team like they had in the ‘Carry Ons’ unless there is something very real in their love of each other.’
To the point that she herself felt distinctly out of things at first.
‘And so did Phil Silvers,’ her husband and manager Michael Margolis now remembers.
‘They gave him a very rough time indeed.’
But, she says, she did think that Ken showed him a certain degree of respect.
‘As for me, I think he was tougher because I was a girl — one who felt that any kind of talkback would have just been out of order.
I think he challenged me.
If I responded, he would be on guard.
I picked up the challenge, which he took very seriously.’
The medium of the films was a great escape for him.
But he still took his work very seriously.
Despite it all, he respected most of his colleagues.
‘He treated her,’ added Michael Margolis, ‘in exactly the same way as he treated Phil Silvers.
To him, they were both outsiders.’
Liz Frazer, who only made three ‘Carry Ons’, Cabby, Cruising and Regardless, remembers most affectionately of all the Ken who wasn't quite so  serious.
‘He was the only one of the Carry On team who was funny off as well as on film.
But, as she added: ‘They were all talented comedy actors, not comedians.
There was no wastage of talent.’
But she saw the intellectual side of Ken as well.
‘When we had a quiz, as often we did in the caravans waiting for filming to begin, Ken always won hands down.’
Indeed, not only was there a tremendous rapport between the members of the company, there was also a recognizable repartee between them, led by Ken, which was so fast that unless he actually knew the language, a stranger was in foreign territory.
‘I spent a lot of time with Phil Silvers talking about his family away from the others,’ Anita Harris now recalls.
The biggest contrasts in Ken's behaviour — and indeed in his life were seen by those who had worked with him elsewhere.
Fenella Fielding, for instance, could contrast the sometimes obsessive manic figure of Pieces Of Eight with the more relaxed co-star in films like Carry On Regardless (she played a woman in search of a male baby-sitter who could take her to bed) and Carry On Screaming (a velvet-clad vamp).
‘Carry On Screaming worked because we both took that nonsense so seriously.’
Michael Thornton noted in the Sunday Express: ‘Kenneth Williams is rather more subdued than usual, which is a pity.
A bit of his nasal falsetto with…or ‘Don't be like that’ might have enlivened the proceedings.’
Instead, when the monster loses an ear, Ken says: ‘Oh well, ear today, gone tomorrow.’
But Fenella Fielding survived it all and enjoyed the experience.
‘There wasn't the awful competitiveness that we had on stage,’ she told me.
‘And we only did each take once.’
Interestingly, she added to that: ‘Every shot was like a first night.’
Consequently, he was more relaxed — and more funny.
‘Sometimes, when people are funny all the time, they wear you out.
Not him.
He only stopped when he felt like it.
When he felt he had said enough and made us laugh enough, he went back to his dressing room.
It was as if he had tired himself out.’
Tiredness was frequently a good excuse for the moods in which he would be less than charming.,
‘He was so moody,’ Fenella Fielding said, ‘that his moods were part of the difficulty of his genius — and his temper.
There were on the film set few of the moments I had come to dread during the run of the stage show — when he'd slap me down, or even when he would encourage me, egg me on.’
He still had a low boredom threshold — which was why he was spending  less time going to Equity Council meetings.
‘He would only go occasionally now,’ Fenella recalled.
‘He would come in late and say very little.
I really believe he couldn't stand the boredom of being in one place for a long time, listening to other people.’
Off-set meetings with others in the ‘Carry On’ organization were usually at their homes, certainly not his.
He would spend Sundays occasionally with Peter Rogers at his home at Beaconsfield.
‘At dinner parties, he would certainly liven the place up.
He could keep the table in stitches.’
That was the risk one ran in inviting Ken to dinner parties.
They inevitably became a stage for a Kenneth Williams one-man show.
He was at this time, a terrible gossip.
‘But he would only gossip about people he was fond of,’ Fenella Fielding told me.
‘He would slag off someone terribly and you would think they must have had a terrible row.
But no.
They were still very, very good friends.
He would say how fantastically bad someone was and would say they had no talent whatsoever.
Yet when you bumped into that same person, they would always talk about him in the most loving way.’
This, however, was part of the unpredictable side of Ken's character.
Sometimes, if they knew he behaved in that way, people would be unwilling to talk about him at all— for fear they would embarrass themselves by saying something sympathetic about a man they knew could just as easily assassinate their characters.
Like them or not, one could never be sure what Ken did or did not mean.
The experience in Gentle Jack and the speech that caused all the problems in that play stood him in good stead.
For as Peter Rogers remembers, he had ‘a wonderful trick — of reciting Shakespeare that wasn't Shakespeare at all.’
What the Bard of Stratford-upon-Avon would have thought of his verse can only be imagined, but Ken adopted the Shakespearean metre to the subject matter on hand — the Government of the day, the state of show business or the food being served.
He would do it on the set, between takes, too.
‘Sometimes, if he got bored he would just come up and start reciting.
He did it so cleverly that you would think it was the real thing — until he burst out laughing.
It was just gobbledegook.
Some of it quite rude.
But it was not vulgarity, just rudery — and he would do it for some very distinguished people we had on the set sometimes.’
They used to have sessions together, he and Rogers.
‘We used to call it the Bitching Hour.
He never bitched about other members of the team, but of people we knew.’
Sheila Hancock told me of his ‘great disdain' for bad actors.
‘He couldn't tolerate them,’ she said.
Peter Rogers recognized Ken as being ‘intolerant at some levels.
But if he didn't suffer fools gladly, I must ask who would want to?
There are some people who get bored who can just fall asleep, standing up with their eyes open.
Kenny wouldn't do that.
His mind was always too sharp.
He would just start thinking about something else.’
That night, he would record his recollections of those who bored him.
The following morning, he would tell Rogers: ‘I wrote about that in my diary’
The relationship between producer and star was so strong that Ken would reveal incidents that most people would keep to themselves.
On more than one occasion, he told Rogers: ‘I had a wonderful wank last night.
Wonderful thing it was.’
As Rogers told me: ‘He was outrageous to that extent.
With anyone else, it would seem outrageous, but with Kenneth it was acceptable because he had that wonderful wit.
I don't think Kenneth was trying to be outrageous at all.
I think he had just got bored and was looking for something to do, so he sought to amuse.’
That would be his usual role at these parties.
Sometimes, he took his mother with him.
‘She was a wonderful, quick-witted little woman, hilariously funny,’ Fenella Fielding remembers.
‘She would hold court.
She was also useful to Ken.
He would use her as his excuse for never going to America to work — a prospect which always frightened him.’
Lou was everyone's idea of the cockney sparrow let loose to fly in a wider world than she had once ever known existed.
They loved stories that tripped off her tongue as easily as other women talked about waiting in the check-out queue at Tescos.
‘She was starin' at me so rudely,’ Lou recounted one day, ‘I very nearly said, ‘Wait a minute, I'll get a basin for your eyes’.’
On another occasion, she said: ‘Posh?
Spit in ‘er eye and it wouldn't choke her.’
Gerald Thomas saw another side of Ken as well as the jovial clown.
The depressions of Kenneth Williams even within the confines of the ‘Carry On’ set-up could be profound.
‘They were never about his work, but about his health,’ he said.
‘He spent his life worrying about his health — terrified he was going to get cancer.
He would constantly talk about it, constantly running to the doctor.’
He was more than just a hypochondriac.
‘He couldn't stand physical pain,’ said Thomas.
Once, the script required him to jump through a plate-glass window.
The window was made of sugar glass, the substance adopted in a thousand movies to look like the real thing.
Thomas kept trying to persuade him it was safe.
To demonstrate the fact, he put his hand through the window himself.
That did the trick —‘Of course,’ recalls the director, ‘I didn't show him that I had cut my hand in the process.’
If there were no problems with pain involved, Ken would happily do whatever he was asked.
But he wouldn't want to be expected to do anything while he spoke.
‘For an actor of his calibre,’ recalls Gerald Thomas, ‘and he was of a very high calibre indeed, he had the inability to play dialogue at the same time as he was handling props.
He so concentrated on his dialogue — I never had to reshoot a scene because Kenny fluffed a line — that he couldn't do anything at the same time as he was talking.’
Thomas first discovered that for himself when he was shooting Twice Round The Daffodils.
There was a scene in which Ken was playing chess with Andrew Ray.
The director wanted him to move his Queen in the course of a deep conversation.
He couldn't do it.
In the end, the move had to be inserted, rather than filmed in master shot.
Afterwards, Ken told him: ‘Never give me dialogue and ask me to handle props at the same time.’
It took some time before the real Kenneth Williams came to the surface.
‘He was very serious in the first of the pictures,’ the director now remembers.
‘He was too concerned to do a good performance to be really funny.
Afterwards, he settled down and relaxed and became a little bit more impish.
He could never feel sure that he was being accepted.’
The advantage that Ken offered the team was the ability to be able to pull off love scenes and other out-of-character poses without anyone ridiculing the whole thing.
‘We didn't overdo or over emphasize Ken's neuterism because we had him make love or going after it, but we knew that underneath it all was another character.’
He would tease, too — telling people that Rogers sat all day in his office, counting the money, except on the occasions he made forays to location ‘wearing a pair of green wellies’— which Rogers maintains, ‘I have never worn in my life’.
He would tell the rudest stories out loud, when he knew that Joan Sims was within earshot.
The question of money would always come up with a team operation like the ‘Carry Ons’.
But not from Ken, Rogers maintains.
‘He was always the one cast member who always stood up for me if there were any bleating from Equity members about them not getting their money from  repeats, compilations and so on.’
After the third ‘Carry On’, the cast had been offered a profit-sharing scheme — and had all turned it down on the advice of their agents, who thought they would be better off getting increased salaries.
‘Kenneth was always the one who reminded them that they could have been very well off had they accepted the offer, which they rejected.
He was content with the money he earned, which was what the agents asked.’
‘There were times when Sid James sowed dissatisfaction among the other artists by claiming that he was getting more than the others.
They all came back through their agents and complained and I told them to forget it.
It was just schoolboy talk.
It never worried Kenneth.’
He never worried about scripts, either, according to Rogers.
‘I would send him a script, but he never turned one down.’
On the other hand, the company always knew which part would be his.
The writers, Norman Hudis and Talbot Rothwell (who took over from Hudis with Carry on Cabby) wrote for Ken and knew exactly which part would be his.
He says that he always knew where he was with Ken.
‘When he was in a reflective or depressive mood, you knew to leave him alone although his manners were such that if anyone came to him to talk, he would stand up to talk to them.’
Ken didn't want to be thought wanting by people for whom he had respect.
‘He liked to be thought of as a man of the world,’ said Gerald Thomas.
‘That was why he dressed the way he did, always immaculate.’
Thomas believes that he sipped his favourite drink at the time, Campari and soda, because he believed — in the terminology of the time — that was the ‘with-it’ thing to do.
In restaurants — his tastes were no more sophisticated now than before, but occasionally he would do better than the Corner House — he would still order at the top of his voice, still hoping to be recognized.
He could be outrageous in the most genteel Italian eaterie, as Gerald Thomas remembered for me.
‘I don't have asparagus,’ he would say as loudly as the way he had greeted the waiter, ‘it'll make my pee smell.’
Other times, he would sandwich discussions about the menu with still more talk about the ‘pain in my bum’.
‘I don't think he would do it to draw attention, but I believe quite genuinely that he was trying to amuse me.’
And it happened towards the end of a lunch or dinner.
‘We always started seriously, usually discussing Louisa and perhaps her problems with her legs which stopped her doing her old-time dancing.’
Then the mood would grow mellow and the bum stories would come thick and fast.
Once, during the shooting of Carry On Regardless, Ken was supposed to be at the Ideal Home Exhibition.
He fell off some scaffolding and had to be taken to the studio surgery.
‘I saw him lying totally naked on a bed,’ says Gerald Thomas, ‘while the sister, who was quite formidable, was applying Savlon to his private parts.
I asked him how he felt, ‘Marvellous!’ he replied.’
He would start expounding his theories on the cultural state of the nation.
Gerald Thomas believes this was not so much his great erudition, ‘but Ken's supernatural knowledge of a lot of things’.
In this, the director is at odds with most of Ken's other friends and associates, but he could be closest to the truth.
‘I think he had a great superficial knowledge, but if you delved too deeply you would probably have felt that he didn't know so much.
He had a very retentive memory.
He learned a great many quotations which he would suddenly come out with.
I doubt, though, if he knew the whole play.
He was showing off.
Everything he did, was showing off.’
Sheila Hancock agrees that a great deal of the Williams intellectual showing off was to rid himself of the ‘Carry On’ persona.
‘He didn't like that image,’ she told me.
‘He didn't like people thinking he was an idiot.
I think he should have been a monk or a professor.
He admired knowledge, which was why he would lord it over you.’
‘He was very upset about some of the work he was doing.
He would rubbish it.’
‘Load of shit, dear,’ he would say to her.
‘Load of shit.
But, as she added, ‘we all do that.’
Nevertheless, despite saying so, she is convinced that his diary is full of entries about her.
‘I loved him very much.’
He was as reticent about having people to his home as ever.
If Gerald Thomas went to his flat to pick him up, he would be looking out of the window waiting for his car to arrive.
When he saw it, he was downstairs, ready to get into the vehicle by the time it had stopped, and the director had got out.
It was a feature of life other characters un the ‘Carry On’ story would recognize.
The series would go on until 1978 with Ken in the last, Carry On Emmanuelle, a spoof on the soft-porn hits of the age, as he had been in Carry on Sergeant, the first.
He missed out on only Carry On Up The Jungle, Carry On Girls and Carry On England, the penultimate in the series.
In between, there was Carry On Again, Doctor (‘Kenneth Williams and Sid James excel,’ wrote Richard Barkley in the Sunday Express) and Carry On…
Loving,(Ian Christie wrote about this in the Daily Express, ‘The only difference between this, the twentieth film in the ribald comedy series  and the first instalment is that the key members of the cast are just that much older.’).
Ken also made ‘Carry On’…
Henry, At Your Convenience, Abroad, Matron, Dick, Behind and finally, the thirtieth in the series, Emmannuelle,(the film that Barbara Windsor refused to do because she said it was ‘just one long nude scene’.
Eventually, she just played a cameo role and Suzanne Danielle was the very femme fatale.)
There was also going to be Carry On Dallas, a parody on the TV series.
But in the end, there were problems about getting the requisite finance and the film was abandoned.
The formula never changed, although with Emmanuelle, the double-entendres left less to the imagination than did any of the other films.
Women were seen to have complete breasts with nipples on them.
Ken himself bared his behind seemingly whenever there was a camera to turn.
As he said at the time: ‘I've never been seen naked in any bed, never.
In my own bed, yes, but then I usually wear pyjamas, but never in public.’
As the critic noted eight years earlier, Ken, like the others, grew a little more grey, a little more lined.
But the people still came to the box office, paid the ever-increasing charges for admission, and stayed to laugh.
All the time, Ken was appearing on television, on radio or on stage.
Some weeks, he would be doing all three and writing his letters, at the same time as making a ‘Carry On’.
As we have seen, some of his work led to friendships — not all of which were uncomplicated.
In the mid to late Sixties for instance there was the playwright Joe Orton.
What happened in their relationship made a day on a ‘Carry On’ set seem to Ken like sitting in the audience at a pantomime.
FOURTEEN
Ken had a ringside seat for one of the most explosive and widely publicized bouts of homosexual love and hate in recorded British history — the lives and deaths of playwright Joe Orton and his lover, Kenneth Halliwell.
Orton was the writer of the naturalistic Entertaining Mr Sloane, and later on of plays like What The Butler Saw.
They were highly acclaimed and immensely popular.
None more so than the play he virtually wrote for Kenneth Williams — Loot.
There can be no doubt that he rewrote it for Ken.
Ken and Orton had been introduced by Michael Codron in 1964.
It was the time of Entertaining Mr Sloane, a play Ken didn't at first see himself.
Codron produced it, but even his links with the producer couldn't persuade him to go to a play which ‘sounded irreligious and immoral’.
As he said, ‘I am not an irreligious man and I am not an immoral man and therefore it struck me that it would be offensive.
I don't want to come out of a theatre feeling disturbed and offended.’
But he went after a friend persuaded him and was glad that he did.
‘I'd never seen anything quite as stimulating as this in the English theatre.
If you'd said to me, this is a French play translated, I'd have agreed…
I was devastated by the evening, almost crystalline.’
It made him think again about contemporary language.
At about that time, Ken asked Codron if he had anything for him.
They talked about Mr Sloane and the producer suggested an introduction to Orton.
‘I think you'll get on very well with each other,’ he told him.
A supper was arranged at Codron's flat.
Ken came and so did Orton and Halliwell.
‘There's absolutely no doubt that Joe was totally smitten by Ken,’ Codron told me.
For all his sophistication, he was still a boy from Leicester and Ken saying outrageous things impressed him greatly.
Largely as a result of that introduction, they became strong friends.
It wasn't long before the personal friendship became a working set-up, too.
Not a partnership — strangely for someone so set in his own ways, Ken would be willing to do as he was told, as far as work was concerned.
He accepted the writer's script and the director's instructions.
Not always  happily.
He would complain as loudly as he would in the midst of a ‘Carry On’ situation, and he would talk about it endlessly, but he would do it.
That, as we shall see, would be a situation that his association with Orton would change.
Later that year, when the writer was working on Loot, the idea first came up for the two of them to work together.
Ken was busier now than he had ever been before.
There were the ‘Carry Ons’, a new radio series with Kenneth Horne — Beyond Our Ken had matured into Round The Horne and was better than anything he had done on air before.
Ken's own television series, International Cabaret had started making an impact, and he was a guest on shows like Juke Box Jury and Call My Bluff, on which he managed to get Joe to appear.
It was during the time the play was being crafted, and for years afterwards, that Ken was a witness to the bizarre happenings that made up this strangest of all relationships, a relationship which ended with Halliwell murdering Orton and then taking his own life.
Ken didn't actually witness either the murder or the suicide.
But was a first-hand witness of so many of the circumstances that led to the deaths.
He saw them at their home, talked with them, wrote to them, received letters from them — and all the time heard blow-by-blow accounts of their sexual activities, all of which a few years earlier would have had them rotting away in jail for life.
The behaviour whetted Ken's own appetite.
For a time the celibate once more tried to end his own monk-like existence.
He relished hearing the stories that Orton told of masturbatory sessions in public lavatories, of men he had picked up in the street, of having sex in shop doorways, of the sizes of his acquaintances' organs and of his experiences with venereal disease.
As Ken told John Lahr, author of the official Orton biography Prick Up Your Ears (Lahr also edited the Orton diaries): ‘He (Orton) had this capacity to have a sexual adventure and tell you the conversation that went on as well.
One wonders how he was capable of sustaining his own sexual performance.
He had this tremendous desire to be thorough.
His sexual adventures were recounted with such an eye for detail.’
On one occasion, Orton told about an old man who took him into a cave in Tunisia and asked him to feel his posterior.
'’ Wonderful bum,’Ken said, ‘Marvellous and working class to boot’.’
Ken enjoyed his visits to Orton's flat, with its crucifix on one wall surrounded by pictures that Ken said were ‘almost porno’.
There were hundreds of pictures on that wall, forming a somewhat unusual collage.
Ken was a great observer at all times.
He remembered how Orton used to sit slumped in a chair and Halliwell was always upright.
It wasn't the only difference between the two of them.
While Orton was promiscuous, always searching for new adventures, new partners, Halliwell was more keen on a stable, married-type relationship with Orton.
‘Halliwell said that these sexual experiments can only lead to a dead end.
My immediate response was to agree with Halliwell,’ said Ken.
The writer told Ken about it all.
But much of it he saw for himself.
‘I was convinced of Halliwell's absolute timidity all along.
I always said that Halliwell was too timid by half.
The only time he seemed to be bold and at all resolute was in contradicting Joe's apparent errors.
He had no fear with Joe in being bold.
But with people he did.’
Orton wrote him letters, both serious and humorous, going into the most intimate details of his sexual encounters.
He also sent him some of his famed fake letters in the name of ‘Edna Welthorpe’— a character he invented for his own fun and that of the few chosen intimates who were allowed to receive them.
They were addressed to people like the manager of the Ritz Hotel — asking if he had seen a handbag ‘she’ had left during a brief stay.
Then there was one from ‘R. Ufricks District Postmaster’ informing residents of his area that pillar boxes with two holes in them had been ‘put to an improper purpose’, which he spelled out in a way unlikely to commend itself to the Royal Mail.
Another letter was signed ‘Uncle Whippity’, which might have been sub-titled, but wasn't, ‘The Joys of Syphilis’.
It advised children on the ease of getting gonorrhoea, but said that while syphilis was more fun, it was more difficult to get.
He also said that before anything else, a boy must first learn how to masturbate.
Ken said he found that one ‘too rude’ for his tastes.
Only slightly less controversially, Orton also made up letters to newspaper agony aunts —‘What can I do because my boyfriend won't kiss me?’
They talked religion, too.
‘Orton understood that his irreligiousness was entirely religious,’ Williams noted.
‘He could only talk like that because Ken was religious himself,’ said John Lahr, who recounted many of the Williams reactions in Prick Up Your Ears.
Ken was in one of his most religious periods and so was Orton.
But the writer couldn't understand the aristocracy of the Vatican and constantly said so.
‘He understood the agony of the Crucifixion,’ Ken told John Lahr.
‘He was very much aware of the fact that many of our symbols had become clichés, banalities.
He was very interested in restoring them to their proper significance.
In the process, he felt he had to offend.’
So the stories proliferated, most of them true.
Orton told Ken that he was totally anonymous in his affairs.
He always said he was a lorry driver, a packer, a lithographer (no doubt an idea he developed from a conversation about Ken's own origins).
Ken particularly liked the story Orton told him about a man he had picked up in a lavatory and asked him if he did it often.
The man said he did — with some nice people who had LP's.
Sometimes he got as much as what would now be £1.50 to go home with.
He would write to Ken about his holidays in Morocco and going to see dancing ‘by what turned out to be the Senegal National Shitpot Company’.
In another letter he wrote: ‘I didn't see a cock the whole time — except my own and that glimpsed only briefly in a cracked mirror.’
Ken replied, Orton later wrote in his own diary, that he had had a similar experience in Beirut and had ‘paid twelve guineas a night for the privilege.’
Orton wrote about Ken ‘Sexually,’ he said, ‘he really is a horrible mess.’
He said that Ken constantly referred to the ‘guilt’ that he felt.
He recalled his telling him about the time he went into a pub when a man suggested having sex with him and pulled down his trousers in front of the assembled company.
When Lahr wrote the story, Ken insisted on a line in which the man asked him to ‘give me a fuck’ being removed.
He did agree to the sentence ‘It's legal now,’ being included.
(A week later, Ken returned to the pub, but it was empty.
Again, he said he felt guilty about it.)
Orton, on the other hand, told him that there was nothing to feel guilty about in a homosexual relationship.
He knew that Ken was incapable of any kind of real sex, with man or woman.
That was why he needed to be funny with other people.
It was an ‘outlet’ for him.
Otherwise, he was ‘a very sad man’.
Ken insisted on a line in the diaries which quoted Ken as saying, ‘I get no cock, you know.
It's love I want,’ to be replaced by, ‘I have no sex.’
There were other changes that he demanded.
‘They illustrated a not very pleasant side of Kenneth,’ John Lahr told me.
One showed his racist tendencies.
He took Orton to see his show.
Afterwards, surrounded, says Lahr, ‘by very BBCish company,’ he gave a description of a fat black woman singing about ‘mah chains’.
Ken mimicked the  singing of the woman — a ‘dizzy cow’— who was dressed ‘like a Nigerian priestess’.
He couldn't understand why ‘Negroes’ who weren't in chains any more kept singing about them.
Ken talked a lot about suicide, but in Orton's company it had to have sexual connotations, as though he were constantly — and whatever the subject of his conversations — having to keep up with the Joneses, in this case Orton and his assorted friends if not specifically Orton and Halliwell.
A friend of Ken's had just taken his life after being given the choice of going to prison or a mental hospital.
He opted for the hospital.
Ken revelled in the story.
Well,’ she said, ‘there's all the lovely mental cock.
I'll be sucking all the nurses off.
I'm sure it'll be very gay’.’
The man committed suicide after treatment ‘to stop her thinking like a queen’.
As Orton noted, Ken told a lot of stories about people who committed suicide — and constantly talked about death, but in a funny way.
He also related them to his own state of affairs.
He hated being alone, he told Joe, perhaps slightly envious of his relationship with Halliwell.
Orton said that he himself enjoyed his own company.
Ken told him about a trip he had made to Spain with a friend whom he called ‘Milicent’.
He saw a ‘queen’ in the hotel and decided to try his luck.
But as Orton pointed out in the diary, as usual nothing came of it — not even after telling a man who tried to get in their way to ‘piss off’.
Ken's favourite holiday spot was Tangier.
In a letter to Orton from there, he wrote: ‘Tangier is certainly the place for homos.
Well, cheerio, keep your cheques and your legs crossed.’
In 1965 he went to Tangier with Orton and Halliwell.
Ken himself was called upon to act as a kind of bodyguard for Halliwell — which is only part of the near-farcical side of the relationship between the three of them.
The very idea of Kenneth Williams protecting anyone is so ridiculous that it is laughable, but Halliwell didn't see things that way.
He asked Ken to walk him along the Rue Dante.
He was frightened of being attacked by Arabs.
Ken later said: ‘I said, ‘This is ludicrous Kenneth.
Nobody's going to murder you.
You're not prosperous enough…
This kind of timidity always made me feel that he was incapable of any violence.
And when they rang me about the killing and somebody said, ‘your friend's been murdered,’ I said, ‘You're talking rubbish.’’
In a letter from Tangier to Ken in London — Orton was known to write to him on toilet paper — he told Williams that ‘Bill and Mike’ kept Ken's picture on the bar for several days until replaced by a half-empty  Chianti bottle.
Ken loved it all and wrote letters back to Orton which the playwright said reminded him of James Joyce.
The effects of the Orton-Halliwell lifestyle became so infectious to Ken that he started breaking habits of a lifetime.
He invited the two of them to his flat for tea or dinner, a practically unheard of thing.
More importantly, he wanted to match exactly his accounts of meeting ‘rough trade’ in the street and bringing them back.
Once more, there is no record of his actually completing a transaction.
But the Guardsmen he told Andrew Ray about multiplied now.
There was a lorry driver who made excursions to the Farley Court flat and one evening when Orton was there, he introduced him to a Post Office telephone engineer called Clive — who later became part of the Orton set- and his flatmate Tom.
Ken kept pressing Clive to tell him of his sexual adventures on site.
They were ‘filth’ but everyone appreciated the stories, he said.
Ken, meanwhile, told the most outrageous tales about himself and his views on sex — occasionally with Lou present.
That was sometimes too much even for the equally outrageous Orton, who partly envied the relationship Ken had with his mother — he knew he couldn't talk to his own parent that way — and was partly disgusted by it, to the point of wanting to change the subject from sexual organs and sexual intercourse to something more inane.
Ken, though, was in one of his devil-may-care moods and continued the chat about cocks, fucks and other parts of the body and their various functions.
When Joe told his story of making love in a cold doorway with his backside exposed to the street, Lou told him he was a fool.
‘You might have caught double pneumonia.’
Lou, at this time, was very keen on that sort of talk herself.
When one of Ken's friends told her he had just bought a new television set — a 17-inch console — she commented: ‘Seventeen inches?
That should console anyone.’
Lou talked about Pat being on holiday in Greece.
‘She'll be getting the dick,’ said Ken.
Lou told Ken afterwards how much she had enjoyed the evening and the company.
She particularly liked Orton.
‘What a nice fella he is.
Really nice, isn't he?
Not like most of the theatrical friends of yours who really don't listen, do they?
Wanting to hear themselves speak.
And he listens to you, you see.
He's interested in people.’
None of the banter Lou heard, however, compared with the stories  he told about mutual acquaintances — sometimes in the embarrassed and blushing presence of the people about whom he talked.
One man was a ‘queen’, who deserved all that ‘she’ could get, and as Ken told the story the man prayed for the floor beneath him to open up.
Ken didn't care.
It was like the conversations he had on the ‘Carry On’ set, embroidered for an audience whom he knew could relate to it all.
If he upset the people involved, why should that spoil a good story?
He loved his tales of the ‘queens’— he said that one of his favourite occupations was sitting on a park bench, watching them, all of whom, in the parlance of the active homosexual, had to be ‘she’ and ‘her’.
Lou was doubtless bemused by it all and is convinced to this day her son was not a homosexual at all—‘thank God he was nothing like that’, she says.
If in other company, he was constantly saying that he was asexual, in the presence of Orton and Halliwell he was one of them — and wanted it that way.
Orton's diaries record the time when Ken and a friend called Henry came to the writer's flat.
Williams called Henry, ‘Henrietta’ and proceeded to detail a story that made the man blush and deny everything.
But Ken proceeded just the same.
The details were horrific.
No words were spared.
The diary entry also added that Ken told Orton: ‘I'm awfully fond of you, you know.’
He was glad he had agreed to take part in the TV series Call My Bluff in which Ken was starring.
He pointed out that he had originally wanted Robert Bolt, but his secretary said it was not the sort of thing he would do.
Another Orton diary entry referred to a man complaining about the TV show being a ‘fake’— presumably because he could see they worked from scripts.
Moments of more serious theatre talk seem to have always been secondary to the outlandish sexual banter.
He was happy telling his own stories or listening to Orton's.
Ken told him that after a performance of Call My Bluff a woman approached him and asked, ‘Any chance of a fuck?’
He said he was quick to point out that he had no such intention.
Ken later felt the necessity to justify his joy in Orton's adventures, which he claimed met his disapproval.
He said that as an actor he had to respond to stories which he found so funny.
The day after one such party at chez-Williams (whether Orton or Halliwell appreciated how privileged they were to take part in rare occasions like this is not on record) Orton wrote to Ken:
‘I can't tell you how I enjoyed yesterday evening.
It was v. pleasant  meeting such nice people.
But, as I've said before, you do have such interesting friends.
And the filth, far from reacting upon me as upon a famous London impresario, added fuel to the fire of my enjoyment!
I gave Tom and Clive my telephone number when we left…’
Williams would always like talking about Orton, although he would publicly protest for years that it was so boring to keep going on about his relationship with the writer.
As John Lahr told me ‘He was very pleased to have been included in the books and he helped.
He was loyal.
God, I can't tell you how much I appreciated that.’
But Ken more and more didn't want a lot of the bad language that passed between him and Orton and Halliwell to be included.
They saw his depressions, too.
Ken believed that Orton was the man to whom to go when he was down.
‘If we're talking about compassion, a sense of sympathy, I would say Joe had it.
About humanity, especially with people like Halliwell…a tremendous loyalty and as far as Joe was concerned a great love.’
Once, Ken told John Lahr, he was in the depths of despair.
‘I was suicidally depressed,’ he said — a phrase that was omitted from Lahr's book at Williams's request — and called on Halliwell at his home.
He looked, he said, ‘like a great boiled egg’— the once extraordinarily handsome young man was now as bald as one and the day that Ken called had left off his toupee.
Ken though he was ‘wet, full of goodwill and resolution’.
But Williams wouldn't let Halliwell see that he thought so little of him.
Instead of finding consolation in Orton who was out, he stayed to talk to Halliwell — who couldn't understand why Ken would want to talk to him instead of the writer.
Halliwell was cooking haddock at the time.
Ken persuaded him to cut the portions he was making for Orton and himself into three.
After Orton's return, Ken said that he ‘dropped my facade’.
As he told Lahr: ‘Up to that point I'd been brittle and arch with Halliwell, because I sensed his inwardness and his desire not to talk.
And I sort of made him talk.
After a while, I said, ‘I'm terribly depressed, utterly, sickeningly depressed.
It all seems so utterly pointless, my kind of life’.’
It was about the only time Ken opened up about his feelings about living in Farley Court by himself.
Maybe this was principally why he had gone to Joan Sims and proposed.
But it was to a totally different kind of person to whom he confessed his total loneliness.
It was, he told him, ‘an unshared life.
My predicament.
My living alone.’
John Lahr spent a lot of time with Ken when working on his Orton books.
Today he describes the always dapper figure in the Burberry raincoat (over sharply pressed grey trousers and a tweed sports jacket) who would come at ten o'clock in the morning for his chats.
He told me he knew that Ken would have been an impossible person to live with.
‘He was far too hysterical a personality to cohabit.’
He was always depressed.
‘Always lovely, but always depressed.’
But this time when he saw Orton — a man who was constantly telling Ken to enjoy himself sexually before it was too late and to stop feeling guilty about it — he was worse than usual.
Orton told him: ‘Any time you feel this, always come here.
Don't even bother to phone.
I'm glad you came.
It's murder to sit and brood.
I know what it's like.
Tell me…tell me exactly what you did today.
Why?
Where did you go today?’
Ken said that he found Orton to be ‘the most marvellous counsellor.
He actually got the adrenalin going, forced the pendulum which had almost stopped to swing again.
He was a great activator.
He had tremendous energy.
I never met Joe in terms of no energy.
I never met him when he was atrophied or drear.’
But it wasn't easy to get him to give sympathy.
Joe told him: ‘I must remain objective.
I can't be involved.’
That was the way he worked, too, Ken said.
Orton's philosophy was to be ‘a fly on the wall’.
He said that they both loved ‘exposing the bogus and pretentious’.
Ken and Orton related to each other, not just because of their similar sexual proclivities but because of their backgrounds.
They were both working class and somehow with him Ken could drop his own  pretensions of what Alfred Doolittle in Pygmalion called ‘middle-class morality’.
He didn't affect his upper-class accent that a lot of people believed was natural Williams speak.
He didn't talk of his intellectual aspirations.
‘We did both love exposing the bogus and pretentious.
I've always hated it…:
I've also had to face behind desks the same kind of pretentious people, what Shakespeare calls the ‘insolence of office’.
I loathe it.
Joe loathed it, too.’
Loot was the obvious vehicle in which Ken and Orton could work seriously together.
It was Joe's idea that the part of the police inspector — posing as a Metropolitan Water Board inspector — should go to Ken.
When Williams appeared to like the idea, Orton totally changed the part so that it could fit him, not so much like a glove, but like a well-crafted cabinet, one in which Ken could be displayed at his finest and with plenty of space to ensure that nothing got in his way.
It was early on in their friendship that Joe Orton realized that Ken was ideal for the alleged policeman, Truscott — a man he freely based on Det.
Sgt. Harold Challoner, the policeman who planted evidence on innocent people whom he disliked and who was described at his trial as being ‘quite mad’.
Orton told Ken: ‘I want to make this detective much more you.’
In the original play, called Funeral Games, the nurse (to be played by Geraldine McEwan) was the centre of the action.
Orton switched things around so that it was much more Ken's vehicle, as Williams said, ‘He did, suddenly, get fired with the idea of writing a zonking great part for me.’
That, according to Michael Codron, was probably the problem.
‘That meeting with Ken and his decision to make Ken's part big made it a sort of broken-back type of play.
He developed Truscott in Ken's image, but it really wasn't Ken.
I think that was to the detriment of the play, but was due to his absolute hero worship of Ken.’
Other parts were played by Duncan Macrae as the father MacLeavy, and Ian McShane as the son — both Scots, so Michael Codron asked Ken if he would like to play Truscott in a kilt, an idea that was not pursued.
David Battley played the son's friend.
Loot was a farce, although it was not about people running in and out of other people's bedrooms, in and out of coffins more likely.
Instead of a French maid, there was a nurse.
Rather than missing lovers there were missing bodies, or to be precise one missing body — and a lot of missing loot.
By the time it reached London, what seemed to be missing most of all was the play itself.
But by then, a lot of other things had happened.
The play began its provincial tour in Cambridge (it went all over the country, but when it came to including the play in Ken's career notes for Who's Who in the Theatre, he only mentions Cambridge, as though referring to the West End theatre of that name).
The actors played one version and rehearsed another.
At the end of the tour more than 150 pages of rewritten script had had to be learned by the company.
There were changes in the script right from the earliest moments.
At first these were received by all concerned well enough.
Michael Codron remained optimistic during the first rewrites.
The play had still been called Funeral Games up to this point.
But on 2r October 1964, he wrote to his star:
‘Dear Ken, Here is the exit Joe has re-written and which I think is very good.
He has thought of a new title: Loot…’
As Ken recalled: ‘Loot was an appalling flop, a great big flop….
It was like a ship that set out with the navigator doing one thing, the captain doing another, the deck hands doing something on their own.
It never got concerted.’
Orton was drained.
As for the cast, ‘we were all exhausted.
David Batley crying.
Me angry with everybody.
Duncan Macrae coming off the stage talking to himself.’
In Brighton, the then Sir Laurence Olivier came to see the show and called round to Williams's dressing room afterwards.
‘The trouble, Kenny,’ he told him, ‘is that you haven't got a play.’
There were problems with local ‘watch committees’.
In those days, if a writer didn't get approval from the Lord Chamberlain, councils had to approve the plays being presented in their areas.
In Manchester, they refused to allow a line in which Ken, as Truscott, asked one of the characters: ‘Where do you do it?’ and was told: ‘On crowded dance floors during the rhumba.’
There were even police standing in the wings ready to cart everybody off to the nearest station should the forbidden line be recited.
‘I felt again and again as an actor that we simply were not gaining the audience's confidence.
We never did establish that for the simple reason we were in a terrible quandary ourselves wondering which version was the right one.
We were tentative — which is death for Orton.
You must take the stage with enormous conviction and panache.’
The director, Peter Wood, made Orton — who had personally requested him to direct it — do the rewrites.
Rehearsals were hell — although not quite as hellish as the first performances in Cambridge.
Lines were difficult to learn.
They required considerable breathing practice.
Ken said he saw the play in the way he saw all comedy ‘like a ball being thrown from one place to another’.
Orton told him he was totally right.
The play was produced in a stylistic fashion.
Ken remembered a lavatory chain without a lavatory in sight.
‘When Loot failed, we were all performing stylistically.’
Peter Wood put a metronome in the footlights.
When Ken asked what it was for, he was told: ‘This play is essentially stylistic and I want the dialogue to be delivered in a stylistic fashion.’
As Ken remembered: ‘We all had various arguments about it.
Eventually, after the failure of the opening there was a management conference called.
The director  agreed that he'd misinterpreted the play.
And we decided that from then on the performance should be naturalistic, which of course was the point of Joe Orton's dialogue.’
So they started rehearsing again — naturalistic in the midst of a stylistic set which, as Ken pointed out, ‘contradicted everything that we were doing’.
Ken wrote in his diary (quoted by Lahr): ‘My relationship with Wood is getting very strained.
Today, when he asked me to alter dialogue I'd already learned once more— I refused.
I dislike doing this as I'm well aware that defiance of authority is a bad example to the cast.
There are occasions on which he forces one into rebellion simply because what he's doing is wasteful and futile.’
‘Ken didn't like the director at all,’ says Codron today.
‘He didn't admire him at all.
Ken thought he had got the idea of the play all wrong and I think in that I have to agree with Ken.
John Lahr made the point to me that Ken became a kind of scapegoat for the problems of the play.
Williams was bigger than Truscott.
All the time he was on stage, it was difficult for audiences to think of him as other than the ‘Carry On’ character or the voice they knew on the radio or now on television.
The box has always had a lot to answer for.
Loot gave it a whole lot of new reasons for guilt complexes.’
When the rewrites were presented by Codron and Wood, Ken was out of character again.
He thought they were lousy — and said so.
‘I shouldn't have set foot near this rotten mess,’ he wrote in the diary.
Michael Codron — who shared his work with another producer Donald Albery, a man who had totally different ideas from his own — felt much the same way.
‘We should never have toured, for one thing.’
As he explained: ‘It was not a play that should have toured at all.
It was so outrageous.
The regions — they have since come up to London — were miles away from that sort of thing.
I'm not being sneery about it, why should they have wanted it?
It was not a subject that should have been laughed at.
‘People came to see Kenneth Williams and thought they would be watching a ‘Carry On’.’
At one rehearsal Geraldine McEwan shouted: ‘I can't go on with this any more.
I can't go on.’
Towards the end of the tour, the show played at the Golders Green Hippodrome.
It began badly but by Saturday night, it seemed that the audience was with them.
The company felt better about things.
‘After so many weeks of work, it seemed that we had got it right,’ Michael Codron told me.
If that were true, it was probably in spite of Ken, not because of him.
Fenella Fielding saw him in the play there.
‘He had a role, but he kept going from character to character, using a whole lot of different accents, cockney one moment, the voice of a high court judge the next.’
If this were a respite it was a shortlived one.
At the Pavilion in Bournemouth there was a mass walk out of about 200 disgusted people.
As The Times headline put it: ‘Bournemouth old ladies shocked.’
But it was a short-lived respite.
Ken remembered hearing a woman at his hotel tell a man: ‘It was a good job you didn't come.
The play was disgusting, absolutely filthy.’
The play got as far as Wimbledon and then seemed to die.
‘People came out of the theatre and were shaking their fists at us,’ said Ken.
One woman went up to Codron and Peter Wood and said just one short crisp sentence.
‘It was Felicity's twenty-first.’
'In other words,’ said Codron, ‘we were responsible for totally mucking up this woman's entry into womanhood by letting her see Loot.’
The Phoenix in London's Charing Cross Road, which was empty at the time, wouldn't take the play.
The owner said that he would rather keep the theatre dark than offer such rubbish.
Codron tried to get it on at the Royal Court — on the face of things, an ideal setting-but it was turned down there, too.
If the cast had wanted to, they could have moved to the Lyric, Hammersmith.
The members of the cast decided that no, they didn't want to.
After fifty-six performances, it seemed that it was all over.
As Michael Codron told me: ‘Ken remained very loyal to it, even though he was miserable about it.
There were moves to recast the play, but I wanted to stay with Ken and believed that if we could have got it into London we would have had a success.’
Before very long, however, it did open in the West End.
But it was a totally different version, with a different producer and without Ken.
Orton wrote to Williams hoping he wasn't too upset.
Orton certainly was not upset.
The final version of Loot, totally different from all the ones in which Ken had worked, was an instant hit.
On 16 October 1966, Orton wrote to him: ‘As you know by now, Loot has had an unqualified success.
I hope this won't affect our friendship.’
The play won the Evening Standard drama award for 1966.
Later, the film rights for Loot were sold for £100,000.
Ken wasn't exactly thrilled with any of this, although his anger was  more against Michael Codron than Orton.
‘After all the Loot misery,’ Codron told me, ‘we sort of went quiet on each other.’
Ken had to go back to his own life and Orton and Halliwell to theirs.
It would also be their deaths.
The story was that Halliwell killed Orton in a frenzy, believing that the writer was going to leave him.
Ken always thought that was untrue.
He heard him say several times, ‘I'll never leave him.’
Ken was sorry about it all, but he didn't let it interfere with his own plans, which were blossoming as usual.
FIFTEEN
Ken wore his homosexuality like a trade mark.
It was an unforgiving label — simply because as far as anyone can tell, he never fulfilled any of his urges.
In one of her braver moods, Pat once asked him about homosexuals.
It was all right for the active partner, but how did the other fellow get his satisfaction.
‘It's down to J. Arthur…,’ he told her.
She worked that one out using the combined thought that J. Arthur had to mean the movie mogul J. Arthur Rank and that what her brother really was doing was using a convenient form of rhyming slang.
With Ken, it was constantly down to J. Arthur.
Ken never thought of girls.
He did continue to think of rough-hewn men, or boys with what he described as ‘French bodies’.
He tried to enjoy their company, but there was always that guilt.
He had an inferiority complex about his sexuality as about much else, which is probably why to some people he could be so rude.
John Lahr told me of his astonishment at how unpleasant he could be to waiters at the Indian restaurant they visited together.
Yet when people were being positively rude to him, he took it all very much in his stride.
He and Pat were walking through a London street when a red Royal Mail van shuddered to a halt beside them.
‘Hello, Ken, you old poofter…’ called the man behind the wheel.
‘Hello,’ Ken called back, feigning the appearance of what looked very much like a smile.
Pat, however, was shocked to the core.
She ran cold all over.
‘Why did you do that?’ she asked Ken.
‘Why answer him?’
Ken had no doubts about the reason.
‘Do you know him?’ he asked.
‘Do I know him?’
No, was the answer to both those questions.
‘Will I ever see him again?
Do I even know which depot he comes from?
What's the point of worrying about him.’
Pat was deeply hurt, but Ken maintained a look on his face that seemed to be as shiny as the brown shoes he wore under those immaculately pressed trousers.
He was at times obsessed by his feelings for women.
The only one he loved was his mother.
He trusted Pat — despite the impression he seems to have given a lot of his friends and acquaintances — and enjoyed the company of people like Maggie Smith and Sheila Hancock.
But the idea of going to bed with a woman revolted him.
He wanted nothing to do with men who were bisexual.
That notion, too, disturbed him beyond measure.
Pat saw just how true that was so the night that Ken was due to go out with one of his current close friends.
The man was so shocked by what happened that he told Pat all about it.
Ken went to the man's flat before they were going out to dinner.
He wasn't quite ready.
Ken wanted to know why.
The man said that he had been with a woman.
Ken was furious.
‘You,’ he said, ‘have you been to bed with her?
Have you been touching her?
Have you been playing with her tits?’
The man smiled.
But Ken was not laughing.
‘You're not going out with me after that, he said.
‘Go and have another shower.’
And for the second time in ten minutes the man showered.
Ken didn't want to think there was any remnant of a woman's sexual smell on a man he had previously trusted as one of his own.
Pat said that until she heard that, she hadn't realized just how anti-women her brother was.
She had first had her suspicions years before when he had sent her a photograph taken on his twenty-first birthday.
She was in Australia at the time and her then husband looked at the picture and said, ‘Oh, he's a poof.’
She denied it at the time, but soon she realized that those were his inclinations.
She once asked him outright if he were homosexual.
He replied.
‘If you mean do I prefer the company of men to women, then yes, I am.’
Once, Ken came knocking at her door.
He had been at a ‘knickers-off’ party which he heard might be raided by the police.
He didn't want to be incriminated.
Pat herself felt much the same way about that after Ken's death.
She came across boxes of photographs of Ken with boys in highly compromising positions.
‘I tore them up and destroyed the lot,’ she said.
For the same reason, she won't allow his diaries to be published.
Not only do they include unkind and unflattering things about other people in the theatrical profession, they bear witness to their writer's sexual habits and name names.
‘I won't allow those to go out,’ she told me again and again.
If, however, her main dislike of Ken's sexual behaviour was the way it coloured his career, then she has perhaps cause for concern.
Ken was the one for whom the word ‘camp’ could have been coined.
Yet, despite all the evidence, she was not that easily convinced.
‘I had never believed that Ken was a homosexual.
I knew that a lot of his friends were.
It was on one of the visits to her then home at Bickley in Kent which he used to make on summer Sunday afternoons, that convinced her.
‘He used to sit in the garden and go to sleep or drink hundreds of cups of tea.
He gave me a great long lecture on what homosexuals do.
Then, he asked me, ‘Why did you ask me?’
‘I said, ‘I don't know.’
He asked me how old I was and I said, ‘forty-five’ or whatever I was.
He couldn't understand how I had been married and been in the bloody Air Force and yet didn't know.
I told him that I didn't mix with them and it never came into my life or my conversation.’
That was the point that she again asked him if he were homosexual.
He repeated that he preferred men's company to women's.
But now he added ‘If you mean, do I participate then I am not a homosexual.
So you can draw your own conclusions from that.’
She told him that the Bible indicated that thinking something was like doing it.
‘That's what I say,’ he replied.
‘Draw your own conclusions.’
She followed that up with what seemed to her to be the inevitable question: ‘Well, are you a virgin then?’
‘Yes,’ he replied.
‘And I believed him.’
It wasn't easy to discuss sex with him.
But several years later they did.
Pat was having an affair — and in a crowded restaurant, he asked her at the top of the sentorian Williams voice: ‘Well tell us about this man you're having the affair with then.’
Lou chimed in: ‘Her having an affair!
She'd run a blinkin' mile.’
Pat wanted to change the subject.
‘No, come on then,’ he called to her.
‘Did you have the blinkin' dick?’
That was the way he enjoyed talking about sex, a slightly diluted form of the conversations that were so much part of his connections with the Orton-Halliwell set.
But he said it loud enough for the whole restaurant to be convulsed and Ken to enjoy his audience at the same time.
Later he rang her up and said he had embarrassed her.
She thought an apology was coming.
Instead, he laughed, one of those raucous Hancock's Half Hour snide laughs.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘that serves you right.
It's what you get when you go round having the dick.’
Pat rounded on him: ‘Well, at least I can say, ‘I'm not a virgin’.’
Ken's voice changed.
‘He got all serious,’ said Pat.
‘Yes’ he answered.
‘That's true.’
She asked him if he were still a virgin.
He replied that he was.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I think that's sad.’
He told her: ‘I daren't be otherwise — because if I were ever in a compromising situation, if the police raided or if someone kissed and told I'd be up the creek.’
She didn't know at the time about the pictures that had been taken or about some of those activities in which he did take part.
She told him that she firmly believed he was missing an experience to be treasured.
He never, she maintains, missed not having a family life or the presence of children.
And here is another one of the paradoxes of the Williams life, the closed compartments that ensured Ken was a different person to different people.
Friends talk of how marvellous he was to their children.
‘He didn't like children,’ says Pat.
‘No, not very much,’ agreed Lou.
‘But he was always kind to those who were around.’
But Pat remembers him saying to various children: ‘Why don't you lay down at the bottom of the swimming pool for half an hour?’
Or ‘Why don't you go and lay down in the middle of Piccadilly Circus?’
Neither of them would know until his death, for instance, that he had a godson.
He became more and more secretive as the years went by.
He didn't like to talk about money any more than he used to like spending it.
‘It's not important,’ he told his sister.
‘You shouldn't love possessions.
You should love people.’
As Pat said: ‘That was the Christian bit coming out again.’
Accordingly, the only outward sign of a certain limited degree of prosperity were his immaculate clothes, although he never had a Savile Row tailor make him a suit or went to one of the more fashionable outfitters specializing in foreign-made clothes.
He patronized John Lewis and Marks and Spencer and usually felt glad that he did.
(Pat describes a shopping expedition to John Lewis in London's Oxford Street with Ken, looking for a shirt.
He called to her from one crowded floor to the other, ‘Any luck?’
As she said, everyone else seemed to think they were on Candid Camera).
All his suits were hung in the wardrobes in covers.
Next to them, his assortment of sports jackets and then his dinner suits.
His shoes were always brightly polished before being put away — echoes of childhood here — each pair with wooden trees inside them.
One side of his wardrobe would be his best ties; then the crocheted ties he wore every day.
His underwear —‘very white, very neat, very tidy’— was in drawers His socks were neatly rolled or folded.
All his shirts were properly folded in three columns in his wardrobe, the striped shirts in one pile, the plain whites in another, the checks in a third.
But he always gave the impression that he cared much more about people than things — even if that meant falling, as Pat would have it, for the occasional sob story.
She remembers the time he was coming out of his flat in the midst of a rainstorm and was approached by a young man who asked him for the price of a meal.
‘What are you doing walking the streets in the pouring rain without a coat?’
Ken asked him.
The youngster told him that he had come from Wales to make his fortune as a pop singer.
He had been seen in Wales by a DJ who had suggested that he look him up, should he ever come to the big city.
The boy took this as an invitation to London.
Ken took the boy to his home, dried his clothes and gave him a meal.
Now, Pat is convinced there was no sexual connotations to this kindness.
‘It was his way of doing a Christian act.’
He told the boy, she says, to go back to Wales and save up the money which would allow him to come to London with a certain degree of security.
He also gave him an overcoat.
‘I can't go back to Wales,’ said the youngster.
‘I haven't got any money.’
Ken bought him a train ticket, put some cash in his hand and took him to a nearby restaurant
‘Is there anything else you need?’
Ken asked.
He had in mind a newspaper or magazine to read on the train.
The boy said, ‘Well, I did notice in a shop window a lovely glittery suit that would look very good on stage.’
‘Ken was disgusted,’ Pat said.
‘He was upset that the boy would try to tap him for that dreadful suit.
He told him that if his voice was that good, he wouldn't need a glittery suit.
He was very hurt.’
Said Pat: ‘That would be Kenneth's way of doing a Christian act, let that boy get home in safety, instead of roaming the streets homeless.’
Nevertheless, is it too far fetched to include this in the collection of stories of guardsmen, telephone engineers and building site workers who went to Ken's home?
Almost no one else was ever invited back.
What is likely is that once more Ken did not follow through with his desires.
Was it once more his conscience, his sense of guilt?
Pat is certain it that it was not.
He was on happier terms in his favourite restaurants.
In the Seventies  he was a regular visitor to Joe Allens in Covent Garden where he went with his mother.
Pat was with him the day a young woman approached him exceedingly politely while he was enjoying his veal — in one of his favourite Italian restaurants, Biagis, he would go for a filleted sole — and asked for his autograph.
Ken looked at her and said, ‘Fuck off.’
‘He liked Joe Allen's because it was filled with theatricals, people whom he thought always minded their own business,’ said Pat.
Needless to say, minding his own business was the one thing Ken was not able to do.
Dining in one restaurant with Hugh Paddick, he got himself into a furious row with a woman doctor at the next table, challenging her views on life.
‘He kicked up a rumpus wherever he went,’ said Paddick.
It never seemed to matter very much to managements, however.
In the midst of doing both the Round The Horne radio series and a couple of ‘Carry Ons’, Ken was cast as Napoleon in a BBC TV version of the Anouilh play French Cricket, with Robert Helpmann playing Fouche, the Chief of Police.
It was a welcome break from comedy, but it wasn't noticed enough for there to be a great many similar offers.
Not that he any more minded his own business now than he had before.
He would probably have maintained that minding his own business would never have got him anywhere, least of all starring on radio.
There he was above all an observer of life, carrying on — forgive the pun those observations into the characters he played.
Round The Horne was Ken in his element, largely because Barry Took and Marty Feldman (the latter before long to make a huge hit in Hollywood) wrote as much for him as for Kenneth Horne.
It was Beyond Our Ken refined and restructured.
The old elements were essentially the same, but the refinements made the weekly shows not just entertaining, but addictive, compulsive listening.
He played a wide selection of roles again.
Even as the sidekick to Kenneth Horne —‘I'm an old panhandler…
I was huddling over my pan looking for gold,’ said Horne.
‘You won't find any there either, duckie,’ replied Williams — he was a favourite.
He played an old salt —‘Aah…aah…aahh.
You all think I'm a raving madam.’
That was a misprint in his script about Moby Dick.
‘Madam’ should have read ‘madman’.
‘Oh…yeees,’ he agreed when co-star Betty Marsden pointed out the misreading of the misprint.
It went out the way it was recorded.
As Hugh Paddick told me, ‘it was never rehearsed’.
But there was no one more popular than Rambling Sid Rumpoe, the folk singer, who would at the drop of a mangelwurzel sing ‘The Runcorne Splodcobblers Song’, sung by the splodcobblers of Runcorne as they thump  their cordwaggle bellow afore cobbling their splods.
Or the Oriental gentleman, Chou En Ginsberg, MA (failed).
He, together with J. Piesmold Gruntfuttock would have kept Ken gainfully employed had he done nothing else.
They were all different, their voices varied.
Yet one always knew which one was Kenneth Williams.
And when he and Hugh Paddick joined together for their Julian and Sandy routine — bravely supposedly using the names, and names only, of Julian Slade and Sandy Wilson (writers of The Boy Friend and Salad Days)— Williams and Paddick were giving new meaning to that word ‘gay’, especially when they talked about the figure-hugging black number they had bought in Carnaby Street.
He loved that role, Barry Took told me, because it was a way of being quite open about homosexuality and taking the mickey out of it was safe.
Julian and Sandy were a reaction to Rodney and Charles, but less cliché-ridden.
At one time, they were dropped because Took and Marty Feldman were bored by them.
There was such a protest from the cast that they were reinstated.
They were a tremendous send up of ‘camp’ characters years before their time, two ‘glaring queens’, as Paddick pointed out.
The idea was thrashed out at a lunch given by Kenneth Horne.
Marty Feldman, whose idea it was, came out with a great deal of language that no one else seemed to understand.
Paddick was supposed to use the word ‘lallies’.
He refused.
He thought it meant breasts.
Feldman told him it was an old-English name for legs.
The word stayed in.
On a later occasion, Hugh was supposed to do a tap dance.
‘Come on then, show us your lallies,’ called Ken.
There were problems about so blatantly exposing homosexuality on the air.
The smoke in Broadcasting House offices blew through long meetings on the subject of Julian and Sandy.
Ken was to tell John Lahr about his discussions with Marty Feldman on the subject.
‘I don't care,’ Feldman told Ken.
‘I want very much to establish two comic homosexual characters and they can revolve around a figure of the establishment like a Richard Dimbleby character — decency, Establishment values.’
Sandy would say to Julian: ‘Oh, girl, your patio's gorgeous, shove a couple of creepers up by our trellis and we'll have this place going.’
To which Kenneth Horne would add: ‘I quite agree.’
As Feldman told him: ‘(It was) making it obvious that the Establishment and the outrageous could meet on some level.’
Ken added: ‘Marty's angle was not to be afraid of anti-feeling, because we're making people laugh and in laughter we're making a kind of sanity.
It's like going into a dark room and being afraid.
Then when you put some light on, it's not a big deal.’
Both Ken and Hugh Paddick just had to feel the same way.
‘We were always very, very friendly,’ Paddick told me.
‘We got on terribly well together.’
Once more, they respected each other 's work.
And they saw each other out of work, too.
They even went on holiday together.
It was in the middle of the Sixties, half-way through the eleven-year run of the two shows.
It was one of the few BBC radio shows which played to full houses.
Paddick had just finished his run as Col. Pickering in My Fair Lady at Drury Lane.
Ken had the memory of Loot still burning his ego and both agreed that simultaneously they needed a break.
They decided to fly to Gibraltar and then to tour the south coast of Spain — with Paddick at the wheel because Kenneth still wouldn't learn to drive.
‘We were supposed to be travelling incognito, but a ‘Carry On’ film was showing on the Rock at the time, so he was mobbed and we were whisked through customs very quickly.
Then at the hotel, he was recognized and before we had been there for five minutes Radio Gibraltar was down to interview him.
We ended up doing a ‘Rodney’ and ‘Charles’routine about the Gibraltar apes.’
The next morning, the crowd scenes were repeated in the shoe shop to which Ken had gone to buy a pair of sandals.
Paddick had had enough of this and insisted on moving on.
They went to Malaga, where Ken was upset about not being recognized and then left because after raising his voice he was being pestered by autograph-hunters.
It was time to move on.
Ken wanted to go to Tangier —‘He had been there with Orton and all that jazz and I wasn't interested.’
In fact, he said by now they had begun to get on each other 's nerves.
‘I'd be on the beach sunbathing and he'd be sitting there in a suit, collar and tie and black shoes.
Not really my idea of how to spend a holiday.’
They reached Cannes, where Ken got into the spirit of things again much to Paddick's embarrassment.
The sole entertainment in the restaurant to which they went was a violinist ‘with three strands of henna'd hair from left to right.’
Ken couldn't speak French, but insisted on requesting a tune — by humming it out loud, at the top of his voice.
‘We had to share a room because we couldn't book two singles.
He took pills to get to sleep.
I lay awake all night worrying about the chaos he had caused.’
At that point, they decided it would be best for everyone if they went home.
They stayed up all night before the flight back.
‘We both got  terribly drunk.
Me on whisky, he on gin and tonic.’
They had a row.
‘I really went for him and felt rather sorry for it afterwards.
He said, ‘How is it you know so much about me?’’
Paddick told him it was because he had watched him at work for so long.
‘I then went on holiday by myself.’
He was never invited to his flat, apart from a drink in the Farley Court flat before an evening at a restaurant.
‘It was a monk's cell.
But a spotless, pristine monk's cell.
He gave me a drink.
After the drink, we went into the kitchen.
I am sure it had never been used before.
After that, his mother came in to wash the glasses up.
He smoked himself, but everything, all the ashtrays, were immediately put away.’
‘I don't know whether it was like Howard Hughes and cleanliness, but it was going on that way.’
He was fastidious in other regards, too.
Punctuality was by way of being an obsession — although once he missed a recording session with Barry Took altogether and all but flayed himself for his lack of professionalism.
During the run of Round the Horne, Ken had found himself — probably reluctantly — hosting a meeting at Farley Court of Horne and the rest of the cast.
It was due to begin at eleven am, Bill Pertwee told me.
‘We arrived at 10.55 and rang the bell.
There was no answer.
Then, there was a voice from inside.
‘I know who you are, but it's not eleven o'clock yet,’ Ken called.
On the dot of eleven, he opened the door and allowed everyone in.
They were served coffee.
By now, though, no one was allowed to smoke.
In restaurants, Ken and Hugh Paddick had meals together where there was inevitably the same story of not being recognized and then having to move because too many people were pestering him.
Ken always seemed to respect Kenneth Horne —‘a father figure to all of us,’ as Barry Took put it.
But he would have sport even with him.
The two Kenneths were walking up Regent Street, on the way from a Broadcasting House meeting to a Paris Cinema recording.
Ken suddenly left him and went into a doorway of Hamleys, the big toy shop.
He made all the movements of a man apparently answering a desperate call of nature.
As he walked away again and up to Horne, he fiddled with his trousers and said, ‘Ah, that's better.’
To the principal female interest in the series, he had another trick.
When Betty Marsden positioned herself in front of the microphone, that was the moment he chose to touch up her bottom.
Just putting you at your ease,’ he said.
Since she must have known he had no sexual interest in her, she didn't complain too much.
In conversation, he could be very rude about his colleagues.
In the studio, he would talk about people in the show, ‘being very brutal,’ said Pertwee.
‘If anyone stood up to him, he would deflate.
But he would never talk badly about Kenneth Horne, or about the writers.’
And yet Ken kept very much to himself.
‘People say how sad it was that he had no relationships.
I think that was the way he wanted it.’
He went into hospital to have his piles sorted out, but nobody knew anything about it until the treatment was over — and then there were more Williams ‘bum’ stories.
Barry Took heard them all — and a few more besides.
Once more, he was telling the same jokes before a show went on the air or was finally taped.
It was as though he were acting as his own warm-up man.
His favourite was about the man who told a doctor: ‘Yes.
You see I was having a pee — and my dick came off in my hand.’
The doctor asked to see the fallen member.
‘I've got it in my tobacco pouch,’ said the patient, undoing his pouch and showing the contents to the doctor.
‘This isn't a penis,’ said the medical man.
It's two ounces of Ready-Rubbed Old Holborn shag.’
‘Oh,’ the patient replied, ‘I've smoked my cock.’
It was an old joke, but he told it beautifillly.
‘It wasn't the joke, it was the ritual — to get himself psyched up for the performance.’
Took discussed this with Marty Feldman — told him what jokes Ken would tell and in what order.
He was in form.
The same jokes in the same order.
‘He could mould the characters,’ said Barry Took.
‘Our trick was to put them in different situations.
Once we got into the swing of things, it took no time at all.’
Once, Ken invited Took and Feldman for lunch.
He wanted them to write a television show for him.
They came up with a mock chat show programme in which Williams was being interviewed by Clement Freud, as lugubrious-looking then as now.
The BBC commissioned it instantly.
But before he had seen the script, Ken changed his mind, he didn't want to do it.
Eventually the script was used for Marty Feldman's own show later on.
Another show they did included a sketch in which Ken is one of two men discussing a third, now deceased, called ‘Funny He Never Married’.
I he obvious inference after a time is that the man was homosexual and that the men talking were, too.
Again, Ken withdrew.
A series that was to have featured Ken was later done with Terry  Scott instead.
Ken was as unclear about what he wanted to do as to how he was going to fulfil sexual urges which he inwardly knew would never be satisfied.
He told Took about a consultation he had had with a doctor, who told him: ‘What you ought to do is to get yourself a retired petty officer to look after you.’
The implication was obvious.
‘He was far too fastidious,’ said Took.
‘It became a mania, that fastidiousness later on.’
He was constantly concerned about both his backside and his nasal passages.
It took a particular mood for Ken to talk about his sexual problems.
‘He needed to be in a docile mood after a show to be able to talk.
He told me about himself in a cab after a show.’
If he upset people, he would write to apologize.
Once, Bill Pertwee — again a staple member of the cast — remembered for me, Kenneth Horne made him write to the wife of an executive he thought Ken had insulted at a party given by the BBC for the Round The Horne cast.
Ken hadn't wanted to go, but Horne had insisted.
He told him: ‘These people provide our bread and butter and you've got to go.’
Ken's solution was to be outrageous.
He cornered the wife of the then head of BBC radio and told her: ‘There was this man.
Opened his raincoat to me, he did.
And there it was, all hanging out.
You could see all his pubics.’
The woman looked dumbfounded at this strange man in her presence and walked away.
Ken was warned by Horne never to do anything of the kind again.
Sometimes, the offence was seemingly less severe.
On a TV Wogan show, Ken would pay tribute to Marty Feldman for writing Round The Horne.
Barry Took was deeply upset.
Ken wrote asking to be forgiven for being ‘a foolish old man’.
It wasn't the only letter he wrote to the Took family.
Once, Barry's daughter asked him for an autograph.
‘Go away little girl,’ he said.
Later, when he discovered the identity of the child, then thirteen, he wrote to apologize.
Despite all that, Took remembers him as being ‘very generous of people's ability.
He respected talent.’
But Ken didn't always respect his own talent.
‘He didn't see the difference between Beyond Our Ken and Round The Horne or between Carry On and Just A Minute-in which he was quite brilliant.
But it was the sophisticated talent of his radio work that lingered.
It was just one aspect of the continuing legacy of Round The Horne.
‘At his best, he was as great as Peter Sellers, although he had a humility  that Sellers never aspired to,’ Took now says.
‘He wasn't uniquely gifted, he was just better than anyone else in my view.’
Years and years after the series finished, it is still being played on BBC World Service and abroad.
It is a favourite in Australia and in Los Angeles.
Perhaps more than anything else he did, it represents the real Kenneth Williams.