

12
You can visit a lot of pubs in an hour, if you put your mind to it.
And we had to.
By the time we left the Parrot there was only an hour left to closing time.
In the first two places, we didn't pause to drink.
Ludo and I just took one side each and approached every table with snapshots of Tamsin.
Had anybody seen her?
No.
The third pub was the Harp of Erin, where it is not advisable to interrupt a drinking man without a Jameson's or a Guinness in your hand.
Preferably both.
The sign outside may say Céad Míle Faíte, but inside you watch your step.
Then we blitzed through the Noah's Ark, the Windsor Castle, and the Mechanic's Arms.
I let Ludo do the Deptford Arms, since I am banned there on account of Vinnie Dirkin.
Then together we tried the Royal Albert and the Star and Garter.
Funny the way territories persist.
The Harp of Erin is Irish, the Windsor a dive.
The Deptford Arms is white, both the Albert and the Garter are black.
Tamsin, being half and half, could have been in any of them.
Pushing between the tables among drinkers I don't recognise brings home how long I've been away.
The territories are new to me.
In the white pubs are mainly young kids, with a few old men and just one or two middle-aged.
Black pubs are full and loud.
Ludo and I shuffle from pub to pub, table to table, like the Salvation Army rattling tins.
We show Tamsin's photo.
People shake their heads.
Some think we are plainclothes cops.
Some think we want Tamsin's dues.
Either way they shake their heads.
Back in the Harp, Irishmen stared eagerly at her photo.
‘Now there's a pretty one,’ they'd say.
‘Will you look at that?
I wish to my heart that I hat seen her, and that's the truth.’
In the Noah's Ark was a guy who recognised me, but he didn't know Tamsin.
In the Mechanic's they knew Ludo.
But in the Royal Albert we meet with hassle.
Six black heavies hem us in, want to know why we are snooping.
They don't like whities asking questions while they drink.
Then from behind the bar a hunk the size of Ludo and with a nose like a squashed pear tells them to cool it: we aren't police, he says.
He knows the face of every cop.
When we try the Star and Garter next door it is crammed tighter than a coal bucket, and it belts rap at a thousand watts.
We can't ask if they've seen Tamsin because nobody can hear.
I try yelling in a Rasta's earhole while waving her snap in front of his eyes.
He grins and shakes his head.
He thinks that I am selling her for the night.
Outside, it is closing time and we have drawn a blank.
Inside they are drinking up: two hundred and fifty black fellers nursing their last long drinks.
The music switches off.
The street stops quivering.
The night is no longer young.
Ludo and I turn our collars up against the chill April evening, and ram our hands in our coat pockets.
He looks disappointed.
He was sure that if we checked enough pubs we were bound to find her.
He thought that if we really tried, we would be rewarded.
He has faith.
Besides, he was with his older brother.
Ludo also has faith in me.
‘There's a bus stop along the road,’ he says sadly.
‘The 141.’
To catch a 141 at this time of night will take all the faith Ludo has.
But we start to walk.
Two black guys block our way.
There is a tall one with seven days of stubble, who wears a navy tracksuit and white polo.
There is his friend in a loose wool suit.
‘Why you looking for Tamsin Peters?’
‘D'you know where she is?’
‘I asked why you want to know.’
This being our first promising response, I explain briefly our reasons once again.
As I speak they watch my face.
‘You a cop, right?’
‘No, we live here.
My name's Carter.
He's my brother.’
They both nod.
Then the wool suit asks, ‘You're Floyd Carter, right?’
‘Yeah.
You know me?’
‘Your brother just got killed.’
‘That's something else I am interested in.’
He shrugs.
‘Can't help you, man, you know?’
The four of us stand watching each other in the dark street while the laughing crowd drifts past us from the pub's side door.
I decide that these two are worth another.
try.
‘Listen,’ I say.
‘I need a lead on this.
Can you give me a little help?
Please.’
‘We don't know who killed your brother.’
‘D'you know where we can find Tamsin?’
‘Sorry.’
I take a breath.
‘I told you, her mother's worried.
This is the first time the kid's been out so long.
Now, if Tamsin is all right, whatever she may be doing, she only has to phone her mother.
OK?’
The tall one with the stubble nods at me.
‘If she is not all right?’
‘I need to know.’
He nods again.
A dozen other blacks from the Star and Garter hang off from us, listening to what goes down.
From the wide open pub doors, heat and liquor-smells flow into the street.
The black beard smiles.
‘We know this girl, right?
But we don't know where she is.
I tell you something: maybe we get some of the brothers to keep an eye out.
You understand me?’
‘I'd appreciate it.’
‘Where you living, man?’
I hesitate, then give them Jamie's address.
‘Well, that's handy.
Not far at all.’
The onlookers part to let us through.
As we leave, I glance around to see if anyone shows more than idle curiosity.
Those two white guys might.
Thirty yards back along the street they sit in a murky Cavalier.
They might be talking to each other.
They might not.
As we walk away from the Broadway the pavements become empty.
Ludo whistles to himself.
I stay quiet.
When we reach the bus stop we read the timetable to see how late the 141 is supposed to run.
We can either hang around here hopefully in the cold or start walking.
If we walk, I can deliver Ludo to Suzie in twenty minutes.
If we wait, we could freeze on the pavement inside five.
We think about it.
The Cavalier has stopped twenty yards behind us on the road.
I tell Ludo not to look at it.
But he looks at it.
I say I'll have a word with them and he shouldn't follow me.
But he follows me.
The two men watch us come towards them.
Their car is parked on our side of the road with its engine running.
I watch the driver's hands.
Pavement or no pavement, if he kicks the car forward now I could die the way that Albie did.
Albie was on the pavement when he died.
They don't do anything.
When I reach the passenger window I knock on it.
The guy sitting inside is thin, looks tall, and has neat dark hair.
He wears a beige topcoat and gunge tie.
It tells me something.
After a moment, he winds the window down.
‘Yes?’
‘You have something to say to me?’
‘Why don't you come in, out of the cold?’
‘Why don't you step out on to the pavement?’
He continues to study me.
He has pale amber eyes.
‘Mind the door,’ he says mildly, and he opens it.
I step back.
Now he is outside the car I see that he is a little over six feet tall and carries no more spare flesh than does an iron poker.
He looks soft as a poker, too.
‘Your bus may not come for ages.
You should have brought your car.’
I am about to retort that I have no car, when it occurs to me that it might be something he wanted to find out.
This is not the kind of guy who makes polite conversation.
Every word has a purpose.
He speaks quietly, pleasantly, with an even delivery that would sound the same even if he was threatening your life.
He has Policeman written all through his body.
He would look a cop if he was soaking in his bath.
I ask why he is following me.
‘Following you?
Why would we do that?’
‘You tell me.’
His pale amber eyes register no expression.
The pause hangs in the cool night air.
‘I'm sorry,’ he says.
‘I didn't catch your name.’
‘What's yours?’
‘Kellard,’ he says.
‘Frank Kellard.’
‘Rank?’
He hesitates only one moment.
‘Detective Sergeant.’
‘A sergeant on motor patrol duty?
Bit of a comedown, isn't it?’
‘And what's your name, sir?’
So we go through the identification rigmarole and I don't hide anything.
There's no point.
‘Carter,’ says Kellard slowly.
‘I knew an Albert Carter, but he's dead.’
‘We're his brothers.
You knew that.’
‘Why should I know that, sir?’
‘D'you normally follow people for no reason?’
‘Why were you at the Star and Garter, sir?’
‘It's a pub.’
‘So it is.
Not your regular, is it?’
‘Why d'you ask?
What's special about it?’
‘I didn't say it was special, sir.
Did you stay there long?’
‘If you were watching, you'd have seen when we went in.’
‘Did you stay there long?’
I decide that I don't like answering questions in the street.
‘Don't let me keep you from your work,’ I say, and turn to go.
‘One moment, sir.
If you wouldn't mind.’
His face hardens.
‘We have reason to believe you may be carrying controlled drugs about your person.’
He delivers a few more sentences of standard cop-speak.
Then they search us.
The driver does it.
He turns off the engine, comes out of his car, walks round it on to the pavement, then tells us to turn and face the wall.
‘Put your hands flat against the brickwork.
You know what to do.
Ludo and I lean against the wall side by side as if we were doing press-ups standing up.
A cold breeze numbs the back of my neck.
While the driver runs his hands along our limbs looking for suspicious objects, Sergeant Kellard stands aside.
The driver, of course, doesn't find anything, so he begins to work his way through our pockets.
The only thing he finds of interest is that Ludo and I both carry photographs of the same girl.
‘And who might she be, sir?’
‘It isn't your business.’
‘Would you be looking for this girl, by any chance?’
We both stay stumm.
Kellard turns to Ludo.
‘Mr Carter, would you care to tell me what you were doing in that public house?’
Ludo shuffles his feet.
‘Did you have any particular business to conduct — or just the usual?’
When I try to say something, Kellard stops me.
‘Nearly finished, sir, if you don't mind.
Now, come on, Ludo, I've heard about you.
You're not the sort of man who likes to get into trouble, are you?’
‘I try not to,’ mumbles Ludo.
‘Not like your brothers, for example?’
‘That's enough,’ I snap.
‘We're off.
If you want any more, copper, you put us on dab.’
‘Have you done something wrong, then, sir?’
We start walking away.
‘Ludo,’ the sergeant calls.
Ludo stops.
‘I knew your brother.’
Ludo turns to face him.
‘And do you know what?
I always believed that though Albie was unquestionably a villain, you were not.
Was I wrong?’
Ludo mutters something.
‘Let's go, Ludo,’ I say, drawing away.
‘Innocent people,’ the sergeant says, ‘don't mind talking to police officers.
So why are you both running away?’
‘Here comes my bus,’ says Ludo.
He is right.
The long-lost 141 is grinding downwards through its gears as it approaches the bus stop.
‘That's my bus,’ Ludo says again.
‘We can drive you home, sir.
We know where you Carters live.’
‘I'm not going home,’ Ludo admits.
‘Really, sir?
Where are you going instead?’
‘You run for the bus,’ I tell Ludo.
‘And I'll talk to these guys.
You just catch that bus.’
Kellard looks me briefly in the eye.
‘Run along, then, Ludo,’ he says.
‘You don't want to miss it.’
I have not sat in the back of a British police car, marked or unmarked, for twelve years.
They haven't changed.
‘Cold out there, wasn't it?’ says Kellard.
‘But now that you're tucked up in here, none of your mates will notice that you're talking to us.
It's better that way, isn't it?’
I stare at the back of the driver's head.
‘You're a villain, like your brother,’ continues Kellard evenly.
I don't reply.
‘Now, Mr Carter, sir, the Star and Garter — not the obvious pub for a man like you, is it?’
‘I like the music.’
‘Very loud, I'll say that for it.
Were you meeting someone there?’
‘No.’
Kellard doesn't say anything.
He doesn't do anything.
He just settles himself into the cushion of the rear seat and waits for me to speak.
If he had a pipe, he might light it.
From the untroubled expression on his face, you'd think he was remembering the taste of its tobacco.
I realise that I have little I need to hide.
I had wanted to keep  Tamsin's name out of it, but it's too late now.
He has seen the photographs.
So I tell him about the search for her, and he sits and listens.
When I have finished, he says, ‘Bit of a long shot, wasn't it, trying the pubs?’
‘Where else could I look?’
‘Her friends.
The people she goes around with.’
‘I tried the only ones I knew.’
‘Did you try the police?’
‘Her mother did.’
‘Did she really?’
He seems surprised.
‘Your brother Ludo — you say he's staying with them?
Any chance there was something going on between them?’
‘Going on?’
‘You know-hanky panky.’
‘Tamsin and Ludo?
Do me a favour.’
‘How about her mother-anything there?’
He sees what I am thinking.
‘It's a bit unlikely, I suppose.
But most disappearances of teenage girls are due to domestic difficulties.
They seldom get abducted.
You say the police are looking into this already?’
‘I doubt it's top of the list.’
‘Someone will be dealing with it.
And I hope that when-that officer has to interview someone he gets more co-operation than I had from you.’
‘I'm sitting here in your car answering questions.’
‘But you're not co-operating.’
There is an edge to Kellard's voice ‘What d'you think police work is, Carter?
Petty crooks like you and Albie — you turn everyone against us.
You call us the filth, the enemy, bogies, fuzz.
You have a hundred poisonous names.
But when your Mrs Peters finds that her little girl has stayed out late, what does she do?
Calls the police.
And when our constable makes the rounds, interviewing her daughter's friends, what do they do?
Act clever, play dumb, be as unhelpful as they can.
Yet we're all part of the same community, Carter.
We're supposed to be on the same side.’
He breaks off.
I sneak a look at what I can see of the driver's face, to check how he likes his boss's sermon, but his face is wooden.
So I look at Kellard.
His face shows nothing either.
I say, ‘We treat you guys like that because of the way you act.
Hassling people.
Stopping guys in the street for no reason and then searching them.’
‘But you're a villain, Carter.’
‘I'm here for a funeral.
I have not lived in this country for ten long years.’
‘I've worked this manor for twenty-two.
You may not know me, Carter, but I remember you.
And I knew your brother.
He didn't move away.’
‘So you've got us labelled, have you?’
‘Like you've got me.’
We sit in silence for half a minute.
Then I ask, ‘Were you staking that pub or watching me?’
He hesitates.
‘We were watching the pub.
We had reason to believe…’
He changes tack.
‘When you and your brother came out from it, things began to fit.’
‘Made a mistake, didn't you?’
‘We may have done.
You had nothing on you, and a reasonable story.
But your brother Albie used to use that pub.’
‘The Garter?’
‘You could be picking up where he left off.
Am I right?’
‘Picking up what?’
‘Are you involved in it too?’
‘Involved in what?’
Kellard's pale amber eyes look tired.
‘Innocent as a new-born baby, aren't you, Carter?’
‘I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘They all say that.’
He sniffs.
‘You can go now, Carter.
We won't offer you a lift.’
‘I've missed my bus.’
‘The 141 doesn't go where you are going.
Unless ‘you're spending the night with Mrs-Peters too?’
‘I'm not.’
‘No.
But it's odd that your brother is.
What's the reason for that again?
I forget.’
‘I can go then, can I?’
‘You can go.
I'm sure you can walk home from here, a big boy like you.’
‘Yeah.
If the neighbours saw you and me together, Kellard, they might talk.
Think you were leading me astray.’
‘We're in plain clothes.
This is an unmarked car.’
‘Not around here, it isn't.’
I get out.
I take a glance at the outside of his Cavalier so I'll remember it.
Then I slide off in the direction of New Cross Station.
I hear them turn the engine on.
Then they pass me.
I continue along the dark pavement with my hands thrust deep inside my pockets.
Enough came out of that conversation to keep me brooding half the night.
The cops saw me where they thought I shouldn't be, so they got curious.
And once the cops get curious, there's no stopping them.
From now on, they could keep plodding  behind me, dogging at my heels, convinced I have a bone to throw to them.
They are not alone.
Huey Carmichael wants to offer me a job.
He employs a singer who slips the word to me, and she disappears.
I have a bunch of hoods lurking around some corner wanting ten thousand pounds that I have not got.
I have taken Ludo out of our house into hiding.
Well.
Whatever Albie got himself into seems to have caught the attention of a lot of people.
And whatever I try to tell them, they seem convinced I am a part of it.
Wherever I go in Deptford, I have people watching me.
Watching and waiting.
But no one will tell me what it is they're waiting for.
That's for me to find out.
13
Jamie's light is on.
I linger across the street, looking up at it.
It is perfectly reasonable he should still be up.
Jamie is not the type to tuck himself in bed early.
Back in our early twenties we could be up all night.
Remember I told you he had that job checking street-lamps?
Sometimes when I wasn't in training, he and I would spend the evening round the pubs, carry bottles home, listen to music and talk till four.
Then, to sober up, we'd spill out on to the streets and do the street-lamps until dawn.
But he's older now.
And I have stopped taking things for granted.
Someone thinks I should pay them ten thousand pounds.
Someone killed my brother with a car.
Behind the curtains a shadow moves.
It could have been Jamie.
Why should it be someone else?
He has his light on, and he crossed the room.
Nothing wrong with that.
But I wait.
I stand another long minute on the cold pavement opposite his terraced house, and I watch.
Nothing happens.
I cross the street.
Quietly, I slide his key into the lock and turn it.
I push the door slowly forwards so it hardly creaks.
I step inside.
The hall is dark.
No lights are on.
When I close the front door behind me, the hall is lit only by the streetlight, glowing faintly through frosted glass.
I creep toward the stairs.
When I was a kid I used to practise stalking up the stairs.
According to what it says in books, you have to tread carefully right  out on the edges of each step, where they are fixed against the wall.
They creak less there.
But it never worked for me.
Either I am too heavy or I just don't do it right.
As a kid I used to wonder how burglars could creep round your house at night without waking you.
No one could do it in our house-not even Albie.
I decided not to be a burglar.
Jamie's stairs creak every one in three.
Anyone straining their ears up there will hear me coming.
I reach the landing and stand outside the door, key poised, listening.
I hear someone move across the floor.
Then something dunks.
It could have been a glass put down upon a table.
It could have been Jamie, padding softly around his flat so as not to disturb the neighbours.
He could be waiting up for me.
So I slip his key into the lock, turn it, and step inside.
The hall is empty.
There are lights in the other rooms.
I close the door.
When I move into the living room, someone is waiting.
It isn't Jamie.
It is a girl.
14
She stands small and thin by the curtained window, wearing a black sweatshirt, black wool leggings and pointed black suede shoes.
Her hair is red, cut with a machete, and her face is china white.
We watch each other.
‘Jamie in?’
I ask.
She tilts her head.
‘You a friend of his, or what?’ 'A friend.
And you?’
She nods, a short movement of her head, once up, once down.
‘You usually call this late?’ 'I'm expected.’
She nods again.
‘Who are you, feller?’ 'I came in with a key.
Who are you?’ 'I look after things.’
The state of this flat, that is not a proud claim to make.
We hold eye-contact a few more seconds.
I decide that whoever this hobgoblin is, her business is with Jamie and not with me.
‘OK,’ I say.
‘Let's start again.
My name is Floyd Carter.
I'm a friend of his.
I'm sleeping here tonight in that bed.’
I point to the sofa.
‘And where do you sleep?’
‘You look like a cop to me.’
‘I don't care what I look like.’
For another two seconds she studies me.
Then she switches on a dumb schoolgirl smile that wouldn't fool a grandma and she says, ‘Hey, you dealing, man?
You got some bags?’
‘Bags?’
‘You know, man.
I can pay.’
‘You got the wrong man.’
She sighs.
‘You really a friend of Jamie's?’
‘I told you who I was,’ I say quietly.
‘Now it's your turn.’
She draws a breath.
‘Look,’ she says, ‘it's a bad scene here.
OK?
Jamie is sick.
Asked me to help.’
‘What kind of sick?’
She points a finger to the bedroom door.
She wears red nail varnish.
‘Take a look.’
I start towards it and then stop.
‘You first.’
A tired smile flickers across her face.
‘You think I have a boyfriend in there, armed with a razor?
Come on.’
She opens the door and strolls into Jamie's bedroom.
I follow.
His room looks as if the contents were emptied into it from ceiling height.
Sprawled across the unmade bed is Jamie, a blanket over him.
He lies on his side with his eyes shut and his mouth open.
The pale stringy redhead hovers over him, defiant but anxious.
We stand on opposite sides of the bed.
Jamie's head lies motionless between us on the dirty sheets.
When I rest my hand on his forehead the skin feels cold and damp.
He is hardly breathing.
I lift the blanket and peep underneath.
Jamie is half dressed, one knee bent up towards his stomach.
I let the blanket fall.
‘Has he had an overdose?’
‘How close a friend are you, feller?’
‘Will you try answering questions instead of asking them?’
‘OK.
D'you want your coffee black or white?’
The girl's name is Eva.
She sits me down in Jamie's heap of a living room while she clatters in the kitchenette.
She doesn't take long.
The kettle was already warm.
Eva ambles in with two mugs of steaming coffee.
‘Can't offer you alcohol,’ she says with a smile.
‘It's all used up.’
‘What exactly is wrong with Jamie?’
‘You know he uses heroin?’
Eva begins.
I blow on my coffee.
I am sitting on the edge of the shakedown bed I had hoped to sleep in.
Eva perches on the side of the mangey armchair.
‘Well, what is wrong with him,’ she tells me, ‘is that because he couldn't find heroin he used a substitute.
One he was not familiar with.’
I ask which one.
Eva goes back to the kitchenette, opens a cupboard, and returns holding a small white supermarket tub.
According to the label, it contains bicarbonate of soda.
Eva opens the lid and I glance inside.
Down in the bottom of the tub lies a pinch of pink powder.
‘Jamie thought he'd bought Diconal — dikes, you know?
Pink tablets.
He crushed them up But this powder turns out to be Soneryl.’
‘He used this instead of heroin?’
‘Sure.
He just didn't know that these tablets were barbies.
He thought they were dikes.
Maybe whoever sold them to him said that they were.
Listen, dikes are an opioid, right, from opium?
Like heroin.
They have a similar effect.
But Soneryl is a butobarbitone.
‘That's a big word.’
‘Don't patronise me, feller.’
‘Sorry.’
I pause to sip some coffee.
‘Where do you fit in this, Eva Are you supplying, or what?’
‘I'm just a friend.’
I can't blame her for not admitting anything: we have only just met.
‘I'd better take a look at my patient,’ she says.
I follow her back into Jamie's bedroom.
The way she stoops over Jamie's body, I could believe he is her patient.
First she opens one of his eyelids to check the pupil, then she puts her finger inside his mouth to make sure his tongue does not block the airway.
Then she times his pulse.
‘His skin is still clammy,’ she tells me.
‘But he's breathing better.
Not so shallow now.
The pulse is stronger too.’
‘You a doctor?’
She ignores the question — a habit of hers, as I've learned already.
‘He's pulling through, you know?
That's good.’
‘No chance of a coma?’
‘Not now.
There could have been.
Barbies are strong sedatives, right?
They come in tablets because you are meant to swallow them, not inject them in your vein.’
I wander around his untidy bedroom, wondering what I can do.
Eva says, ‘The trouble with barbies is you have to be precise.
If you inject the right amount you could feel like you had six glasses of your favourite tipple.
You'd be so merry you could cry.
But you get the dose wrong, slip in a pinch too much, and you're unconscious, just like that.’
She rearranges the way that Jamie lies on the bed, and she tidies the blanket over him.
‘He'll survive,’ she says.
‘Now comes the boring part.
I sit around here all night to make sure he doesn't have a relapse.
It's still a risk, you know?’
I nod.
‘He should be in the A and E,’ Eva says.
‘But that spells trouble, right?
Registration, a load of questions, forms to fill.
He'd be a marked man after that.’
She walks past me into the living room, and I follow like her student nurse.
Eva points to the sofabed.
‘You said you were sleeping the night.
There's your bed.
There won't be any more excitement from here on.’
‘Will you be in there with Jamie?’
She nods.
‘I'll take a turn.
You can't stay up all night.’
‘Yes I can.
No disrespect, feller, but if something happens, you gotta know what to do.’
‘I'll wake you.’
‘This is my job.’
She stands before me solid as a rivet.
I ask, ‘What is your job, Eva?’
She closes her eyes.
‘It's late, man.
We'll talk tomorrow, OK?
You get some sleep.’
‘I couldn't sleep now.’
She grins at me.
‘You can have some Soneryl, if you want.
That'll help you sleep.
I don't take the Soneryl, of course, so I don't sleep.
I can't drift off to dreamland on a shakedown settee while Eva paces round the flat, watching that Jamie does not slip into coma.
I take a walk.
Out in the damp night air I consider my position.
You have to admit that so far I have played Honest Joe.
I came back for my brother's funeral, and I wore my collar and tie.
They told me someone killed him, and I didn't say a word.
I have been done over in the street.
I have been searched by the police.
Throughout all of this have I reacted?
Apart from losing my cool with Vinnie Dirkin in the Deptford Arms — which I think you'll agree is excusable — I have not hit back.
I have been soft.
I have been quiet.
And you know what?
It doesn't work.
When I reach the end of Jamie's street I pause at the corner.
I turn to take a long look down.
There are no people.
On the empty  pavements, street-lamps burn glumly.
Cars sleep at the kerbsides.
A cat prowls.
One of the houses has a light on, because someone else can't sleep.
I turn up my collar, cross Lewisham Way, and head up the road towards Broadway.
Twenty yards along, someone says my name.
15
There are two of them.
Tucked into the shadows ahead of me along the pavement the two blacks had melted out of sight.
Now they stand swaying in front of me, easy and relaxed in the dark.
I listen for anyone else behind me, but hear nothing.
These two are alone.
‘We just coming to get you,’ one of them says.
‘You want something?’
‘We found her for you.’
It takes my tired brain another second to realise that these are the two I met outside the Star and Garter.
I relax.
A little.
‘You mean Tamsin Peters?’
‘Who else — you lost more than one?’
‘Where is she?’
The guy with the stubbly beard says, ‘She around Woolwich somewhere by now.
But we find her easy enough.’
‘No address?’
‘Who need an address, man?
She on the river.’
They tell me that Tamsin is out on a boat at an all-night party with two or three hundred other people and a stack of booze.
‘People buy a ticket, you know?
Like a club.
You coming, or what?’
I pause only a moment.
‘I'm coming.’
‘We drive you to the river.
Then this man got a boat.’
‘Where's your car?’
The way I look at it is this: I asked for help, and they gave it.
Some things you can't do on your own.
You have to join with people and work on it together.
So now that these two have offered to help me, I should not be suspicious.
Helping other people is not unnatural, is it?
Is it?
It is a question I ask myself twice more: once inside their car, once when we stop.
We are out in the Greenwich Marshes now, in those river wastelands behind the South Metropolitan Gasworks.
The breeze is wet.
Out here is dark and lonely, and as convenient a place as they could wish for to stick a knife in and leave me cold.
We walk along a footpath beside the river.
It is muddy.
Beside us, dark Thames water laps against the stonework.
Across the river on the northern side it looks no brighter than over here.
A few dim stmt-lamps in industrial estates.
No cars.
No pretty lights.
After about two hundred yards we stop.
Tethered to a bollard is an outboard wooden dinghy.
It rocks on the water.
‘Let's go hunt ourselves a party,’ says the one who owns the boat.
Chugging across the dark river with these two fellers in the outboard, I relax with them.
The bearded guy gives his name as Rufus, and the boat-owner is called Des.
They laugh at fetching Tamsin.
What the girl needs, they say, is a firm father.
Or a firm something.
Then they watch how I react.
Will I laugh with them or not?
What do I really want with the girl?
They offer to come on board the party boat to help me find Tamsin, but I say no: they might scare her.
‘You think you won't?’ asks Des.
They laugh again.
‘What's the joke — something I should know?’
‘No, man,’ says Des soothingly.
‘It's just she eighteen, you know what I mean?
She at a party with her friends.
What she going to think you've come to do?’
Des cuts the engine and we bob to a standstill.
The big pleasureboat looms over us, dark and noisy in the choppy water.
It is moored here in the middle of the Thames about a hundred yards inside the Barrier.
Little can be seen in the darkness.
Either side of the river the banks are dead: dockyard slums and wasteland, waiting for the pendulum to swing back.
Only the Barrier is new: a long row of big silver bathtubs upended in the water, waiting for that one freak high tide when it must stop London sinking beneath the rushing sea.
I suppose the party could have been louder.
It could have been a lot more brightly lit.
It could not have been more crowded.
Music throbs and surges like an ocean swell: synthesisers and unyielding rhythm.
Plastic bluebeat.
Synthetic soul.
Under strobe lights flickering like a tropical storm across the deck, the kids dance closepacked, sweating, eyes glazed against the lights.
Around the dancers swills a crowd of onlookers, some watching, some drifting into corners.
The air is damp, but it isn't raining.
Smells of hot-dogs taint the air.
I lean my back against the side rail and look for Tamsin.
Most of the kids seem about her age.
There are a few older fellers trying to keep up.
I don't envy them.
Just watching it all is tiring.
Kids are jumping, twitching, jerking their arms.
You don't need a dance mistress to learn these steps — you need a gym.
There may be a dozen of the older fellers — early thirties, dressed younger, staring hungrily at the girls.
They hang around the edges of the dance floor, drinking, jostled by gangs of teenagers milling around.
I ease away from the crowd along the railing, wondering where she will be.
Des and Rufus have agreed to stay down in the outboard and wait.
I have come on board alone.
Round the far side of the cabin-house, away from the dance deck, the lights are dimmer.
Most parties when I was young, this is where you'd want to bring your girl — quiet, secluded, romantic view across the water.
But I haven't got a girl, and I push my way among the couples along the narrow gangway like a wandering voyeur.
I feel my age.
I complete the circuit around the deck area.
Tamsin is not there.
She must be downstairs.
The doorway leading down is narrow and jammed with kids.
Some push their way in, some squeeze themselves out, some wait hoping that a tide may carry them through.
I am bigger than any of them, but I think the reason they let me through is because I am older: they assume I am crew.
Stairs lead down to the bar area.
It is as crowded as the dance deck, but more garishly lit.
Down here are more of the older fellers, seeking comfort at the bar.
I peer at the kids' faces, and feel like a teacher at an end-of-term disco.
No Tamsin.
I edge round to the side corridor and watch the queues for the His and Hers.
I get that teacher feeling again: the one where he walks unexpectedly into class, and after a sudden flurry the kids settle down and look innocent.
It's because I didn't join the queue.
It's because I leant against the wall at the end of the corridor and watched them.
Hallo, teacher.
At the front of the queue, but not part of it, is a lanky white guy about thirty years of age.
He nudges the boy standing next to him.
The boy strolls up.
‘You want something?’
‘I'm waiting.’
The boy looks into my face, wondering what to say next.
‘I smell a cop,’ he says.
‘Get your nose fixed.’
‘You're snooping, man.
Get out of here.’
‘Tell your friend I am standing here another five minutes.
He can deal or walk.
It's up to him.’
The boy goes back to deliver the message, and the lanky feller looks at me.
So do the kids in the queue.
One of them curses and walks away.
Another follows.
As the queue starts to break up, the lanky guy sends his runner back to me.
‘If you don't get outa here, mister, we're gonna take you apart.’
‘I look forward to it.’
But the lanky one will not come over.
A man carrying merchandise will not walk into trouble.
Whether I am police or not, he has too much to lose.
He and the boy disappear deeper inside the boat.
Half the kids stay to wait in line.
Suddenly, two girls fall laughing out of the Ladies into the narrow corridor.
I push myself off from the wall and walk across.
‘Was there a girl in there with you — half-caste — not black not white?’
Half-caste.
Forgive me, Tamsin.
The girls both look at me, and the giggler slows her giggling.
‘There is a black girl,’ she says.
‘How black?’
She laughs outright.
‘How black d'you want?’
Both of them find this funny.
I ask if they think the black girl will come out soon.
‘Why don't you go look?’
‘We'll hold your hand,’ splutters the giggler.
They both hold their sides and laugh till tears run down their cheeks.
Everyone begins to smile.
Tension begins to melt.
‘You lead the way,’ I tell them.
The two girls totter to the lavatory door, laughing at the funniest thing they've seen since Grandma sat on her chihuahua.
It's just as well they are going back inside the lavatory.
Until I come right inside, I am hidden from the wash basins.
So the two white girls standing in front of the mirrors are caught by surprise.
In the tiny room they both have their backs towards us.
They freeze in mid-action.
We watch their reflection and they watch ours.
Each girl holds a little handbag mirror in the palm of one hand, and a coiled cylinder of paper in the other.
One end of each paper cylinder hovers below their nostrils, the other hangs above the mirrors.
On each shiny mirror is a thin line of white powder.
Slowly, in unison, the two girls lower their hands.
Their reflections stare at me.
‘Don't laugh,’ the giggler warns them.
‘You'll blow your stuff away!’
My two start laughing again.
The two by the mirror do not.
As I take a step forward I say not to worry, I am not police.
They keep their backs to me.
My eyes are on the black girl sitting on the floor, slumped against the wall, her eyes closed.
I reach out to her.
She feels cold.
When I touch her cheek her head sways.
Her mouth opens and she groans.
It is a deep groan.
‘What are you girls snorting?’
I ask.
They giggle into the mirrors.
I snap, ‘Come on!’
One of the girls at the basin takes her finger out of her mouth, and simpers, ‘Volatil.
It's a kind of speed.’
She watches me in the mirror with big brown eyes.
Slowly she turns towards me and raises her little hand-mirror so it is level with her chin.
She places the end of her paper cylinder at the end of the line of powder.
She pokes the other end inside her nostril.
She keeps watching me.
Daring me to stop her.
I don't try.
I notice that her paper cylinder is a rolled-up five pound note.
The girl inhales steadily through her nose.
She takes several seconds to sniff up the whole of the line.
Then she lowers the paper cylinder and stands watching me again.
Nothing happens.
She does not freak out.
She doesn't stagger.
She simply looks satisfied, as if she had just bitten into the most delicious slab of chocolate she ever tasted.
She licks her lips.
‘You know what it tastes like?’ she asks dreamily.
‘What?’
‘Like ground-up brick dust, peed on by a cat.’
They burst out laughing.
But then the second girl wails that she has laughed away her whizz powder.
All four swarm like seagulls round the tiny sink.
The outside door opens.
A new girl asks, ‘You still got that man in there?’
I point to the black girl on the floor.
‘We need some help.
Get one of the stewards down here.’
Don't worry, the others say, they can deal with her.
‘Is she the black girl you were looking for?’
I shake my head.
‘Then you can leave now,’ the new girl says.
‘She needs a doctor.
Whatever it was that hit her, it wasn't speed.’
I remember Jamie.
‘Maybe barbiturates.’
‘We can deal with her.
Listen, you've had your peep inside the Ladies.
So now scram, mister, OK?’
I hesitate, but against half a dozen girls in a tiny lavatory there is no contest.
I slink out.
In the corridor the youngsters give a sarcastic cheer.
The barman sighs and nods his head.
‘No one hit her?’
‘She overdosed on some kind of speed.’
‘I'll get the medic.’
He slides towards his phone.
I pull away through the crowd to the narrow flight of stairs.
That girl will have a mother like Suzie.
She'll want someone to help her little girl.
Waiting for me on deck is the black guy with the beard, the one called Rufus.
‘We thought we lost you, man.
Thought you staying here the night.’
‘I ran into trouble.
‘You bringing her home
‘If I find her.’
‘Why, she only dancing.
She right here all the time.’
The man is right.
Out in the middle of the crowded dance floor, Tamsin Peters bounces with the rest.
She wears a white childlike party frock, edged with lace, stiffened with gauze, decorated with flounces and bows.
It should look ridiculous, and yet somehow, on her slim little body, that laughable, crushable, rub-your-face-in-it white dress makes Tamsin look frail, in need of protection, as sexy as a sprite.
She does not look tired.
Three o'clock in the morning, bopping through a weird limb-jerking dance routine, and she looks like a child at playschool.
Half these kids do.
They could be at a skipping game in the playground.
Other kids look exhausted.
Sweat pours off them, their faces crease, their dancing slips out of step.
They slow down.
I see a boy's shoulders sag as they lose their strength.
His arms flop loosely.
His feet wearily repeat the old pattern, dragging him round the dance floor in a last slow spin.
He is like an insect caught in fly spray, whirling crazily, while the poison spreads paralysis slowly through his veins.
As I push through the dancers towards Tamsin, the boy sinks helpless to the deck.
Two men from the side come in to drag him away.
I hope they're friends.
Now that I am closer to Tamsin I can see that she is more tired than I had thought.
She smiles but her face is strained, and she is not smiling at me.
She is smiling into space.
She looks as if she hasn't slept these two whole days.
I doubt she has.
When I position myself in front of her, she barely notices.
Her face bobs up and down.
I say, ‘Hallo, Tamsin, remember me?
It's Floyd Carter.’
She says, ‘I
‘I came to fetch you
‘Come on, dance, you Floyd.
You Floyd.’
‘we’ re going home.
Her face tilts to look up into the sky where there ought to be stars.
Exasperation gnaws at the edges of her gaze.
‘Just move, Floyd.
Feel it talking.’
She keeps her head up.
She keeps the smile on her lips.
She won't let me intrude on what she feels.
I accept that.
At this time of night, after two days away, I don't have to drag her immediately off the floor.
‘Dance with me, Floyd.’
I make a stab at it.
I am the sort of man who enjoys dancing, but these steps are outside my ken.
I don't know the rules.
‘That's Boogie you're doing, you Floyd.’
‘It's what I know.’
She giggles.
‘Then I'll have to take you in hand, won't I?’
Look at this kid: eighteen years old, three in the morning, hasn't slept for two nights.
Pooped on pep pills, has a mother worried sick, and she is going to take me in hand!
‘We're leaving now.’
‘You Floyd.’
She laughs to the inky sky.
‘Come on.’
‘One dance.
It hasn't finished.’
This is the kind of music that never does finish.
There-hasn't been a break since I came on board.
‘We are going home.’
Tamsin glowers up at me.
She has wide brown eyes.
Then she opens her pretty red lips and smiles with pretty white teeth.
In that crushable taffeta ballet dress she has no right to look so cute.
Not at this time of night.
‘I'm not coming, you know, Floyd.
We'll have fun here.’
‘We are leaving now.’
‘We are not.’
When a girl smiles this beautifully, she is about to throw a fit.
‘Please, Tamsin.’
I try it gently.
‘I'll scream.’
‘I thought you would.’
Swiftly I bend forward and grab her by the waist.
I lift her soft and easy as a male ballet dancer would lift Giselle.
I drop her across my shoulder and walk away.
She starts kicking.
I smile at the watching people and say she is always this way at bedtime.
Tamsin screams.
‘I'll smack your bottom.
In front of all these people.’
The kids laugh at us.
Because I am grinning, they think we're  fooling.
I continue making light of it.
Tamsin kicks and splutters.
She wriggles in my grasp.
When we reach the hand-rail where the ladder is, I pat her lace backside.
‘Hold tight now, Tamsin honey.
We're going down.’
Trudging along the footpath through the Greenwich Marshes, Tamsin slows with every step.
Inside the jacket that I lent her, she shivers.
Without it, I shiver too.
The four of us plod silently through the darkness: Rufus and Des camouflaged in the night, me in my shirt sleeves, Tamsin in that white taffeta frock beneath my jacket.
Her legs look thin and cold.
Her little frou-frou skirt bobbles like an ostrich's rump.
Halfway along the path, I lift her up a second time.
This time I do not fold her across my shoulder.
I carry her like a baby in my arms.
In the car she falls asleep.
Suzie comes into the room with a mug of hot chocolate.
She puts it in my hands.
‘Don't get up,’ she says.
I am sitting in an armchair in her tiny front room.
I have my shoes off.
Suzie has lit the fire, and has set one small light to glow in the corner of the room.
My eyes droop.
She sits for a moment on the arm of the chair, and rests her hand on my neck.
It feels cool.
‘You look exhausted,’ Suzie says.
‘Mm.’
‘You'd better sleep here.’
‘Mm.’
‘You can use my bed.
Both the other beds are occupied.’
Tamsin never really awoke.
I carried her in her crumpled dress up the short flight of stairs, and laid her on her bed.
When I left the room, Suzie went in and closed the door.
Ludo was hovering on the landing in his size forty-six pyjamas, looking for ways that he could help.
I said we should leave Tamsin and her mother to themselves.
He came downstairs with me.
When Suzie finally emerged she sent him back to bed.
Now she and I sit in her little front room like middle-aged parents.
The kids are tucked beneath their duvets, and I have a mug of chocolate.
Suzie leans down to brush her lips against my cheek.
‘Thanks again,’ she says.
Then she stands up and crosses to the other armchair.
She sits in it and drinks from a china cup.
‘What's that?’
I ask lazily.
‘Chocolate?’
‘Coffee.
I won't sleep now.’
Outside it is still dark.
The low light here in the room seems to draw the walls in closer.
I feel cosy in my armchair.
‘If you'd made me a cup of coffee,’ I say, ‘I could have walked home.’
‘Aren't my sheets clean enough for you?’
I grunt.
‘What are you trying to prove, Carter?
You're not going to walk off now into the rising dawn.
Even Clint Eastwood waits till sunset.’
‘I don't want to be a nuisance.’
She laughs.
‘You're so damned independent, aren't you?
You spend all night looking for my daughter.
You drag her off a boat in the middle of the river.
But you don't want to be a nuisance?
Get upstairs and go to bed.’
I grin at her.
‘I'll drink my chocolate first.
It'll give me the energy to get up there.’
‘And who was going to walk all the way home?
I thought you said your house wasn't safe?
That's why Ludo's here.’
‘No one will be at my place at this time of night.’
‘Nor will you.
What happened to this friend you were supposed to be sleeping with — she throw you out?’
‘I didn't say it was a she.’
‘Just checking, Carter.’
She smiles at me.
‘Do you want to go up to bed now?’
‘Is that an invitation?’
‘The state you're in?
You won't make it up the stairs.’
Her room is the colour of russet apples.
Her bed is soft and smells of her body.
I lie naked beneath her duvet, sliding my legs slowly across her undersheet, imagining they trace the patterns that she made.
Through the curtains a soft grey light is creeping.
Two cars drive past.
Occasionally I hear Suzie downstairs clink a piece of crockery.
She runs a tap.
A door closes.
I lie dozing, unable to fall asleep.
I wonder whether later she might slip back up the stairs and come to me.
I fall asleep.
16
Eva's black cat-suit looks as if she slept in it.
Her face is crumpled too.
‘Our man's all right, considering.’
Her red hair stands erect as bristles on a scrubbing brush.
She leads me through to Jamie's bedroom, which she has tidied.
Jamie is propped up in a neatly made bed on which lie two discarded magazines of which he might have read the covers.
He looks pale.
His black hair needs a wash.
He welcomes me with a weak grin and a feeble cough.
When I quip that he sounds as if he has just come round from anaesthetic, Eva says, ‘He has.’
‘I brought you these flowers.’
I don't need to tell him this because I am clutching them upright in my hand.
I hold the bunch stiff as a tennis racket waiting for a serve.
‘A man with flowers,’ laughs Eva.
‘Now that's something.’
‘Thanks, mate,’ Jamie says.
Eva whisks them away from me.
‘Don't often see a guy bring another man flowers.
It's kinda nice.’
She leaves the room.
Jamie grins his tired grin.
His teeth look green.
‘Flowers, eh?’
‘This place could use them.
How d'you feel?’
He shrugs.
‘I got the shakes, my throat's sore, my head's busting apart.
What else d'you wanna know?’
‘You were worse last night.’
He nods and looks away.
‘It's bloody freezing in here.
Eva's all right, isn't she?’
‘She saved your life.’
‘I'd have slept it off.’
He grins defiantly as Eva sweeps in through the door.
‘You'd have slept right through your funeral service,’ she says.
She has my flowers in a vase.
‘Barbies are a bad scene, Jimbo.’
‘Pinkies,’ mutters Jamie.
‘Pink Soneryl.
There's a barrowload on the streets right now.
Someone must have bust a factory.
The things are turning up all over.’
‘He said they were Diconal.’
‘You're a prat then, aren't you, Jimbo?
You believe everything you hear on the street?
What was the feller's name?’
‘I got a headache, Eva.’
‘Surprise, surprise.
You asking for a pill already?’
‘Yeah.’
‘It's kinda early.’
‘Just gimme the damn thing.’
Jamie opens his eyes and sticks his hand out.
He glares at Eva with something close to hatred.
She shrugs.
Out of her black handbag she brings a packet of Silk Cut cigarettes.
Inside the package are no cigarettes — only little parcels wrapped like toffees in bright coloured paper.
She unwraps a blue one, revealing a dozen capsules — orange and turquoise.
Four of these capsules Eva shakes out into her hand, and places on his chest of drawers.
She rewraps the rest, slips them back inside the cigarette packet, and drops the pack inside her handbag.
Then she hands a capsule to Jamie.
‘These have to last till tomorrow lunchtime.
If you score anything else, you stop taking them.
You hear me?’
‘Yeah, yeah.’
‘Only one now.
Drink lots of water.’
Jamie snaps open the capsule and sprinkles its contents into the palm of his hand.
He frowns at the little mound of coarse white powder, then claps his hand to his mouth, and swallows.
He grimaces.
He grabs the glass of water, and drinks.
He grimaces again.
He closes his eyes and opens them.
Then he licks the residue off his palm, and swallows the rest of the water.
‘How long will it take?’ he asks.
‘About twenty minutes.
Less, 'cos you broke the shell.’
‘Tastes bloody awful.’
‘That's why they wrap it in a shell, Jimbo.
You're supposed to swallow the capsule whole.’
‘No point waiting for the goo to melt.
My head hurts now.’
Jamie leans back against his grey pillows, his eyes closed and his face screwed up.
I ask Eva what she gave him.
‘Tuinal.
It's a barbiturate.
Not too strong.’
‘Wasn't that what he OD'd on?’
‘He's come through that now.’
‘Why give him another?’
Jamie snarls at us from the pillow.
‘Will you go talk about me somewhere else?
My head's thumping.’
‘Come on,’ Eva says, and we leave the room.
I follow her to the kitchenette.
‘We have to ease him down gently,’ Eva says.
‘If we made him do cold turkey straight after the barbs, he'd get the DTs, you know?
Could throw a fit.
Choke on his own vomit.
You wouldn't want that to happen to your friend.’
‘Is he on barbies too?’
‘No man.
He takes four pills today, two tomorrow, then he stops.
Understand me?
I hate barbs.’
‘But you carry them.’
‘I bought a few, just in case.
They will wind down the pain.
Only cost him a couple of quid.’
‘You sell these pills?’
‘What d'you think-I'm a charity? l-his is an emergency supply, you know?
Like the flying doctor.’
‘Private medicine.’
‘I ain't National Health.
Jimbo has to pay.’
She hands me a cup of coffee.
She did not make one for Jamie.
‘Caffeine is a drug, feller.
The man has enough in his body as it is.’
‘A cup of coffee won't hurt him.’
‘You ever drink expresso?
It gives you a lift, right?
Straight away.
You put caffeine behind some other drug you've got inside you, and it gives that drug a kick.
It's a catalyst.
Shoots the other drug round your body all the faster.’
I sip from the cup that she made for me.
I decide that coffee tastes good, whatever she says.
‘What you're doing, Eva, is handing me the old ‘everyone's a junkie’ line, right?
We're all hooked on something: coffee, tea, cigarettes, alcohol.’
‘Or the drugs your doctor prescribes.
You know-the ‘safe’ ones?
People get a script from the doctor, right?
They like what the drug does, they get repeats.
They are hooked.
Except they don't realise they are hooked.’
‘What drugs are you on, Eva?’
‘Everyone's a junkie, feller.
You just said so yourself.’
17
Is it in the back of the white Mercedes with Huey Carmichael.
Beneath his white linen suit he wears a turquoise woollen rollneck.
It clashes with his skin colour, making it more dunglike than usual.
I can't shake that comparison: the way his skin glistens, the soft-packed  oozing quality that he exudes.
When I breathe in beside him I expect to recoil from the smell.
But he smells of citrus.
Dixie the minder is in the front seat, driving.
He wears a pale grey striped suit, white shirt and silk floral tie.
His black hair lies in a hundred casual curls.
Some guys would spend an hour teasing each curl into place.
Not Dixie.
I bet he just runs a comb through.
These are a couple of expensive lookers, all right.
When we step out of the white Merc, people will wonder which one is boss.
But I am sure Carmichael knows who killed my brother.
I have only to get in close and I'll find out.
There are two possibilities: either Carmichael himself had Albie killed, or he knows who ordered it.
He sent for me to meet him.
He pressed me to join his gang.
Would he have done these things if he'd killed Albie?
I think Carmichael wants to test me.
If I pass his little test, he may talk.
I have no interest in Carmichael's enterprises, but keeping in seems to be the only way to find what happened.
And why.
Until I know why Albie died, I won't know whether Ludo and I are also in danger.
Until I know why Albie died, I can't wrap this business up.
So I have to pass Carmichael's test.
He holds the key.
He is the only lead I've got.
We have come north through the Blackwall Tunnel beneath the river, along East India Dock Road and into the Isle of Dogs.
On my right through the car window I see what money has done here.
Flattened out the docks with a giant's bulldozer.
Laid two square miles of building site.
Brought in cranes and preformed building blocks.
Built a plague of offices.
Look at them.
Brightly coloured, futuristic; made of metal, gaudy plastic and glass.
When they do use bricks here, they paint them brick red so you will know they are bricks, then they stick them on to the front outside walls as an ornamental display.
Every building seems designed to house desks and computers.
But I remember when people lived here.
We stop the car below the Blackwall Basin, in front of one of the few remaining terraces.
These friendly brown houses won't last much longer: three are boarded up, the others prepared for siege.
Two tall cranes loom above their roofs.
Across the fronts of the tired houses drapes a long banner: ‘LDC And The Council: The Blighters Of This Terrace’.
Carmichael glances up at the grubby banner, and he shrugs.
He  is not affected.
These are not his customers.
These are not who we've come to see.
‘Time to introduce yourself,’ he says.
I step from the car.
Dixie climbs out to join me, but Carmichael stays inside.
He nods at us through the car window, then snaps shut the central-locking, making himself secure.
The sound of the four doors clunking is like rifle-bolts slamming home.
Dixie says to follow him.
We stroll back along the main road, across the drawbridge, towards the first spot on the strip-a small expensive development where rich people live.
At the entrance, a smart blue and white placard announces its name: ‘Cotton's Landing — A New World’.
I guess it is.
These immaculate little new houses are like modern fortresses.
They remind me of tiny wooden houses on a Monopoly board.
Over-simplified.
Pretend.
Across the choppy water from them stands Billingsgate Fish Market, smartened up to tone with the neighbourhood.
Its bright-painted metal girders hang like an awning above its roof.
The market hall looks like a trade marquee.
But it isn't.
It is real.
Every day, the porters work there from five till noon.
Yuppies won't like living across from all that noise.
They won't appreciate the five a.m. early call.
‘You see him there?’ asks Dixie.
The guy is a businessman.
He is in his late twenties, very smart, with beautifully polished hair.
He is dressed like Dixie, because around here suit and tie is the uniform.
The three of us drift together, as if we met quite by chance near the water's edge.
The man keeps his eye on me.
Dixie tells him I'm OK.
The man asks my name.
‘John Burns,’ I say quickly.
‘I'll be your touch from now on.’
All this is said so nonchalantly, with so much gazing across the water and into the cloudy sky, that a spectator might be convinced we really did bump into each other in our lunch break.
We admire the view.
Flocks of pale grey gulls skim low above the brown water
‘You brought the stuff?’ the businessman asks Dixie.
I say that I am the one who brought it.
The man nods.
‘Does the deal stay the same?’ he asks.
‘Only the face has changed.’
The man licks his lips uncertainly.
He asks Dixie, ‘This is kosher, yes?’
‘Straight up,’ says Dixie.
‘I don't know.’
‘This is me standing here,’ Dixie says patiently.
‘You know me.
I introduce you to my friend —’
‘John Burns,’ I supply.
‘There, you see,’ babbles the businessman.
‘You don't even know his name.
What kind of friend is that?’
‘A business friend,’ says Dixie.
‘We don't need names.
I don't even know your name, do I?’
‘I told you my name.’
The guy glances at me again.
‘I don't know it's your real name,’ says Dixie.
I watch this played out before me and I keep my own mouth shut.
I just want to pass Carmichael's test.
Dixie says, ‘If you don't want the stuff, we leave.
We have a busy day.’
He means it.
The man can see he does.
He reaches out his hand to touch Dixie on the sleeve.
‘I'll take a sample,’ he says.
‘What's the matter — don't you trust me?’
I can sense when a scene is about to turn ugly, so I interrupt.
‘Are you dealing or not?
The minimum's an ounce.’
The neat young businessman stares at me.
He tries to peer right through my eyeballs to read what is written on my retina.
‘Same price as before?’
‘Same price, same quality.
Thousand an ounce.’
He tries to look as if he is considering the fairness of the price, but while he hesitates his head has started nodding.
‘OK.
I'll take it.’
‘Just one ounce?’
He nods again.
I pull the Daily Telegraph out of my coat pocket and as Dixie explained to me I point to an article on the front page.
The man leans forward, grasps the paper as if to take a closer look at it, and removes the small white packet of cocaine from behind my thumb.
Then I take back the paper.
While I flick through to the centre pages, the businessman puts his hands in his pockets and waits.
I give him back the open paper.
When he brings his hands out of his pockets, the newspaper masks the brown envelope that he is holding.
He pretends to read an article.
I watch the seagulls.
Then I take back my Daily Telegraph, fold it to hide his envelope, and return the paper to my pocket.
‘You see,’ I say.
‘Nothing has changed.’
He nods his head.
‘I'll see you again, then, will I?’
‘Don't be so nervous next time.
You sure one ounce is enough?’
Now that he has the cocaine in his pocket, his confidence has returned.
It's as if he'd just had a snort of it.
‘No problem,’ he says.
‘This'll keep them happy for a while.’
He steps back, one hand rammed in his trouser pocket, the other punching in the air.
‘We'll go for it, right?’
‘Right.’
‘Right,’ says Dixie.
The man blows.
Carmichael pushes the button to make his rear window glide down.
‘How did you get on?’
His eyes are on Dixie, standing behind me.
‘The man was nervous,’ I say.
‘Only bought one ounce.’
‘Little and often,’ says Carmichael.
‘Now for the gun.’
He says it real casual.
I glance out of the corner of my eye towards Dixie.
He says, ‘OK.’
Neither of them seems to find it in any way remarkable.
I make sure that my face shows nothing too.
Though this is the first time they have mentioned a gun.
‘Come on,’ says Dixie.
We leave Carmichael snug in the back of his Mercedes, reading Daltons Weekly.
We cut through Managers Street into Coldharbour — a narrow street, hard on the riverside, one of those enclosed lanes you find around docks.
Half of its houses are boarded up.
Caravans stand on muddy plots of waste land.
Round here used to be where working men lived.
See it now before it's pulled down.
Hidden on the bottom corner stands an old black and white pub, backing on to the river.
It is called The Gun.
I see.
We buy two pints of Taylor Walker and take them out on to the rear balcony.
There would be a fine view across the Thames, except that all there is to see opposite is the gasworks and Delta Wharf, a place that has not been prettified.
Heaps of sand lie scattered about it like soft pyramids.
Cranes tower above.
A dozen old boats dry out on its sloping river shore.
Around the other side of that point of land, round where the river bends back on itself and we cannot see, lie the Greenwich Marshes.
As the crow flies, they are half a mile away.
The Thames Barrier is half a mile further towards the sea.
But from over here on the island, those south-of-the-river places are in another world.
Inhabited by another people — my people.
I have been back in London long enough to know my place.
In The Gun, whatever lunchtime crush there was is thinning out.
Dixie and I are alone at the south end of the balcony, breathing in the strong Thames air.
‘That dealer seemed worried,’ I say.
Dixie sips at his beer.
‘You trade around here, you trust nobody.
And never trust a straight.
They don't trust each other.’
‘You think that schmoe is in the nearest lavatory, checking out his stuff?’
Dixie shrugs.
‘Would he know what to look for?
It's eighty per cent talc anyway.
Lemon fragrance.’
All cocaine is diluted for the street, usually one to five.
It can be cut with many things — baby powder, glucose, icing sugar, flour.
For snorting up your nose you want cocaine about twenty per cent.
At that bulk it is also easier to divide into little bags.
Sipping at his Taylor Walker's, Dixie nods at the view.
‘That bend in the old river ought to keep this pub nice and sheltered.
But it doesn't.
When the wind comes up, you smell the gasworks.’
He sips beer again.
‘D'you live around here, Dixie?’
‘Across the way.’
A man materialises beside us so unobtrusively I don't realise he is there until he speaks.
He is the next breadhead — about my age, with grizzled hair.
He is loose-limbed, smart casual in his dress.
He might work in advertising, if he is not too old.
‘Two, if you've got them,’ he requests.
Dixie introduces me.
‘John Burns?’ the man queries.
‘That's a famous name on the Isle of Dogs.
Union leader in the last century.’
‘My dad was a docker.’
‘I bet he wasn't called John Burns.’
The man grins.
‘Have a read of my newspaper.
Nineteen hundred in the envelope.’
He hands me a folded Guardian so we can work the indoor drop.
Dixie is proud of these handover tricks.
He invented them himself.
There are just the two.
The Indoor is where the man hands me his newspaper at the table and I unfold it sitting down.
The envelope which he has placed inside slips beneath the table to my lap.
I uncrease the paper and open it across the table as if to read.
The bottom half hangs down, allowing me to transfer the envelope to inside my coat.
I exchange this particular envelope for two one-ounce packets and hide them in my hand.
Then I refold the newspaper and return it.
In a perfect world, he would simply stuff the paper straight into his pocket.
He would know I had placed two packets there inside.
But this is not a perfect world.
Those two tiny packages represent nearly two thousand pounds.
They are so small it is quite possible a guy could drop one.
But if the breadhead was to walk away and tell me later that he found only one packet, what would I say?
You must  have dropped one.
So the procedure is that when I return his folded newspaper, I place the packages in his palm.
Then he knows that he has got them.
I know it too.
‘How about a bigger discount?’ he suggests.
‘I buy two ounces and I save only a hundred pounds.
That's not a lot.
What's the discount if I buy four?’
‘I'll talk to my supplier.’
‘Appreciate that.’
He stands up, and he smiles.
‘Because I'd prefer to continue buying from your company — Mr Burns.
But I have to keep an eye on prices.
Understand?’
‘Found another source?’
He shows me the clean pink palms of his hands, and he raises his bushy eyebrows.
‘London is a big city, isn't it?
See what you can do.’
Another smile, then he walks off along the balcony and back inside The Gun.
‘What d'you think?’
I ask.
‘I think he's testing out the new man.
But he's a regular.
Carmichael wouldn't want to lose him.’
I try probing about Carmichael.
‘How come Huey doesn't carry drugs, yet he wears a gun?’
Dixie smiles.
He says, ‘Everyone has a weakness.’
Sitting beside Carmichael in the back of his white Mercedes, I pretend that I am comfortable.
Dixie is driving.
Carmichael seems in an expansive mood and talks philosophy.
‘We run a business, you understand me?
Several products, several markets.
They overlap.
The market on the Island takes a single product — cocaine.
No heroin, speed or MCD.
People here don't want downers, they want kicks.
And they don't like speed because they think it is not a pleasant stuff to sniff.
Like ground-up razor blades, hey?
People don't like the smell.
Coke is cleaner, they say, more subtle, less demanding.
It costs more, but money doesn't worry people here.
They expect pleasure to cost money.
They know the Lady is an aristocrat.’
He is talking to me as if I could be a partner in his business: he is drawing me in.
So I try to sound interested.
I say, ‘Cocaine is sophisticated.’
‘Customers think so.
That's what matters.
That's why they pay six times as much for it.
These are the people who buy an exclusive wine when others buy Spanish red.
They still get drunk on it.
It's the same with drugs: coke is refined, speed is effective.
Speed keeps you up there longer — five hours, maybe more.
Take a snort of cocaine and you're down inside one.
‘But for these people in their high-pressure offices, that's an advantage.
Coke gives them a quick high and a safe return.
It gets them up through a business meeting and brings them back down to earth when the crisis is passed.
Christ, if they took speed they could be high six hours.
They'd go home, not get to sleep.
Come in to work next morning looking shit.
Cocaine is right for these people.
That's why they buy it.
‘Cocaine is a fashionable product, right?
Listen, d'you know anything about modern marketing?
Every product has what they call a life cycle, like a curve on a graph, rising up from development on to a plateau of maturity, until finally the product curve declines.
Most products have that life cycle.
Very few exceptions.
Occasionally a product may be reborn.
You know: it had declined, it looked dead, but really it was sleeping.
Cocaine was reborn that way.
‘What you also have to realise, Floyd, is that markets have a life cycle too.
They have to be sought out, developed, milked in their maturity, then kept fertile as long as we can.
Here on the Island we have a mature market.
It needs a particular strategy.
If you're going to work it, Floyd, you need to know what our strategy is.’
I nod wisely.
I don't say anything.
I don't want to stop his flow.
‘A new market initially needs three things: investment, faith and vision.
Then, to help it develop, we spread the word.
Get publicity.
Convert the trend-setters, hey?
When our market becomes mature, it needs firm management.
Finally, as our market dies — and all markets die eventually — we cut our costs and squeeze out our last profits.
Squeeze out every drop.
‘As I say, we need different strategies.
I need different people to control those strategies.
I need visionaries to see opportunities, I need trailblazers for when an area takes off, I need a firm hand when it matures.
‘You, Floyd, will be my firm hand.
Dixie can set trends.
Dixie will move north into the city to bring new markets on, while you run the Isle of Dogs.
The yuppies on this island have already been converted.
The networks are all laid down.
But the customers need to remain impressed.
They need to see a tough manager — someone like you, hey?— so they never think that the organisation has gone soft.
People must believe that you're such a tough shit you would snap them in half if they sneezed.
And you know what?
The yuppies will like it.
They like dealing with professionals.
They want to be part of where it's at.
You see why I want you in my team?’
We are emerging from the south end of the Blackwall Tunnel, back on our side of the river.
Dixie concentrates on his driving.
But  I can see his eyes in the little mirror.
He is grinning.
He has heard it all before, and he has his own opinion.
I turn to Carmichael.
‘Why me?
Tough guys are ten a penny.’
‘Sure they are.
But you're not from the ten-a-penny tray, Floyd.
I remember you from when I was a kid, back in the days when you don't remember me.’
Carmichael smiles at the extra ordinariness of that idea.
‘And I have heard people keeping your name alive all the years you've been away.
I know what people think of you.
You have an image.
You have brand identity.
You are the sort of manager that I need.’
18
If I want to break a lock on someone's front door, I can think of three ways.
One is I pick it — for which I need the right jiggler.
Two is I break a pane of glass, reach through and turn the knob.
The third is I use a Lloyd.
I have to try this method because I don't have a jiggler and a smashed glass is hard to hide.
My Lloyd comes from Deptford market.
It is a six by four-inch rectangle of white celluloid, for display on a fruit and veg stall.
It says ‘Don't squeeze me till I'm yours’.
I slide it through the crack at the edge of Vinne Dirkin's front door and work it round to the bolt of the Yale.
Celluloid is good for this.
It is flexible enough to bend around the channel in the woodwork, and hard enough to push back the steel Yale bolt.
You know how the bolt sits, with the curved edge towards you and the flat one faced away?
Your Lloyd pushes against that curved edge and eases it back into its slot.
The Lloyd is firm enough to hold the bolt there when you push open the door.
Then you're in.
I close his door quietly and creep gently along the hall.
I don't think he is home.
Ten minutes ago I knocked at the front door, waited in the street.
Nothing happened.
It never does.
Three times I've come round here, and three times no one answered.
Either no one lives here, or they don't want visitors.
Ten minutes ago I walked to the end of the street and waited.
No one showed.
So I came back and let myself in.
It is towards eleven o'clock at night.
He must come home sometime.
Someone lives here: it is almost furnished.
Downstairs I find a through room, a kitchen and a john.
The through room is where  Dirkin lolls around, watches TV and takes exercise at the dartboard.
The place looks like an empty public bar.
I creep upstairs.
Two bedrooms, a bathroom and unoccupied.
The bathroom is sparse and may occasionally get used.
Say once a week.
The bedrooms get used more often.
Both hold an unmade double bed.
Vinnie Dirkin does not look married.
I guess this place is shared by two men, both with a double bed.
Both optimistic.
I start opening their drawers.
The contents don't tell me much, except both men have a feeble taste in clothes.
There arc two guys living here, but I don't know whose clothes are whose.
I come downstairs.
The problem with two men living here is I don't know who will come home first.
It could be Vinnie or the other guy or both of them together.
I sit and think.
Suppose it is the other guy — what do I do?
Do I tell him I'm waiting for my friend Vinnie?
Suppose they come together?
If we're going to have a fight, I'd better get in first.
But I haven't come to crunch the guy, I want to hear him talk.
Can I persuade him to talk without crunching him?
I guess not.
I have been sitting in this armchair for about an hour.
It smells of damp clothes.
I remember we used to have an old Labrador cross that used to sleep under the kitchen table, till it finally gave up and died.
The dog smelt like this chair.
Albie used to like that dog.
He would drag it out for exercise every day.
Their favourite walk was down across the waste ground along Deptford Creek.
The dog always ended-up in the water.
Maybe that was why it died, rubbish leaching into that creek.
On fine days they would walk the length of the creek, down past where it trickled under Deptford Bridge into the sports field at Saint Johns.
They'd look at the waterworks and come back.
He was my big brother and now he's dead.
Somebody singled him out and smacked him with a car.
Why did they do that?
He wasn't carrying anything.
Those guys didn't stop the car, jump out and pick up a parcel.
Ludo said that they just left him there.
Like an accident.
Like it was meant to look an accident.
Hit and run.
The police would go through the motions, but they wouldn't make a meal of it.
It wasn't murder, the police would say, just an accident.
A misdemeanour has been committed but the offender has not been caught.
What had Albie done?
And why did they ignore Ludo?
I guess that part is not hard to answer.
They thought Ludo was too stupid to be a threat to them.
A big idiot is what they'd say.
And it wasn't Ludo they had a quarrel with.
He was just a bystander.
They could leave him gawping from the pavement while they accelerated away.
I sit here wondering how much Vinnie Dirkin knows about the murder.
He and his friends claim Albie owed them ten thousand pounds.
That doesn't give them a motive.
If a guy owes you that sort of money, you do not squash him with your car.
Not if you want to be paid.
So the question I am wondering is this: does the person Albie owed money to — the man behind Vinnie Dirkin — know who it was that killed him?
Because it seems that Albie got himself into trouble two times over — once for the money, once for something else.
The two things ought to be connected.
Maybe he got ten thousand from one place so he could pay off someone else.
But if he paid off that someone else, why would they kill him?
It does not make sense.
The only thing that is certain is that Albie died in debt.
Dirkin says that the debt has passed to me.
I'll feel a whole lot easier when I hear the name of Dirkin's boss.
One look at the fleapit that Dirkin dosses in convinces me that if Albie owed ten grand to anyone, it was not to him.
Dirkin would be lucky if he was owed a ten-pound note.
Someone opens the front door.
I am into the kitchen like a mouse slips in its hole.
I stand out of sight.
The man closes the front door, passes through the hall, and enters the room that I just left.
He sounds like he lives here.
He doesn't talk.
The man crosses the through room, comes into the kitchen and turns on the light.
It is Vinnie Dirkin.
We look at each other.
Dirkin glances quickly around the kitchen.
Maybe he is looking for a knife he can grab.
But there isn't one.
So I wait.
‘What d'ya want?’ he asks.
His eyes still dart around the room looking for a weapon.
Or for an exit.
‘How d'ya get in here?’
A time-wasting question while he thinks what to do.
There is nothing he can do.
I continue watching him, knowing that my silence is more effective than anything I could say.
I am like a spectre in his house, come to claim his soul.
All we need is a clock somewhere to chime the midnight hour.
‘You get outa here.
You hear me?’
I nod, and start towards him.
‘Get out!’
He is shouting now.
‘Sit down, Dirkin.’
He hesitates.
He wants to defy me, but he thinks better of it.
He might feel safer sitting down.
I walk round behind his chair, place my hands on his shoulders, and squeeze them gently.
They are thin and bony.
I don't touch his neck, just his shoulders.
He twists around.
I tell him to face front.
He does so.
I stand behind him and feel him shivering.
‘Start talking,’ I say.
‘What about?’
I stay silent.
‘What d'ya want me to say?’
Instead of replying, I massage the base of his neck.
‘I dunno nothing.
We just delivered a message.’
‘Whose message?’
‘I dunno —’
My hands close around his neck.
His own hands involuntarily rise to clasp at my fingers.
I tighten my grip.
‘Put your hands down, Dirkin.’
But of course he won't.
He tries to loosen my fingers.
‘Who was it from?’
We are struggling now.
Suddenly I let go.
I jerk my arms wide, break his grip.
‘Don't get up!’
I warn, but he does.
He dives from the chair and hurtles to the door.
We reach it together.
I slam a blow into his cheek, and it knocks his head against the wall.
With my other hand, I grab his throat.
‘Don't let me get angry, Vinnie.’
I keep my hand upon his throat and haul him stumbling to the centre of the room.
I stand facing him, one foot away, my fingers on his larynx.
‘You tell me who sent the message, or I hurt you till you do.
Who was it?’
He shakes his head.
I increase my grip.
Again his hands rise to pull at mine.
I raise my other fist nine inches from his face and he shrieks, crossing both arms before his face to ward off the blow.
He is terrified.
‘Tell me, you stupid bastard.’
I pull one of his arms away and I glare at him.
His eyes bulge.
His head nods.
When he tries to say something I relax my grip.
He backs off a pace from me and stands sobbing.
‘It ain't worth it, Vinnie.
Just tell me who it was.’
‘All right.
I'll tell you.’
His breath keeps catching in his throat.
He is still shivering.
‘His name is Richardson.’
Tod Richardson.
The man is Neanderthal.
His whole family is evil.
Theirs is the sort of dynasty that in some small corners of the world forms dictatorships of terror.
Tod has a brother in Gartree Maximum Security, and another drowned in the Thames.
He had been dropped there in a sack.
Time was when the Richardson clan could scare this area witless.
People pale at the name even now.
But the clan is broken — they belonged to a primitive dark age.
Brute strength and viciousness aren't the powers that they were.
Though you don't ignore them:
Discovering that the man who has been passing threats to me is the mighty Tod Richardson will not help me sleep peacefully in my bed.
Runners like Vinnie Dirkin I can handle.
Tod Richardson I cannot.
He is not the sort of man you wait to see what he will do to you.
Nor do you try to run away.
You listen carefully to what he wants.
And you do it.
‘Tod Richardson,’ I repeat, speaking flatly, nodding to Vinnie Dirkin as if I'd guessed it all the while.
Richardson.
He is the one to see.
I explain to Vinnie Dirkin that we are going round there.
He does not seem pleased.
He is not eager at all.
The Richardson's have a long, single-storey ranch of a place in Blackheath.
They would do.
It has a wrought-iron garden gate flanked by two brick pillars and an entry phone, the whole thing set out as for a country house.
Except their garden drive is only thirty yards long.
The gate is locked.
‘Gimme a leg-up over the wall.’
‘I ain't coming in there,’ says Vinnie.
‘Bastards will kill me.’
‘Clasp your fingers together.’
I put my toe into his cupped hands and hoist myself up on to the wall.
I sit astride it and reach down for him.
‘Not bloody likely,’ he declares, and he runs.
He just takes off.
This being the first moment that I have not had my hand on him, he seizes the opportunity.
He gambles that I will not leap down and pursue him along the pavement.
And he's right.
A big reason for bringing him was so he would not call Tod Richardson on the telephone and inform him I was coming.
It's too late to do that now.
I jump softly down into Richardson's front garden.
The house is in darkness, unlike the garden.
Halfway up the little tarmac driveway I trip a sensor.
Lights come on.
From beneath the low rain gutters two floodlights blaze down and blind my eyes.
Who  would have guessed it?
Tod Richardson protects himself from burglars.
No burglar would be that foolish.
I ring at the door.
It makes a two-note chime, like in the Avon commercial.
Dogs start screaming from around the back.
I step away from the front door into the floodlight and realise that the dogs aren't round the back.
They are close at hand.
They have loped around the side of the house to see who has come.
Two large Rottweilers, black and slavering.
Two yards away.
They growl and show their fangs.
Oh Grandma, what big teeth!
I glance at the front door: no one showing yet.
I glance at the wrought-iron gate: it's a long way off.
So I back away from them.
Whichever way you react to Rottweilers, you will lose.
If you run, they'll chase and catch you.
If you stare them down, they'll take the challenge.
Your best bet is to act unconcerned.
Which is easily said.
I try to drift away from them, keeping a hopeful eye on that front door.
Is no one in there?
The dogs start stalking.
In the flick of a tail, it all happens.
Their growls change to a panting whine.
I step back.
They hurtle forwards.
I leap sideways.
I dive to the only place I can go: shoulder first through Richardson's window.
Amid a shower of broken glass I crash sprawling on his carpet.
The dogs' heads appear above the windowsill, howling through the rift left in the glass.
An alarm bell rings.
One of the Rottweilers nudges at shards of glass in the bottom of the windowpane.
The other tenses its shoulders ready to spring.
I am on my feet.
I scuttle to the door.
As I whip through, the dogs land lightly on the carpet.
I slam the door on them.
Here in the hall the lights are on.
But no people come.
I peep through another door, open across the hall: no one.
I peep along the corridor: no one again.
This is a single-storey building.
There are no stairs, just a hundred yards of corridor.
I take the left.
The alarm stops ringing.
The air hums.
The only sound now is of the dogs, howling from the closed front room.
On the right-hand wall of the corridor ahead of me, a door opens.
A man in a dressing-gown steps out, carrying a shotgun.
He points it at me.
I show my palms and turn on my sweetest Bugs Bunny grin.
Then I hear another voice behind me.
I squint across my shoulder.
A second slab of beef has crawled out of bed and found his doorknob.
He wears pyjamas.
No dressing-gown.
But like his  friend he holds a shotgun.
For one mad moment I consider diving to the floor.
Would both the pillocks blast off along the corridor and shoot each other?
It happens in the movies.
But Bugs Bunny is not real life.
‘What the fuck are you doin'?’ asks the first one.
‘Good evening,’ I reply.
‘Is Tod Richardson in?’
The dressing-gown stomps up to me and jabs his shotgun against my chest.
‘How d'ya get in here?’
I reproduce that wide open smile.
‘Through the door, of course.’
The one behind asks what the dogs are yelling at, but I don't turn round.
I smile encouragingly at the hulk who has his twelvebore pressed against my breast.
‘You grinning at?’ he shouts at me.
‘I'll tear you apart.’
‘Can I see Tod Richardson?’
‘Too right you'll see him.’
He laughs at me.
‘What're those dogs goin' on about?’
‘Must've heard this fucker coming in,’ deduces the striped pyjamas.
‘How'd they get indoors?’
Dressing-gown jabs my chest again.
‘You let them fuckers in?’
‘The dogs?’
‘Of course the fuckin' dogs.
You leave the window open when you climbed in?’
‘I came in through the door.’
‘What fuckin' door?’
‘The front.’
‘The fuckin' front?’
He draws spittle for his next question, then makes eye-contact with the man behind, and says nothing more.
The dogs stop barking.
They have done their duty.
We can hear the two dogs whining behind the lounge door.
I ask for Richardson again.
‘Why d'yer wanna see him?’ says a new voice from behind.
I lift my head and I take a breath.
But I keep my eyes to the front.
I grin at Dressing-gown and I sing out nice and loud: ‘Hallo, Tod, how are you?
Been a long time, hasn't it, my friend?’
Then I turn round.
He gawps at me.
Like his buddies, he is fresh from bed.
He wears a black and red kimono over blue striped pyjamas.
He has lost half his hair, and that which is left could use a comb.
His face is puffy.
Either he has just woken up or he has been grinding his face into his pillow.
‘Who the fuck are you?’ he wants to know.
‘What d'you mean ‘Who am I’?
You send your boys round with  a message, tell them to be sure they deliver it, then you ask who I am?
I'm offended.’
‘You fucking bust in here, or what?’
‘You've aged some, Tod.
D'you know that?’
He dumps forward and squints at me.
‘You're Carter's brother.’
‘He was mine.’
‘Think you're fucking clever, do yer?’
‘I don't walk out in front of cars.’
‘What yer mean?’
‘Who wrote the contract on my brother Albie?’
Richardson stares at this blond stranger throwing him questions in his corridor.
He says, ‘Fuck knows,’ and waits for me to speak.
So I do.
‘Thought you and I should have a talk, Tod.’
‘Did yer?’
He studies me, his brain creaking behind his eyes.
Dressing-gown sniggers.
Richardson freezes him with a glare.
We all wait.
‘What about?’ he asks at last.
‘Money.’
He sniffs.
‘Fucking late, you know that?’
‘I wanted to be sure you were in.
Is there somewhere we can talk?’
From his front room, one of the Rottweilers moans.
Richardson frowns.
‘Those fucking dogs inside?’ he asks.
No one answers.
He turns away.
‘Bring him in the lounge.’
The bozo in pyjamas gets there first.
He opens the door for Richardson and the two dogs burst out.
They hurtle around the hallway and try to bark it down.
The noise is deafening.
Richardson shouts at them.
They shout at him back.
He demands that his minders sort them out.
Pyjamas seems afraid of them: he stays close to the wall.
But Dressing-gown knows his stuff.
He wades in among the pair of them, grabs their studded leather collars and starts yanking them away.
So he's the dog-handler.
He and the two Rottweilers slither down the corridor.
Peace returns.
I let Pyjamas and Richardson enter the lounge ahead of me.
Then we all stand gazing at it.
The room looks as if it was hit by a howitzer.
Curtains billow in the breeze.
Broken glass lies across the carpet like sprinkled water.
An armchair lies on its back.
Two small tables lie on their sides.
Cushions have been pulled from the settee and torn apart.
‘If they were mine,’ I say, ‘I'd have those dogs put down.’
He is not bright at the best of times.
And for Richardson, the best of times is not at one in the morning when he has suddenly awoken and jumped out of bed.
He listens to me explaining that the front door was unlocked.
That I pushed it and walked in.
That I peeped into his lounge.
That the two dogs saw me through the window, and jumped clean through the glass.
Because they thought I was an intruder.
It is too incredible a story to disbelieve.
He stands in the hall, shaking his head, as if he himself is a Rottweiler that crashed through some glass.
He shouts at everybody.
He shouts down the corridor at the dogs.
He shouts especially at Pyjamas, who skulks off for a broom.
Then Tod leads me to his den.
It is a small room, cosily lit, though the study walls are not lined with books.
The only bookcase he has is stacked with video tapes whose titles I do not read.
There is TV and audio and a heap of magazines.
‘So you wanna talk money?’
I nod.
‘Middle of the fucking night?’
I nod again.
‘Sit down,’ he says.
They are big comfortable armchairs — the sort you should sink into with a glass of whisky.
He doesn't offer.
He sticks a cigarette in his mouth and lights it.
I begin.
‘You sent your boys round, Tod.
Some debt Albie owed you.’
‘Ten thousand fucking quid.’
‘Albie's dead.’
‘I fucking know that.’
‘Then so is the debt.’
‘Like fuck.
You're his brother.’
‘Would you pay your brother's debts?’
His eyes blaze at me.
‘Leave my fucking brothers out of this.’
I shrug.
‘We both lost a brother.’
‘Too fucking right.
Now what?’
‘A man dies, his debts die with him.’
He considers this.
‘No.
Being dead don't kill your debts.’
‘Dig Albie's body up and explain it to him.’
Richardson breathes in.
He doesn't like arguments, not verbal ones.
‘I'm fucking telling you, right?’
‘Albie's debts are not my business.’
‘Fuck they're not your fucking business.
You inherited.’
‘You have a receipt?’
I could have asked had he got a book of Chinese poetry.
Receipts do not exist in Richardson's world.
‘Your brother owed me.
That's what counts.
I don't ask why I should believe him.
I don't suggest I might doubt his word.
‘Why did Albie borrow this ten grand?’
‘That's my business.’
He blows cigarette smoke irritably across the room.
I throw my hands up.
‘I have to know the reason.
You've got to tell me that.’
‘Why?’
‘You want me to pick up the tab.’
‘Fucking Albie didn't tell yer?’
‘No.’
‘Then it's private, innit?’
I lean back in his comfortable armchair and I sigh.
‘I can't help you, Tod, can I?
You're demanding money without a reason.
You wouldn't pay a man on that.’
‘It's not me that fucking owes it.’
Richardson leans forward to stub his cigarette out in a dirty ashtray.
‘Nor is it me.’
I stand up.
Richardson won't manage a longer chat.
‘You understand my position, Tod?
I can't pay for something I don't know about.
It's the principle.’
He stands too.
‘Same thing with me.
Fucking principle.
I want the money.’
‘You'll have to write it off.
Due to an unfortunate decease.
A bad debt.’
I look round his room.
‘You can afford it.’
‘What the fuck do you know?’
He takes a threatening step towards me.
‘You ain't fucking walking out on it, Carter.
I want my money or all the fucking stuff back.’
‘What stuff?’
He hesitates, his angry head two foot from mine.
‘The stuff.
You know.’
‘t know.’
‘The fucking heroin, that's what.’
Richardson would be into it.
If it pays and it's illegal, he wants in.
Remember, the Richardson's have run gangs in Deptford since the war.
That's what they do.
Thieving, extortion, gambling and sex.
All of which activities are declining around here.
Thieving needs to be done outside of Deptford — somewhere there are decent things to steal.
Gambling and sex take place up west, north of the river, where punters play.
Even extortion has gone off the boil.
There isn't the money left in Deptford to extort.
The Richardson's ran forays into other parts of London, muddying other people's water, but it was not appreciated.
It could be why his brother went swimming in a sack.
Here in Deptford, the Richardson's moved inevitably into drugs.
Amphetamines, at first.
Then heroin.
In the last few years, drugs are a business that has grown.
Plenty of customers, close at hand.
Plenty of profit.
Nowadays, it's the most profitable thing Tod does.
And it gives him power.
Selling drugs involves a lot of little dealers, a lot of networks, a lot of outlets.
Many people are involved.
And all those working folk rely on Richardson.
Heroin is a currency: control its supply and you control the economy.
‘Albie was a dealer,’ Tod tells me.
‘But you knew that.’
Everybody thinks I know things that I don't.
For Albie, apparently, dealing was just a sideline at first.
Richardson supplied, Albie sold it on.
Then Richardson suggested Albie work for them on salary-in much the same way, I think to myself, that I am supposedly working for Carmichael.
But I don't mention this to Richardson.
‘Your brother knew his fucking way around.’
‘Well, he lived here all his life.’
He also understood what was what.
If Richardson said he wanted to employ him, Albie would not resist.
Albie would know that this was not a matter he had a choice in.
He would also look to make things work his way.
From the way Richardson talks about him, Albie did it well.
Tod found him reliable.
As he says, Albie knew his way around.
And Albie was not a user.
Among the thick-headed rhinoceroses that Tod employs, Albie would shine like the evening star.
But Richardson's own light was fading.
The last ten years have not been kind to him.
His family had declined in power before I left.
Now, ten years later, he has one brother recently dead, the other two years' inside, the whole of his south London empire in decay.
It isn't even his empire any more.
He has competition.
‘That fucking wog Carmichael got my club.’
We stand facing each other, Tod and I. Occasionally from along the corridor comes the sound of banging, as his minders hammer temporary repairs to his front room window.
Richardson ignores the noise.
He slumps back into his chair like an embittered tramp, drawing deeply on his cigarettes, sinking into an early morning reverie.
He broods on how he lost the Parrot.
It was the year he lost Sam, the first of his brothers.
Sam Richardson is still early in his term at Gartree Maximum Security.
Tod says Sam should not have gone soft on a blab who squealed.
Going soft, in their terms, means Sam did not kill him.
He just nailed the feller's hands to a door.
‘Should have nailed his tongue,’ Tod says.
In what remained of the once-great Richardson clan, Sam was the closest that they had to brains.
Losing him meant that they lost a lot of revenue.
Business grew worse.
They had to raise money.
The Parrot was one of their more recent acquisitions, and when Huey made them an offer, they took it.
The best deal they could strike.
A mistake.
Owning the Parrot had given them status.
Selling it said they were no longer top of the heap.
They realised that people were sneering at them.
The Richardson's couldn't have that.
So Tod and his brother Frank scraped some money together: asked Carmichael to sell the Parrot back.
He wouldn't.
‘So we fucking did the bastard.’
But not in the usual Richardson way.
The old-style brothers would have called on Carmichael uninvited: smashed him, smashed his property, or smashed both.
That's how the Richardson's got the Parrot in the first place.
But this time, what Frank and Tod did was to fight Carmichael out in the territory.
Huey the Snake had a grip on the local drugs network, so the Richardson's moved in to break his hold.
Commercially.
Sam told them what to do from Gartree.
He told them to put their pushers out to undercut Huey's prices.
Carmichael cut back.
They cut again.
During all this, the Richardson's didn't abandon their old techniques.
Whenever they caught one of Huey's candymen, they gave him a kicking, broke some bones.
I ask if Albie was involved in that.
Not in the violence, Tod tells me.
Albie stuck to dealing.
Having lived in Deptford all his life, Albie knew every jabber, snorter, speed-freak and pot-head in sixteen square miles.
He ran round them all like an angel down from heaven, dropping packets of heroin at a bargain forty quid a gram.
Smackheads said prayers for Albie.
He could move stuff faster than ice-cream in July.
Tod pumped more stuffout to him and increased his float.
‘Where was it all coming from?’
I ask.
Tod looks up from his memories.
A cigarette dangles slackly in his mouth.
‘Plenty around,’ he says.
‘Always is.
Even at measly forty quid I made a fucking profit.’
‘So did it work?’
‘Did what work?’
‘Did you manage to stuff Carmichael?’
‘Oh yeah, he don't touch scag now.
Sticks to fucking cocaine, north of the fucking river.
He's out of things down here.’
‘Carmichael would not have been pleased.’
‘He's off my fucking manor.
That's what matters.’
‘He would not have liked Albie stealing away his trade.’
‘He fucking didn't.’
‘Someone killed Albie.’
‘Carmichael ain't got the fucking balls for that.’
‘No?’
‘Fucking wog.’
We sit in the deep armchairs, both brooding on private thoughts.
Richardson has admitted Albie owed him ten thousand pounds.
What he doesn't seem to know is that Albie had been talking to Carmichael.
But Albie was not working for Carmichael.
He was ‘difficult to deal with’, Carmichael said.
Now, since somebody killed Albie, the smart money has to be on Richardson or Carmichael.
But which?
Both men are prepared to talk to me: Carmichael went out of his way to, and now he even employs me.
Would he have killed my brother?
But equally, would Richardson kill one of his best employees — especially while he was holding ten grand's worth of his heroin?
It's hardly logical.
So who did kill Albie?
And more to the point, what am I going to do about it?
The house is silent.
The dogs have been kennelled, and the bodyguards have either gone back to bed or have fallen asleep in the hall.
Eventually I get up to leave.
When I stretch I hear my bones creak.
‘I still want that fucking money,’ Richard on says.
‘What money?’
‘Ten thousand fucking pounds.’
‘What did Albie owe it for?’
‘Fucking told yer.
Didn't you listen?
Albie carried a fucking float.
Ten fucking ounces.
That's ten thousand fucking quid.
Right?
And I'll tell yer something else: you're his fucking brother-you're gonna fucking pay it back.’
19
Ludo grins and bobs up and down as if he has just unwrapped a toy train set.
Morning sunlight catches in his red hair.
He has come out into the road wearing slippers.
The buttons of his shirt are done up wrong.
He paces around the car at the kerbside, and pokes at it.
‘A Fiesta,’ he exclaims.
‘They're really good.
They keep their value second-hand.’
‘It isn't mine.’
‘Nought to sixty in less man ten seconds.
that's a lot of car.
‘You want a ride in it?’
‘Wow, thanks, Floyd.
Where shall we go?’
‘I'm taking you home.’
‘Oh good, that's really great.
Two lots of really good news.’
‘Just one thing.’
‘What's that, Floyd?’
‘It's a small car.
Can you fit inside?’
‘Can I fit?’
He pauses.
Then his face clears.
‘Oh, you're joking, aren't you?
A Fiesta's not that small, Floyd.
Quite roomy, really.
I've seen the advertisements.’
‘We'll get your bag.’
In the house, he thanks Suzie and tells her that he is grateful.
Just because he is happy to go home doesn't mean Suzie should think —
‘Of course not.
We enjoyed having you.
You were our guest.’
‘That's right.’
He beams.
‘A guest.’
‘Careful with that coffee, Ludo.’
He had forgotten that he held it in his hand.
Now he gapes at the cup and saucer, tottering at the end of his extended arm.
It's as if he has just noticed an extra thumb.
Suzie smiles at me.
‘There is a man next door who's been looking for a job at least five years.
You come home and find one inside five days.’
‘I have a lucky face.’
‘Maybe, now the bruise has gone.
I hope this job is one you can talk about.’
‘I'll bring you any gossip from the canteen.’
'Do I know the company you'll be working for?’
‘Not this one.’
‘Oh-oh.
You're not going back in the family business, are you, Floyd?’
‘Meaning?’
‘The furtive kind of life that Albie led.’
‘Furtive?’
‘Lay off the one-word questions, will you?
Is this car legit?’
‘Taxed and insured.
Legally owned.’
‘And is the job legit?’
I begin a flip answer, and with anyone else I would complete it.
But I stop.
Suzie waits, her green eyes watching me.
I drink some coffee.
‘Albie never had a car,’ Ludo says.
‘He reckoned that in London you didn't need one,’ I say, glad of the change of subject.
‘By the time he was in his mid-twenties and he still hadn't learnt to drive, he was afraid he'd fail the test.
How's Tamsin?’
‘In bed,’ Suzie says.
‘I woke her about ten.
Cup of tea, lots of smiles, sympathetic hand on the shoulder.
I was nice to her all day yesterday.
Thought it might make her feel guilty and ashamed.
D'you think I should stop her singing in that club?’
‘She's eighteen.’
‘And I'm her mother.’
‘She's too old to be kept in, Suzie.
She's making her own life now.’
‘She's still my kid, and she needs my help.’
‘She needs the sort of help you're giving her — cups of tea, smiles, warm hand on the shoulder.’
‘Don't we all?
And she's had eighteen years of that.’
‘Which is why she came home.
Kids have to break out.
She didn't do this to hurt you.’
‘She could hurt herself.’
‘Even if you keep her in another day or two, you'll have to let her out sometime.
Singing is her career.’
Suzie glares at me.
‘Easy for you to talk, big boy.
You're not a parent.’
She looks away.
Then she picks up her cup and blows on it.
‘I'm sorry, Floyd.
I shouldn't have said that.’
‘Yes, you should.
I understand.’
There is a pause.
Ludo frowns and says, ‘Floyd nearly was a daddy once.
Weren't you, Floyd?’
‘Yeah, that's right.’
Now it is my turn to pick up my cup.
‘That wretched Albie,’ Suzie says.
After I have settled Ludo back into the house, after I have rebuttoned his shirt, after I have bought some groceries with him, after all of that, I drive back to the Isle of Dogs.
This time I work alone.
Dixie has shown me the circuit, today I start the routine.
Today is easy.
Three of yesterday's heads hadn't enough money so were not supplied.
Much of their business is run on credit.
Their newest users pay cash up front, and for a while they stick to that.
But then a user will get stuck: no money for the next fix.
It's just temporary, they will  plead: give me a little on account.
They'll be persuasive.
They'll be plaintive.
Anything, they'll say, that's what they'll do.
Which is how the breadhead likes it.
The usual thing is the breadhead smiles.
No problem, he says, here's what you do.
But the first time the breadhead says it, you expect the worst: he'll ask you to thieve, to sell your body, to start a life of crime.
But not at all.
Nothing like that.
Nothing difficult at all.
It could even help you.
What he will do is lend you one gram on account.
Let's say that's sixty quid you owe him.
But here's your out.
You take your gram and divide it into twenty-five standard hits.
Put each hit in a bag.
Sell each bag at the usual going rate — five pounds — and you make a hundred per cent profit.
You can repay that sixty pounds and still have change.
Except you're a user.
You won't sell it all.
But that's still no problem, the breadhead says.
Just keep half the gram he lent you for your own use, and sell the rest.
The money you earn from twelve bags will pay the whole of what you owe.
Simple, right?
Except you want some more.
You have none left.
You used half the hits yourself, earned sixty for the rest.
That sixty will pay off what you owe.
But to buy some more you need more cash.
Which you haven't got.
So you'd better borrow another gram and start again.
That one gram's credit will keep you locked in to your dealer.
And you've become part of the supply line now: selling on to finance your need.
You had better be careful.
If, from every gram, you are selling a dozen bags, that's a lot of trading.
The breadhead sells once while you sell twelve times.
And you sell to amateurs, to anybody.
You're the kind of dealer who gets caught.
Possession with intent to supply.
First offence.
Six months inside.
There is another problem.
Selling twelve bags to every gram means a lot of footwork.
Keeping only half of every gram is an act of will.
Footwork and willpower you could run out of Especially if you're using.
The time comes when you sell less than half, and use the rest.
You haven't made the sixty pounds you owe.
But you still have that craving.
So you start shouting at your breadhead: come on, supply me.
Come on, tell me, what the hell do I have to do?
He makes suggestions.
You're out of options.
You decide that maybe what he suggests wouldn't be so terrible.
Not unbearable.
Not if you only had to do it once.
So I wouldn't be a breadhead.
They're the ones who really turn  the screw.
Me, I am temporarily in the wholesale business.
Selling to little traders on the street.
Funny how the rich don't carry cash.
Two of the three I have to see today wear suits on their backs could buy ten grams apiece.
Yesterday all three told Dixie they were out of money, so he should return today.
Maybe it was because he had me with him.
They listened politely to his introduction, but they hesitated.
I could have been a set-up.
Maybe they said Not Today Thank You to see how Dixie reacted.
In business it never hurts to be cautious.
But today they'll have to make a choice because I'm on my own.
I have already made my choice: for a little longer I play along with Carmichael's test.
I have few qualms about it.
Cocaine is the kind of drug that does not have to do you harm — unless you're stupid with it.
You use it for a high, like a shot of whisky.
There's no reason you should be hooked.
But if you do get hooked — and if you are the kind of smart-suited city type who has driven ordinary folk off this island — well, that is your affair.
Don't expect me to wipe your tears.
Both the men in expensive suits meet me on big-suited territory.
The first man chooses a pub along Marsh Wall on the Millwall Dock, which in my day was the kind of place no one ever wore a suit.
Now the dock is unrecognisable.
Bullet-proof glass-windowed offices that scream of money.
Marble walls.
Revolving doors.
The pub is like a five-star hotel lounge: huge windows and modern chairs.
It is called the Spinnaker, for a nautical touch.
We exchange newspapers.
The second suit waits up Westferry Road in the City Pride.
It ought to be familiar.
There always was a pub here but it has been transformed.
In my day it even faced the other way.
Now it is green and white, has a trendy garden, and plays music big and loud.
‘You can skip the newspaper,’ the striped suit says.
He is the kind of man who grins and touches your arm.
‘No one reads a paper in the City Pride.’
I guess he's right.
They just shout at each other.
They pretend they're at a party in their lunch break.
They shake off the office, freak out, go back to work.
We do the business plain as Peter among the punters.
He hands me a white envelope.
A minute later I give him a smaller brown one back.
‘No one watches anyone in here,’ he says.
It seems to me that everyone watches everyone all the time.
That is, when they're  not watching themselves in the mirrors, making sure that they are still up to the mark.
I leave the car where I have parked it and walk to my last appointment.
The way those clouds are building in the sky, I ought to drive.
But I like fresh air.
I want to take in the scenery.
There is plenty to see, because they have certainly spent money here.
Just half a mile away is the crowded, run-down Poplar High Street.
Yet here am I on a road that instead of tarmac looks like a patio laid in bricks — every one hand-placed in herringbone pattern.
Looking at the road makes me notice that old white van.
The one crawling like a milk float.
Most vans around here scoot straight through.
This one doesn't.
It creeps along.
Behind me.
I turn to stare at it, and the driver stares at me.
So does the man beside him.
Then the van rolls forward, gathers speed, and drifts on by.
I watch it go.
Probably it was nothing.
Doing a job like this, you get imaginative.
I continue walking down to the north section of West India Dock, to the Sugar Warehouses.
It must be because they are historic that they have been left standing.
Huge six-storey hulks, brick built nearly two hundred years ago.
Always gloomy, and now empty.
The windows are guarded with iron bars, those on the lower floors viciously spiked to keep out thieves.
In the shadow of these oppressive brick carcasses I sense the power of the original sugar barons.
As their men humped coarse sacks down this narrow lane, the gritty sugar inside would wear through the hessian and rub raw against their shoulders.
Men dripped blood from flayed skin here.
That's why they named the place Blood Alley.
My man waits at the end of it.
He wears a smart grey fisherman's jumper and blue slacks.
‘I'm your touch now,’ I remind him.
‘What d'you need?’
‘Three ounces.’
Despite the jumper he looks cold.
‘I only brought two.
That's your usual supply.’
‘OK.
Two.’
‘That'll be two grand.’
‘Don't I get a discount?’
‘Not on two ounces.
You want the other one tomorrow?’
‘I suppose so.’
He shivers.
‘You using?’
‘I caught a cold.
Here's your money.’
He pulls a wad of notes from his trouser pocket and starts to count them.
‘You should have had this money ready and wrapped up.’
‘Thought I might buy three.’
He doesn't look at me.
‘When we deal again,’ I tell him, ‘you have the money prebagged, in thousands.
Anyone could be watching this.’
‘Sorry.
I thought you'd want to count it.’
‘I'll count it afterwards.
Like you will check the weight.’
‘I'm still new to this, Mr Burns.’
‘The rules are simple: no one cheats.
Don't ever try.’
He finishes counting.
I take the two thousand and he stuffs the rest of his money back in his trouser pocket.
He handles the wad carelessly, like a handkerchief.
The money seems valueless to him.
‘Same time tomorrow?’
I ask.
‘If you like.
I can wait a few days.’
‘It's up to you.
I'm coming anyway.’
‘OK.
The other ounce.’
We separate.
I let him leave first.
For a man running a fastmoving high-ticket business, he sure has lost his interest in life.
I walk back along Blood Alley.
I shiver.
Whenever a wind blows anywhere, it always nips through here.
In the shadows it is cold.
It is about to rain.
When I come out into the light at the end, I look for the white van.
I didn't like the slow speed it moved at.
I didn't like the way that shortly after I noticed it, I did business with a nervous man.
I didn't like the casual way he counted his money.
But there's no sign of the van.
Because the Isle of Dogs is really a peninsula, it gets congested where it joins the land.
The worst spots are Poplar High Street and East India Dock Road.
To avoid them, I cut back round Marsh Wall and up the eastern side.
I am in the Fiesta again, cruising comfortably with the window open, driving home.
Halfway along Preston's Road, I see the white van in my mirror.
Who is it?
No one knows I'm here except Huey Carmichael.
I suppose this could be part of Huey's test.
This is the first time I have worked without Dixie.
Maybe Carmichael sent some guys to keep an eye on me.
Then I see the police car.
I couldn't miss it.
It is parked ahead of me.
Two large blue uniforms have leapt into the road and are signalling me down.
I pull over.
As one of the two cops comes to lean into my window, the white van overtakes and glides on by.
‘Excuse me, sir.
Just a routine check.’
Like hell it is.
‘Are you the owner of this vehicle, sir?’
‘The driver, not the owner.
It's insured for any driver.’
‘You have the papers?’
I reach for the glove compartment.
‘Just one moment, sir, if you wouldn't mind.
It's very busy out on this road, sir.
Would you mind pulling into there?’
He indicates the quieter road to our left, leading back along the top of the Enterprise Zone.
‘Is this necessary?’
‘If you wouldn't mind, sir.
A purely random check.’
Naturally.
The police just happened to be checking cars today.
They just happened to pick on mine.
They just happened to move me off into this quieter road.
I stand in a light mist of rain.
Any minute now that dark cloud will open: a short, sharp shower.
Here in the quiet side street everything remains polite and formal.
Nothing is as it should not be.
As long as you ignore Detective Sergeant Kellard, sitting quietly in the back seat of the police car.
As long as you ignore the police dog, sniffing around mine.
Sniff, sniff.
Sniffer of the Yard.
I think I should stroll across and talk to Kellard.
Too late copper, I should say.
The stuff's delivered.
20
April sun improves the look of Malpas Road.
It washes over the low roofs of the two-storey terraces and dries the dirt on the pavements.
Scraps of paper, previously sodden, begin to stir in the gutters.
Cats bask on windowsills, children chase each other screaming round a corner, a man comes out of his house to mend his car.
Jamie walks me down to Brockley Cross, inhaling fresh air through his nostrils like Islanders sniff cocaine.
He greets an old woman as she peers through the window of Patel's newsagent shop.
She smiles back.
At Brockley Cross five roads meet.
There is a garage, the Howarth Timber Yard and a bunch of shops.
Apart from Jim's Cafe and the fish and chip shop (with Chinese takeaway), there is also a locksmith, the Baytree Florist and the double-fronted Birds Dress Agency (‘Good As New', established 1830).
It makes me think.
Mr  Bird (not Mrs — not in 1830) started that second-hand clothing business more than a century and a half ago.
Through all the Bird generations it passed down to today.
Each generation chose a new youngster to be trained in the family business: buying and selling old clothes.
I wonder if those kids welcomed the opportunity, or whether they yearned to escape the smell of unwashed cloth.
‘I could murder a bacon sarnie,’ Jamie says.
‘Good.’
It is why we're out.
Jamie was moping around his flat, existing on cups of tea and stale bread toast.
I hauled him off to Jim's Cafe.
‘Afternoon, Ida.
Breakfast please.’
‘Just got up?’
‘Don't start,’ says Jamie.
‘What you got?’
‘It's on the board, same as always.’
On Ida's board are all the fried permutations: egg and bacon; egg and sausage; egg, sausage and bacon; hot pies; hot pies with chips and beans; sausage with egg, chips, bacon, beans, tomato.
Bread and butter.
Coffee or tea.
Jim's is an unprepossessing corner cafe-shabby furniture, steamy windows, pine tongue-and-groove walls.
But whatever food you order will be cooked for you fresh.
Jamie and I sit down at a side table to wait.
‘My own fault,’ he says suddenly, flicking back that lock of troublesome black hair.
He grins at me.
‘What was?’
‘The barbies.
Could have sworn they was dikes.
I should've tested them.’
‘You a pharmacist?’
‘Nah, but I shouldn't have injected them straight off, should I?
Always sample a new supply.
Don't inject nothing till you have snorted, smoked or sucked it.
Find how strong it is.’
‘Is that what Eva said?’
He grins.
‘She's OK, ain't she?’
‘Is she your girl?’
‘Eva?
Do me a favour!’
‘You could do worse.’
‘Heart of gold, body of iron.’
‘Does she always act that tough?’
Jamie shrugs, picks up a fork, and polishes it on his sleeve.
‘She used to be married.’
‘Tough girls do get married.’
‘Usually to wimps.
Reckon I'd be too much of a handful for her.’
'You think so?’
‘One tea,’ says Ida, appearing beside us at the table, ‘with eggs, tomatoes, chips and beans.’
‘That's mine,’ says Jamie.
‘And a bacon, egg and chips,’ she says.
‘Two slices and a tea.’
‘That's mine.’
When she has shuffled back behind her counter I nod at Jamie's pile of food.
‘I'm surprised you can face that, sliding around your plate.’
‘I'm convalescent, ain't I ?
Invalids like sloppy food.’
He tucks into it, breaking the egg yolk on to the beans, mashing the fried tomato into his chips.
‘Anyway, I'm vegetarian now.
Meat's bad for you, innit?’
I eat my bacon, hot and salty.
Two men in shirt sleeves stroll in through *e open door.
They fetch cups from behind the counter, and pour some tea.
They say hallo to Ida, sit down, and light their cigarettes.
Ida continues reading her Daily Mirror.
When the men have finished their tea, they will leave money on the counter.
She need not ask for it.
At her cafe table the two men can sit as they would at home at their kitchen tables.
More comfortably perhaps: here in the cafe there is no noisy kid, no smelly old dog, no scolding harassed wife.
Jim's Cafe is the cosiest place they know.
‘Was Albie supplying you?’
I ask.
Jamie looks up from his plate, the fork suspended.
A blob of red tomato falls off.
‘You know about that?’
‘I know he was dealing.
Had a lot of customers.’
Jamie sniffs.
‘He was beautiful, your brother.
Always a fair price.
Always there.
Man was a marvel.’
‘So I hear.
And after he died, you ran short?’
‘Yeah.’
Jamie twirls his fork in his egg and beans.
The yolk blends into the red sauce, leaving flakes of egg white among the beans.
‘After he got topped, we had a drought.
Nowadays there's very little heroin about.
And it's gone back to the old prices.
I had to switch to Diconal.’
‘Just to make do?’
‘Nah, I prefer them, tell the truth.
Dikes are clean…
They usually are.
You get smack cut with all kinds of shit.
A geezer down in Catford once mixed smack with flour.
Imagine cranking up with that!
Flour and water's an adhesive, innit?
You don't want glue in your veins, do ya?
Bloody Catford — they're out of the ark down there.’
Jamie scoops the last of his beans, and forks them into his mouth.
‘What the hell?
Better than watching telly all day long.’
‘Is it?’
He pushes back his chair.
‘You haven't lived here these last ten years.
Bloody government destroyed the life of ordinary people.
You know why?
Because politicians hate the working class.
They were either born rich, or they're getting their own back on the kids who beat them up at school.’
He stands up.
‘I think I'll blow a quid on the Eight Ball Deluxe.’
The Deluxe is one of two machines standing just inside the door.
Apart from when the weather is really cold, that door will always be open.
All through the day, local people will walk through, treating the cafe as an extension to their home.
They won't always buy things.
They may sit down at a table to chat to a friend.
They may share a joke with Ida.
They may take a toasted sandwich to eat outside.
The radio plays continually, and some folk come in just to check the hourly news.
While I finish my mug of tea, Jamie loses his pound on the old fashioned pinball table.
He considers the Tik Tak Cash fruit machine, but shrugs his shoulders.
‘No fun in that.’
When we walk back to his flat, the sun has melted the last greyness from the sky.
Jamie punches my arm.
‘You don't like the way I live, do ya, Floyd?’
‘It's your life.’
‘Think I'm a hopeless junkie, don't ya?
Well, I'm not.
I got the whole thing under control.
What you saw last night was an accident, wasn't it?
I've been doing smack on and off for about five years.
What harm has it done?
The only problem I get is finding my supply.
When it's available I get by on half a gram a day.
That's all.
I've been doing that amount all the time.
It's no different than some blokes smoking fags.’
‘You think they're not addicted?’
‘We're all addicted.
So what?
Drinking, smoking, shooting drugs.
It's what gets us through the day.’
He stops beside the kerb and looks into my face as if he has seen something there he never saw before.
‘Why shouldn't we have a little pleasure, some support?
Tell me that.
Life don't mean doing only what is good for you, Floyd.
What sort of life is that?
I know the life this country has marked out for me.
They want to bend me to their will like a factory machine, so they can scrap me when I wear out.
Well, I tell you, if I'm a dumb machine I want my fuel.
Regular.
Gimme a gram a day and I'll stay numb.’
21
Tamsin puts her feet up on the table and asks why not.
Come to that, she wants to know, who will stop her?
She wears a large loose-knit white sweater and a pair of tight black pants.
Her hair is everywhere.
‘I'll stop you,’ Suzie says calmly.
‘I've taken a day off and I've changed my shift.’
Tamsin glares at her.
‘I'd have thought it was a bit late for playing mother.’
‘That's who I am.’
‘Well, shit,’ Tamsin says, her eyes defiant.
There is a silence.
She turns to me.
‘You're staying too, I suppose?
Did you bring an overnight bag?’
‘No.’
‘You could sleep in the spare room like your brother did.’
She stares at her mother.
‘I suppose you'll be happier with Floyd.’
Suzie's green eyes blaze.
‘What is that supposed to mean?’
‘Huh!’
‘Well?’
‘as if you didn't know.’
‘Tell me,’ Suzie says.
I look at the carpet.
I hear the pause.
Tamsin says, ‘This is bloody ridiculous, you know?
You can't keep me locked in.’
‘Try me.’
Suzie looks stern.
Tamsin pouts.
They flash their eyes at each other so much you'd think they were rehearsing a scene from Carmen.
‘It was only a party,’ Tamsin says.
‘On an ordinary boat.’
‘What time did it start?’
I ask.
She frowns at me.
‘What does that matter?’
Then she stops.
‘You were away two nights,’ Suzie points out.
‘No party runs from one night to the next.’
‘This is a damned inquisition.
I don't remember where I was.’
‘Exactly,’ says Suzie.
‘What pills had you taken — or was it cocaine?’
Tamsin crashes to her feet, glaring at me.
‘Did you tell her that?
You told those lies?’
Suzie cuts in.
‘He didn't need to.
And they weren't lies.
When I put you to bed you were high as a kite.’
‘I'd been drinking.
Sorry!’
‘That as well?
Listen honey, d'you think I lead a sheltered life?
You think I never see junkies in the wards?
Every weekend I see kids stoned.’
‘I'm going upstairs.’
‘I was wrong about one thing.’
Tamsin pauses at the door to hear what Suzie has to say.
‘You weren't on cocaine.
It was some kind of hallucinogen, wasn't it?
What's in fashion now — one of those with letters instead of a name: MDA, PCP, LSD?’
Tamsin tosses her head.
‘XTC.’
‘Ecstasy.’
Tamsin dithers in the doorway.
‘It's quite harmless, you know.’
‘It won't kill you, I suppose.’
‘I'm going to bed.’
This time Tamsin does leave.
Suzie stays in her chair, the prim ward sister.
I stand up, walk across, and squeeze her shoulder.
I ought to do something more.
But I don't.
Slowly Suzie lets the air out from her lungs.
She lets her head droop against my arm.
Her hand reaches up to stroke my wrist.
We stay like this, facing in opposite directions at her armchair.
I don't say anything.
Her fingers tickle the hairs on the back of my hand.
I hear her breathing.
I sit down on the edge of the chair and put my arm around her.
She feels warm against my side.
After a while she says, ‘What was I to do when Tom died — stop Tamsin singing?
When he was alive, if she had to go somewhere that might not be safe, Tom went with her.
Well I let her carry on singing.
Sometimes I went with her, sometimes I couldn't.
I had to work.
Perhaps I was wrong.
Perhaps I should have told her to concentrate on school.’
‘You did the right thing.’
‘That's not how it looks.’
I stroke her blonde hair.
‘She should have told you where she was, that's all.
She probably didn't realise how long the party would go on.’
‘This is not the first time.’
Sitting on the arm of her chair, I clasp Suzie's head into my body.
It is quiet in the room.
We rock softly to and fro.
Tamsin bursts in through the door.
She wears pyjamas.
‘Oops, I'm sorry!’ she says archly.
‘I should have knocked, I suppose.’
Suzie and I ease away from each other.
We don't stand up.
‘I came for a drink — if that's all right.’
Tamsin runs into the  kitchen.
We hear her open the fridge.
I am not sure whether I should stand up or stay close to Suzie.
In the end, I stand up and move away.
Suzie touches my fingers as I leave her.
I think she would have preferred me to stay.
Tamsin appears in the kitchen doorway, clutching a tall glass of blackcurrant cordial.
Her pyjamas are made of thin translucent cotton.
She wears nothing underneath.
I look away.
‘I'm sorry about the party,’ Tamsin says.
Suzie smiles.
Relief drains the tension from her face.
‘I know.’
‘I should have phoned, shouldn't 1?’
‘I was worried.’
‘Are we friends?’
Suzie holds out her hands.
Tamsin slips across to her, kneels down, and kisses Suzie on the cheek.
As she kisses her mother, she looks at me.
Then she sits on the floor at Suzie's feet.
‘Am I allowed to ask about the pills?’
Suzie asks softly.
‘No,’ says Tamsin.
She strokes Suzie's leg.
‘They're not addictive or anything.
They're not real drugs.’
‘They're a start.’
‘Let's not talk about it.’
‘OK, honey.’
We all three stay silent with our thoughts.
I move back to my original armchair and sit down.
Tamsin smiles at me from Suzie's side.
‘Am 1 sitting in your place?’ she asks.
‘No,’ I answer easily.
‘Your mother was a bit upset.’
Tamsin cocks an eyebrow.
A shadow flits across Suzie's face.
It is as if I had made a small betrayal.
‘Your mother’ instead of‘Suzie’.
‘A bit upset’ to put her down.
We all three sit in the warm front room, watching each other.
22
Ludo wants to make me a cup of hot chocolate.
He says he knows what to do.
I feel that he has been waiting for me to get home so he can demonstrate this talent.
He wears an apron.
‘It's the best thing to drink before you go to bed,’ he says.
‘It helps you sleep.
Albie taught me how to make it.’
‘Go ahead.’
Ludo strikes a match, turns on the gas, and holds the flame to it.
He shakes out the match and places the spent end on the work surface beside the cooker.
Then he slides his saucepan of milk over the flame.
‘The important thing is not to let the milk boil over.
But I won't, I promise.
I'll be careful, Floyd.’
‘How much milk have we got?’
‘I bought two extra pints.
And some bread.’
He beams at me.
‘Well done, Ludo.’
‘You don't put the chocolate in till the milk has boiled.
That's what Albie says.
Said.
You sprinkle chocolate on top of the milk when it's in the cups.
Three teaspoonfuls.
Three for each cup.
Someone phoned earlier.’
‘Who?’
‘He didn't say.
He said he would phone again.
And he did.’
‘He phoned twice?’
‘He wants to speak to you, I think.’
‘Did he leave a name?’
‘Do you want your chocolate in a cup or in a mug?
A mug is bigger.’
‘A mug.
Did he leave a name?’
‘Who?’
Ludo leans over the saucepan and stirs the milk with a wooden spoon.
‘The man on the phone.’
‘Oh.
No.
He said he'd phone back.’
‘He said that both times?’
‘Yes.
Well, I think he did.’
‘If you keep stirring that milk it'll never boil.’
Just after ten o'clock, the phone rings again.
Ludo jumps up.
‘Can I answer it, Floyd?
I did before.’
I shrug.
‘Hallo?
Yes?
This is the Carter household speaking.
Ya.
Yes.
Floyd, it's for you.’
He hands me the receiver.
‘That you this time, Carter?
This is Vinnie Dirkin.’
‘And?’
‘I gotta speak to ya.’
‘You heard from Richardson?’
‘I ain't gonna speak on the phone.
Can you come out?’
‘Why can't you speak?’
‘I need to see ya.’
‘You know where I live.’
‘I can't come there.
You know the Windsor Castle?’
‘Of course I know it.’
‘Half-past ten then.
It's about your brother.’
‘Which one?’
The phone goes dead.
We drive there in the Fiesta, arriving fifteen minutes late.
I park a hundred yards away up the High Street.
It might be wise to arrive on foot.
Keep the car in reserve.
Of all the pubs Dirkin could choose, he would pick the Windsor.
It is a small dive on the corner of Deptford High Street and Finch Street — the quiet part by the station, near where the railway bridge cuts at an angle across the street.
Opposite the station is the Mechanic's Arms.
The Windsor Castle is on the station side.
Sitting at the bar are several wizened old men and two blousy women hiding their age.
They glance up dully when we come in.
Then they look back into their glasses.
They look as if they just heard bad news.
Dirkin sits alone at a side table.
He stands up.
‘Thought you'd never get here.’
‘You know what thought did.
You buying the drinks?’
‘I know,’ says Ludo.
‘You know what?’
‘I know what thought did.’
He chuckles.
‘Thought its bum was out the window so went outside to have a look.’
Ludo laughs again.
He is proud of his joke.
Dirkin frowns.
‘We ain't got time for a drink,’ he says.
‘I thought you wanted to talk?’
‘Not here.
Somewhere private.’
‘This is private, Vinnie.
People in here have been brain-dead for fifteen years.’
‘We gotta go somewhere.’
‘Sit down, Vinnie.’
He hesitates, but he sits.
‘Where d'you want us to go?’
Dirkin licks his lips.
‘Not far.
Honest.’
Ludo nudges me.
‘He's playing a trick on us, I think.’
‘You see?
Even Ludo isn't fooled.’
Dirkin squirms in his chair.
‘People are looking at us, Carter.
You standing up like that.’
‘What's the game, Vinnie?’
‘Man wants to talk to ya.
In private.
About your brother.’
‘I'm his brother,’ Ludo says.
‘Nah, the other one.
Him that's dead.’
‘Where do we meet this man of yours?’
‘There's this flat in Childers Street.
It ain't far.
Come on.’
Vinnie stands up.
‘The last time we met,’ Ludo points out, ‘you tried to beat us up.’
I glance at him.
‘You remember this guy, then?’
‘Of course I do,’ says Ludo.
‘I'm not that thick.
People think I don't remember nothing.
Well, I don't forget a face.
We aren't going with him, are we?’
‘We can look after ourselves.’
I catch Ludo's eye, and he stops arguing.
Vinnie wipes his nose on his sleeve.
‘They don't wanna talk to both of you.’
‘They?
How many are there?’
Vinnie looks flustered.
He glances down at the table, as if the answer might be written on a beer mat.
‘Come on, Ludo,’ I say.
‘I wouldn't believe him, whatever he said.’
Which is fair enough, but why do we go with him?
Why do we let him lead us out of the Windsor, along that murky little lane they renamed Finch Street?
Because I need to hear what Dirkin's man has to say.
Maybe it is also because Finch Street is such a dirty little alley it is not the place anyone would try to lure me down.
It's too obvious.
On a dark April night like this one, at around the time the pubs are turning out, most people wouldn't creep down Finch Street for a pee.
If it looks that dangerous it may be safe.
Wouldn't you say?
The three of us pick our way across the pot-holes past a couple of lock-up garages into the patch of waste ground that leads to the blocks of flats.
Above us to our left runs the railway viaduct, big and brooding in the night.
Between it and us are two fenced yards, piled high with rotting rubbish.
Puddles gleam dully in the dark.
Vinnie walks ahead of us.
He makes a point of it.
So if there is going to be trouble it will come from the rear.
And it does.
Ludo and I hear it at the same moment.
We both turn.
Two men have come up behind us.
Each carries three feet of chain.
The men's faces look familiar: they were with Dirkin on the night that we first met.
I am disappointed.
I had hoped for better than this.
When I glance back towards Dirkin, I see a fourth man coming to join him.
He completes the original Dirkin quartet, back for a second performance.
He too carries a heavy chain.
Dirkin has a knife.
Ludo and I wait between the two pairs, watching them.
They watch us.
Dirkin's three friends are shivering.
I suspect they have  been out here on this cold patch of mud waiting since half past ten.
I'm glad we were late.
Dirkin speaks first.
‘I owe you one, Carter.’
I ignore him.
The other three have not come for his sake.
They have come to reinforce the message they left last time.
Though first they would like to use those chains.
‘You ready, Carter?’ one of them asks.
He is the talkative one: leader of the pack.
Beside him stands the black guy.
‘Brought the money, have you?’ the spieler asks.
He hopes I haven't.
He wants to use that chain.
‘It's all settled.’
‘What you on about?’
‘I talked to Richardson last night.’
‘Oh yeah?’
But his eyes flick toward Dirkin.
‘Ask Richardson,’ I suggest.
‘He ain't here, is he?’
‘Ask Dirkin.
He took me there.’
Vinnie decides it is time he spoke.
He sounds nervous.
Maybe it is just the cold air that makes him sound that way.
‘Yeah, well, Carter went round there, right enough.
But the boss still wants his money.
He phoned me today.’
Thank you, Tod Richardson.
A man true to his word.
The last thing he said to me last night: I still want that money.
The first thing he did this morning: phoned Dirkin.
‘Have you got it, Carter?’
‘What if I haven't?’
‘You get a beating, chum.’
Dark as it is on this patch of forgotten ground, I can see the eagerness in his eyes.
I say, ‘Show it, Ludo.’
And the dickheads stand there and watch us.
They wait in the mud, stuck to their spots, chains in their hands, looking like cowboys challenging us to draw.
Except that if they were cowboys they would be dead.
Because Ludo and I drop our hands to where our holsters would be, and brush our jackets aside.
But instead of guns, we pull out baseball bats.
We had hung them down the inside of our trousers when we got out of the car.
Now Vinnie will realise why we did not sit down in the pub.
If I was Wyatt Earp I'd have shot the four of them.
Ludo and I hold our clubs; they hold three chains and a knife.
They can start it.
The black goes first.
Inching towards me, he suddenly lashes out.
Like a whip in slow motion, the length of heavy chain curls towards my face.
I ignore it.
The man is too far away.
The end of his chain flicks harmlessly in the air.
He moves closer to try again.
I grip the baseball bat with a hand at either end as I would grip the handlebars of a bike.
I thrust it towards the lashing chain.
The chain hits it.
The links curl round the club and tighten.
I pull, and the black guy stumble forward.
Then I release my left hand and swing the club hard at his face.
The drag of the chain slows it but can't stop my club thumping against the side of hi-head.
He reels backwards.
The other three close e in on us.
The spieler swings his chain.
Ludo catches it on his club, as I caught the first one.
But when the third chain coma clattering round my club, it smashes against my fingers like an axe.
My fingers feel chopped off at the knuckles.
My scream of agony is like a yell of rage.
I heave on the baseball bat, and wrench the chain from the big guy's hand.
Then I leap at him, flailing the club.
Vicious tongues of chain flick through the air.
One catches his raised forearm.
Another curls past his guard and cuts his cheek.
He falls.
The black guy starts clambering to his feet while Vinnie dithers with his knife.
He is not anxious to get involved.
Nor is the spieler now.
Ludo has just swung his club in a Boris Becker smash at the spieler's head, and I think I heard a bone break.
He was a lucky victim: he got his arm up just in time.
If Ludo's club had reached the spieler's head it would have caved his skull in.
But all that happens to him is that he topples into the mud with his arm broken and his face bruised from where the broken arm was smashed against it.
Yeah, he was lucky all right.
I go for Dirkin before he decides to use that knife.
He makes a run for it.
As he slithers across the mud I gain on him.
My mangled left hand feels as if it is being eaten by a rat, but I have so much adrenaline surging through my body I could sail.
I catch Dirkin at the side of the waste ground.
He turns on me, holding the knife out in front of him like a torch.
I swing my club at it, and he jerks his hand back.
As my arm swings past, he stabs feebly at it.
We are now so close that his knife tangles in the material of my jacket and he loses it.
I thump him in the ribs with my club.
He totters backwards, and staggers through the dark opening into the patch of yard below the railway viaduct.
He can go nowhere from there.
The yard is piled high with rotting rubbish: boxes, bales of newspaper, two mattresses.
A smell of decomposing food.
Dirkin tries to climb the slippery mound of garbage, and I grab the waistband of his trousers.
I heave him back.
My left hand is now 50 hot with pain that it is useless.
I used my right to haul  him to me, and I use it again to punch his head.
I do it three times.
As he starts to crumple at my feet, I grab the front of his shirt and drag him upright.
When I let go he slumps immediately into the pile of refuse.
I pick him up again.
I am shouting into his face but he isn't listening.
So I push him backwards into the mountain of stinking rubbish, and he sinks down on it.
He becomes a part of it.
I hear someone behind me.
My feet are tangled in old cans and cardboard boxes.
I twist around.
Looming before me in the darkness is my brother Ludo, a baseball bat dangling from his hand.
‘Are you all right?’ he asks.
I say I am.
Out across the mud patch it looks empty.
I ask if they ran off.
Ludo nods.
‘Two of them ran away.’
‘Two?’
He stands nodding, looking serious.
I come out of the rubbish yard, pick up Vinnie's knife, and follow Ludo across the ground.
I sense what I will see before I see it.
The body of the third man lies chest down in the mud, head to one side.
The man's cheek is cut from where I caught him with the chain.
It isn't bleeding any more.
He has stopped bleeding for ever.
‘He wanted to hurt me with a knife,’ explains Ludo.
The knife lies a few feet away in a puddle.
I decide to leave it there.
‘He hasn't moved, Floyd.’
Ludo looks frightened.
‘Is he dead, do you think?’
‘You couldn't help it.’
‘I'll get into awful trouble, won't I ?’
‘We won't tell anyone.’
Ludo still looks worried.
He says that the spieler saw him hit the guy.
‘He won't tell anyone, either.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Certain.
You saw him run off?’
‘With the black man.
I could have caught them.
They weren't running fast.
Should I have stopped them, Floyd?’
‘No.’
‘They saw what happened.
I bet they'll tell on me.’
The pain in my left hand is such that I can hardly bear to look at it.
My fingers have stiffened.
Along the knuckles, my flesh gapes red and open.
Ludo notices it for the first time, and asks what he can do for me.
‘Don't worry about it.
I got off lightly.’
Ludo frowns.
‘I bet they'll tell the police.’
‘Tell them that they waited in the dark for us?’
‘It's a good job you made us bring those clubs, Floyd.
Did you know they would all be here?’
‘We just came prepared.’
Ludo and I stand a few more moments looking at the body in the mud There is no doubt that he is dead.
No one sleeps in that position.
‘Should we bury him?’ ash Ludo.
I shake my head.
‘What about that other man in the rubbish dump?’
‘Forget him.
He'll slip away when we've gone.’
Across the high viaduct rumbles a late train.
A cool breeze stirs my hair.
‘What should we do?’ ash Ludo.
‘Get out of here.
I sense it the moment we are inside the front door.
I am not sure why: nothing is different in the hall.
Maybe there was a draught from the window they smashed at the back of the house.
The rooms are a mess — drawers out, contents on the floor.
Squab cushions on the carpet.
Lids unscrewed from jars, boxes opened, books thrown off the shelves.
Not too much damage.
Upstairs; the beds have been unmade, clothes are everywhere.
The panel has been ripped from the bath.
Ours is not the kind of house where you expect to steal jewellery and furs.
Burglars would have taken the video.
Kids would have made more mess.
These guys were looking for something.
Ludo seems close to crying.
He sits on his pulled-apart bed, holding his old brown teddy bear again t his chest.
They had thrown the bear into the corner of the room.
Ludo shakes his head.
I ask him to come to the bathroom and help me tend my hand.
He brings the teddy bear and sits it on the windowsill where it can watch us.
Then we run tepid water and wash off the dried blood.
Flakes of torn skin curl back from the wound like pith on an orange.
With my hand under water in the bowl I try moving my fingers.
They seem to work.
I ignore the pain.
It has become a part of me.
Maybe Ludo could have been a nurse.
He smears ointment on a strip of lint and lays the dressing gently across my wound.
Then he wraps a bandage firmly round my hand, making sure it is not so tight that my fingers cannot move.
He fastens the bandage with sticky tape.
I help him tidy his room.
We don't take time over it.
We throw clothes back in their drawers and remake the bed.
When I suggest  we finish the work tomorrow he says that he won't be able to sleep yet, so he'll help with my room.
While we do it, I explain what the fight was about.
He is entitled to know.
I explain that Tod Richardson tried to do two jobs at once: one, have his boys reinforce the message about the ten thousand debt, and two, have another crew search the house.
If at one in the morning last night Tod had had his brain switched on, he could have had his minders sort me out there and then.
But his brain was not switched on.
Tod works on low wattage at the best of times.
Besides, he would have seen last night as a meeting between two sides to an argument.
There are rules about that.
The rules state that you let a guy say his piece and you consider what he said.
If you decide you don't like it, you show him later.
You do not spill blood on your own carpet.
You do not bring business into the house.
This morning, Richardson decided I still did not appreciate that he was serious about the money.
He also decided that his usual debt-collection procedures would persuade me of that seriousness.
He just had to let things run their normal course.
Meanwhile, it was worth turning our house over to see if Albie had stashed the drugs inside.
You never know.
Well, Tod looks to have missed with both his shots.
Out in his Blackheath ranch he could even now be interviewing an empty-handed burglar, plus whoever dared turn up from Vinnie's gang.
He will not be pleased with any of them.
I had better ring.
‘You think you're fucking clever, Carter, don't yer?’
‘You cocked it.’
‘I cocked it?
You're gonna wish you'd never been fucking born.’
‘One of your men is dead.
Did they tell you that?’
‘What fucking men?’
‘The four you put on to me.
Vinnie Dirkin's men.’
‘You fucking talking about?’
‘Don't try to smart-talk me, Richardson.
You set Vinnie on me to get us out the house.
You set someone else to turn it over.’
‘You're talking shit, Carter.’
I didn't think Richardson was the kind of guy who denied anything.
I didn't think he would bother.
But he must be behind what happened.
‘What's your problem, Tod — you think your phone's tapped?
Have your men reported back yet?’
‘Get off the line.’
‘I beat you this time, Tod.’
‘You couldn't beat a fucking carpet, you.
You're in deep trouble, Carter, fucking deep.’
‘One of your heroes didn't come home, Tod.
He's lying dead on a patch of waste ground.
And when I put this phone down, Tod, d'you know what I'm gonna do?
I'll phone the law.
I'll tell them a geezer is lying there, and he was killed by you.’
‘You're off your trolley.’
‘He's one of yours, Tod.
The Bill can connect you.
Especially when they are tipped that it was you who topped him.’
‘What's with you, Carter-you a fucking nark?’
‘And I'll tell you another thing for nothing.’
‘Piss off.’
‘There's a knife beside the body.
The fingerprints on it belong to Vinnie Dirkin.
And that's a fact, Tod: he had it in his hand.
So the cops get this anonymous tip-off, right?
It's from a guy who knows where the body is, and who knows exactly whose dabs are on the shiv.
Why should that guy be wrong when he fingers you?
You're in trouble, Tod.’
For several seconds there is silence, apart from his breathing.
While he thinks about it, I am thinking too.
I am wondering whether I have sussed this right.
Richardson has denied everything so far.
Maybe he is not involved.
Maybe Vinnie has been working on his own.
Maybe I'm wrong.
Then Richardson explodes.
I hear a gush at the far end of the line, like steam bursting out under pressure.
‘That fucking Dirkin!’
Tod curses another full minute without drawing breath.
I stand at my end of the phone line, grinning while he raves.
When he finally pauses to suck some air, I say, ‘Me not telling the cops is worth ten thousand quid, I reckon.
It makes us quits.
You just stay out of my hair, Tod, and I'll stay stumm.’
Ludo was supposed to be in bed.
But when I put the phone down I find he has been standing in the doorway.
‘That was the man who did this, is that right, Floyd?’
‘Yeah.
His name is Tod Richardson.’
‘Will that end it now?’
‘I hope so.’
‘Floyd, did he say anything about — you know?’
‘About what?’
‘About the man I hit on the head.’
‘Nothing at all.
Go up to bed.’
‘I'm not ready for bed yet.’
Ludo shuffles his feet.
‘That man he was dead, wasn't he, Floyd?’
‘Don't worry about it.’
‘Did I really kill him?’
‘I don't know.
Don't think about it.
Maybe he'll be all right.’
‘Like when you play cowboys?’
‘Yeah, that's it.
Maybe he was just playing cowboys.’
Ludo considers this idea.
He wants to believe it true.
Then he gives up puzzling over it, and returns to my talk with Richardson on the phone.
‘Those burglars he sent — you said they were looking for something.
What were they looking for, Floyd?
We haven't got much.’
‘Something Albie had.
Or something they thought he had.’
‘What was it?’
‘Nothing important, Ludo.
We should get some sleep.’
‘AU right.
Good night, Floyd.’
He turns to leave.
‘I thought you meant that smack of his, that's all.’
‘Smack?’
‘Yes, he used to keep it here.
Is that what they wanted?’
I stare at him.
‘You knew about the stuff?’
‘I knew he kept it here.
It was worth a lot of money, Albie said.’
‘How come you knew about it?’
Ludo looks surprised I should ask.
‘I just did.
We used to divide it up together on the kitchen table.’
‘You and Albie?’
‘Ya.
Well, Albie mainly.
I used to wrap the bags up.
Some were ever so small, Floyd.’
‘I didn't know Albie involved you in this.’
‘Well, I always like to help around the house.
I can do things, you know, Floyd.’
As I am learning.
In the last two hours I discover that he is a pharmacist, a male nurse, and a killer.
Out on the waste ground is a guy with his head bashed in.
Ludo swung his club at him with all that strength he hardly knows he possesses.
Does Ludo now realise the man is dead?
Does he understand what happened any more than when he divided heroin on the kitchen table?
What goes on in Ludo's brain?
A thought occurs to him.
‘Do you think they found the smack, Floyd?
We didn't look.’
I pause a second.
‘You know where it is?’
‘I don't know.
I haven't looked.
Albie used to hide it, you see.’
‘Where?’
If I had been looking, I might have found it.
The giveaway was to stand in the upstairs hall outside Albie's old bedroom and examine the door.
To look at the fingerplate above the handle.
To look at the screws.
There are glints in the grooves, a few rough edges, that show that these screws are often loosened.
Two small scratches appear on the fingerplate itself, beside the screws, where the screwdriver sometimes slipped.
Ludo is conscientious.
He bends closely to his work.
He unscrews the plate and removes it from the door.
Behind the plate is a chiselled cavity.
Inside the cavity is a polythene bag.
Inside the bag are several smaller bags.
Inside each of them is a single ounce of heroin.
23
I should not be here.
I should not have stayed.
1 should not have let the three days expire.
Now one of Dirkin's friends lies dead beside a viaduct.
Richardson wants the heroin returned to him, and I am in deep with Snake Carmichael.
Albie was less trouble when alive.
Carmichael frowns as I tell him what happened on the Island yesterday.
I leave little out.
I mention the white van I think was following me — it could have been his, checking on my performance.
Whoever's it was, Carmichael will want to hear about it.
I say that I don't know who the van belonged to, but it drove past when it saw me with the police.
‘Could have been a Q-boat,’ I suggest.
‘What the hell is that?’
‘Unmarked police car.
We used to call them that.’
‘You've been away too long.’
We are in his maroon and white office at the Parrot — Huey Carmichael, Dixie and me.
Dixie and I are dressed up for the Island.
I wear blazer and slacks, and my hand is bandaged.
Dixie wears pale grey.
Carmichael wears his beloved white linen suit, this time with a yellow sweatshirt.
We all three drink glasses of Lucozade.
Huey thinks Lucozade will keep him healthy.
All he has to do is drink a bottle a day, and he can skip lunch, keep late hours, loll around in his soft leather chair.
From the look of him, he may be right.
He is lean, hard, and  his doggy brown eyes are bright as a terrier's.
Lucozade and speed are all he needs.
The only way I would like Lucozade is with a gin in it.
Carmichael is sending Dixie with me to the Island.
I have some big deliveries to make, and after yesterday Huey prefers to have me kept an eye on.
Dixie smiles apologetically.
He would prefer not to come back on to my patch, and he has his own investments to look after in the City.
‘What do you think, Dixie?’
Carmichael asks from the chair behind his desk.
‘You think we should lie low a few days, hey?’
Dixie scratches his chin.
‘The day we hold off because some geezer may be watching is the day we should change our line of business.
There is danger every day.
That's the way it is.’
‘Hey, Dixie, did you ever see this white van?’
‘No.’
‘Were you ever stopped by the police?’
‘It could happen to anyone.
Police are always stopping cars.’
I interrupt.
‘These were not traffic police.’
Dixie shrugs.
‘What's the difference?
They were filling their quota.
They need to book some motor violations so they can get a day off in court.
Cops gotta do something on that island to-justify the taxes.’
‘Hey, this is some dilemma, Floyd,’ says Huey, gazing at the ceiling.
‘You have to make some big drops today.
Now you come up with this.
What do we do?
To go or not to go, that is the equation, hey?’
Carmichael downs the last of his Lucozade and drums his fingers on the white leather top of hi-desk.
‘What stars are you, Floyd?’
‘Stars?’
‘Yeah, stars, you know, your horoscope.
What star sign were you born under?’
‘Capricorn.’
‘I'm a Capricorn too,’ puts in Dixie, smiling.
‘How about that, Floyd?’
‘It's a small world.’
‘Well, I'm a Scorpio,’ says Carmichael.
He is leafing through a newspaper, looking for the forecasts.
I glance at Dixie, and he winks.
‘Here we go,’ Carmichael says.
He folds the paper open and lays it on the desk.
‘What does it say for me, hey?
‘Be on your guard against negative influences which may affect your professional and domestic life.’
What?
I don't have a domestic life.
Still, ‘don't be negative’ means that I should go for it.
Yeah.
What else does it  say?
‘Power games may be played out by others around you.’
Who wrote this stuff, hey?
I don't want this psychological crap.
I'm gonna change my paper.
Where's the rest of it?
‘Confrontations and complex issues could show colleagues in their true light.’
What does that mean — I should stay in bed?’
‘Well, you're a Scorpio,’ Dixie says.
‘Scorpio is all about confrontation, right?
The sting in your tail.’
‘They write this stuff for office workers,’ Carmichael complains, peering at the newsprint as if it was written in a foreign language.
‘Am I gonna have a good or bad day, that's all I want to know.’
He plucks at the newspaper irritably, as if there might be a better forecast on another page.
‘What does it say for Capricorn?’ asks Dixie.
‘We're the ones going there.’
‘Oh yeah,’ growls Carmichael.
‘I'll read it out.
Capricorn.
‘Don't lean too heavily on your lover, and try to avoid conflict with their family.’
Does that help?’
We shake our heads.
Carmichael continues.
‘Get a load of this: ‘Your relationship with your boss is now extremely well starred.’
Well, fancy that.
‘Today you will need ingenuity and initiative.
Don't be reckless or your plans may fall apart.
Press ahead with self-control, and success will be yours.’
Hey, what more could you want?’
‘You're making it up,’ Dixie says.
‘It sounds too good.’
‘No, I'm serious.
Look at it.’
Carmichael hands him the paper.
Dixie reads.
‘Yeah, that's what it says,’ he agrees.
‘Don't lean too heavily…
Relationship with your boss…
How do they Know about this, up in the stars?’
‘Horoscopes are how the stars are interpreted,’ Carmichael says.
‘And yours are excellent.’
‘What was that about confrontations?’
I ask.
‘That was my forecast, not yours.
You just need — what was it?— ingenuity and initiative.
Success will be yours.’
‘Just send five pounds for details.’
‘Don't laugh,’ Carmichael says.
‘There is truth in the stars.’
He stands up.
‘So we go for it,’ he says.
He crosses to his wall safe.
‘Look the other way, please.’
Dixie and I turn obediently away.
It isn't necessary, because Carmichael shields the combination lock with his body.
Not only does he believe in horoscopes, he thinks we two have X-ray eyes.
We hear the door open.
We hear him bring something out.
‘OK,’ Carmichael says.
We turn round.
On the white desk he has tossed several wraps of cocaine.
He holds others carelessly in his hands.
I ask, ‘How much have you got?’
‘Just had a delivery from Spain.’
As Huey throws the spare wraps back into the safe, I glance inside.
Some delivery.
He must have several kilos there.
If he paid between twelve and fifteen thousand pounds a kilo, Carmichael has a hundred grand inside that safe.
And that's at import prices.
The street price of that little lot, cut down into 40-milligram bags, would be half a million pounds.
That's how the police will value it.
They'll calculate as if Carmichael sold the whole consignment to end-users and made all the profit himself.
The police will ignore the distributors, like Dixie and me.
They'll ignore the breadheads we sell to, who add their own hundred per cent mark-up.
They'll ignore the little bagmen, adding another hundred per cent on top.
The police will ignore all of that.
They'll talk it big.
When they announce one of their rare little hauls, they'll talk street prices, to make the figures really large.
Carmichael repeats our instructions.
When we make our rounds today, we are to shift as much stock as we can.
The consignment in Huey' safe has to be moved out and down the line.
He does not want to hold on to it.
It is dangerous.
And it is bad for his cash flow.
We are to get the stuff out to the breadheads, and tell them to push it fast on extended credit.
The whole consignment, Carmichael says, must filter down into as many pairs of hands as possible.
It's what financiers call ‘spreading the risk’.
Huey laughs at that.
He thinks he made a joke.
If I was making a career of this I guess I'd resent Dixie coming with me.
After one day on my own I am put back on trainee status.
But I understand Carmichael's reasoning.
He has to be sure of me.
Like I have to be sure of him.
To tell the truth, I can use an extra hand.
Today I have to hit as many marks as possible, and Dixie can find them fast.
He knows this island.
He knows the cut-throughs and footpaths, the bridges, the temporary paths between building sites and brand new office blocks.
We are in the middle of the Island, at the top of East Ferry Road, at a pub where yuppies don't go.
It is called the Queen.
It is built of weathered red brick, and is V-shaped to fit a fork between two roads.
The sign outside says it is ‘The Friendliest Pub On The Island’.
But that one painted notice is not enough to make up for the shabby doors, scruffy brickwork, and grimy frosted glass.
Inside, the pub has dark wood, flocked wallpaper, and a dense green ceiling.
Its decor has not changed in two decades.
For as long as ordinary people remain on the Island, this pub will not change.
The blonde behind the counter gives us two pints of John Bull, a smile, a plate of cheese and ham rolls.
We move to a side table.
‘Not a bad pub,’ Dixie says.
‘One of the old ones.’
‘I like a pub where I don't meet my customers.
They won't come in here.’
Looking more carefully at the people who are in here, I see that few are true locals.
They don't live here.
These men are working on building sites around the Island.
They avoid the yuppie pubs and choose places like the Queen.
It serves seven beers: Taylor Walker and John Bull — they're local, at least— then there is Tetleys from Yorkshire, Guinness from Ireland, Lowenbrau, Skol and Australian Four X. Even the video game comes from Japan.
‘Are you gonna lean on your lover tonight?’ asks Dixie.
I look puzzled.
‘Huey's horoscope for us Capricorn's.
It said don't lean on your lover.
Don't mix with her family.’
‘You're Capricorn, Dixie.
Does it sound true for you?’
He looks rueful.
‘Only too true-that bit about not mixing with her family.
Her mother's staying.’
‘Does Carmichael believe in horoscopes?’
‘Sure.
He's a nut-case.
Vegetarian too.’
‘How about you?’
‘This is a ham roll I'm eating, Floyd.’
‘That shows you ain't Jewish, but do you believe in horoscopes?’
Dixie shrugs.
‘They're nonsense but, you know, sometimes they seem to hit things right on the pin.’
Tacked to the wall above his head is a handwritten notice: ‘The Strippers Are Back Thursday And Friday Lunchtimes 12.30 — 2.30’.
In the bow-end of the V-shaped saloon stand rough wooden platforms, where the girls will come and strut.
I doubt the pub will turn the lights down.
Maybe someone will draw curtains across the frosted glass before they turn up the disco tape.
Then a couple of women will clatter sweatily through a series of numbers, as close to the punters in the pub as their mum at the kitchen table.
Lunchtime at the local on the Isle of Dogs.
Across from the Docklands Arena, East Ferry Street joins Lime harbour and then widens.
Opposite the Arena is a pub called the George.
We don't go in.
Our mark stands by a white BMW.
I guess it's his.
He looks about twenty one years of age and wears a mid-blue suit above a cream fly-fronted shirt.
‘You're late,’ he says.
Dixie says it has been a busy day.
‘So what?
I can't afford half an hour waiting for you to show up.’
‘You eat lunch yet?’
‘What's that to you?’
‘You could have eaten inside the pub.
Killed two birds with one stone.’
‘I don't eat lunch.
This the new man?’
I nod to him.
He tells Dixie that he'll take an ounce.
Dixie says the deal was for three.
‘You think I can find three thousand quid just like that?’
‘I gave you warning.’
‘What d'you mean, warning?
Don't give me warnings.’
The boy speaks cockily, but his voice trembles.
Back in his office he is used to giving orders.
‘In this game,’ Dixie says, ‘we all have to make sacrifices.’
The boy scoffs.
‘Sacrifices!
This is business.
You sell, I buy.
And you don't set the terms.’
‘I set the price,’ Dixie says.
‘You ask a price.
I don't have to buy.’
‘You have an alternative?’
‘There's always an alternative.
Listen, I nave a thousand pounds in my pocket.
I'm in the market for an ounce.’
I speak for the first time.
‘Perhaps you will tell us the name of your alternative?’
The boy looks at me coldly.
‘That's my affair.’
‘I would regard it,’ I say pleasantly, ‘as a special favour.’
Dixie narrows his eyes.
He is watching the game I play.
‘People come to me sometimes,’ I continue, speaking quietly, with just the trace of an American-Italian accent — that shambling mumble that Marlon Brando used in the Godfather.
‘They speak to me.
They ask: will you do something for me, because you are my friend?
I never refuse them.
And then, one day…’
Here I pause, to pick an imaginary sliver of oregano from my teeth, like Brando again, his cheeks stuffed with cotton wool.
‘One day I return to these people, and this time I ask that they do a favour for me.
You understand this?
Return of a favour.
It's how our family works.
We help each other.’
The boy looks uncertain.
Something about the words that I use, and the way that I deliver them, something about it strikes a low chord in his guts.
‘What are you rabbiting about?’ he asks shakily.
Dixie joins in the act.
Gently, almost lovingly, he wraps an arm round the boy's shoulder.
He places his mouth dose to the boy's ear.
‘Don't insult my brother,’ he whispers.
‘Don't even think of it.
He would never forgive you.’
‘My brother Dixie, he speaks well of you,’ I say.
‘He asked especially that I should meet you.’
‘Why?’
The question comes quietly.
I give a small but eloquent shrug.
‘Perhaps you are not ready yet.’
‘For what?’
‘I will tell you this, my friend.’
I still mimic Brando.
‘I will take an interest in you.
You will be special in my sight.
Would you like to prosper in our family?’
For a moment nothing happens.
He stands with his mouth slightly open, trying to follow the script.
Then his teeth clunk together.
His head nods.
‘Yeah, I want to prosper.
Sure I do.’
‘I am glad to hear this.’
I nod gravely.
‘In three days I will visit you again.
I will bring five ounces of cocaine.
It is my hope that you will bring five thousand pounds.
Do you think you can do this for me, as a friend?’
‘Five thousand?’
I nod, and extend my hand.
The boy is about to reach out for it when Dixie whispers urgently in his ear.
The boy glances across at me.
His eyes widen.
Then he looks nervously about him, bows, and accepts my hand.
He kisses my fingers.
For the first hundred yards we keep straight faces.
Then, far enough away, we begin to chuckle.
All our suppressed mirth escapes in little bubbles as we walk along the road.
We replay the dialogue, improving on the lines.
‘If we practise this around the Island,’ Dixie says, ‘we could make our own movie.
Isle of Dogsfather, what d'you think?’
‘It gave the boy a thrill.
He thinks he's working with the Mafia.’
‘We gotta do it again.
Learn the words right, we'll get the whole island quivering in line.’
‘If we had the words right, it wouldn't work.
You need spontaneity.
That was a once-off.’
On our left is the big Asda supermarket where we parked the car.
On our right, alongside but above the road, runs the Docklands Light Railway, bright and new.
Little blue trains, each with two boxy carriages, glide up and down.
They are Toytown trains; pretty in the architect's drawings, hopelessly crowded in the peaks of the  day.
The amount of people crammed into offices out here, they should have built longer trains.
Off the road to our left begins a grassy bank that will continue almost to the river.
It is the edge of the Mudchute, a high wide wasteland of scrubby hills and valleys.
Its tough pale grass grows on mud and clinker dredged up from the docks.
Dixie and I climb the steps of its damp embankment to make today's final drop.
The Mudchute is still the same wasteland.
These thirty-two acres have changed little since the three of us — Ludo, Albie and I — used to play here as kids.
Even the inner-city farm is still here.
When I was young, the farm was created by local action groups for school kids and anyone else who didn't know what a sheep felt like.
Or a cow, or a pig, a goat or a pony.
The farm had chickens and rabbits, and grew things.
You couldn't eat what they grew: the soil was polluted, because at the bottom of this road there had been a leadworks.
The lead stayed in the soil.
‘That's the guy,’ Dixie says.
The man leans against the gate two hundred yards ahead of us along the muddy path.
He is waiting.
Behind him, the path runs down into a fold of land that once had allotments.
Families grew flowers and vegetables.
In those days no one measured lead in the soil.
Not round our way.
Years ago, most of those allotments disappeared, because the Port of London Authority commandeered the land.
They said they would expand the docks.
Everybody was in favour of that.
Our dad thought he might get his job back, but he should have known.
The project never happened, plans were shelved.
As we stroll on the high path along the edge of the fields, Dixie explains about the man.
‘He's new, but he built his network real fast.
Surprisingly fast.
We should watch him.’
‘Maybe he brought his old network with him.’
‘Maybe.
A guy like this is either good news or very bad.’
‘Bad as in dangerous?’
‘Bad as in unusual.
I hate things unusual.
He's a big spender.’
‘Just my type.’
‘Big spenders have big ambitions.’
We are halfway there by now.
The man has dark hair and wears a brown topcoat.
He doesn't move from the gate.
‘If you're worried about him, we should make him come to us.
The land drops behind him.’
‘He's the customer.
We go to him.’
Moisture hangs in the breeze that drifts across the Mudchute.
It could rain soon.
On this damp cold ground, the grass is not like  grass in picture books: it is town grass-tufty, unkempt, in patches of mud.
The Mudchute is not a neat park, it is wilderness, in the guts of London.
But it won't survive here.
Not now.
Land around here costs five million an acre.
Already, around the edges of this open land, new money peers in: prim doll's houses along the west side, cranes on the northern skyline.
Speculators will flatten these muddy green hillocks, bulldoze the few trees, and they'll build.
Somewhere inside the thirty-two acres they will leave a landscaped formal garden.
It is all that will remain of the Muddie we knew.
We arrive.
The big spender asks if I am the new man.
‘You can call me John Burns.’
‘You look like a Carter to me.’
He doesn't smile.
But he scored a point there-he'll be pleased with that.
I check him over: square face, small eyes, black hair greased down, nose could have been in a fight.
He doesn't look the city type.
‘Do I know you?’
I ask.
‘Don't look like it.’
‘Then how do you know me?’
‘I heard you was back.’
‘You're from south of the river?’
‘I live on the Island.’
Not in the plush Cascades or the twee Cotton's Landing.
I suppose he could live in one of the few old terraces not yet knocked down.
He isn't saying.
It's all right with me.
I don't need his address.
Dixie asks the breadhead how much he wants.
He says ten.
‘Ten ounces?’
‘That's what I said.’
‘That'll cost you ten grand.’
‘Less a discount for bulk.’
‘First I heard of that.’
‘You want to get rid of it or not?
You're overstocked.’
I let them haggle.
If the man is arguing prices, then he wants to do a deal.
Down behind him in the straggly little valley, I notice that a few allotments do remain, after all.
An old man works on one.
‘OK, nine and a half ponies Nine fifty an ounce.’
‘I've heard better.’
‘But we can deliver, can't we?
We're always here, always pure.’
Behind me, out in the shabby rolling fields, a dozen brown and white sheep are munching the grass.
Near our feet lie dead brambles.
Not far away, in an old ditch called the Newtie, Ludo and I would come to catch tadpoles and newts.
We took them home in jam jars.
Hardly anyone comes here now.
Way over there, a man and his boy walk a dog.
They keep it on a lead, away from the sheep.
Down there, the old man potters with his cabbages.
Across that fold of land behind him come two sporty types in joggers.
They stop to chat by the gate on the other side.
‘Not here,’ the breadhead says.
‘We're on the skyline.’
‘We'll go down there,’ suggests Dixie.
Down in that dip we will be completely out of sight.
No one will see us.
We won't see them.
I say that I will stay up here.
‘What for?’ asks the breadhead.
He is already through the gate and starting down the slope.
Even Dixie looks surprised.
‘I'll keep a lookout.’
‘The Muddie's empty,’ the breadhead says.
‘Almost.’
The breadhead doesn't like it, but Dixie claps him on the shoulder and laughs.
‘We only need two,’ he says.
I wait by the gate as they pick their way down to the slimy bottom of the dip.
The dampness in the air becomes drizzle.
I find I'm holding my breath.
My stomach muscles are tight.
Dixie and the breadhead pause at the bottom, then turn to face each other.
Dixie wipes a raindrop from his brow.
Along the valley, the old man wanders off from his allotment into a small rickety shed.
The two joggers resume their training run.
They trot lightly down the path on the other side of the dip.
Dixie waits for them to pass.
But they don't.
Not both of them.
In the bottom of the dip, one man stops beside the breadhead, the other jogs on past.
It takes him less than five seconds to reach me.
‘Down you come,’ he says calmly.
He is a yard away from me across the gate.
Just out of reach.
‘I said, come on.’
I glance past him into the dip.
The breadhead in the brown topcoat now holds a pistol in his hand.
It is small and black.
It pokes out above his clenched fingers and points at Dixie.
‘Think I'm stupid?’
I ask the man.
I inch towards him.
He slips his hand inside the unzipped top of his jogger suit and withdraws it enough to let me see his gun.
‘You won't use that up here.’
‘Try me.’
I won't do that.
The only witnesses on this whole soggy wasteland are the father and his son walking their dog.
They're half a mile  away.
The old man is keeping dry inside his shed.
It is as easy for the sportsman to shoot me up here as down there.
I open the gate.
He stands aside to let me pass.
Down at the bottom, the breadhead covers Dixie while the second jogger takes Dixie's cocaine.
Then he loosens Dixie's money belt.
When he has taken that, he will go through Dixie's pockets.
And find Dixie's gun.
I hesitate at the top of the path.
‘Get a move on,’ my jogger says.
He moves a warning step closer, his hand snug inside his zip.
Coming down the slippery track, I stumble.
Involuntarily I reach out my arm.
I grab the front of his loose blouson and I heave at it.
We crash to the ground and roll fighting down the slope.
In one split second I see the brown topcoat and his jogger gape at us.
I see Dixie ram his hand into his pocket.
But I have enough to do.
This man does not wear a jogger suit for effect.
He is fit.
His fist crunches into my left cheek and drives my head against the ground.
His other hand splays across my face to hold me down.
He fumbles inside his blouson.
Then a gun fires.
I can't see whether it was Dixie or the topcoat.
I wrestle with the heavy heap on top of me.
He rams my head into the mud while he grabs his handgun.
As it appears from his zip top I smack my right fist into his face.
I can't grab the gun with my left, because my hind is still bandaged.
I get my right to his gun.
He smacks his other fist into my unguarded face, then tries to tug my fingers from his pistol.
Twice I bang my bandaged left against his cheek, and feel the cuts re-open across my knuckles.
I try to twist my body so I can jab my left elbow in his face.
But he ducks, wrenches at my fingers, and pulls his gun hand free.
I force my forearm beneath his chin and thrust it upwards.
Some of his weight lifts off my body.
But even as I squirm free, I see his gun come round toward my face.
‘Drop it!’ screams Dixie.
He stands beside the topcoat's body.
The other sportsman waits his chance.
But my man fires his gun.
The centre of Dixie's shirt caves in instantly, as if a hidden mouth inside had sucked at it and vomited blood.
I heave the bastard off as Dixie falls.
We grapple on the wet ground — both of us with a hand on his gun.
He has it in his grip, but I control the way it points.
His other hand clamps on mine and tears at my fingers.
I try to thump him with my left, though my hand is a ball of pain.
He punches me.
But I twist myself above him on the ground.
I drag my knee in to his head and grind it into his face.
I grind it deep for Dixie.
The guy holds tight to his pistol but he can't make  me move my knee.
His left fist flails at me.
He hammers against my ribs.
But the blows are weakening.
Suddenly I have twisted the gun out of his hand — but it flies away from us across the ground.
I stab my finger in his eye.
He screams with pain.
I slide my knee to the side, grab his throat with my right hand, and squeeze.
He rolls his head.
He clutches at my fingers.
I tighten my grip.
All this time his friend has been tugging at my shoulder.
Now I see him scramble for the fallen gun.
But I beat him to it.
I am nearer.
I dive across the mud, scoop it toward me with my bandaged hand, and take a hold of it.
The jogger backs away.
He stumbles against the topcoat's body.
He panics.
As I clamber to my feet he starts to run.
He slithers up the slope where he first came down.
But I ignore him.
His partner is writhing on the ground, about to rise.
I take a kick at him.
It catches the side of his head and he collapses.
I kick again.
The next kick he doesn't feel.
But I have to do it.
Dixie lies so still and bloody that I don't need to touch him.
There is no point.
I become oddly calm.
From my trouser pocket I take a handkerchief, and I use it to clean fingerprints off the gun.
I work methodically.
It's like a therapy.
The gun is like a rosary to me.
When I have finished, I throw the gun several yards off into the brambles.
I look at Dixie.
His eyes are open but he does not move.
His chest is obscenely red.
Nearby, the man in the brown topcoat lies face down.
He does not move either.
I prod his body with my shoe.
Then I kneel beside Dixie and feel through his pockets.
I don't know what I am looking for, and I don't find it.
His gun lies in the grass.
His envelope and money belt are with the runner who got away.
As I kneel in a kind of mourning, someone calls.
The old man is hobbling across his allotment, shouting questions.
I stare in his direction, hardly seeing him.
He waves his fist in the air, and I realise that what he sees is three men on the grass, with a fourth going through their pockets.
He will remember this.
Blond man, blazer and slacks, one hand bandaged.
Red on the bandage where blood has seeped through.
He is plodding closer.
He thinks that I am the man who killed the others on the wasteland, yet he keeps coming.
At his age, I guess he doesn't frighten any more.
I shall have to go.
But which way?
Back across the fields is the father and his son.
And it's a long way to where we came in.
The old man is ten yards away now.
I stand up, and start to climb the opposite bank leading  to the nearer exit.
At the top of the grassy embankment I check the street scene outside.
It looks normal.
Cars with their wipers going.
An old lady beneath an umbrella, carrying shopping.
Several people over there, sheltering from the rain beneath the elevated section of the railway.
Stairway up to the station.
Man in a jogger suit halfway up.
He waits on a balcony where the stairs divide.
We are no more than a hundred yards apart.
As the crow flies.
Two hundred yards on foot: down the slope, across the pavement, up the stairs.
He sees me watching him.
He licks his lips nervously, but he doesn't move.
He doesn't need to yet.
I start down the slimy path toward him.
Behind me, the old man is still shouting.
He has reached the bodies now.
I keep my eye on the jogger suit.
He keeps his eye on me.
I get the ridiculous idea that as long as I walk normally and don't start running, he will wait there, to see what I do.
But I'm wrong.
The man turns and trots away from me up the right-hand staircase from the mezzanine to the station platform.
When I glance to my left I see why.
Up from the river chugs a little blue train.
The jogger intends to catch it.
So do I.
I slither down the muddy steps leading off the Mudchute embankment.
I stumble through the gate.
I run between the concrete pillars holding up the elevated railway, on to the steep stairs.
I have never used this model railway, but I saw which way he went.
He took the right-hand staircase.
At the mezzanine where the stairs divide, a sign says ‘Do Not Cross Red Line Without A Valid Ticket’.
I hurtle past.
On the final flight another sign demands: ‘Have You Cot A Valid Ticket?’
They really care.
As I burst on to the empty platform, the train starts to pull away.
It is moving slowly.
I thump against the side of a carriage as it passes.
People glance out at me from inside their cocoon.
I run along the platform with the train, and thump again.
A passenger frowns.
A girl in light blue uniform waves her finger at me.
The train moves on.
At little more than walking speed it glides away.
I examine the track.
It looks safe enough.
This isn't like the Underground.
The rails here are spread well apart on a concrete floor.
Whichever rails are live, they have big gaps between them.
I jump down.
I am not insane.
I know the rails are electric, but the gap between them is a whole yard wide.
I can run along the middle.
At the speed the train is going, I will catch it at the next station.
It is only half a  mile away, near the Docklands Arena at the other end of the Mudchute.
The last notice as I leave the station reads: ‘Warning: Automatic Trains Operating, Live Current Rails.
Do Not Go On Or Near The Track’.
I chase the train.
From the rear window I am watched by a mother and her toddler child.
The kid thinks I'm funny, but the mother shows no reaction.
None at all.
The blue train is pulling away from me in the drizzle, gathering speed, effortlessly accelerating along its elevated track.
My ribs hurt.
They took a beating on the Mudchute.
I am slowing down.
I stand gasping for breath, as I realise where I am: stuck on a strip of concrete railway within a pair of electric rails, twenty feet above the ground.
Along the left side of the track is wire fencing.
To my right is a three-foot central barrier, then the southbound rails.
I glance behind.
If another train bore down on me, I'd have no room to stand aside.
This track is not a public walkway.
But no train is coming.
I am quite alone.
No one can see me up here.
The track is not overlooked.
Down to my left are normal-sized houses.
Across to the right is open land.
I trudge back to Mudchute Station.
Nobody is on it.
No passengers.
No staff.
No one walks the Mudchute on a rainy afternoon.
I clamber up from the trackway on to the empty platform.
It is an isolated world.
The toylike character of this electric train set is emphasised by lack of people.
I am like a lonely child, unattended in the attic.
My toy station is blue metal and glass.
The handrails are red.
The electric advertising board has three-sided vertical panels, endlessly rotating to show repeating ads.
Three for the price of one.
I trudge off the platform on to the exit gantry and look below.
At the foot of the stairs is the old man.
I duck back inside.
He didn't see me.
He was telling his story to people sheltering from the rain.
He was pointing across to the Mudchute, explaining what happened.
Soon, someone will ask if the man he saw was a blond guy in a blazer streaked with mud.
A man with his hand bandaged.
Then they'll come up here.
A train is coming.
I can hear the rumble.
When I peer along the track I see that it will be on the track across from me, going south to the river.
I need to catch that train.
But I will have to cross the line.
To return to the mezzanine landing and nip up the other stairs would let them see me.
I can't risk that.
The only way I can get across is to jump down on to the track again.
I do so.
Through the central barrier there is no gap.
So I run several yards to my left, step on to a two-foot metal platform, straddle the barrier, and jump down the other side.
But in the time it takes me to do this, the incoming train has reached the other end of the station platform.
I am in its path.
A hooter blasts as the train slows down.
I hop across the outer live rail to haul myself quickly on to the southbound platform.
A blast again.
Two blue carriages shudder to a halt beside me, and the train doors open.
I step inside.
On this damp day there are few passengers.
And there is no driver.
None at all.
The train only has a guard.
The guard presses a button for stop or start.
He presses a hooter if he sees an idiot on the line.
But that can't be right — no driver.
It cannot work like that.
Somebody must drive the trains by remote control, scanning the tracks by TV monitor.
He must sit in his office, playing the Docklands Light Railway like an arcade game.
It is a toy.
The guard is young, black and unconcerned.
He shakes his head at me.
I raise my hand.
‘I know,’ I say.
‘I know.
Let's not keep everybody waiting.
Let's just go.’
I sit down hurriedly.
He clucks his tongue.
But the reason I have sat down so quickly is because the old man has just popped out on the northbound platform.
He has people with him.
I huddle in my seat, but they ignore me.
They are all looking along the track to the north.
Someone saw me running up that right-hand staircase, running for the train.
He thinks I caught it.
Eventually the guard strolls off to press the button.
We glide south.
Beyond Mudchute there is only one more station.
Island Gardens is the end of the line.
The streets bring back memories, though the buildings here have changed.
Nothing major — the odd warehouse and high wall, the swathe of railway at roof height.
This is a corner of the Island not yet fully refurbished by development.
Fifty yards from the station I recognise Island Gardens Park, looking out across the Thames.
It looks as quiet and peaceful as it always did.
Any other day, I would visit the pie stall inside the park gate.
If it's still there.
I would take a coffee to the river wall, and gaze at Greenwich on the other side.
I would admire the twin white domes of the Royal Naval College.
I would squint across at the Cutty Sark and the never-absent cranes.
I would watch gulls wheel above the Thames while brown water laps the river walls.
I would gaze towards home.
But not today.
At the park entrance is that familiar little rotunda.
I nip-inside.
Rather than wait for the groaning lift, I use the stairs.
When we were young, we used to count them.
Eighty-seven.
Eighty-seven steps spiralling down sixty feet below ground level, into the Foot Tunnel beneath the Thames.
The Greenwich Foot Tunnel is a long straight tube, about eight foot high, only seven in places, walls and ceiling tiled in white.
No cars can use it — only people, walking.
It is like a secret passage, bringing Deptford workers north of the river, taking them home again at night.
It brought us kids under the river to the Isle of Dogs.
Today its job is to drain the dregs from the battered Island, back to their houses in the south.
24
‘We must get the car back,’ Carmichael says.
That is the least of his problems, I'd have thought.
He has lost his right-hand man, half a kilo of cocaine and around ten thousand pounds in cash.
I ask, ‘Dixie's wife-has someone told her?’
‘The police will do that.’
‘Christ, we were talking about her, just this lunch time.
Her mother's visiting.’
Carmichael nods.
‘That'll make it easier for her, hey?
But you stay out of this.
You don't go round there, right?’
I take a breath.
He explains: ‘The police will be watching Dixie's house to see who calls.
You can't go there, you see that?
We have to act like we never knew the man, understand?’
I nod.
‘That's how it is.
Casualty of war.’
Yeah, that's how it is.
I understand.
I ask, ‘You got a drink in here?’
‘Don't you like Lucozade?’
He opens the wall cupboard, properly stocked, and pours a whisky, large.
Just as he places it in my hand, he asks, ‘Why today?
Tell me that.’
‘You mean how did they know that today was a big one?’
‘That's right.’
He keeps his hand on my whisky.
‘All the breadheads knew it.
They had to bring extra money.’
Carmichael purses his lips.
He looks me straight in the eyes as he takes his hand from my glass.
It feels light.
‘You didn't talk to anyone?’
‘No.’
He holds my gaze.
‘Still, you did manage to kill one of them.’
‘Dixie did.’
‘So one of them suddenly got rich, hey?
Did he look a user?’
‘Too fit.’
Carmichael nods.
‘You should have killed him, you know that?’
‘Which one — the one that got away, or the one who shot Dixie?’
‘Both.
Why not?’
‘There were two dead already.’
‘You stop when both sides get one each?
We play to win, not to draw, Floyd.
You were on home ground.’
He frowns at me, then shrugs.
‘You better go get the car back.’
‘Hope I'm not recognised.’
‘What d'you think — the old man will hang around the supermarket?
Of course he won't.
Did those guys know where you parked, hey?’
‘Doubt it.
But the car has been there more than four hours.
That's a long time to be shopping.’
‘Cars overpark every day.
What you cannot do is leave it overnight.
But you've got to do it, Floyd.
If you think you can't go on the Island in case you're recognised, then you are finished.
Understand?’
‘When you fall off a horse, the first thing you do is climb back on.
I know.’
‘It hasn't been a good start, has it?’
I don't take a gun.
A gun didn't help Dixie.
I return to the Island as if I was going on evening shift: catch a 188 to Greenwich Church Street, cross the harbour beside the Cutty Sark, slip under the river through the Foot Tunnel.
I even use the Docklands Railway.
But I have changed my clothing.
There is always the chance that those little blue engines are operated by a Fat Controller behind a monitor screen, and the Fat Controller might just recall the guy who chased a train along the track.
I now wear a blue sweater beneath a navy anorak, dark slacks, anonymous.
On my left hand is a clean bandage.
No sign of blood.
The little train carries me two stops from the Island Gardens terminus to Crossharbour near the Arena.
I linger across the road from the Asda, watching the carpark.
The supermarket is still open: evening shoppers after work.
I see my car.
Looking carefully all about me, I drift into the carpark.
I shall be the only person returning to his car without a shopping trolley.
Maybe I should pop inside and buy something.
Then I shake my head.
Just collect the car, Floyd, and yet out of here.
By the time I park the Fiesta in Malpass Road, it is nine o'clock.
I stay in my seat for the radio news.
We are the third item.
‘Two men died today in a shooting incident on the Isle of Dogs.
At about three-fifteen this afternoon a group of five men congregated in the Mudchute, a park in the Cubitt Town area.
It is believed that a scuffle broke out, and two shots were fired.
According to witnesses two of the alleged assailants made their escape together via the Docklands Light Railway, while another made off across the park.
The reason for the affray is unclear, though a police spokesman played down any suggestion of feuding between criminal gangs.
At this stage, he said, it seems more likely that an attempted mugging went badly wrong.
Police have appealed for witnesses, and ask anyone in the vicinity of Mudchute Station between three o'clock and three-thirty this afternoon to contact them as soon as possible.’
I remain in the car throughout the other headlines to see if I scored a double.
But Vinnie's man with his head staved in on a patch of waste ground near Deptford Station does not get mentioned.
His death is not remarkable enough.
What do the police think about the killings on the Mudchute?
Maybe neither Dixie nor the topcoat had criminal records.
Certainly the old man will have said he saw a man robbing them.
But if the police really think those two stiffs were innocent members of the park-going public, why do they think villains gunned them down?
Why did five men meet at all on the Mudchute in the rain?
Why?
Too many questions.
The police are putting up a smokescreen.
Someone has told them to play it down.
Someone thinks he knows what is going on.
I get out of the car.
As I approach Jamie's house, I glance up at the-first floor.
No lights are on.
I ring his bell.
In my pocket I have the key he lent me, but if Jamie is not there I don't want to sit in the wreckage of his flat till he finally decides to show up from the pub.
I'll go home to Ludo.
Halfway back towards the car I see someone standing there.
It is Eva.
She wears her usual dull black leggings, and for the cool April evening she has put on a black woolly top.
She waits for me.
She says, ‘Last time we met you had a key.’
‘Don't you have one?’
‘I don't live here.
You have it with you?’
‘Why d'you want to go in?’
Eva moves a step towards me.
She keeps her voice down.
‘This is urgent, man.
Can you get us in?’
His flat is less of a wreck now.
Jamie must have liked the way Eva tidied it, because he has not yet pulled the place apart.
Maybe he does not pull it apart, maybe it just disintegrates.
Eva goes immediately into the bathroom.
She wastes no time.
She tells me that Jamie has been caught in a drugs bust at the Cross Keys pub.
I groan.
He and a dozen others are down at Lewisham nick, ‘helping with enquiries’.
If the fuzz follow their normal pattern, then at this very moment someone will be interrupting a tame magistrate snoozing in front of TV News to sign search warrants.
Any of the dozen who was carrying will have his pad turned over.
Anyone still in Lewisham nick would have been carrying.
If they weren't carrying when they walked in there, they will be now.
The Bill can fix that.
Eva emerges from the bathroom with several bottles of pills.
‘I'll only leave his aspirin.
Everything else goes.’
‘You've got a packet of cough sweets there.’
‘Victory V. Punks sometimes grind them up to mix with Iranian.’
‘Does Jamie do that?’
Eva is in his bedroom now.
‘He uses better stuff.
But the filth won't care.’
‘They can't charge him for possession of a packet of Victory V.’
‘You've never been busted, have you, feller?’
Eva pockets Jamie's tin box of works.
Inside will be any heroin Jamie has managed to get hold of, a tube and tin foil for smoking, plus needles for shooting up.
‘Go through his waste bins,’ she tells me.
‘Find anything that should not be there — especially foil.
You with me?’
‘How long do we have?’
‘It depends whose pad the police hit first.’
I drive Eva out through the west side of Deptford towards Bermondsey.
Somewhere around there she can stash Jamie's things.
I will not know where this hiding-place is.
I ask Eva what Jamie was caught carrying.
She doesn't know.
She shakes her head bitterly.
‘I was doing so well with him, you know?’
‘In what way?’
‘You know, man.
He promised me this time he really would stop cranking.
He'd only smoke the stuff.
He even gave me some needles — after that scare with the Soneryl, you know?
I thought I had him straight.’
‘You think you can get him clean?’
‘Only Jamie can do that.
But I tried to stop him shooting up, you know?
To come down easy.’
‘What are you, Eva — some kind of social worker?’
‘Do me a favour!
None of that official crap.
We help our friends, you know?’
Quietly, we motor along Woodpecker Road.
The drizzle has cleared, leaving the evening fine and cool.
While I pull out to overtake a bus, Eva explains about the self-help group she belongs to.
You can hardly call it a group-it is too loose-knit.
It doesn't have a name.
It doesn't really have members.
But everyone in the group, association, whatever you want to call it, has been a user.
Some still are.
They know what it takes to maintain a habit.
They know what it takes to come off.
‘We don't preach, right?
Don't make a judgement.
Just try to help our friends — know what I mean?’
‘D'you have much success?’
‘Sure — if they're ready to kick it.
But that's not all the group is about.
We try to help friends through the bad times.
Everyone has bad times, right?
We look for clean supplies.’
‘Are you supplying?’
Eva looks at me before replying.
She shrugs.
‘If we have to, we do, sure.
In small quantities, clean, when the need is bad.
Sometimes that's the best help we can give.’
We are in Trundley's Road now, slowing to turn right behind Deptford Park.
Traffic is light.
Driving is easy.
‘Jamie says he has smack under control,’ I say.
‘Any chance he's right?’
‘Junkies all say that.’
‘He says it isn't smack that's the problem, it's buying it.
If smack was on sale like cigarettes, he could survive forever.
He'd live as normal a life as a cigarette smoker.’
‘Junkies all say that, as well.
Heroin is stronger than nicotine, man.
I get out here.’
She points with her ginger head.
‘Heroin numbs the feelings.
Junkies don't need to eat.
They don't need sex.
They don't give a lazy damn.
The whole world may be against them, but they can't feel it.
They shut everything out.
D'you know what that's like?’
She opens the car door, but pauses in her seat before getting out.
‘It's like dying — slowly, beautifully, not a care in the world.
A lovely way to go, don't you think?’
25
Tamsin opens the door and smiles.
‘You came right on cue.’
I follow her in.
She wears an enormous white sweatshirt so bulky that she could have had it from Ludo.
She also wears skin-tight red pants.
Her white sweatshirt is bunched up and tucked in at the small of her back, so her rear is exposed.
In those pants I do mean exposed.
She flounces into the living room and holds open the door.
The TV murmurs.
We are alone.
‘Where's Suzie?’
‘On nights.
She wants me to stay in.’
‘She's worried about you.
You're all she has.’
‘I'm a big girl, Floyd.
Hadn't you noticed?’
The theme for the News starts on the television.
‘You want this on?’
Her hand reaches for the switch.
‘Just the headlines.’
Tamsin remains poised by the set, ready to kill it.
All we see are those headlines, and I have to hold my hand up to get the last one: ‘Murder on the Isle of Dogs — muggers turn to guns.’
‘That's local,’ I say.
‘And boring.’
It goes off.
‘Sit and talk to me, Floyd.’
She comes back across the room, punches me playfully in the chest, then flops on to the sofa.
She curls up at one end, leaving plenty of room.
I choose an armchair.
She shrugs.
‘I should hate you,’ she says.
I raise an eyebrow.
‘Dragging me off from that party.
It's embarrassing.
You were like a caveman collecting his bride.’
She cocks her head.
‘You know why they call it Ecstasy?’
‘I can guess.’
‘Because it's the Love Drug.
I've still got some upstairs.’
There is a devil behind her eyes.
‘You're not going to tell Mummy?’
‘No.’
‘Oh goody.’
She wriggles on the sofa.
She is a little girl putting on a little girl act.
She thinks she is a vamp putting on a vamp act.
‘Now we have a secret between us, don't we?’
‘Suzie didn't search your bedroom, did she?
Because she trusts you.
‘You're beginning to sound like the older generation.’
‘I am the older generation.’
‘But so dishy with it.’
She giggles.
‘Some girls go for older men.’
She changes position on the sofa.
Now she lies on her back, her head propped against one end, her legs bent, her bare feet flat on the cushion.
‘I'm cold,’ she says plaintively.
‘Are you cold?’
‘I'm going home.
I thought Suzie was here.’
‘And I thought you'd come to see me.’
She's a trier, I'll say that.
When I smile at her, I try to make it a fatherly smile.
I don't think I succeed.
‘I'm too old for this, Tamsin.’
‘I bet you're not.’
Her head tilts.
‘When your curfew is lifted, I'll come to the Parrot to hear you sing.’
‘Don't strain yourself.’
‘I will only have eyes for you.’
I stand up.
She lies watching me.
‘Men are such patronising bastards,’ she says.
I blow out so hard that I mist up the windscreen.
I must get my mind back to the here and now.
Wipe off the windscreen.
See clearly again.
I put the car into gear and drive back to Jamie's flat.
I arrive just in time to run into the law turning the place upside down.
They are searching the flat methodically, opening cushions, moving furniture, looking beneath the floor.
I am interested to note that they have not unscrewed the fingerplates from his doors.
A police dog is whining in the bathroom.
My arrival depresses Jamie even more.
He lights a cigarette from the butt of the first.
He glares at me from beneath his eyelashes.
A dog scratches vinyl in the bathroom.
The only person who looks happy is that smug cop, Kellard.
One sniff of drugs and he is there.
Sniffer of the Yard.
He stands tall and thin, his eyes glinting, a tight smile on his face as if he is pleased to see me.
He probably is.
I can see what he is thinking: the pieces are falling into place.
He doesn't know what they will build to, but as long as he keeps finding new pieces the picture will slowly become clear.
The patiently plodding policeman: he should never have come off the beat.
He looks wrong out of uniform.
His plain clothes are plain.
He wears an old-fashioned brown tweed jacket, looks like it has biscuit crumbs sprinkled all over it.
Beige twill slacks.
Heavysoled brown shoes with laces.
Green tie.
‘You live here together?’ he asks.
‘You know where I live.’
‘You came in with a key.’
I don't answer.
It wasn't a question.
It was one of those statements you feel you have to correct.
He wants to hear how you'll do it.
‘This is where the drugs are distributed, is it?’
That one is a question.
I am supposed to say no.
Then he'll stare at me silently, until I say more.
‘Lost your voice, Mr Carter?’
‘I'm not under arrest.’
‘No, but your friend is.
You ought to help him, if you can.
Or perhaps anything you said would just make things worse?’
I shrug.
A plainclothes man brings the dog out from the bathroom, into the kitchenette.
I watch it stand on its hind legs with its snout on the worktop.
The dog sniffs its way along.
Jamie asks who is going to clear up when they have finished.
‘It would be easier if you told us where the drugs are, sir.
Then we could all go home.’
‘There ain't no drugs,’ Jamie mutters.
He gives it no emphasis, doesn't try to persuade.
His lack of interest adds plausibility.
He must have realised that Eva has been in.
Kellard stands placidly in front of him.
Kellard believes in the quiet approach: give enough rope.
He would be the same in his interrogation room: no violence, no threats, just the quiet.
Let an hour or two pass.
Then some more.
Stay with the man, watching him, waiting hour after hour, until eventually the man has to give in and say something to draw the whole thing to a close.
I ask what will happen when they have finished poking through Jamie's food cupboards.
‘That depends on what we find, sir.’
‘There's nothing here.
You must know that by now.’
‘How would you know that, sir?’
Good question.
How could I know, unless I had moved the things out?
I react as Eva would, and come back with my own question: ‘What happens if you don't find anything?’
‘Hypothetical, I'm afraid, sir.’
The man with the dog has come up behind me.
His dog sniffs at my trousers.
His handler coughs.
‘Should this gentleman be searched, sir?’
Kellard considers.
‘Friend of the accused, sir,’ the man says.
‘Had a key to his flat.’
Kellard looks at me quizzically.
‘We've done you once already,’ he muses.
‘Try again,’ I say, ‘if it'll make you sleep better.’
Kellard gives me one more penetrating gaze.
‘See what he's got,’ he commands.
This time I do not have to lean against a wall.
I stand in a five-pointed star position in the middle of the room while the doghandler runs his hands along my limbs.
It is a strangely impersonal experience.
Even when his hands pat their way up to my crotch it is less embarrassing than having a tailor measure my inside leg.
It is more embarrassing when the copper goes through my pockets.
I have little in them, nothing that matters, but those few crumpled contents laid out on the table are my possessions.
They define who I am.
They don't amount to much.
‘Will you be staying here, sir, after we've gone?’
I shake my head.
‘If we need to get in touch with you, sir?’
‘I'll be at home.
— Are you all right, Jamie?’
‘Right as bloody rain.
It was good to see you, mate.
Thanks for everything.’
‘Well.
Anything I can do.
You know.’
‘Pop round tomorrow.
If I'm not back, you better open the windows.
Get rid of the smell.’
When I walk through my front door I hear the TV playing loud.
Ludo has not gone to bed.
I join him in the living room, where he is bolt upright in an armchair watching a video.
Something about spacemen.
The picture freezes on what looks like the underside of a vacuum cleaner, suspended like a novelty balloon in a clear night sky.
Ludo has a shamefaced look.
But the picture looks innocent enough to me.
‘Don't try anything, Carter.’
Out of sight behind the door were two other men, two big men.
One holds a pistol.
We have met before at Tod Richardson's.
I don't give them a welcoming smile.
‘Water pistols at your age?’
‘Don't get smart.’
‘Are you all right, Ludo?’
‘I couldn't help it, Floyd.
They tricked me.’
‘Don't worry.
You're not hurt?’
‘Oh no,’ he says, and he starts to stand up.
‘Sit down.’
Ludo stops, poised halfway, thinks and sits down.
He seems more puzzled than angry.
The one with the gun speaks.
‘You're coming with us.
‘Where?’
‘Fucking find out.’
‘What's he want?’
I ask.
‘Who?’
I close my eyes.
‘Richardson, dumbo.
Who d'you think?’
‘Don't call me a fucking dumbo.’
He steps closer.
‘I'll call you what I like.’
He glares at me.
If I can make him take another step he will come alongside Ludo.
He's dumb enough to feel safe with Ludo.
Ludo makes him feel smart.
‘You punks mended that window yet?’
I ask with a grin.
‘Fuckhead,’ he says.
‘Come here and say that.’
He hesitates.
His eyes narrow.
They were little eyes in the first place.
‘You're going on a ride, fuckhead.
We're taking you in the car.’
He does not come closer.
He won't fall for that.
‘You.’
He turns to Ludo.
‘You don't move out that fucking chair.
You do, and your fucking brother is dead.
Right?’
Ludo nods slowly.
He is wondering how long he must sit in the chair.
Maybe Dumbo has done this before.
I had hoped not.
I had hoped he and I might snuggle in the back of the car while his mate did the driving.
Big Dumbo would keep his gun on me, I would watch his hand.
Somewhere on the journey would come a chance to make a grab.
But that's not how we do it.
Dumbo puts me in the front passenger seat and seats himself behind.
He jabs the gun barrel to my neck.
‘Keep your head screwed front, and don't get fucking smart.’
Then we go.
Part of the time I feel the point of the barrel jabbing at my neck.
Other times it is at the back of my seat.
Maybe there is a moment when Dumbo drops his guard, but I can't see him.
So I wouldn't know.
All I can do is sit in the front and wait till I see Tod Richardson.
What does he want now — the same ten thousand pounds?
He can't be that short of money.
The old Richardson family would have written it off as small change.
But Tod is the last one left, clumping around his empty ranch with two minders and his Rottweiler dogs.
I can imagine the man in the evenings, slumped in his armchair, a glass in his hand, brooding on how life has let him down.
He is a spent force.
His empire is gone.
What income he has comes from heroin, extortion and other people's thieving.
Small  time stuff, with small people.
He can't live off that.
But what does he want with me?
Walking in through his front door comforts me, a little.
It was possible we were headed for the marshes.
Dark and quiet.
A good place to leave a body.
My worry now is that we meet at his house before moving on.
To the marshes.
We are in his front room.
I notice his new window and the smell of fresh paint, but don't mention it.
‘I fucking owe you one,’ is how he starts.
‘Why's that?’
‘You killed my oppo.’
‘Are you still on about that?
There were four of them, Tod, with chains, and Dirkin had a knife.
He was lucky it wasn't him that got stuffed.’
‘I don't give a shit about fucking Dirkin.
You're causing too much aggravation, Carter, you hear me?’
I nod, as if he gave me useful advice.
‘You crossed me once too fucking often, Carter.’
I nod again, less confidently.
I say that I thought we had already been through all this.
‘When?’
‘On the phone, Tod.’
Tell him slowly, like a child.
‘You would forget the ten thousand, and I wouldn't tell the law that you'd left a stiff behind the Windsor.’
‘Fuck all that.
I'm talking about this fucking afternoon.’
‘This afternoon?’
‘You fucking put a bullet in him, didn't yer?’
This afternoon.
The Isle of Dogs.
Me and Dixie on the Muddie.
‘Those were your men?’
‘Whose you fucking think?’
I stay silent for several seconds.
I realise that the guy in the topcoat was not a loner, but a set-up staged by Richardson; that Richardson is not the no-hoper I had thought.
‘Your idea, Tod?’
‘Whose d'yer think?’
Richardson prowls around the room, stabbing his fingers in the air.
‘What were yer fucking doing there, Carter?’
‘On the Island?’
‘Right.’
I ignore his question.
‘Did you mean to kill Carmichael's man, or was it meant to be just a robbery?’
‘What d'yer think?
I went for his money and the drugs.
Didn't  know how much there was of which, but who cares?
I prefer the fucking money, to tell the truth.
You gotta sell the drugs to make the money.
So it's easier if the other fucker's done the work already, innit?’
He stands close, staring at me.
‘What happens next?’
I ask.
‘Next?’
‘Yeah.
Why've you got me here?’
‘Gonna fucking kill yer, Carter, that's why.’
‘Unless?’
I ask.
‘Unless?’
‘You'll kill me unless I do something.
Such as what?’
He looks puzzled.
‘What've I ever done to you, Carter?’
‘What?’
‘Why d'yer fucking muscle in?
It was all set up.
We take twenty grand from the nignog.
We fuck his network.
But then you fuck us up.
You killed my man.’
‘I didn't shoot your button man.
Dixie did.’
‘The fuck is Dixie?’
‘The one they shot.’
‘Who shot?’
‘Your guys.
Carmichael's man was called Dixie.’
Tod looks bewildered.
I say, ‘Dixie shot the button man.
Then one of your runners topped him.’
He breathes out.
‘Where do you fit in, Carter?’
‘I was passing by.’
‘Don't pull my tit.’
He has the look of a man whose cards are shot, so I try a finesse.
‘You were right, of course, Tod.
We should do it your way.’
‘The fuck?’
‘You sussed that I am in with Carmichael, and you want me to put the drop on him.’
‘Is that right?’
‘You're a shrewd bastard, Tod.
I gotta hand it to you.’
I leave a pause.
I want to hear the man deny that he is shrewd.
as if he would.
‘Right,’ he says suddenly.
‘What's your game?’
‘We take him out.’
‘The Snake?’
‘Who else?’
‘The nignog.
Right.’
A pause.
What the hell, he thinks.
‘How d'yer reckon we take the fucker out?’
I've got you, Tod.
‘I'm inside Carmichael's gang, right?
Like you sussed it.
I know every move he makes.’
‘I like it.
I fucking do.’
‘I find out when Carmichael takes his next delivery.
I tell you.
Then you come in and blast him out.’
Richardson frowns.
‘Easy to fucking say that.’
He is nervous.
He shows me that he is nervous.
‘You can take him, Tod.’
‘So why haven't I done the fuck already?
The nignog's got some clout, you know.
It ain't that easy.’
‘You got no ambition?’
I ask.
‘That fucking nignog?
He can't fuck with me.’
‘Not Tod Richardson, right?’
‘Right!
Fucking right.’
His face clears.
‘What's the plan?’
Oh, I have plans, Tod.
Do I have a plan for you?
26
‘Lucky?
I'll say I'm lucky.
What is it — seven years, eight?
All that time I've used heroin, dikes, Palfium, you name it.
I've even drunk morphine off a spoon, like a medicine.
I've swallowed stuff, smoked it, snorted and cranked.
And all they catch me with is a few DFs.
Now that, son, is what I call lucky, bleeding lucky.
No complaints.’
Jamie grins.
DFs are painkillers.
DF118s.
They are so widely prescribed you may have taken them yourself.
But then, knowing you, you'd have stuck to the proper dosage.
‘What were the others carrying?’
Eva asks.
‘Mostly DFs.
Coupla guys on dikes.’
‘No H?’
‘I told ya, we were lucky.’
Jamie laughs.
We are sitting around drinking coffee in his flat, but you would think we were drinking champagne.
Morning sunlight burns through the grime on his front window.
It glows on the carpet, and tries to join our celebration.
Eva wants to be sure of the facts.
‘The charge was possession, right?’
‘I only had six tablets.’
‘That's just possession.
Did you make a statement?’
‘Yeah.
I didn't want to look uncooperative in court.
I said I  didn't know the other guys, we just happened to be in the same pub.
All the right words, Eva.’
‘What about those other guys — what did they say?’
‘Christ knows.
I acted like I wasn't with them.
In the end the cops had to let us out.
Most of us, anyway.’
‘Did you talk with any of the others later?’
Jamie grins — his little boy grin.
‘We had a celebration, you know?’
‘Where?’ she snaps.
‘Don't worry, the Bill was miles away.
Some of us went round a guy's flat.
A right little shooting gallery.’
‘You prat, Jimbo, I knew you'd scored.’
‘Did I say I hadn't?
Jesus, Eva, I needed something.
I can't walk out the nick a free man and carry on like nothing's happened, can I?
Man's gotta let his hair down.
Anyway, my nerves were shot.
I needed a hit.’
He glares at us defiantly.
We don't have to say anything, so we don't.
Jamie drains his coffee and stands up.
‘Fancy a drink?’ he asks.
‘On top of what?’ asks Eva.
Jamie looks at her.
He knows what she means.
‘I only smoked some.
I didn't crank it.
A drink won't hurt.’
She studies the inside of her coffee cup.
She doesn't say anything.
I ask when his court appearance is.
He says next week sometime.
I nod.
Jamie watches Eva.
She keeps her eyes down.
He crosses to the window, wipes the inside of the pane and gazes out.
We are on the edge of a long silence.
But he breaks it.
‘I said I was grateful, Eva.
If they had found my works, I'd still be there.’
‘They'll bust you again,’ she says.
‘Nah, they didn't find nothing here.
Looked hard enough.’
‘Their warrant's valid for a month.’
He frowns.
‘They've used it now.’
‘It is not an admission ticket, one time only.
They can come back as often as they like.’
‘Oh.’
‘I suppose you want me to hold for you?’
‘Yeah.
Thanks.’
Jamie is wondering when the police might call again.
‘And they can renew it,’ she says.
‘Gotta have a reason.’
‘They already do.’
Jamie sniffs.
‘What, one offence?
Handful of tablets?’
‘Known To Consort With Other Users.
Your card is marked, Jimbo.
Did you have a medical?’
‘Some doctor came.
Gave us all a once over.’
‘And?’
‘My veins are clean.’
‘But you inject,’ I say.
‘Not often.
I only go in for skinpopping.
It's mainlining that leaves scars.’
He and Eva glance at each other.
Something was left unsaid.
‘I should be all right in court,’ Jamie continues.
‘A year on probation, I expect.
But I ain't going into no detox clinic, swigging bloody methadone.
No thanks.’
His fragile good humour has faded.
He kicks moodily at the carpet.
‘Another thing-if I can't keep my works here, where am I gonna jack up?’
‘Not at my place,’ Eva says.
‘Sodding public lavatories,’ he mutters.
‘Nah, I'll do it here.
This is where I like it.
Got a routine that I go through.
It's important, that.
Draw the curtains, make a space, lay the stuff out.
Take my time.
I mean, getting it ready is half the enjoyment, right?
Calms me down before I fix.
OK, it's a ritual — what's wrong with that?
Not like fellers smoking a cigarette: just pull it out the packet, stick it in their mouth, don't think about what they're doing.
Heroin is what's the word?— something to be savoured.
Know what I mean?’
‘You've been lucky,’ Eva says.
‘You're still on top of it.
And there's plenty of stuff around, not expensive.
All that could change.’
That's right, Eva, I think to myself: now that Richardson has the market sewn, all that could change.
‘There was plenty of stuff around when I was using,’ she continues.
‘I would buy an ounce and sell half.
So I was out selling all day long.
It was like a job.’
I nod.
I don't ask what happened next.
‘Then I lost my feller.
We were both using, though even with selling the stuff we were short of cash.
He started mainlining on barbies.
Every week he needed more than the week before, and to get a full hit he had to inject.
Anyway, he was no good with needles, and he made a mess of his veins.
You know what happens to a mainliner's veins?
They go lumpy and knotted, then they collapse.
He had to keep looking for new places he hadn't fouled up.
There's one in your groin, you know, the femoral vein?
Don't look surprised, Floyd, I know what it's called.
Close to the femoral vein is the femoral artery.
He stuck the needle in that.’
‘In the artery — what did you do?’
‘Nothing.
I was out scoring smack.
I don't know what I'd have done anyway, because the jab sent his leg into spasm, cut off the blood supply, that was that.’
‘Did it kill him?’
‘You're too dramatic, Floyd.
No, he's still alive somewhere.
But he lost the leg.
Had it amputated.
He blamed me, of course.’
‘Why you?’
‘Had to blame someone.
So, goodbye to him.
Of course, I still had the kid.’
I didn't know she'd had a child.
‘I used to take the kid with me, buying and selling.
Good upbringing, right?
I know.
Well, one day I opened the door expecting a customer and there were three strangers.
Tough looking.
They threatened us-me and the kid.
Screwdrivers and a bottle of acid.
Took all I'd got.
It scared me rigid.
I needed a fix more than I ever thought that I could.
But I was too scared to go out.
For a while, anyway.
But, you know, I had to live, so I made myself go out.
I told my supplier — you know, I said I'd been done over, I had no money, n. stuff.
Could he drop me a few grams on credit?
He was a cold sod, said he'd think about it.
But I was desperate.
He knew that.
He said there might be one way, you know, I should think about it.
An alternative arrangement.’
Eva's eyes flicker.
‘But then he gave me half an ounce on credit.
I used some and sold some.
I bought some more.
Started paying off my debt.
I really put my back into it, you know?
Application.
Hard work.
Then the three guys came again.
Same threats.
They threw the acid this time — only at the wall, to burn the paper — so I could see it, you know?
They started coming every week.
Every time he heard a knock at the door, my little boy used to hide under the bed.
Poor little bugger.
He wouldn't come out till they'd gone.’
She stops.
I ask, ‘Wasn't there anyone could help you?’
‘Such as who?’
Stupid question, Floyd.
‘I moved to another pad.
They found me.
I moved again.’
She pauses.
‘Then I lost my little boy.’
She blows out noisily through pursed lips.
Then she blinks, slowly, holding her eyelids together for three long slow seconds.
When she opens her eyes, I don't know what it is that she sees.
We each find a different part of the room to stare at.
Then Jamie coughs and offers more coffee.
No one wants it.
He leaves the window where he was standing, walks across to Eva and places his hand on her arm.
‘I'm sorry, Eva.
I don't deserve the help you're giving me.’
‘People like us have to stand together,’ she says.
‘You aren't tough enough on your own.’
Jamie sighs.
‘I don't even try to fight it, do I?
I give in to it.
I use smack to blot things out.
Pathetic.’
‘Don't start feeling sorry for yourself, Jimbo.’
‘Ah Christ,’ he says, leaving her and stomping round the room.
‘I hate this life, you know that?
What's the point?
I oughta give it up.’
I glance at him, then I check Eva's reaction.
There isn't one.
She has heard him before.
‘Nah, I mean it,’ he says.
‘I can easily give it up, you know.’
He waits.
‘Yes,’ she says flatly.
‘Yes what?’
‘Yes, you can.
If you want to.’
‘That's right.
And I will.’
‘But you don't want to.’
‘Ah, come on, Eva.’
‘You don't really want to, Jimbo.
You think you do, at this moment.
But you're not sick of it.
You don't hate it.
You're not heartily bloody disgusted by it.
You don't want to purge it out your life more than anything in the world.’
‘Yes I do.’
‘More than anything in the world?’
‘That's right.’
‘Anything?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Absolutely anything I could name?’
Eva faces him, holding him with her eyes.
Jamie hesitates, and tries to grin.
‘Well, like what, for Christ's sake?’
‘You see?
You don't hate it enough, Jimbo.
Not yet.’
‘Well, well,’ laughs Carmichael.
‘So what are you telling me, hey?’
‘You don't think this is a threat?’
‘Threat?’
He looks genuinely amused.
He rocks forward out of his leather chair and walks from behind his long white desk.
‘You think I'm worried, Floyd?’
He rests both thumbs in the waistband of his trousers.
‘I welcome it.’
He laughs again, and crosses to his one way window.
‘I tell you what I really don't like,’ he says, staring down at the club floor below, ‘I don't like if I don't know who are friends and  who are enemies.
I don't like if I can't see what's on the cards.
That's what I don't like.
It's why I never gamble.’
Staying seated while he prowls around makes me uneasy, so I stand up and join him at the window.
‘You sleeping with her?’ he asks, pointing down.
A group is rehearsing.
Tamsin waits to sing.
‘No.’
‘You want to?’
I pause.
‘No.’
‘Not sure, hey?’
His voice drops as he asks it.
‘She's the one you were looking for, right?’
‘That's her.’
Carmichael watches my face.
‘Girl has not been here a few nights.
I missed her.’
‘She's back now.’
‘I could have fired her, you know?
But I didn't.
I thought, no, she is Floyd's special young friend.
His mistress or something.’
‘She isn't.’
‘Not even once?’
‘No.’
‘OK.
She's pretty.
A good singer too.
I can use her, you know?
Pretty girl with talent.
But you're definitely not — you know; you can tell me, hey?’
‘We're not.’
Huey drops it abruptly.
‘OK then, this Richardson.
He tried to steal my strip on the Island?’
‘That's right.
And it was his men killed Dixie.’
‘You are managing that strip now, Floyd.
What are you going to do about it?’
‘Richardson wants to drive you out of all your strips.
He's already frozen you out of Deptford —’
‘He what?
What's that man been telling you?’
‘He says he undercut your prices and forced you out.’
‘Did he hell!
I let him sell some smack here, because it's peanuts.
Deptford is a poor area, Floyd, you noticed that?
Do you know what the smack market is worth in Deptford?
About half what I earn from speed.
Not a quarter what there is in cannabis.
I can get more profit selling drink downstairs.
Anyway, that Richardson sells smack so cheap he doesn't even make a profit.’
‘He's a thorn in your side, though, isn't he?’
‘He's not a thorn, he's a prick.’
Carmichael laughs.
He waits for me to laugh.
‘Listen.
He's welcome to Deptford.
He was welcome.’
‘His cheap prices don't annoy you?’
He shrugs.
‘Of course not.’
‘But you put pressure on his breadheads?’
Huey chuckles.
‘Like your brother, you mean?
You think I might have killed your brother because he worked for Richardson?’
‘Somebody killed him.’
Our eyes meet.
I shrug and look away, as if it doesn't matter.
He breathes out.
He takes his time about it.
Then he says, ‘Hey, look down there, Floyd.
Your girlfriend's started singing.
You want that I turn up the sound?’
I shake my head.
From up here, Tamsin looks like a teenager after school.
She wears a long yellow sweater and light blue jeans.
The sweater is big for her, but does not disguise the shape of her body.
Huey and I watch as she cuddles the microphone, wrapping her mouth round it, almost swallowing it at times.
Whatever words she is singing must be important.
She concentrates on them.
‘Tell me what you know of Richardson's plans.’
‘The man cannot be serious, hey?
He has a brain made of concrete.’
‘He's serious.’
‘But the Island is an upmarket area-a very upmarket-area.
Those people won't buy cocaine and designer drugs from a hulking great turnip like Tod Richardson.’
‘He'll employ someone.
A man in a suit.’
‘Richardson wouldn't know cocaine from soap powder.’
‘Does it matter?’
Carmichael collapses in his soft leather chair and rotates round in it moodily.
‘Can you honestly see him making out on the Island?’
‘Until a few years ago, the only ones on the Island were people like him.’
‘The world has changed.
We are talking about one of the most upscale markets in the country.
That is the new City of London, man — millionaires and yuppies.
My kind of people.’
Huey grins, a vicious, hungry grin.
‘Richardson thinks he can make them his kind of people.’
‘It's preposterous.
He is a small-time criminal.
He does not belong.’
‘His family goes back a long way.’
‘He is a has-been, and you know it.’
‘His family owned several square miles round here — owned them, Huey.
They controlled the thieving, the gambling, the drinks and the sex.
He is not going to give that up.
He wants his empire back.’
‘He wants the Parrot back.
That's what it is.
I gave him a fair price for it, and I have let him carry on trading in smack.’
‘But you find him irritating, don't you, Huey?
You want to shake him off like a wasp on a sunny day.
But he won't quit that easily.’
‘Then I'll have to make him.’
‘You know how his family held on to their empire?
Through fear, fear of violence.
The Richardsons weren't sophisticated, didn't leave things to imagination.
They just did it.
If a girl stopped paying her percentage, they cut her face.
If a guy tried to run out on them, they nailed his legs to the floor.
I mean it, Huey.
This family knows one way of persuasion: they hurt you bad.
Really bad.
They cripple you or they kill you.
Nothing else, nothing fancy.
They come along with something sharp and heavy and they swat you with it.
It isn't clever.
It won't please your rich folk on the Island.
But it'll work.
These are the men you'll be dealing with, Huey.’
‘Yeah?
Let me tell you the sort of guys I've been dealing with for years.’
Carmichael throws his head back.
The lapels of his white jacket slide open to reveal his pink shirt.
‘You heard of the Yardies, hey?
Out where you've come from?
In the West Indies, Jamaicans are called Yardies because people think we sit in our back yards all the time, thinking we own the Caribbean.
Here in this cold country the word Yardie means a Jamaican gangster.
You know why that is?
Police can't tell the difference — a young male Jamaican is a young male gangster, simple as that.
You see this gun?’
He produces the little black pistol he keeps stuffed in the waistband of his trousers, and he grips it snug in his hand.
He points it upward, as if he means to blow a hole in the ceiling.
‘You know what this is?
Browning thirty-eight.
A useful pistol.
But you know what a Yardie packs — I mean a real Yardie?
He packs a calibre forty-five minimum — maybe even a ninety.
Those are huge guns.
They are magnums, like for Dirty Harry.
They blast a hole like a stake through your heart.
If someone gets hit by a magnum bullet, he is dead.
What I mean is that if he gets hit in the body anywhere, any place above his balls, he is dead, no dispute.
There's no such thing as being wounded by one of those.’
‘You don't carry that sort of gun.’
Huey smiles.
Casually he holds his small pistol towards me, butt first, for inspection.
I can look at it.
But he does not bring it close enough for me to take a hold.
‘Floyd, I'd be more scared of a man who carried this.
A pistol like this can hit somewhere near its target.
A magnum makes a lot  of noise and a terrifying big hole, but might hit anywhere.
That magnum has a kick like a field-gun.
You gotta hold it with boht hands, aim carefully, stand with both feed apart, and you have to be strong.
Then maybe the gun won't jump out of your hands, hey?
Maybe the bullet will go somewhere near the direction you aimed it.
You see, the point about a magnum is that it is metal psychology: it scares the shit out of the guy it is aimed at, it makes the guy who holds it feel really proud.’
Huey stuffs his Browning back in his trousers.
I say, ‘So what are you telling me — that the Yardies swagger around with big guns they can't handle?
Tod Richardson's boys aren't like that.
They use things like a hammer and a nails, a block of wood, even a saw.
Those things don't sound fearsome — till you see them used on a man's body.’
Carmichael clucks his tongue irritably, and continues defending his team.
‘Yardies can do all of those things.
I was working a patch up in Islington once.
There was a little breadhead called Innocent Egbulefu.
Nigerian.
He sold some Jamaicans a bag of fake cannabis.
A mistake, but then, Innocent was not wise.
Another of his mistakes was to live in a flat eight floors up.
Yardies called by, smashed his door down, grabbed the man, threw him out through that eighth floor window.
But the thing is, Floyd, they did it fast.
When the police straightened out Innocent's body on the ground, know what they found in his hand, hey?
The remote control for his TV set.
He hadn't had time to let it go.’
‘Just the sort of thing the Richardsons would do.’
Huey is not having that.
He thinks we're into the big number from Annie Get Your Gun : ‘Anything You Can Do, I Can Do Better’.
‘But the Yardies know how to use guns.
Listen.
When Shankie Alfred was shot over Acton, it was in a club.
Crowded.
Two Yardies walk in — Danger Mouse Campbell and Sammy Dread Miller.
Miller shoots half Shankie Alfred's head off.
Literally, half his head, one shot.
Everyone dives to the floor.
You know what the witnesses said afterwards?
Campbell and Miller were smiling, all the way through.
You picture that, Floyd, hey?
They come in carrying the shotgun.
Smile.
Hallow, Shankie.
Smile.
You had this coming to you, Shankie.
Smile.
Blam!
Campbell and Miller look at the customers cowering on the floor.
OK, folks, you can relax now, all our business is done.
Smile.
Leave the club.
Smiling all the time.
You see what that means, hey?’
‘They were cocky.’
‘They thought they would not be caught.
Couldn't be caught.
Thought they could stand up in full view in a club crammed with people,execute the man.
No one would testify.
No one would dare.
Metal psychology.’