

1
On the desk in front of me lie two human hands.
They are alive, but perfectly still.
One of them is sitting, poised like a crab about to scuttle, the fingers steadying a fresh Government-issue folder.
The other is holding a grey Government-issue ballpoint above the label on the cover, as motionless as a lizard, waiting to strike down into the space next to the word Subject.
These hands, and the crisp white shirtsleeves that lead away from them, are the only signs of me in the room.
Slid neatly back to make room for the empty folder are the two full ones I am also working on, labelled in the small neat letters characteristic of this grey pen and these two pink hands.
Subject: Annual Assessment of Departmental Efficiency, Proposed Procedure and Timetable; Subject: Joint CO/ Treasury Overview Meeting, Sunningdale.
Beyond the desk is a plain maroon carpet.
At the edge of the carpet are a filing cabinet and a hatstand and two upright chairs.
From a hanger on the hatstand hangs the jacket of a pale grey summer suit.
A net curtain stirs at the window, diffusing the sharpness of the outside world.
Which is in any case an airwell, with more net curtains at the windows on the other side.
There's nothing personal about this place.
That's why I feel so much at home here.
Sometimes I glimpse a figure moving behind the net curtains on the other side of the airwell.
Sometimes through the  wall I hear phones ringing and muffled voices answering them.
‘Bartlett,’ they say, briefly and flatly, with neither pride nor shame.
Or ‘Kyle’ or ‘Milmo’or ‘Gedge’.
Sometimes my own phone rings, and the voice that answers it is here inside the room, emerging from somewhere about the point where my two shirtsleeves meet.
Because of course I have my voice in here with me, as well as my hands.
I'd forgotten that.
‘Jessel,’ it says, flatly and truthfully.
Then nothing for a bit, then perhaps ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, or, ‘Before Cabinet on Thursday…
At ministerial level…
As a matter of urgency…’
And then, when I put the phone down again, it resumes its full natural flow, inside my head instead of outside, as perfectly articulate and well-modulated as only a voice inside one's head has a chance to be.
My hands are going to write a single word on the outside of the empty folder, in the space for Subject.
I know what the word is, of course.
When it appears I shall be launched into my next piece of work.
This is the short moment of stillness before the journey starts.
My hand moves.
‘Summerchild’, it writes, in the familiar script.
Left hand moves down the label to the heading Security Classification.
Right hand puts down the pen and moves to the top drawer of the desk.
It takes out a blue tag printed with the words ‘Staff in confidence’ and sticks it into the space on the label.
A small sound is audible in the room.
I recognize it as a sigh, but have no recollection of authorizing its publication.
Monday.
Another week, another file.
2
Summerchild.
Yes.
And at once there is something a little awkward in the room, a little uneasy, a little personal.
The outside world has suddenly got a foothold here.
The world of muddle and incoherence, of being seventeen, of home, of unidentified feelings, of unresolved questions.
As soon as Ken Hurren mentioned the word in his office this morning, when he asked me to take the task on, I felt a secret dismay.
‘It's one of those old chestnuts that crops up from time to time,’ he said.
‘All the supposedly mysterious deaths of people connected with defence.
Summerchild is usually one of the cases that gets cited.
Innocent Civil Servant, apparently no defence involvement, body found on MOD property.’
He waited to see if I was going to frown and drag some faint recollection out of my own memory, but I said nothing.
Summerchild was in fact found on the pavement on the other side of Whitehall.
But, yes, it was in front of the Ministry of Defence, and he'd jumped out of one of the windows.
‘I think it was some time in the seventies,’ said Ken.
‘I imagine you were still at school.’
He smiled, in the somewhat sanctimoniously paternal style he has adopted since he became deputy head of the Division.
I smiled back.
It was in 1974.
The summer of 1974.
The end of June, to be precise.
I'd just left school.
Ken, I imagine in my turn, had just left university.
‘Anyway, look it up and minute me about it, will you?
Apparently the television people are showing interest in the case.
Or so I'm informed.
I gather they're going to tell us he was working on some secret defence project, after all.
There's also supposed to be a mysterious disappearing colleague and some kind of Russian connection.
It sounds nonsense to me, but I'd like to have a brief resume of the affair to hand, just in case there's a sudden panic at Number Ten.’
Defence — disappearance — case.
My slight personal acquaintance with the subject of all this discouraging impersonal solemnity seemed slightly ridiculous.
So I continued to say nothing.
I merely asked why it was a matter for us in the Cabinet Office.
The answer was even more unsettling — that this was the department he'd worked in.
I hadn't realized that I'd followed so closely in his footsteps.
He worked in Whitehall, that's all I'd known at the time.
It seemed a full enough account.
I'm not sure that I was aware, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, of any sub-divisions within that single blanched palace of administration, that great white hall of bumbledom.
But it was to this very building that he departed each morning, from an office much like this that he returned each night.
I can just see, through the net curtains of the office opposite, someone leaning back from his desk, the phone to his ear.
That could be him.
He'd be — what — in his fifties now if he'd lived, a Deputy Secretary, perhaps even a Second Permanent Secretary.
‘Summerchild,’ he could be saying, briefly and flatly, as if there never had been a case.
as if he had no more unexplained attributes than anyone else.
He wouldn't have been on this airwell at the time, though.
According to Ken he worked in the old Government Commission, which was tucked away in the back somewhere, until the present Government wound it up and the Cabinet Office took over its functions.
Together, of course, with responsibility for any legacy it left of mysteries and embarrassments.
‘It shouldn't take you long,’ said Ken.
I suppose my reluctance was more visible than it should have been.
‘I know you've got one or two other things on.
End of the week, perhaps?’
He should have referred it to Management and Personnel over in Great George Street and let the Security Division sort it out.
But he wants to keep it in his own hands.
He wants to be ready with something his own people have prepared, as soon as the alarm goes up from the Secretary of the Cabinet.
I suppose these two blind crabs of mine should be grateful for the variety that my work involves.
They should be pleased to turn for a moment from the Annual Assessment, which even they find a little dull, to some piece of historical research.
You'd think they'd be intrigued at a chance to play detectives.
But they don't give much sign of it.
I suspect even they find something distasteful in the prospect.
Perhaps it's simply because they don't really know how to go about it.
They've spent their professional life dealing with general classes of person, with samples and percentages of classes, not with individuals.
They're trained to collate evidence about the present, and project it into the future, not to find out what happened fifteen years ago to some one particular person, least of all one with whom I had a slight personal acquaintance.
I move the folder to one side and take a pad of ruled Government paper.
I write slowly as I think:
1.
George Street, for S's personal dossier.
2.
Registry, for any reference.
3.
Westminster Coroner's Court, for papers of inquest.
I start telephoning.
As I do so I gaze at Kyle (or Gedge, or Henning) on the other side of the airwell.
He is running his hand through his thin grey hair.
I suddenly remember Summerchild's hair.
It was fine and coppery, standing up around his head like the burning bush, or a single over-arching eyebrow raised in perpetual surprise.
No one in any of the offices around this airwell has red hair or freckles.
Nor for the moment can I think of anyone else in the entire Administrative Grade of the Civil Service who does.
I believe there are no red-headed Civil Servants.
How curious.
I remember that one of the Assistant Secretaries in the Home Affairs Secretariat is an old Government Commission man.
John Killick.
I dial his number and on the other side of the airwell Kyle picks up his phone.
‘Killick,’ says Kyle.
So that's Killick!
Or is it the merest coincidence that Kyle is sitting back in his chair, with the receiver to his ear, stroking the bald patch on the back of his head as I explain my business?
Killick has no recollection of any work in the department on defence, or of anyone mysteriously disappearing.
So far as he can remember Summerchild was working on a comparison of incomes inside and outside the Civil Service.
He was doing it with Michael Treacher, who is now teaching government somewhere in Canada.
Killick hangs up.
A moment later so does Kyle.
I go to Registry, thinking about Summerchild.
I remember the first time I saw him, appearing out of the winter darkness in that unmade-up lane outside his house in Greenwich.
I was standing there talking to his daughter, Millie.
Or not talking to her.
This would have been after a rehearsal of the local schools orchestra, some time early in that last year of his life.
I imagine I was holding my trombone case, kicking at the loose pebbles in the roadway.
Millie would have been fiddling awkwardly with the thick brush of ginger hair coarser than her father's, and even redder — that sprang away all round her face, while her cello case, which I had carried back for her, was no doubt propped up against one of the crumbling and gateless brick pillars in front of their house, like a portly little old man too out of breath to speak.
At some point during this silent debate Summerchild came walking up the lane.
Not that he was Summerchild then, of course.
He was Mr Summerchild — an entirely different creature.
To me, at any rate.
To Millie, presumably, he had the appearance and nature of Daddy.
He was on his way home — characteristically late, I realize, now that I keep the same office hours from the back blocks of the building where I am now sitting.
He stopped and carefully put down his briefcase.
He smiled at Millie.
She smiled at him.
He nodded to me.
I nodded to him.
He sighed and gazed at the cello.
He seemed to have some fellow-feeling with its weariness.
We stood there, all four of us, in silence for what seemed a very long time.
The fine red-gold of his hair was like an angel's aureole against the street lamp.
I had the feeling that if I hadn't been present he might have risked uttering a few words to Millie.
She was rather younger than me and known to be as brilliant as her hair.
He must have wanted to know what triumphs she had to report.
I don't suppose he was pleased to find an ageing trombonist hanging around outside his gate, distracting his daughter from her future.
Eventually he sighed again, picked up his bag and went on up the steps into his house.
No, he must have said something first, now I come to think about it, because I can remember very distinctly the way he spoke.
The words seemed to have been dragged up one by one from the depths of himself, like prisoners loaded with chains, and released to the world only with great reluctance.
What words they were, though, I have no recollection.
Perhaps if I could remember them the whole mystery would be solved.
I saw him a few times more after that, in the months that followed, coming slowly up the lane from the station, as Millie and I stood at the gate.
I heard the same sigh, and no doubt the same gravelled reluctance of speech, though I can't remember anything he said.
I now detect in them not only tiredness and disapprobation.
With hindsight, and also with my regular weekly exposure to the full taxonomy of psychic pathology, I diagnose a somewhat depressive turn of mind.
How much more depressed he would have been, if he could have seen the silent trombonist in years to come, ensconced in his offices, sifting the sparse and scattered remains of his life.
Whilst poor Millie, far from playing cello concertos at the Festival Hall, or leading archaeological expeditions to Asia Minor, or whatever she was expected to be doing by this time, is…
I don't know.
What is she doing now?
Still living with her mother, I think, in that unmade-up lane.
I must make inquiries.
She left the orchestra after her father died.
I don't think I ever saw her again.
By this time I am in Registry and Mrs Tamm is silently laying the results of her research in front of me.
I like Mrs Tamm's silence almost as much as I like the impersonality of my room.
In so far as she possibly can, she lets this great dull store of words speak for themselves, without addition to their number.
She is silently waiting for me now to understand the nature of what she is offering me.
It is a ledger, the size and solidity of an old-fashioned accounts book, with broken corners and an air of belonging to that grey period which is too far gone to be new but not yet far enough off to be old.
She gives me time to read the label on the front cover Government Commission Press Department, 1974 — then opens it and slowly turns the pages, so that I can see it is a cuttings book, in which the Commission's Press Officer has pasted the results of his labours, the stories inspired by all his briefings, handouts and leaks.
Mrs Tamm turns to the middle of the book.
There, alone on the page, is a very short cutting of a different sort.
‘Death fall’, says the headline.
‘Thank you,’ I say to Mrs Tamm.
She goes silently back to her work.
According to the handwritten inscription over the cutting it is from The Times, page three, on June 25th.
The body of a man found yesterday in Spring Gardens, SWl. was identified last night as that of Mr S J L Summerchild (39), a Civil Servant.
Police said that Mr Summerchild appeared to have died as the result of a fall.
Foul play is not suspected.
I find this a little surprising.
An inch on page three?
In my memory there were prominent headlines and a sudden flurry of importance.
There were newspaper reporters standing in the lane where he had lived, waiting all day for someone to come out of the house.
And what's this about Spring Gardens?
Where are Spring Gardens?
He was found outside the Ministry  of Defence, in Horseguards Avenue.
That's surely what all the fuss was about.
I turn the page.
We are back into grey acres about Civil Service decentralization, for which the Commission seems to have been responsible.
But other accounts of Summerchild's death must have been appearing in the newspapers somewhere, because a little further on there is another cutting from The Times.
This one is dated two days later, June 27th.
It is from page one, at least seven column-inches long, and it is pouring cold water on reports of a more sensational nature.
‘Whitehall body: ‘no spy link’, says the headline, and beneath it, ‘From our Political Staff’.
Reports that Mr Stephen Summerchild, the Civil Servant whose body was found in Whitehall earlier this week, had connections with espionage were being firmly discounted at Westminster yesterday.
The official line is that it remains Government policy never to comment on allegations of this nature.
But unofficially the suggestion was authoritatively pooh-poohed.
Mr Summerchild, it was pointed out, was employed in the Government Commission, the department set up by Harold Wilson in 1965 to coordinate the workings of the various ministries.
Whitehall sources believe he is much more likely to have been concerned with such humdrum matters as integrating inter-departmental communications to prepare the ground for Civil Service computerization.
Speculation was sparked off because Mr Summerchild's body was discovered on Ministry of Defence property — a yard in Spring Gardens, at the back of the Admiralty.
A Ministry of Defence spokesman said yesterday that he appeared to have fallen from one of the offices on the third floor, but declined to surmise why he was visiting the Admiralty.
Mr Summerchild lived in Greenwich with his wife and seventeen-year-old daughter.
Mrs Summerchild was not available last night for comment, but neighbours described him as a reserved man who was devoted to his family, and who had a passion for music.
He occasionally played the violin in local musical events.
One neighbour said: ‘He was not the kind of man you associate with James Bond activities.’
I am curiously disconcerted by the wrongness of my memory about where the body was found.
There was something horribly appropriate, it seemed to me, about the idea of a man being dashed to death, like a sacrifice to the god of war, at the base of that great white tomb in Horseguards Avenue.
But round the back of the Admiralty, put out in the yard like a dead cat…
Why the Admiralty, of all places?
There's something neither here nor there about it, neither plain enough nor mysterious enough, neither explicable nor inexplicable.
Though if he took his own life, as everyone has always supposed, and as we are still likely to be supposing after the present rumours have been scotched — if the balance of his mind was disturbed, that curious disruption which accompanies a man's election to end his life, but never any other procedure, no matter how eccentric or irrational — then reasons are not to be looked for.
I turn the pages of the cuttings book.
Proposed changes in Civil Service terms of employment, the problems of interface between Whitehall and the European bureaucracy in Brussels, leaders from the Guardian and the Telegraph about decentralization…
Nothing more about Summerchild until July 5th, when there is a two-column report of the inquest, headed ‘Open verdict on death fall man’.
The story has slipped back to page two, though, I notice.
I shall be getting the full papers from the Coroner's office eventually, and I run a rather cursory eye over the brief details here.
Mr F K A Tite, Summerchild's Permanent Secretary, gave evidence in person, I see.
Somewhat surprising.
I wonder if the Secretary of the Cabinet would go into the box if I were found outside the Ministry of Agriculture.
Wouldn't have described Summerchild as depressed, he says…
Had perhaps seemed somewhat preoccupied…
No idea of reason for this…
Didn't know why Summerchild should have gone to the Admiralty on the morning of June 24th, but his work was  related to conditions of employment in the Civil Service and involved liaison with other departments, so nothing particularly surprising about it…
Then Mrs Summerchild…
And as soon as I read the name I see her standing there in the witness box, self-contained, precise, unknowable.
Her head is lowered defensively, so that one's impression of her is greying hair, with watchful eyes lurking in the shadows beneath.
She is observing the Coroner now with that same surreptitious brooding care with which she had once watched Millie and me from her kitchen window, as we stood talking, or not talking, at the gate.
She measures out her guarded replies to him in neat, carefully checked words, as once she had suggested, from the top of the steps outside their front door, that Millie might like to invite me in for a few minutes.
Her husband had been very involved in his work, she tells the Coroner.
Had never discussed it at home.
Had been working late.
Very late?— Sometimes.
— Had seemed at all depressed or anxious?— Had seemed tired.
— Anything unusual about his manner when he had left for work on the morning of the 24th?— Not that she had noted.
The pathologist: Injuries consistent with a fall from an upper storey.
Had been dead no more than an hour when he was found…
An Admiralty clerical worker: Had found the body at about 9. 50 am, when taking office waste out to the yard for collection.
Was lying beside dustbins and boxes of waste paper, just inside the locked gates to the yard.
A Ministry of Defence security officer: No record of Summerchild entering the building.
No one in the offices overlooking Spring Gardens with any recollection of seeing him…
A police witness: Difficult to establish exactly where Summerchild had fallen from, because of subsequent rain.
There was a window open on the third floor, but marks consistent with the rubber-soled shoes he was wearing suggested that it was from the parapet in front of the four dormer windows in the roof.
If this was so, then the most probable point of  impact was approximately 50 feet away from where the body had been found.
— Could the body have been moved?— Possibly.
But it had been raining and the surface of the yard had been washed clear of any traces.
— Could he have survived the fall and dragged himself to the position where he was found?— This seemed the most likely explanation.
Then, after the inquest, nothing more, until I notice a slip of paper projecting from the book much further on, which turns out to be another of Mrs Tamm's silent helpfulnesses.
It marks a cutting from the Times Parliamentary Report, November 20th, Prime Minister's Questions.
‘Mr C S Jones (Lab), Leicester NW — Will the Government now publish the report on which Mr S J L Summerchild is known to have been working at the time of his death?— The report has already been published as Cmnd. 4078.’
I look up, aware that Mrs Tamm has placed some document silently beside the cuttings book.
It is Cmnd. 4078 — Comparability: The Effect of Differentials in Reward on Recruitment and Wastage Rates in Four Selected Sectors of Government and Manufacturing Industry.
I turn the pages.
Cost-of-living allowances…
Expressing job satisfaction as a numerical index…
Table VII…
Annexe C…
I don't need to read it through to know that there will be no mystification here, no hint of distress or depression, no trace of weariness or unusual hair colour, no premonition of ruptured aorta or broken ribs.
This is as far as I can get with my researches for now, because after lunch I have to go to the Treasury, with my colleague Jane Showell, for a meeting of the joint working party on Sunningdale; not even death takes precedence over the Treasury.
But while Tony Lesser is once again listing the Treasury's objections to the topics Jane and I have proposed for discussion papers, a picture suddenly comes into my mind, with the most painful vividness, of Summerchild dragging himself across the hard wet ground, on the morning of June 24th 1974, to the locked gates of that yard behind the Admiralty.
It is as if the words had suddenly come to life inside my head.
‘Could he have dragged himself…?’
Dragged  himself.
The syllables are raw and cold in my nostrils, like the wetness of the ground I am pressed against.
They scrape me down from head to foot — my torn clothes, my hands, my broken knees, the nose on my face.
They hurt inside me like the split sacs and shattered bones.
Could he have dragged himself…?
He could.
He did.
He is now doing so.
A silence has fallen in the room, I realize.
Tony Lesser has stopped speaking.
He is looking at me with a slight frown, disconcerted by something about me, ready to be embarrassed.
Jane has looked up from her papers.
So has Lyell, the other Treasury man.
They are on the point of asking if I am all right.
I have an instant of panic — what has my face been doing?
Then I remember what it's been doing: nothing that they could see, because it's hidden behind my beard.
My strange and wonderful beard!
My dense and well-trimmed hedge against the inquiring world.
I stroke it gratefully as I raise a counter-objection to Lesser's counter-proposals.
Their question dissolves, unasked; the moment passes.
When the meeting is over Jane and I walk back towards our own department, past the sightseers waiting outside the security barriers at the end of Downing Street.
The June warmth has become slightly oppressive and I feel a continuing sense of strangeness, of standing slightly outside myself.
We are talking about the meeting.
As we reach the door of the Cabinet Office she says, ‘I think that was all right, wasn't it?’
I stop.
‘I mean the meeting,’ she says, looking at me with a sudden trace of anxiety.
I tell her I'm going to take a walk and I continue up Whitehall on my own, leaving her gazing after me.
She thinks she is a little worried about me.
I think she is a little irritated at needing to be worried.
I don't know quite which way to go; I'm not in the habit of taking strolls in the middle of the day.
I push through the tourists and into the Horse Guards.
I walk out on to the great parade-ground beyond, where the grandstands left over from Trooping the Colour are still displacing the more usual arrangements for Trooping the Parked Cars.
When I get to the road, with St James's Park beyond, as fresh and green as an  early summer salad, I stop and turn.
I am looking at the most magnificent townscape in London.
My world, seen from the outside.
From here it appears to be not the central generating plant of ministerial power but some vast open-air theatre.
The Parade is the stage and the great offices of state that enclose it on three sides are the décor.
On my right, as I look at it, are the five lofty plane trees which shade the back gardens of Downing Street.
Then, in the corner, the Cabinet Office, with the elegant classical façade of Kent's old Treasury flanked by its nineteenth-century annexes.
Somewhere in the heart of the further annexe my empty office awaits me.
Somewhere in the annexe on this side, where the Government Commission pursued its sober tasks, Summerchild lived out his working life.
I start to think for some reason about the idea of being all right.
The meeting was all right.
Summerchild was not all right.
What about me?
Am I all right, as they were on the point of asking?
What is this all right?
It suddenly seems as peculiar a notion as the balance of one's mind.
I try to visualize the balance of my own mind.
In one pan the Unknown Substance.
In the other the neat little brass weights, geometrically round and gleaming, maintaining the scale in perfect equilibrium.
I continue with my survey of the world I inhabit.
Next to the Cabinet Office is the Scottish Office.
Then the back of the Horse Guards.
Everything is quiet and contained.
No one is stepping out of any of the windows.
No one is even leaning out of a window.
No one, on this warm summer afternoon, is so much as visible at a window.
There is no sign of human life.
Everything is all right.
I continue to turn.
And there, all along the lefthand side of the Parade, is the grandest building of them all — the Admiralty.
Its long colonnaded frontage basks in the afternoon sunlight.
The green copper cupolas and complex wireless aerials on the roof reach importantly into the blue of the sky.
Now I know where my walk is taking me.
I go past the creeper-covered bunker at the end of the façade and follow it round into the Mall, until I am facing Admiralty Arch.
Between the Arch and the back of the Admiralty proper runs a small unnamed side-street which I must have passed a hundred times without really noticing.
It has a curiously defensive nature, I realize as I walk down it.
The roadway is closed to traffic by a turnpike, then, underneath a kind of Bridge of Sighs connecting the main block with the buildings attached to the Arch, it is closed again by a set of ornamental gates — and then closed for a third time by another turnpike.
Beyond this second turnpike it ends in a T-junction with another small street.
I walk up to the lefthand end of this street, where it emerges in Trafalgar Square, and check the name: Spring Gardens.
I retrace my steps and walk up the righthand arm of the T, where the roadway is closed by a second set of iron gates.
Beyond them is a courtyard surrounded on three sides by the rear walls of office buildings, like a miniature version of Horse Guards Parade.
The wall on the left seems to be the back of a bank, the wall on the right and the one at the back of the yard belong to the Admiralty.
There is a parapet along the roof of this third wall, with four dormer windows beyond it.
From somewhere along that parapet, on a wet June morning nearly fifteen years ago, Summerchild fell.
Across that tarmacadam towards these gates he crawled.
And among bins and rubbish like the ones in front of me now he stopped crawling, and died, and lay unnoticed.
The gates are padlocked.
I rest my head against the bars and gaze through them as into a cage.
In the warm afternoon shade the scene says nothing to me.
The ground itself is not as harsh as the words I felt beneath me for that one curious moment at the Treasury.
For an hour he lay here and no one saw him.
I look up at the windows.
The end wall is three floors high, with dormer windows in the attic above, and each floor has four windows on it.
The righthand wall is three floors high, with ten windows on each floor.
Forty-six windows.
In all of them  hang net curtains.
In none of them is there anyone to be seen.
Forty-six windows, and not a soul looking out.
I begin to appreciate for the first time, as I stand here on the outside looking in, how very reserved is the world in which we work.
Another picture of Summerchild comes into my mind, another encounter in the darkness of the unmade-up lane.
But this time the scene is back-to-front.
This time I am the one walking along the lane and he is the one standing outside the gate.
He is carrying his violin case, for some reason, and he is standing absolutely still, gazing at something with great absorption.
It is not the lights of London, visible over the roofs of the houses on the lower side of the lane.
It is his own house.
He hears my step on the rough stones of the roadway, glances at me, then walks silently up to his front door and lets himself in.
I suppose I was on my way to call for Millie, but I walk on past the house instead, obscurely ashamed to have caught her father unawares.
What was absorbing him so deeply, I realize as I go by, was the sight of his own living-room, with the curtains innocently open, and his wife and Millie moving silently about the bright world inside.
I walk back to the Cabinet Office.
I do not like the task I have been given.
I am now standing outside a gate, outside a window, looking into a life that does not belong to me, and I should rather look away.
There are no great secrets here, I am sure of that, only intimate awkwardnesses, only small sad discrepancies in that little grey heap of Unknown Substance on the balance-pan.
I get back to my office and set to work with the phone.
It is a frustrating business.
Whichever way I try to come at the Unknown Substance it remains just beyond my grasp.
Sir Francis Tite (as he now is) is alive, but is said to be senile.
I can't get my hands on the inquest papers until the end of the week.
Worst of all, Management and Personnel say there's no trace of Summerchild's dossier at Great George Street.
According to the register it was last signed in on September 5th 1974.
There is no record of its being signed out again.
This could mean that something sinister has happened to it.
It could equally well mean that it has simply been mislaid.
My one success is with Michael Treacher, who Killick said was working on the comparability report with Summerchild.
I track him down to the University of Saskatchewan and just catch him at home before he leaves for work.
Back from the great plains of Central Canada comes the brief response, as crisp and neutral as if from the other side of the airwell, ‘Treacher.’
I explain my business.
‘How curious,’ says Treacher.
‘Someone called about this the other day.
Also from the Cabinet Office.’
‘Really?’
I say.
I suppose this was the television company.
‘Yes, we had quite a little chat about the place.
I couldn't help asking him if the waitresses in the Cabinet Office canteen still wear those terrible green overalls.’
I can't quite understand this.
‘There aren't any waitresses in the Cabinet Office canteen,’ I say stupidly.
‘Thank you,’ says Treacher.
‘I'm sorry to play tricks.
Your supposed colleague was perfectly happy with the idea of green waitresses.
Yes, I did work with Stephen Summerchild on the comparability report.
At one stage.
I had to finish it on my own, of course.’
‘You mean, after his death?’
‘No, after Tite took him off it.’
I feel a faint stirring somewhere inside me.
A sudden alertness, a touch of adrenalin in the blood.
A small discrepancy has appeared, a faint crack in the ordinariness of things.
So Tite's evidence at the inquest was not strictly accurate.
I formulate a carefully unsurprised question.
‘When was that?’
‘I can't remember.
This is 1974 we're talking about, isn't it?
Heath went some time in March, I think.
I recall it as being immediately after Wilson came into office.
It was probably something to do with the change of Government.
Tite wanted him for the special unit he was setting up.’
A special unit?
The crack is widening by the moment.
‘This unit,’ I say cautiously.
‘Can you tell me anything about it?’
‘Not really,’ says Treacher.
‘Something confidential, I assume.
I don't think many people knew about it.
I noticed Tite didn't say anything about it at the inquest.’
‘I noticed that,’ I say.
‘Summerchild didn't tell you anything about it himself?’
‘Stephen?’
Treacher laughs.
‘I'm not sure Stephen ever told anyone anything about anything.
He was a terrible depressive, you know.
It was often quite difficult to get two words together out of him.’
‘You've no idea what this unit was doing?’
‘I saw him in the canteen once or twice after he'd left comparability,’ says Treacher.
‘I suppose he must have said something.’
I wait.
‘But what it was I can't remember.
I just recall that I got a bit of a shock when I heard they found him on MOD property.
Because I had the definite impression that this was the area he was working in.’
‘Defence?’
I feel a reluctance to pronounce the word.
‘Or something connected with it,’ says Treacher.
His tone changes.
‘Do they still have cabinet pudding in the canteen?’
I don't think there's anything behind the question this time but nostalgia.
But even nostalgia can misremember; I don't think they've ever served cabinet pudding in the Cabinet Office.
‘It's mostly apples and yoghurt these days,’ I tell him.
After I have put the phone down I sit gazing at Kyle on the opposite side of the airwell.
He is also replacing his receiver and turning to gaze thoughtfully out of the window.
I get the impression he has had some rather unwelcome news.
Defence, then.
I was wrong.
A world of secrets and mysteries.
And all of them to do with the dull task of bringing people to their deaths.
3
I could quite reasonably give up at this point, I think.
I could-perhaps should — go back to Ken Hurren tomorrow morning and tell him that there may after all be some question of security involved.
I think he would then be obliged to pass it across to Great George Street, and I could honourably retire to the dull comfortable depths of the Annual Assessment.
But what sticks in my head, ridiculously, is the cabinet pudding.
Maybe they were still eating cabinet pudding in those days.
The Treachers and the Summerchilds are the older generation.
1974, yes.
Heath.
Wilson.
I'd forgotten what was happening in the world until Treacher pronounced those ancient incantations from my childhood.
The miners' strike and the three-day week.
Cold and darkness.
I remember the grey excitement of walking to rehearsals through the blacked-out streets, of playing ‘Mars the Bringer of War’ by candlelight, in overcoats and scarves.
Yes, and I remember the tanks moving down Whitehall; or at any rate I remember the picture I had of them in my head as Tilly Tilling, in the middle of a history class, suddenly began to tell us about the military putsch that was coming.
I remember the shake in his voice, the vengeance.
I realize with a shock that those tanks are moving down this same peaceful street I'm now walking along.
Because by this time I'm halfway up Whitehall on my way home.
I've stayed at my desk until half past seven, writing up the minutes of our meeting at the Treasury — even doing a little  preparation for a series of consultations I have to begin tomorrow in connection with the Annual Assessment.
Warm shadows have lengthened across the road and the tourists have gone.
In the side-streets running down towards the river theatregoers are looking for parking-spaces, but on the pavements there's no one but a few belated bureaucrats like myself, heading for trains and Tubes.
No tanks.
The tanks never came.
I like this street.
I like all these noncommittal grey frontages, some unobtrusively elegant, some cautiously flamboyant, that give so little away about the thought that teems behind them.
I hope I look a little like a Government building myself.
A quiet façade, perhaps with a touch of distinction.
Pale grey summer suit, ready-made but a perfect fit; neat hair already beginning to match the suit; and, what pleases me most, this trim matching beard to bridge most of the gap between suit and hair.
I run the tips of my fingers over this beard at difficult moments and am reassured by its fibrous smoothness as much as my son used to be, when he was a little younger, by the feel of his old piece of blanket.
I know that my thoughts and feelings are as safe as Cabinet Office minutes behind this beard.
My whole personality is decently concealed.
I don't think anyone would even realize I was a Civil Servant.
A little idiosyncratic, I think, my appearance — but without going to the slightly absurd lengths of ginger hair and freckles.
I am indeed a walking department of state.
Because on the inside — yes, I have my airwells, I have work going forward behind the net curtains.
Evidence is being collected — these buildings, this traffic.
A never-ending report is being written — here it is.
This report is being minuted in the margin — I'm doing it now.
‘The first sign of madness,’ joke people who have been caught talking to themselves, confident of course that it is not.
A late sign of sanity, in my view, if you do it as I do it, silently, the lips entirely still, the net curtains drawn.
After all, to think is to speak.
To think clearly is to organize one's speech into sentences and paragraphs; sentences and  paragraphs into sections and chapters; sections and chapters into a coherent draft report, ready for submission.
And to speak silently is to speak without asking for other people's time or sympathy; without wounding their sensibilities or undermining their faith; without breaching confidentiality or the Official Secrets Act.
To speak to oneself is to speak without constraint, to draft a minute which will be laid before a minister who will never read it.
I have timed my departure from the Cabinet Office to leave seven minutes to walk to Charing Cross, and then another two (no more!) before my train leaves — if, of course, it happens to be running.
Seven minutes is what it takes me at this time in the evening; eight, sometimes nine, coming the opposite way in the morning, to allow for waits at the two pedestrian crossings and the crowds coming out of the station.
But that's fast walking, as anyone else in the Cabinet Office who travels by way of Charing Cross would confirm.
It must have taken Summerchild at least an extra minute in each direction; as I recall it from those evenings fifteen years ago, he walked at a much more reflective pace, as if slowed by some inner weight.
I wonder if he left two minutes in hand, like me, to get from the barrier to a compartment level with the Greenwich exit, or three, or five, or whether he liked to arrive at the very last moment and leave a slight uncertainty in the air.
He must have caught this same train many times, and all the others before and after, as I have.
He must have been on one or other of them every night, in weather much like this, all through that last summer of his life.
The train starts, and thunders slowly over the bridge across the river.
The Government buildings along the Embankment drop away behind us, and here I am in another world, another life.
South London.
Every evening Summerchild looked down from these same arches on to this same exhausted tangle of brickwork.
He saw this warehouse…this grimy market…this factory…
Inside his head, beneath the odd blaze of hair, behind the reckless display of freckles, the same low horizon unrolled, the same milk-crate stacks of  Council flats came up out of the east, like this, slowly turned, just so, and fell away into the west, like that…
I stopped seeing those flats years ago.
It's not me seeing them now — it's Summerchild.
Only of course he never saw them, either.
I am giving him eyes he never had.
I am drafting the minutes he never drafted.
For a moment even the voice I am drafting them in changes.
The light, detached tones inside my head grow low and reluctant, as if I were switching the tape-recorder to a slower speed.
And now here I am getting off the train at Greenwich, as Summerchild did, instead of the next station down the line, as Jessel does.
I do it without premeditation, as naturally and wearily as if I did it every night.
I am — how did my neighbours describe me?— a reserved man who is devoted to his family, with a passion for music.
I walk slowly through the tunnel beneath the line, one of a dozen returning commuters, cross over the road with ten of them, make my way through the gnarled little streets beyond the redundant town hall with eight of the ten, and begin to climb the scarp of the South London hills with the remaining five.
Halfway up the hill I turn off, and now I am on my own.
I am in a little lane that runs across the front of the hillside, with a kind of broken roadway underfoot which disintegrates as I follow it into gravel studded with outcrops of manhole.
I haven't walked along here for years — not, it occurs to me, for fourteen years.
And yet I know it almost better than my own street.
I find the name in my head, as if it had always been there: Hyde Hill Lane.
I am moving slowly now, as slowly as Summerchild moved when he came out of the darkness on that winter's night.
I pass the lock-up garages and the grease-blackened signs that indicate some small motor repair workshops.
On my left the ground drops away through uncertain undergrowth into back gardens and a view of rooftops.
On my right there is a sudden and implausible terrace of little bow-fronted villas from the early thirties, still waiting for this left-over country lane to grow up and get itself surfaced and turned into a bypass.
But it has  not grown up.
It has escaped from time and place and municipal control.
It has the lost intensity of a dream.
Now here on the left London is beginning to appear beyond the rooftops, lying wide and blue and docile at my feet.
I look at it for a moment, tracing out my journey from Westminster.
I turn away from it.
I know precisely what I shall see, on the other side of the lane, looking out to London over my shoulder.
And there indeed they are — an odd little cluster of houses built a century and a half ago, in a jumbled assortment of all the styles available at the time.
They have the same wistful air as the terrace further back, as if they too had once entertained hopes of the lane going somewhere in life.
The Summerchilds lived in the third one along, with the peeling woodwork and the neglected grey rendering.
I believe Millie and her mother still do.
I realize that I am standing just as Summerchild stood that other night, when I saw him gazing with such intensity into his own life.
Now one of the tall windows on the front room stands open to the warm evening air, but there is nothing to be made out in the darkness of the room beyond.
For a moment I think I might walk up the steps and ring the bell.
I imagine the door opening and a woman with a ginger fuzz of hair, painfully familiar, painfully changed, standing on the threshold, frowning in puzzlement.
‘Brian…
Brian Jessel…
I got off the train at Greenwich — it was a fine evening — I was just walking…
I was just wondering…
You know — what you were doing, how you were…
Whether you could tell me anything about…well…
No, that's not the point.
But I was thinking about you only today, as it happened, because…well, for no very good reason.’
It's impossible.
I continue up the lane and return to the world of surfaced roads and pavements.
I am no longer the late Stephen Summerchild, a reserved man who is devoted to his family, with a passion for music.
I am the living Brian Jessel, a reserved man who is devoted to his family, with, yes, certainly, something of an interest in music.
An interest in music that I had rather forgotten about until the thought of  Millie in the lane reminded me.
I cross the park, as I crossed it so many times in the past, and regain the modest Edwardian streets beyond Maze Hill.
I lift my key towards the lock on my own front door, with all my usual sudden rush of fears and anxieties.
But before I can turn it, the door opens.
Cheryl has been standing inside the front room, looking out of the window, waiting for me.
‘I'm sorry…’
I begin, as I usually do.
‘No, it's just that my sister's going out,’ she says, as she picks up the various plastic carrier bags already waiting in the hall.
Sometimes she brings her children with her, which I don't much like, and sometimes she leaves them with her sister, which I like even less, because for her to have her two children minded for her so that she can mind my one is simply crazy.
The whole arrangement with Cheryl is hopeless.
And if her husband comes back, as he is apparently hinting he might, or if she moves, or gets a job, as she is always threatening to do if he doesn't, or if my colleagues in the DSS find out that I am paying her, then even this hopeless arrangement will come to an end and I shall be back to the agencies and the advertisements, back to the interviews and the references, back to strangers in the house.
‘He had a little accident at school today.’
My heart stops.
‘An accident?’
‘I knew something was wrong — when I got there he wouldn't look at me.
Mrs Lewis had got his shorts in a bag.
I washed them out — they're on the line.’
Oh, yes, an accident.
The front door closes.
I go upstairs and softly look round the door of my son's bedroom.
He is asleep, of course.
As always.
And, as always, I feel the usual wave of uncontrollable anguish at the sight of him.
He is lying on top of the covers, as he often is, with his head at the bottom of the bed and his feet on the pillow.
There are sharp-edged pieces of Lego mixed up with the bedding and an old cardboard box lying across his chest.
I carefully clear as much of the debris as I can.
But there is something about the way he is lying that makes my chest tighten with despair.
His life is  as muddled as his bed.
The home in which we both live is a nonsense, and a nonsense from which I can see no way of ever extracting us.
I go downstairs, a reserved man, devoted to his family, and get the remains of the family joint I cooked for my mother-in-law and Timmy and myself yesterday out of the refrigerator.
It looks hard and dark, and I can find no fresh vegetables to go with it.
Everything inside this house is personal.
Everything was chosen by me, worn by me, cooked by me, repaired by me.
This is why I am not at home here.
I will go to see Ken Hurren first thing tomorrow morning and tell him that Summerchild was working on defence.
When I think of him sighing in the lane on the other side of the Park he seems far too close to home, far too much a part of all the difficult things in life.
I don't want the mess spreading back into my working world.
Then tomorrow evening I'll get home in time to see my son awake, in time to cook a meal, in time to get to grips with things.
4
There are fourteen references to defence in the index of the old Government Commission files in Registry, and I have now wasted the first hour and a half of my working day checking through them all.
I have not changed my decision to disburden myself of the task.
I am merely rounding my contribution off, by finding or, as I hope, by failing to find — some recorded trace of Summerchild's work.
I think I settled upon this last gesture as my train stopped at Greenwich this morning.
I had been the last to get on at the previous station, so I was standing with my back wedged against the window.
At Greenwich the door opened behind me and someone else forced his way in.
He did it reluctantly, with a weary sigh, and I knew, as he pulled the door to behind him, and pressed his chest into my back, that he had hair like a forest of ginger exclamation marks.
And as we swayed on towards Charing Cross together, this densely corporeal ghost and I, the weariness of his sigh and the redness of his hair passed into me, and I was Summerchild again, on his way into our mutual office.
I suddenly wanted to see the work I was doing laid out in front of me.
Or at any rate to see its absence.
If it had been removed from the files, like myself and my career, I could lay myself to rest and forget myself.
File after dusty file Mrs Tamm lays in front of me.
Some of them contain printed reports, some sheaves of handwritten minutes held together by Treasury tags.
Looking for something  that you don't expect to find is a demoralizing task, and succeeding in finding nothing offers only a dreary satisfaction.
Defence requirements and regional planning procedures…
Changes in the presentation of defence estimates…
There are no great mysteries.
There is no sign of the existence of any special unit.
But at any rate I can finally dust my hands and put my jacket on with a clear conscience.
Nowhere did I expect to get and nowhere have I duly got.
But what's this?
Mrs Tamm is silently putting another stack of files in front of me.
‘War Games…
War Graves…
War, Second World, Official History of…’
I look at her in surprise and she shrugs gracelessly, as if she were refusing to take responsibility for her indolence rather than her zeal.
She's right, I realize — the word ‘defence’ may not have formed part of the unit's name.
But then, if Defence could be War, it could be Military, or NATO.
It could be Army or Armed Forces or Armaments.
My heart sinks; the great indefiniteness of the world is spreading through the files like damp.
I find myself sighing, as Summerchild might have sighed.
Mrs Tamm turns on her heel and goes back to her desk.
My sigh has evidently offended her.
I take my jacket off again and sit down to look through the War files…
I have scarcely reached ‘War Damage, Limitations of Government Liability for’, when I realize Mrs Tamm is standing in front of me again.
I look up and smile at her, to undo the effect of my sigh.
She looks away — out of the window, disclaiming any interest in my efforts.
I look down at what she has brought me.
This time it is a single index card.
‘Strategy’, it says at the top.
Yes, why not?
But if Strategy then Tactics.
Or Logistics.
Or Ballistics…
I run my eye down the headings on the card with a growing sense of hopelessness.
Strategy Air, Strategy Asia (inc.
SEATO)…
I must stop now, before my whole day is wasted…
Strategy Naval, Strategy NATO, Strategy Nuclear…
Suddenly my eye leaps to four words in brackets at the bottom of the column: ‘(See also Strategy Unit)’.
For a second or two I stare at the words quite blankly.
Then a kind of warmth runs through my veins.
Two shots of adrenalin through my blood in as many days — this task may have lasting ill-effects on my health.
I have searched the grey Atlantic wastes for some sign of the wreckage, expecting to find nothing, and there suddenly, very small among the waves, is something.
Not much.
Two words, in brackets.
I glance up at Mrs Tamm.
‘I've looked,’ she says flatly, before I can ask.
‘There's nothing.’
But for her to speak at all suggests that the discovery may have released some few small drops of adrenalin into her blood, too.
There is apparently a storeroom, however, where some of the Government Commission's old papers have been dumped to await recycling.
So now here I am — Mrs Tamm won't leave her desk — not heading back to my own room and my labours on the great Assessment, but in the back parts of the building where I have never been before, picking my way blindly along the twisting ad hoc corridors, up and down odd arbitrary stairs, in the faint hope of (seeing also).
Up two steps here — then right — then down seven steps, ducking my head all the time to avoid the slope of the ceiling…
This is what the strategists in the Strategy Unit would call a Debatable Land — a territory on the frontier between different empires which has changed hands back and forth over the years.
Once this was a series of separate houses, with walls isolating level from level, with lackeys running up and down the poky backstairs, and tweeny-maids freezing in the little attic bedrooms.
Before the Treasury was rehoused at the end of Whitehall its junior clerks were scratching here at their ledgers.
The ledgers went; storekeepers moved in.
Dull demi-johns of ink were ranged behind these doors, grosses of brown wooden penholders and grey steel nibs.
When the war came the stationery was moved out and obscure intelligence projects were pursued and filed and forgotten in these rooms.
The Government Commission was established here in triumph, and sank here into obscurity.
Summerchild knew his way round the corridors.
Up these stairs — or down those the (Strategy Unit) lurked inside its protective brackets.
Now  we in the Cabinet Office have colonized the territory in our turn and made it our backyard.
I try an unmarked door and it opens to reveal…yes, stationery again.
Not ink and nibs, but typewriter cartridges and continuous-feed computer paper…
The label on the key Mrs Tamm has given me is crumpled and blank.
What I'm looking for is a locked, unmarked door on the fourth floor up a flight of stairs.
Which of these levels counts as the fourth floor?
Am I up a flight of stairs or down a flight of stairs?
I try another door.
It opens and a young man with a bald head looks up, too startled to speak, from a desk draped in yards of printout.
I am the first human being he has seen since he was posted to this backwater.
I bend to look under a low archway in a dark corner and find a narrow spiral staircase, designed to accommodate only very small and undernourished skivvies.
I squeeze my way up and try my key in the battered, irregular door at the top.
It turns, and the door judders open upon a little room under the eaves, with windows that look out over rooftops and the open sky.
It appears to be a storeroom for the canteen rather than the Registry, though — all I can see is a confusion of brown cardboard boxes blazoned Vim and Heinz and Tate & Lyle.
I lift the flaps on one of them.
The tomato ketchup it once contained has gone.
In its place is compacted human thought — a dense mass of paper, some of it in files, some of it in envelopes and parcels, a lot of it loose, all of it covered in typescript or print or handwriting.
I take off the jacket of my pale grey summer suit.
But where shall I put it?
There is no furniture in the room.
I lay it neatly over a Sarson's Malt Vinegar box.
I roll up the sleeves of my crisp white shirt, because old thought is dusty stuff.
I pick up some of the papers that have escaped from their boxes, pages of unidentified figures that are meaningless in their isolation, and use them as a duster to clean the top of a solidly filled Quaker Oats box and make a chair for myself Then I open up the next nearest box, labelled Squeez-Ee Washing-up Liquid.
Now, can I (see also) the slightest trace of a (Strategy Unit)…?
The very subjects written on the front of some of the files are dead.
Mixed Manning and the Multilateral Force, NEDO and NEDC, ROR and ROS…
Who now still cares about Mixed Manning?
Who even knows what the Multilateral Force was, or could differentiate between NEDO and NEDC?
Thought, I reflect as I pull slices of it out and push them back, is as fundamental a constituent of the world as baked beans or demerara sugar.
And thoughts that were thought a long time ago are as dead as old Squeez-Ee detergent bottles, and as slow to biodegrade.
I think about the half-drafted minute lying on my own desk, on a lower floor in the front of this same building, about the arrangements for Sunningdale.
My minute is alive with still undischarged function, taut with unresolved tension between the Treasury's demands and ours, subtly fragrant with the personalities of the different officials whose views have shaped it.
The work of the coming year will be its fruit.
Then in a few weeks' time it will have been outstripped by the very events which it is shaping.
It will be as dead as the Squeez-Ee files.
Thought is like the honeysuckle around my front door.
The newly green and sweetly blossoming tendrils reach ever further towards the sun and become dead underbrush through their very life and growth.
My minute will be burnt, or composted, or trodden down into mulch, into humus, into peat, into soft coal, into hard.
Maybe, on the underground conveyors in some as yet undug mine, the shiny blackness will split and reveal, like the shape of a leaf, the last faint outline of my life and work…
Ten past twelve, and still no sign of the leaf-shape I'm looking for…
Seven minutes to one…
Seven minutes past one…
I've got to go.
I must clean myself up and get some lunch — I have a meeting on grading with various people up the road in the Civil Service Commission at quarter past two…
Must just look in this last box…
This is ridiculous I'm not going to have time for lunch if I don't go now…
Nothing…
Nothing…
Nothing…
Three minutes past two.
I get to my feet, my stomach aching from emptiness, my whole  body cramped from bending over, my hands too dirty to roll down my sleeves…
I pick up my jacket with the back of my hand and open the door, then realize that there is still one box I haven't looked in — the Quaker Oats box that I was sitting on.
Four minutes past two…
I open the lid and reveal a discouraging mass of loose papers.
I pull out a handful at random…
Nothing…
A second handful…
And there, handwritten at the top of a letter: Strategy Unit — Establishment.
And at the bottom: S Summerchild.
It appears to be about matters of accommodation and staffing.
It is dated March 11th 1974 and addressed to a Dr E. Serafin, with copies to Mr Tite and the Establishments Division.
But I can't take in anything between the name of the subject at the top and the name of the sender at the bottom.
All I am conscious of, as I stand there with the page in my hand, is that here at last are the two terms of my inquiry, Strategy and Summerchild, united by the same sheet of paper.
And written in Summerchild's own hand.
It is as if , out of nowhere, his voice had spoken in the room, as it once did in the lane.
His writing is larger than mine, I note, and as fine as his hair.
The curves have a grace about them; above and below the line the g's and d's trail away in the wind like pennants.
I have an impression of dreaminess.
Five minutes past two…
I cram the minute halfway back into the stack of papers in the Quaker Oats box to mark where it came from and pick up the box.
I can't bear to let it out of my hands — I shall have to carry it with me to my appointment at the Commission…
I shall have to run with it!
It weighs a ton…
I'll get dust all over my white shirt…
What am I going to do with it while I run into the lavatories to wash my hands…?
I put it back on the floor.
It will have to wait for me, like a newly opened birthday present while you go off to school.
I rush out of the room, turn the key in the lock…and what's this?
Agh!
Head!
Against ceiling — low — forgot!
Now what?
Stairs — down — small — spiral — I remember now — cascading upwards under my helpless heels.
5
Strategy Unit — Establishment at the top; S Summerchild at the bottom.
I have lain awake all night waiting to get back to these words and I have now read them a dozen times.
I am back in the little room at the top of the spiral staircase on Wednesday morning and I am sitting on the Squeez-Ee box, with the minute in front of me, going through the remaining contents of the Quaker Oats archive, page by dusty page.
I have also read the handwritten text between the top and bottom a dozen times:
With reference to our meeting on March 7th: on the assumption that the Unit's terms of reference will be agreed in some form broadly consonant with the one you indicated, I have drawn up proposals on the attached annexes under the following headings:
A:
Accommodation.
B:
Staffing.
C:
Bodies from whom submissions should sought.
D:
Forms in which evidence should be taken.
E:
Possible methods of reporting.
F:
Designation.
With regard to this last point.
I have had to find a provisional title for the venture to use in my various requisitions for staff, accommodation, etc.
As you will see from the heading to this minute, I have decided that for the time being we are ‘the Strategy Unit’.
The (very guarded!) formulation ‘unit’ does not  in any way preclude us from becoming a committee, a commission, a staff, a section, or anything else you may choose once it has been decided what form we are going to take.
The (equally guarded!) term ‘strategy’ is also purely provisional.
Taken together, the words I hope conceal more than they reveal, and will serve only until such time as the precise formulation of your terms of reference enables you to select more apposite nomenclature.
(In Annexe F I have listed fourteen different permutations of form and function for you to consider.)
I suggest that we delay announcing our existence to the press until we have a name and clearly stated function.
Communications with the press, in my experience, are best kept short and simple.
They should not be couched in such a way as to encourage speculation or lead to further inquiry — or indeed arouse any other form of interest.
The single page has obviously been torn away from the Treasury tag that once attached it to its fellows and there is no sign of the promised annexes.
Nor have I found them anywhere else in the box so far…
I should be in Ken Hurren's office, not here — I should be turning over my findings to Security.
There can be no possible excuse for any further delay.
I should have been in Ken Hurren's office and now be back in my own, absorbed once again in assessing the department's performance, noting perhaps the promptness with which I myself had channelled work to the appropriate division.
But I am held by the sound of Summerchild's voice.
Up to now I have heard only the few reluctant words in the lane.
But here he is, in full measured flood.
Not to me, of course but this is part of the fascination.
He is turned away from me, oblivious of my existence, addressing someone in the shadows of humour —‘conceal more than they reveal’— which perhaps sorts with the reluctance and the sigh.
But those rather racy exclamation marks are a surprise.
So is the familiarity of calling us ‘us’.
I don't think I should have risked anything quite so rakish.
Then we come to the form of the communication.
The deferential tone, and the fact that it's couched as a letter rather than as a minute, suggest that it was directed to someone outside the Civil Service.
There is no address on it, but I imagine Dr Serafin was an academic.
A younger man, I think — younger than Summerchild himself; there is a firmness behind Summerchild's deference which suggests that he is addressing someone not too senior — certainly one who has not yet served in the world of Royal Commissions and advisory units.
But plainly a man who has made his mark in the world, if he is already being sent for.
I have for some reason a picture of a rather youthful military historian.
He should be quite easy to trace.
More pale humour in the final dictum about the press.
Also, I think, a slight desire to shock, to cut something of a figure as a worldly and cynical administrator.
Yes, in his own quiet way Summerchild is presenting himself to an audience.
The announcement to the press, presumably, was never made.
Did the Unit never in fact settle on a simple enough statement of its function to entrust to journalists?
What this function was I'm even less clear about myself after reading Summerchild's letter.
The term ‘strategy’ is ‘purely provisional’.
The words ‘Strategy Unit’, he says, ‘conceal more than they reveal’.
Yet this is the term which the addressee was eventually persuaded to confirm, rather than any of the fourteen more ‘evocative’ designations in the missing Annexe F.
The date should tell me something.
Summerchild and Serafin had met, presumably for the first time, on March 7th.
This, as various minutes in these boxes have reminded me, was two days after Harold Wilson entered Number Ten.
The State of Emergency declared by Heath was still in force.
I keep coming across internal memoranda about which offices are to have their heating turned off during the morning and which during the afternoon.
There is a circular about the functioning of the lifts during power-cuts, and another about  cooperation with the military in the event of troops being called in to guard Government buildings.
The setting up of the ‘Strategy Unit’ must have been one of the new Government's very first acts.
Could the ‘strategy’ have concerned the exercise of the Government's emergency powers?
Is this why it was so secret?
I still have the grinding rumble of Tilly Tilling's tanks in my mind.
‘Dear Dr Serafin'.
The fine, romantic handwriting suddenly leaps out at me again from the surrounding porridge of the Quaker Oats archive.
This letter is dated March 12th.
Strategy Unit — Accommodation
With reference to your letter dated March 11th, I note your disinclination to pursue the addresses in Croydon and Kilburn and fully sympathize with your feelings.
I felt I should include them in the list if only so that you could see the limited choice at present available.
The advent of a new Government, I am afraid, always results in a rash of new advisory bodies and a consequent pressure upon accommodation.
It is, as my colleague in the Establishment Division remarked, shaking his head sagely, when I made application to him, ‘a difficult time to be setting up home’.
I have therefore arranged for us to view the premises in Northumberland Avenue the day after tomorrow, on your next visit to London.
They are at any rate central and have I believe served for various committees of inquiry, etcetera, before.
There is again something about the tone of this minute that strikes me.
Perfectly correct, entirely urbane — yet there is a hint of the personal in it, something almost — I don't know — avuncular.
I am beginning to see, I think, with some professional interest and sympathy, how Summerchild is dealing with this clever young outsider.
He has assembled a list of self-evidently unacceptable addresses for the Unit's accommodation from which the reassuring words ‘Northumberland Avenue’ have been grasped with relief.
But I wonder if Northumberland Avenue is really where he intends the Unit  to end up.
I know those offices in Northumberland Avenue — I have been involved in submitting evidence to two separate Royal Commissions there — and I do not believe this proposed tour of inspection is going to be a very joyous occasion.
I must assume Summerchild knows the premises, too.
I picture the two of them (and I must suppose Summerchild pictures it himself) walking across Whitehall together, and up Great Scotland Yard, through the thin March sunlight, warmed by the faint hope of summer; then plunging into the frowsty Edwardian gloom, where neither sunlight nor hope of summer ever penetrate.
I see (and Summerchild sees) the young provincial historian becoming even more silent and preoccupied than Summerchild himself as they look at the worn carpets and unoccupied chairs.
Summerchild taps on the hardboard divisions to demonstrate their solidity and stops at once when they ring hollow.
He cranes hopefully up at windows, to demonstrate that you can see the sky if you lean far enough back, and shows Dr Serafin how there is lavatory accommodation available in the basement, only three floors down.
He has more than likely planned the expedition for the half of the day when it is not Northumberland Avenue's turn for heating.
I see them walking back up Great Scotland Yard afterwards, with the historian lost in thought and Summerchild asking him solicitously if he would like to view the Croydon or Kilburn premises after all.
Summerchild is, I think, shepherding his chairman slowly towards where he would be safest — inside the Government Commission building, sharing the Cabinet Office canteen with all the rest of them, under Francis Tite's eye.
I believe the rooms have already been set aside.
Does Dr Serafin know about them yet?
Does he realize that he is part of Tite's plans — as I now dimly begin to perceive — to revive the flagging fortunes of the Government Commission?
Because this, I think, is what's happening here.
The Government Commission, set up by Labour in 1965 to circumvent the rest of the Civil Service, has been quietly declining under  the Conservatives; Heath has made his own arrangements to the same end, by setting up the Central Policy Review Staff, which has been housed by the Cabinet Office next door.
Now Labour is back — and word has immediately gone round Whitehall that Wilson is setting up his own Policy Unit inside Number Ten.
So now the Government Commission has rivals literally on either side of it; it is outflanked to left as well as to right.
But, within hours of Wilson's entering Number Ten on March 5th, Tite has struck back.
Some time that same day, or the following one, the new Prime Minister has entrusted some study of strategy, or some strategic study of something else, to an outside expert — and by the 7th, as we know from Summerchild's first letter, Wilson has somehow been persuaded to staff and service this new operation through the Government Commission.
Indeed, Summerchild has already had his first meeting with Serafin, and been accepted as Secretary of the operation.
By the 11th Summerchild has given the new formation a temporary designation, which will prove to be permanent, and has provided a wealth of possible addresses, colleagues and procedures.
By the 14th Serafin is being steered back across Whitehall, out of the pale sunshine, and in through the threatening corridors of the Cabinet Office towards these peaceful quarters at the rear, where rooms have already been quietly set aside for him.
I am always amused by the idea that outsiders have of Whitehall as being slow-moving; we are like a snake, whose coils seem to be lying motionless even as they flow past your eyes and are gone.
But even by Whitehall standards Tite is moving fast.
He must have been a rather remarkable Permanent Secretary — I should like to know more about him.
I suspect I am going to.
His fate, and the fate of his department, is going to be closely bound to the new Unit.
And when Summerchild fell from the back of the Admiralty, I am beginning to think, the prospects of Tite and his department must have fallen with him.
I am intrigued to watch Summerchild at work, too.
This is Millie's father, coming up Hyde Hill Lane of an evening so  wearily, with so little to say for himself; yet here he is sliding through the grass with such snake-like speed and resourcefulness.
Now I am wondering about the other lists that he annexed to his letter, of suggested colleagues, procedures and methods.
Will they go the same way as the list of accommodation?
Will Serafin show his independence of mind and his refusal to be controlled by his Civil Servants and reject them all, item by item, so that he ends up discovering for himself the colleagues, procedures and methods that Summerchild has already selected for him?
First the accommodation, though.
How, exactly, is he going to let Serafin stumble upon the rooms that are waiting, as I imagine, somewhere rather close to where I am now sitting?
‘Dear Dr Serafin…’
Another letter in Summerchild's handwriting, dated March 15th.
This is — yes — the day after the visit to Northumberland Avenue.
Strategy Unit — Accommodation, it begins, once again.
With reference to your letter of yesterday's date, I note your severe reservations about the rooms in Northumberland Avenue.
I should perhaps remind you that they would normally be somewhat warmer than they were during our inspection, at any rate during one half of the working day…
Just as I thought!
Nevertheless, I take your point, and will naturally do my best to secure the alternatives you saw inside our own building…
And he's done it!
But how?
…
I must apologize if I gave the impression of trying to keep these from you, as you (perhaps jokingly) suggested.
To the best of my recollection I mentioned their existence as soon as you had expressed dissatisfaction with Northumberland Avenue.
I had not done so before merely because I had not  thought of them in this context; I had supposed that you might prefer to be at some slight remove from the nefarious influences of the department…
The man had style.
No wonder he was weary by the time he walked up to his front door at the end of each day.
I have a suspicion that somehow the heating was on by the time they reached their new destination.
But what was it that Summerchild said to make Dr Serafin so keen to see these other premises in the first place?
I must also apologize if I seemed to be trying to put you off them.
I simply thought I should warn you that they were effectively in a garret…
He told him they were in a garret.
That was the word of warning that made Serafin insist on seeing them.
Because at once he pictured something familiar and intimate — something like his own rooms overlooking some quiet college court.
Here he is, the brightest young Fellow of King's or All Souls, being led round in an invisible collar and chain by my freckled colleague.
‘Effectively in a garret’.
How brilliant.
Summerchild would have mentioned it by way of defending Northumberland Avenue, perhaps while they were still walking back along Great Scotland Yard.
At least it wasn't a garret, he would have said, which was the only other thing they'd been offered.
I imagine they walked in silence for some way after that; putting a new idea into someone's imagination, even if that imagination belongs to the cleverest young Fellow of the very grandest college, is like turning on the television — it takes a little time for the set to warm up.
‘A garret?’ says Serafin finally, as they cross the end of Scotland Place.
‘What sort of garret?’
Summerchild shrugs.
‘Just a garret.’
If Serafin is astute he asks what you can see out of the windows.
Summerchild runs his hand through the glinting aureole around his head, trying to remember.
‘Roofs, mostly, I think,’ he says reluctantly.
‘Roofs and chimneys.’
'I  think I should like to have a look at it,’ says Serafin very politely, ‘if I might.’
And Summerchild bows his head.
He can see that Dr Serafin is going to be a very firm chairman.
‘I'd better lead the way,’ he says grudgingly.
‘It's rather a hike.’
Because of course if they are in a garret they are somewhere very close indeed to where I am sitting now on my Squeez-Ee box.
…
Perhaps I should stress, once again, that I am here to help.
not to hinder.
I have therefore asked Establishment if the room on the fourth floor can be cleared of stores and made available for our clerical staff, and if, as you requested, desks and other facilities for our own use can be got up into the smaller room at the top of the spiral staircase…
So it was this very room.
Of course.
I can hear the two of them on the narrow stair outside, Summerchild placing his feet with ostentatious care on each step, bending his head rather further than is strictly necessary under the low ceiling, while Serafin demonstrates his effortless familiarity with such picturesque difficulties.
The key turns stiffly in the lock.
The door judders open, and Summerchild looks doubtfully in at me and the old grocery boxes.
He stands back while Serafin comes into the centre of the room and slowly revolves on his heel.
‘I suppose we could clean it up a bit,’ says Summerchild reluctantly.
‘We could…put up some shelves.’
And yes, there were shelves.
Now I look I can see the rows of holes in the walls on either side of the old chimney-breast where they were fixed.
Serafin gazes at the irregular geometry of the walls, and the quaintly sloping ceiling.
He opens the little door half-hidden in a corner and finds…what?
I open the little door myself.
Inside is a tiny sink and draining-board, with a gas-ring and an ancient grey kettle.
It's like the scout's room in an Oxford college.
Beyond is another door, which opens to reveal an ancient lavatory.
All the necessities of life are up  here.
You could shut yourself away in this garret all day and never come down.
Serafin emerges from the minuscule domestic offices and crosses to one of the two windows.
I follow him and peer over his shoulder.
We are looking northwards.
In the foreground are the chimney-stacks of the Cabinet Office — complex pillars of weathered grey London stock brick rising like the high Alps from the blue slate foothills of the roof.
Beyond them is another range, which must be the Scottish Office, and then, on the horizon, the fine spider's web of antennae on the roof of the Admiralty.
Serafin moves to the other window.
I follow him.
This one is looking west, straight down into the garden of Number Ten.
I can see part of Horse Guards Parade almost see myself standing there the other afternoon, looking up at these windows, still ignorant of what I was looking at.
Beyond the Parade is the green sea of treetops in the Park, and then the Palace.
The Royal Standard is flying.
The sky is piled with sunlit June cumulus.
Serafin knows now why Summerchild was so reluctant to let him see this place and so anxious to make him settle for the dingy remoteness of Northumberland Avenue.
It is because this garret is at the very heart of Government.
From here you are looking into the rear windows of Whitehall.
If the Prime Minister is walking in his garden on a summer's morning you could push up the rickety sash — like this — and call down to him.
This is the very last place where they would want some outsider installing himself and pursuing his researches.
Summerchild is indeed looking more dubious than ever.
‘I think you may find that some of your less youthful associates have difficulty with the stairs,’ he says.
At once I can see Annexe B, Summerchild's list of possible members of the Unit, as clearly as if it had just come out of the porridge oats box.
It comprises industrialists very close to retiring age, and senior army officers who have passed it.
I believe I can read the names of a few redundant colonial administrators.
Serafin, too, is thinking about Annexe B. He knows, just as well  as Summerchild does, that these are big men who once rowed for their colleges.
They will crack their heads on the low door frame and be forced to stand bent forwards beneath the slope of the ceiling in attitudes of unsuitable humility.
As a matter of fact, I believe that Summerchild is playing not one game here but two.
Even as he uses the accommodation in Annexe A to manoeuvre Serafin into discovering for himself the waiting garret, so he is using the garret to manoeuvre him into rejecting all the proposed associates in Annexe B. Once Serafin has insisted on installing himself in the garret — against all reasonable advice — he is going to discover that the kind of staff he needs will be young and agile, with a good knowledge of the backstairs of Government buildings and an ability to duck their heads and remain inclined slightly forwards for long periods of time.
In short, one or two of the bright young Principals and UnderSecretaries in the department.
When Serafin presses him, Summerchild will try to suggest a few names.
All this is as yet in the future; Serafin is still working out how he is going to insist on occupying the garret, in the teeth of Summerchild's objections.
There is no sense of triumph yet in Summerchild.
In his head, as in mine, the unending private minute is being written and I can read it, I discover, almost as clearly as my own.
Nothing in it suggests even that he is aware of pursuing some covert stratagem in the battle.
He does not know he is taking part in a battle.
He is not a devious or deceitful man, and he has no ambition to be an actor.
He believes that things are as they seem to Dr Serafin; that he is putting up proposals which are as sound as his judgement and experience can make them, that he is withdrawing them in deference to Serafin's objections, and that he will be forced to formulate alternative proposals which cannot be known to him yet because they will take their rise from views Serafin has still not expressed.
It is a cause for chagrin, not satisfaction, that Serafin has rejected all his advice.
He is suppressing this chagrin, of course— and he  could scarcely be suppressing it if he weren't feeling it.
How strange, though, that the report running inside my own head can quote so freely and copiously from the report running inside Summerchild's.
I'm not sure that this has ever happened to me before.
I can't help putting myself in his place, of course, as he looks for ways to contain someone we both regard as an outsider.
I can't help reading between the lines of his letters to Serafin.
If there were any of Serafin's replies here then I might have rather more insight into his side of the story…
Yes, that's odd.
The half-dozen letters from Summerchild that I have found scattered through the porridge oats box seem to be replies to letters from Serafin, but not one of Serafin's letters has yet come to light.
Here are two more from Summerchild, dated March 18th and 20th…
The question of accommodation seems to be settled, but the Unit apparently still has no agreed terms of reference.
Or so I deduce.
But where are the letters in which Serafin informed Summerchild of this?
Summerchild must have filed them, surely?
Even as this problem forms itself in my head it is superseded by its very simple and obvious solution.
The papers scattered through the contents of the Quaker Oats box have not come from the Unit's files.
The Unit's files have vanished, like Summerchild's personal file.
What I am finding is the remains of another file altogether — one kept by Serafin, which contains all the communications he received.
This is why I can follow Summerchild's thoughts — because I am standing where Serafin stood.
And sitting, of course, more or less where he sat, now that he has moved into his new office.
I dust down another box and put it on top of the one I am perching on, to bring it up to the height of a normal chair.
Now I can see rooftops outside the windows as well as open sky.
I slide my construction across to the windows, and build myself a desk with two more boxes.
The light from the western window, overlooking Downing Street, falls across it.
Through the window behind me, if I turn round, I look northward towards the array of  wires above the Admiralty.
So here I am, installed in my new office, beginning another day's work.
I open my briefcase and sort through various, what?— books and papers by colleagues, say — looking for my file of letters.
There is a tap at the door.
‘Come in,’ I say.
Or do I?
I can't actually hear the words.
I don't know what my voice sounds like.
Whereas, when the door opens, and Summerchild enters, stooped beneath the lintel and diffidently smiling, I can hear him perfectly.
‘Good morning,’ he says.
‘I've been giving a little more thought to the question of our terms of reference.
I wonder whether the way to proceed might not be to write our own.
That's to say, put up our own draft for approval.
Approval, in my experience, is usually somewhat easier to come by than the thing approved.’
He lets each word go with some reluctance.
His voice is low, as if the machinery producing it were running slow, not fully warmed up.
I gesture (I imagine) towards a chair on the other side of my desk and he sits down in an attitude which suggests that he intends to stay for rather more than a minute, and rather less than half an hour.
He is carrying a file, I notice.
I assume that it contains among other things the letters I have sent to him.
Am I looking at this file at all anxiously?
Do I already have some suspicion that one day it is going to be removed from the records and scattered, perhaps vanish altogether?
What have I said in those letters?
What am I saying as we sit here talking about this rather strange difficulty that we find ourselves in?
What terms of reference are we suggesting for ourselves?
But I'm Jessel, and I have Jessel's life to lead.
I put all the documents I've found into my own Summerchild file.
As I pick up my jacket from the Sarson's Malt Vinegar box which I seem to have appointed as coat-rack, I pull the lid up with it.
There is a mess of loose papers inside that I have glanced through before.
But now one of them catches my eye because I recognize the handwriting.
‘Annexe A’, it says at the top.
It is the missing accommodation list, filed for some reason under vinegar instead of porridge.
I was right, I'm pleased to see, about his tactics: the six addresses on it don't include the  one I am now in.
I'm just about to put it away in my file when I see that there is something else pencilled upside down at the bottom.
It's another list.
But this one has no title at the top and it's written in a completely different hand.
The letters are small and hurrying and the pencil wasn't sharp.
With some difficulty I read:
1.
Marmite.
Marmite?
Marmite…?
I feel an obscure sense of shame and irritation at finding the word Marmite written on a Government document, even one filed under Sarson's Malt Vinegar.
It relates to that other world, the great shabby confusion outside these walls to which I return each evening, to Timmy and Cheryl, to my mother-in-law who comes to help out at the weekends, to everything unresolved and unsatisfactory.
I do not believe that Summerchild and his Director were discussing the financial structure of the Marmite company, or the competitiveness of the British savoury spread industry.
It does not appear to be written in that tone of voice.
I believe this is a shopping list.
What are the other items?
2.
2X35L 1X32M.
3.
Heels.
4.
Syntax.
5.
Plectra.
Heels, yes.
A reminder to take a pair of shoes to be heeled.
I don't know about the other items.
Is there a brand of cleaner called Syntax?
Plectra sounds like a make of margarine…
A shopping list, certainly.
But whose?
Could Summerchild have given Annexe A to his wife to write on?
Impossible.
If only because he didn't have it to give — he'd sent it off with his first letter.
No, what I am looking at are the first direct signals to reach me from the dark constellation of Serafin.
I find them somewhat disconcerting.
They are not quite what I should have expected from a man like Serafin.
I put the list away in my file, lock the room and carefully pick my way down the little staircase.
Marmite, heels…
But what was the next item?
I take a look in the file as I make my way down to the main entrance.
2X35L lX32M.
I have a feeling that motor oils and radio parts are sold with this sort of code.
Marmite and motor oil?
Marmite and transistors?
Plectra I have certainly seen on my weekly trips to Safeway…
The phone is ringing as I come through the door of my office.
‘Jessel.’
‘Cryer, Home Office.’
‘Cryer’ means nothing to me.
‘Home Office’ means more work.
I stand with the phone in my hand, remembering that I have still had no lunch.
‘John Killick said you might be interested in anything anyone could remember about Stephen Summerchild.’
The thought of lunch goes.
I sit down.
‘I didn't know him very well, I'm afraid,’ says Cryer.
‘In fact I always thought he was in the DTI.
It was a great shock to open the paper and discover he was involved in whatever it was.
I knew him through the Civil Service Orchestra, you see.
He was next desk to me for three or four years.
He played the violin.’
I have my pen in hand, poised above the Summerchild pad.
But we seem to have reached the end of the story.
‘That's all I know about him, really,’ says Cryer.
‘He wasn't a very forthcoming man.
I just thought you might like to know about playing the violin.
I've always felt that was a somewhat surprising sidelight.’
‘Thank you,’ I tell him.
‘Yes.
That's very helpful.’
I put the phone down and try to remember whether the canteen is still open.
But…the DTI?
Why should anyone look at this silent, red-haired violinist and leap to the conclusion that he was in the Department of Trade and Industry?
I am suddenly consumed with a ridiculous curiosity.
I pick up the phone again and dial the Home Office.
‘Oh,’ says Cryer.
‘Because he seemed to be working on that kind of thing.’
‘What kind of thing?’
‘Well…washing-machines.’
Washing-machines?
So they did talk.
Suddenly, after three or four years of silence, as they stood side by side in some rented school hall, slackening their bows and cleating them away in the lids of their violin cases, they began to talk.
About washing-machines.
‘Well, you know,’ says Cryer.
‘There's an expression for it.
The quality of life.
It was a bit of a catch-phrase at the time.
He said he was concerned with it in some kind of way.
I assumed it was something to do with domestic machinery.’
‘Thank you,’ I say again.
But this time I mean it.
Because I saw the words only yesterday.
Somewhere, in one of the brown boxes in the little garret room, wedged between National Economic Development Council and Regional Employment Premium, I saw a file labelled just that Quality of Life.
So now I know where to find the rest of the Unit's papers.
Now I know what they were doing up there in their garret.
Now I know why it was called the Strategy Unit.
The first thing Harold Wilson did when he arrived in office was to set up a Policy Unit inside Number Ten, to work on short-term, day-to-day problems.
The second — obviously, now I see it — was to set up a complementary unit to deal with long-term aims.
Number Ten had captured the tactical unit; Francis Tite's genius was to carry off the strategic one.
Perhaps he had even suggested it.
I imagine him reading and re-reading the Labour Party's election manifesto as the results came in.
In some forgotten corner of the text he had found some vague pledge that no one else had noticed.
I imagine something about ‘looking beyond day-to-day considerations at the quality of life we should be working towards for our people’.
So it wasn't defence and the instruments of death that  brought Summerchild to that little yard in Spring Gardens.
It was life itself.
Or the quality of it.
I have only a very hazy idea about what the phrase means, I realize.
But then Summerchild didn't know himself to start with, by the sound of it.
Washing-machines?
I thought it was something to do with I don't know — sauna baths and golf driving-ranges.
Perhaps lead-free petrol, or traffic-free streets.
But our ideas change.
One day we want champagne; next day it's Alka-Seltzer.
I can't get back to the garret until tomorrow.
But by tomorrow evening, I think, I shall know what the quality of life is — shall perhaps even have discovered how it killed Summerchild.
I shall know as much of the whole story as I'm ever going to know.
The only thing I've time to do today is to run into Registry and look up Dr Serafin.
My man is Dr E. Serafin.
There is no E. Serafin in the reference books.
There is a D. and a V. M., but E. has gone.
The career that looked so promising in 1974 has evidently come to a premature end.
Has he died, like Summerchild himself?
Emigrated to the United States?
Or defected to the Soviet Union…
A foolish thought.
I can't help noticing, though, that V. M. Serafin is Vladislav Maksimych, and is in Russian studies.
I suppose Serafin is a Russian name.
6
Still stroking my son's forehead with my left hand, I reach out into the darkness with my right and fumble for the little clock on his bedside table.
For a moment the dial shines in the night and at once Timmy stirs.
Quarter past two and he's still not really back to sleep.
I must have been sitting here on the edge of his bed, first singing and stroking, then just stroking, for half an hour or so.
He was crying again.
It's always the same.
I wake to hear him crying.
I come in and put the bedside light on, and he lies there with his eyes half-open, conscious but immobilized, as if he were under some strange paralysing drug, unable to tell me what the trouble was, unable to nod or smile or shake off his dream.
I suppose it was about his mother.
She sometimes comes to me in dreams, too — smiling and calm, as if nothing at all had happened.
Once she was holding out a small present done up in coloured wrapping.
There was a feeling of Christmas in the air.
This is why the night is so terrible.
The mind is on its own in the building.
It goes wandering through the files unchecked, pulling open the drawers and scattering the papers, writing wild minutes of its own.
One of these unthinkable night-thoughts thinks itself now: it's because of Summerchild that I'm sitting here stroking Timmy's head.
If whatever happened to Summerchild that year hadn't happened — if he hadn't been found lying with the garbage in Spring Gardens — if Millie hadn't stopped playing in the orchestra — if I'd gone on seeing her week by  week — grown up with her — become easy with her — married her — then Timmy would still have a mother at home.
Except that in that case Timmy wouldn't be Timmy, and the thought that there might be no Timmy, that there might be some other person altogether occupying his space in the world, fills me with terror, as if I had looked out of the bedroom window and found the solid earth beneath the house had disappeared.
Night-thoughts…
But then whatever happened to Summerchild did happen.
Back and forth goes my hand, over the softness of my son's forehead and up into the softness of his hair.
My wrist aches; my own eyes are closed.
Back and forth go my thoughts, over the items on a list, up into the quality of life.
I can't quite make out the items on the list, however many times I go over it, or rather I can't make out the rooms on the staircase, or the stairs on my son's forehead.
They go round and round, and begin to vibrate frighteningly, so that the whole washing-machine starts to tramp across the kitchen floor, in a growing flood of hot soapy water…
Timmy stirs; my hand has stopped moving.
Off we go again, over the softness of his forehead, up into the softness of his hair.
I'm wide awake now, because I've suddenly seen the formula 2X35L IX32M appear in my brain, like the glowing green digits on the video, and then softly, effortlessly deconstruct itself into elements of meaning.
The video becomes a radio, and the L and the M expand gently into Long-wave and Medium-wave.
The X's silently detach themselves from the numbers on either side and become multiplication signs.
I am looking at two lots of 35 in the long waveband and one lot of 32 in the medium waveband. 35 and 32 what?
Metres?
Megahertz?
I know nothing about radio — but I don't need to, I realize, because, even while I watch, the waves are softly withdrawing from the wavebands, as from a beach at low tide on a calm summer's afternoon, leaving me gazing through the darkness of my son's bedroom at three shirts, two of them size 35 long, one of them size 32 medium.
Shirts.
Yes.
I'm smiling to myself in the darkness, Timmy — I wish you could see me.
Marmite, heels, three shirts, half a pound of Plectra, and some product called Syntax, which I now envisage as being like a health-food called Bemax that my father used to sprinkle over his breakfast cereal.
Serafin puts Syntax on his.
It's Syntax that assures Serafin's quality of life.
I gently stop stroking.
Timmy stirs and moans.
I start stroking again.
But here's a puzzle.
Why is one of the shirts a different size?— Because it's for someone else.
Here I am, Serafin, writing my shopping list on the first piece of paper that comes to hand and what I'm writing down is two shirts for myself and one for my son.
If my son takes a 32 he is full-grown, almost as big as me.
Or else — more generously — I am buying one shirt for myself and two for my son.
In which case my son has already outgrown me.
Or perhaps none of the shirts is for me…
Of course.
I have not one son but two.
Why am I buying two shirts for one son and only one for the other?
Because I have three sons, and I am buying them one each.
Three young men, all old enough to buy shirts for themselves, and their father's still going out and buying them shirts!
Strange.
Yes, but I'm not their father, am I. I'm their mother.
I'm a woman.
My whole shape changes around me in the darkness, like the radios melting into shirts.
My hand softens against the softness of my son's forehead.
My hips sit wider and heavier on the bed.
And the whole shape of the Strategy Unit changes, too.
I now see a certain awkwardness in the way Summerchild sits on the other side of my desk.
I see resentment in that courteous smile, hostility in that diffident prose, an element of sheer male aggression in his deft professional manipulation of me.
This is why the tone of his communications with me has that slightly patronizing and protective edge.
It's not a difference in age; it's a difference in sex.
I slide out of my smooth new womanly skin, and slide in behind the russet freckles and bristles facing me across the office to check this analysis.
Yes, the softness I am looking at  somehow irks me.
I think this woman with the three grown-up sons is not younger than me at all, but almost certainly older.
I feel an obscure resentment against her motherliness.
I find myself being another son — a good son, courteous and thoughtful, holding doors open, appearing to defer to all her wishes.
I smile indulgently as I watch her write a shopping list on a document drawn up in my own hand.
My smile is not entirely sincere.
I stroke Timmy's forehead more and more lightly, until I am stroking empty air.
This time he doesn't stir; he is off the beach at last, out beyond the shallows, in deep still water.
I creep back to my room, leaving both our doors ajar.
Whether I get to sleep again myself I find difficult to determine; it's hard to recognize sleep in the dark.
Plectra, I discover, is a make of washing-machine, which thunders and shakes and tramps across the office floor, and Sontax is a sleeping-pill called Spantax, which is a Spanish taxi firm called Taximax…
Whether I was asleep or not, a few hours or minutes later I am undoubtedly awake.
The room is full of early sunlight and birdsong, and I know what Syntax is.
It's very simple.
Syntax is syntax.
Syntax is what my friend Kevin Rice, who was at Manchester with me, was always talking about.
Syntax and semantics.
Syntax and logical form.
Kevin was always talking about syntax because he was reading philosophy and this is the kind of thing philosophers talk about.
So now I know why it's on my shopping list.
When I've bought my sons their shirts I'm going on to a good academic bookshop to get an item for myself — a book called something like Syntax and Significance: A Cognitive Approach.
I am a woman, I am a mother of sons, I am a philosopher.
7
Plectra I break as I reach the bottom of the spiral staircase on my way back to my little garret.
I am arriving off an early train from Oxford or Cambridge, my mind full of Marmite and shirts.
I hear inside my head a dismal metallic howling.
It is the noise made by one of my sons playing his electric guitar.
He plays it with a plectrum.
‘You going up to town, Mum?’ he said, as I scribbled my shopping list just before I dashed out of the house to catch my train.
‘Get me some plectrums from that shop in Charing Cross Road!’
And, even as I hurled the word down on to paper in my headlong rush, I couldn't help correcting his solecism.
Plectra, I scribbled.
So that's the sort of person I am.
Three hulking sons, and a precisely literate mind.
I feel a shade disappointed that the small but promising mysteries of the shopping list have yielded up such a homely creature.
I unlock the door of the garret, place my jacket on top of the Sarson's Malt Vinegar box and hunt through the Squeez-Ee box.
Yes, here it is — a thick brown file with the careful capitals of the title written in Summerchild's now familiar hand.
I feel a ridiculous disappointment.
Soon there will be nothing left to know and I shall have to go back to the Annual Assessment.
I take the file over to my improvised seat by the window, by now reluctant to open it.
A minor mystery, of course, is how the file has survived intact.
Why were its contents not scattered by the same hand that turned the records of the  Strategy Unit out of their covers?
I gaze absently out of the window, wondering.
Perhaps no one knew this file existed.
It was never catalogued; I am the first person outside the Unit ever to know what it was doing…
On the other side of Horse Guards Parade a little group of people are clustered around a strange animal with three splayed front legs, two rear legs in trousers and a single eye projecting from the middle of its forehead.
Facing this creature, like a matador in front of a bull, is a man who never takes his eye off it for a moment.
He gestures at the building behind him, as if trying to distract the animal's attention.
The bull lifts its head a little and gazes up at the Admiralty for some moments.
Then the trousered rear legs begin to edge step by step to the left, and very slowly and deliberately the animal turns its head.
It has forgotten about its opponent; it has become interested in the architecture.
It examines the Horse Guards, then the Scottish Office.
It's not a dumb, tormented animal at all.
As it continues its unhurried survey I begin to feel a grim human intent behind that gaze.
I have the impression of an enemy general, scanning our lines through his field-glasses, or a hardened housebreaker, openly searching for a point of entry.
It continues to turn, moving now towards the Cabinet Office.
The little group of staff-officers accompanying the general turn as well, falling back deferentially to keep out of his line of vision…
He turns his head a little further and it comes to me that these are the people who are making the programme about Summerchild.
With terrible deliberation the camera lifts its single eye towards the roofline.
Together with all its accompanying staff it gazes straight at me…
I move sharply away from the window, shocked to find myself being looked at, cross with myself to have been caught looking back.
I am also alarmed to find the enemy so hard on my heels.
Can they really have discovered the secret of the garret room already?
I look cautiously out again, standing well back in the shadows…
The beast is gazing disconsolately at the ground, its architectural studies abandoned.
Its rear legs have joined the general staff, who are all in discussion  with their backs towards me.
Perhaps they were gazing up here quite absently and speculatively, as I did on Monday.
Or perhaps this programme isn't about Summerchild at all.
It's something educational about government, or the history of the Civil Service.
It reminds me, though, that not all the mysteries are yet solved.
The most important one, the one that I started with, remains as opaque as ever: I have still not the slightest idea how or why Summerchild died.
Indeed, now that I know about the Marmite and the teenage sons it seems more mysterious than ever.
The Quality of Life, yes.
I open the file…
Inside is a thick sheaf of dog-eared papers, held together by a Treasury tag in the standard Civil Service manner.
The first page is a brief routine memorandum from the Clerical Supervisor in Personnel, dated April 18th 1974, announcing the transfer of a Mrs L Padmore from the Strategy Unit to the Economic Secretariat.
But I am getting ahead of myself.
The top document in a file, like the top layer in an archaeological site, is the most recent.
I want to go through in chronological order, so I turn to the back of the stack and find the lowest deposit, the first record of the new Unit.
It isn't much like any document I've ever seen in a Civil Service file before.
It consists of a stack of plain thin copy paper, in the now obsolete quarto size, completely covered in faint, irregular, single-spaced typing.
Many of the letters are flying in the air above their fellows, or sinking beneath them, and the orchestra of different characters is dominated by the solo x key.
As I turn the pages, the light comes through several dozen small holes where the paper has been punctured by full stops, and through a number of larger windows made by pastry-cutting characters like o.
The last line on each page peels away and dives through the bottom of the paper.
There are nine pages.
Wedged so tight against the bottom of the last page that I can hardly read it are four handwritten words that make my heart leap: ‘Yours sincerely, Elizabeth Serafin'.
So this document is my own handiwork.
And I am a  woman.
I think of myself rushing out of the house in North Oxford, or the quiet residential streets beyond the University Library in Cambridge, snatching my ancient portable typewriter off my desk as I go, with the voices of boorish boys shouting ‘Mum!
Don't forget my plectrums!’ and the voice of a husband, too, calling after me that we've run out of Marmite.
‘Oh, and Elizabeth…!’ he shouts.
So I'm an Elizabeth.
I don't know what I think about that.
I turn back to page one.
‘March 25th 1974’, it begins.
Then: ‘Dear Prime Minister…’
I stop reading.
Dear Prime Minister?
This is rather a surprise.
Especially followed by a letter going on for nine densely filled pages.
I feel a twinge of sympathetic embarrassment on my late colleague's behalf.
So, Dear Prime Minister…
The organization which you asked me to set up now exists, at least in embryo.
I began work this morning, together with my Secretary, Mr S Summerchild, and a clerical assistant, Mrs L Padmore, in the premises made available to us by the Government Commission.
My very first act — since one has to begin somewhere — was to decide upon the form in which I would report to you.
The one I have chosen is this — brief, informal letters, written from time to time as our work proceeds, in a plain, straightforward style, as it might be to a friend.
I put the file down again and stroke my beard for comfort, the way Timmy used to stroke his little piece of blanket.
Where is Summerchild, while all this is going on?
At his desk, presumably, in this very room, tormented by the thin chatter of my little portable.
The only place for his desk would have been opposite mine, with the light over his left shoulder.
I look across at him.
What's he doing, while I write my brief, informal, nine-page letter to the Prime Minister?
Writing something of his own, no doubt, carefully and silently, by hand, trying to keep his face absolutely expressionless.
He will presumably have to sort out all this nonsense later.
Where was I?
Yes…
…as it might be to a friend.
I have chosen this form for two reasons.
The inquiry you have asked me to undertake is, so far as I can understand, essentially a philosophical one.
I believe that philosophical inquiry is, by its very nature, open and untechnical.
I also believe that it is very unlikely to produce the kind of answers that can be summarized in a final report.
The ‘answers’ produced by philosophy are the questions that it asks.
The final report on a  philosophical inquiry is the inquiry itself.
What I must decide next is how this inquiry is to be conducted.
But before I can do that I need to establish something even more basic: what it is exactly that I am inquiring into.
I have promised to keep these reports brief.
but I must make a historical excursion here to establish the background to this absolutely fundamental question.
I have so far received only one explanation of what this advisory unit I am setting up is supposed to be doing.
This was in your original phone call to me at home in Oxford, on the evening of March 6th.
It would perhaps have been entirely adequate if I had received it in any normal circumstances.
But the circumstances were not normal.
I must explain that I have no phone in my study, to avoid interruption when I am working, and that I take phone calls in the dining-room…
I have to stop again.
Poor Summerchild!
He sits over there, some twelve feet away from me, vexed no doubt by the babble of the keys, but still unaware of the horror they are spelling out.
What is he going to say when he discovers that he is expected to transmit the first report from an advisory unit in the history of  government to include an account of the Director's domestic arrangements?
It's all right for me — I can close my eyes for a moment, and stroke my beard, and make little gasping noises to myself.
He is going to have to keep a straight face, and deal with it.
…and that I take phone calls in the dining-room, on the other side of the hall.
I am perfectly used to carrying pen and  paper with me when I go to answer the phone.
But when you called I was teaching, and the rule when I am teaching is that one of my sons must answer the phone.
I'm afraid that when Alexander tapped on my study door I was in a rather abstracted state.
I was listening with half my mind to the essay my pupil was reading and although the ideas he was expressing (about sense-data) were in themselves neither new nor interesting they had set off ideas of my own, as the ideas in undergraduate essays often do — I think of it as one of the uncovenanted benefits of teaching.
These ideas were occupying the other half of my brain.
So I went to take the call in some confusion — confusion made worse by haste when Alexander told me it was the Prime Minister.
I have never been phoned by a Prime Minister before, but I imagine they are not used to being kept waiting.
So flustered was I, in fact, that I became entangled with the bicycles in the hall (my sons always keep them there, and other things being equal I usually get past them without too much difficulty), and I arrived in the dining-room even more distraught than I set out from the study.
Worse was to come.
I had assumed up to this point that you really wished to speak not to me but to my husband (who is of course E J Maitland, a philosopher whose reputation is rather more likely than mine to attract telephone calls from the great officers of state) and that I was being summoned to the phone merely because he was not there.
When the gentleman in your office, however, addressed me not as Mrs Maitland, but by my maiden name, which is the one I write under, I realized that it must indeed be me who was being phoned, whereupon it suddenly seemed (perhaps only by association of ideas) imperative that I had the means of writing to hand.
Now, our dining-room had served during the General Election just concluded as the local Labour Party committee-rooms, and there were still various sheets of strawboard balanced on tables and sideboards, covered in the stubs of canvass-returns, with pencils at hand to mark them.
Just as I was put through to you I had the idea of reaching out to take one of these pencils and to tear off one of the canvass-returns as a notepad.
All might still have been well had it not been for yet another unfortunate circumstance.
Just as I was stretching, the room went black: another power-cut.
In the darkness I reached too  far and dislodged the sheet of strawboard.
It fell forwards and I managed to catch it on my outstretched forearm.
I knew that if I let it go it would collapse on to a teapot and mugs still waiting to be cleared from the sideboard, which would confuse the situation still further.
On the other hand I felt I could scarcely ask you to wait while I dealt with the strawboard — you were by this time I think just on the verge of a few conventional politenesses about my work, an awkward stage in conversations of this sort which is difficult to endure gracefully but which is even more difficult to interrupt.
I have to confess, I'm afraid — and now we have come to the point of this long and circumstantial detour, of a sort which I assure you will not recur in these reports — that under the pressure of the circumstances I did a very foolish thing.
I put the receiver down for a moment so that I could take two hands to the strawboard.
If this was foolish, what was unforgivable was not to confess sooner — immediately I had picked the receiver up again.
Because by this time you had moved on to explaining what you wanted me to do and I think I had missed some essential point.
When I rejoined the conversation you were talking about your ‘strikers’ and your ‘defenders’, by which I for a moment thought you meant the miners and their supporters, but which I then understood to be part of an extended football metaphor and to refer respectively to your Policy Unit and your Private Office.
You went on to discuss your own role as a ‘sweeper’(which I gather from my sons is roughly what I was brought up to call a half-back).
As I understand it, you were continuing the same metaphor when you told me that you wanted me to be a kind of groundsman.
(Or groundsperson, as you quickly modified it to, though let me assure you grateful as I am for your awareness of the issues involved that I have no simplistic sensibilities to be offended in this area.)
You said, I think, that you wanted me to ‘check the condition of the pitch’ and to ‘make sure there's a goal somewhere down the other end of the field’.
I believed at the time that I more or less grasped the metaphorical implications of this, but after I had put the phone down I found I was not as clear as I should have hoped to be about exactly what was required of me in concrete practical terms.
This is  when I came to suspect that I had missed something of importance.
I'm afraid that my moment away from the phone also meant that I missed my opportunity to query whether I am really the right person for the job.
The last thing I heard you say before I left the receiver to its own devices was something like ‘Some of us here have been reading your books…’
I assume that ‘some of us’ is scarcely likely to include anyone as busy as you must be yourself.
‘Have been reading’, I realized even as I struggled to find somewhere to stand the strawboard in the darkness, makes a somewhat smaller claim than ‘have read’, and I scarcely expect that my ‘books’, to anyone outside the very restricted world of philosophical studies, are going to include the two on Spinoza; all of which suggests a second-hand and partial acquaintance with my only other work, Natural Man.
This has indeed attracted considerable interest outside the profession.
It has been  taken up both by those who see in it an attack upon civilization as an unnatural cage in which man is incarcerated and by those who take it to be a defence of civilization as man's natural home.
Had I had the receiver in my hand when some break in the conversation occurred at this point, I should have explained to you that it is in fact neither; it is merely an examination of the various modes of thinking which the phrase implies — an examination which, in the tradition of British philosophical inquiry, seeks merely to study and perhaps oil the conceptual machinery and then to put it back more or less as it was.
Though I am, as it happens, an officer of the local Labour Party, this may not suggest the radical intellectual approach that you were perhaps looking for in your ‘groundsperson’.
This last point, however, in passing.
Here I am in my office, after all.
with my embryo staff around me; you may think it a little late in the day to check my credentials.
The other question, however, as to what exactly I am supposed to be doing as I sit here, is plainly still a live issue — which is the reason for this intolerably circumstantial disquisition.
At first, when I put the phone down in the darkness that evening and returned to my pupil in the study, I was not too worried.
I had, after all, been summoned to meet you face to face in  Downing Street the following morning and obviously any difficulties could be sorted out then.
But circumstances, as you will recall, intervened at this meeting, too.
Our conversation in your study turned out to be considerably shorter than I had anticipated.
I drank my coffee and listened while you talked about the Government's commitment to looking at the quality of life you should be working towards for our people (or that we should be working towards for your people — I am not quite sure whether your use of the words ‘we’ and ‘our’included me or not); but before I could raise the questions that remained in my mind from the night before — let alone my new uncertainty as to what exactly was meant by the expression ‘the quality of life’— a young man had come in and murmured something to you about ‘the Governor’and ‘the Bank’.
Whatever it was, it seemed to require all your attention and I understood that I was to go.
As I left, if you remember, you were kind enough to invite me to get in touch with you at once if I had any problems, and as soon as we were outside I suggested to the young man that I should indeed wait and continue our talk at some later point in the morning.
Indeed I insisted, against his advice, on waiting, and waited for the best part of two hours, but then could wait no longer.
(I had a meeting of an advisory committee at the Bodleian at three, which was likely to be acrimonious and prolonged, and I simply had to buy something for the boys' dinner first.)
All my subsequent attempts to find a mutually convenient time to meet have failed — mostly, I have to confess, because my term-time commitments in Oxford made it difficult for me get up to London except at hours when you were in Cabinet, or in the House.
By the time term had ended, as you know, the Government was plunged into various difficulties of its own, which naturally took up all your attention.
I am not, perhaps I should make clear, complaining about any of this.
I am merely placing on record, as precisely as possible, the conditions that determined the starting-point of our inquiry.
New enterprises and institutions are not created de novo, out of nothing; they emerge from a fabric of events which is already complex, which has been long in the weaving, and from which they take their characteristic shape and colour.
The small events in my study and dining-room, the large events crowding your office, have already dictated the first necessity of our inquiry: to write our own terms of reference.
Before we take on staff and work out our programme we must elucidate what seem to be the key concepts in my instructions to date: ‘pitch’, ‘goal’, and ‘quality of life’.
In other words, we must decide what we are doing before we start doing it.
My next report will, I hope, present draft terms of reference for your approval.
Yours sincerely, Elizabeth Serafin
Good God.
Good God!
Is this why the Unit and all its works seem to have disappeared from the records — because it was unthinkable that such a document should officially exist?
But what happened to it when Serafin finished it?
It wasn't submitted to the Prime Minister like this?
No, of course not — it was typed out first.
Typed out?
By Mrs Padmore?
(Who I assume is now ensconced in the larger room at the foot of the spiral stairs.)
Read, by someone in the Clerical Grade?
I'm not given to prudery, but at the thought of some poor woman in the Clerical Grade being allowed to read this…this…whatever it is, I feel a flush of pure shame inside my beard.
Mrs Padmore, as we know from the memorandum at the front of the file, is going to be transferring to the Economic Secretariat in a few weeks' time.
I think it's fairly obvious why.
No.
Wait.
She didn't give it to Mrs Padmore — she gave it to Summerchild.
He sat at his desk, reading it, silently, with every external sign of seriousness.
Then…
I look over towards Summerchild's desk.
He gets up, holding the thin sheets of paper in front of him, perhaps just a little further away from himself than he normally would, and puts them delicately on the desk in front of me.
He says, very gently…
What does he say?
I pull round the next document on the Treasury tag.
Yes it's a page of Government paper in Summerchild's judicious  hand, which does not make holes in the paper, or need x-ing out, or fall off the bottom of the page:
I suggest that we should delay submitting this to Number Ten until you have had a chance to draft the actual terms of reference, as you propose.
Then you might care for me to redraft the complete document in more concise form.
You may feel, on consideration, that a brief outline would serve your purposes better.
Ministers, in my experience, rarely read more than two double-spaced pages.
If you feel very strongly that the background to the Unit's formation needs to be set out, I could perhaps draft it in the form of an (again brief) annexe.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Summerchild.
Or perhaps I should start calling you Stephen — I'm nearly as old as you are now.
We have been working together for the past three days.
Judging by the thickness of the file in front of me we are going to be working together for some little time yet.
I turn over Summerchild's elegant minute and uncover the next document on the file.
Single-spaced typing — holes and x's.
‘March 27th 1974.
Dear Prime Minister, In spite of the most helpful representations and advice from my staff, I have decided to continue submitting my reports to you in the informal way I settled upon initially…’
Here we go again.
But I'm already late for my Assessment Group meeting.
I get up and dust my hands.
I could take the file with me, now I've found it…
It's rather dusty, though…
I see myself putting it down on the table in front of me at the Assessment Group and the papers slipping loose…
Someone — Headland, in the Economic Secretariat, probably — frowns at the appearance of the typing and looks more closely.
Upside down across the table he reads something about bicycles in the hall and cogitations in the study…
On mature consideration I put the file back in the Squeez-Ee box and lock the door on it once again.
These papers are never to be taken outside a secure environment.
8
I am sitting in my office after the Assessment Group meeting, looking at a draft position paper on the assessment of the assessment process itself that David Poole, in the European Secretariat, wants the Group to put up to the Secretary of the Cabinet.
But I am also sitting in Dr Serafin's study, with an essay on sense-data in my hand.
I am her pupil, but I cannot read what I have written, because the lights have just gone out and the glow of the electric fire has dwindled to nothingness.
I am sitting in the darkness, straining to hear my tutor on the phone in the dining-room on the other side of the hall.
She is talking to the Prime Minister.
I have a warm sense of privilege, I think, in spite of the sudden lack of an audience for my opinions.
This time last year I was sitting with twenty other people in some dull sixth-form room, being told about participles or Corn Laws by someone no one had ever heard of, and here I am, just one year later, on my own in a solidly built house in North Oxford, a cup of coffee on the floor beside me, giving my views on sense-data to a well-known professional philosopher who then has to break off to take a call from the Prime Minister.
What are they saying?
All I can hear is the sound of large, heavy objects falling over…the telephone being dropped…someone crashing into a bicycle.
What I am feeling as I listen to this is a strange movement in the undergrowth immediately in front of me; a smile spreading inside my beard…
The phone goes off like an alarm clock at my elbow.
The Prime Minister…
The draft position paper goes sliding over the edge of the desk into the waste-paper basket as I snatch up the receiver.
‘Jessel.’
‘Hurren.
I wondered where you'd got to with Summerchild.’
Hurren?
Oh, Hurren.
Yes.
I think rapidly.
Where have I got to with Summerchild?
‘Making progress,’ I tell him.
‘It's rather a long story.
I'm getting there slowly.’
‘Nothing that's going to worry us?’
‘Oh, I don't think so.’
I put down the phone.
I'm getting somewhere slowly.
But where?
I still haven't the slightest idea.
And isn't it going to worry us?
It's going to worry me.
9
What, for example, is Summerchild feeling — what is my colleague Stephen feeling — as he goes home after reading Serafin's appalling letter and writing his exemplary minute?
Has his depression deepened?
Is this the story that's developing?
Is he oppressed by the same obscure shame that I felt when I read the letter?
Is he walking even more slowly up the hill from the station this evening, even more wearily along the lane?
The towers of South London glide slowly up out of the east as I think these thoughts, perform their well-rehearsed half-revolve and retire with dignity into the west.
The train stops at Greenwich and I find myself getting off and starting on the ritual walk, one of a dozen, as before, one of ten, one of eight, one of five…
Now, I'm climbing the hill.
And, no, it's not harder — it's easier.
I'm not smiling inside my beard now that I'm Summerchild, naturally, because I've no beard to smile inside.
But I have some secret bubble of amusement in me and it's lighter than air.
I sail up the hill and along Hyde Hill Lane as if I were a balloon.
The evening sun has burst out from cloud over London and flooded the fronts of the houses in the lane with a mature and contented light.
I stop for a moment at my gate and look up at the windows of my house.
It's not golden June, of course— in 1974 it's still March, and dark, but the curtains of the ground-floor rooms are open and the lights are on.
In the kitchen Anne and Millie are laying the table for dinner, talking seriously.
How curious  that someone with such a short, neatly waved cap of brown hair should be talking to someone with such a fuzz of ginger hair — and talking so seriously, with no sense of disparity!
I go up the steps in two effortless bounds and let myself in.
At any rate Summerchild does.
I stand at the bottom and watch him.
As he disappears through the front door so the neat brown head and the wild red one turn.
By the time he reappears in the kitchen Millie is watching him closely and Anne is frowning slightly; they have seen immediately that there is something different about him.
He offers no explanation, as they sit down to dinner, and Anne and Millie talk about other things.
Perhaps at some point he smiles slightly to himself, so that Millie smiles, too, and says, ‘What?’
Summerchild shakes his head and says nothing.
Anne watches him over the table in that brooding speculative way of hers, as if he were a long-pondered clue in a half-completed crossword.
He looks up at her inquiringly and she looks away with another slight frown.
Millie glances at each of her parents in turn, then picks up her dessert spoon and studies that instead.
She seems to find it a slightly amusing object.
The whole atmosphere of the house has changed…
Now dinner is over and they are drifting into the other room at the front of the house.
Millie is setting up two music stands and lugging her cello case in from the hall.
Stephen is tightening a bow, bouncing it against his forearm to check its tension.
Anne is sitting down at the piano, unfolding her spectacles, smoothing the music in front of her.
A, she plays, looking over at them patiently, A…
A…
A…
Stephen and Millie are touching bows to strings, then screwing up their faces as they force pegs another fraction of an inch tighter, waiting for a string to break…
They settle…look at each other interrogatively…
Bows hover above strings, hands above keys…
Then Stephen bobs his head, and
The front door opens.
A woman is coming out of the house.
She comes down the steps in the evening sunshine, with a little dog on a lead.
I turn away immediately and move on up  the lane.
I can feel behind my head the haze of reddish hair going away in the opposite direction.
I can feel it turn, too, as Millie realizes who she has just seen.
She'd hardly changed at all.
She still looked like a serious seventeen-year-old, was still wearing the same shy clothes.
She has never married.
Or so I have heard.
I walk rapidly across the Park.
The reassuring cloud of honeysuckle around my front door, as I approach it, suddenly makes me stroke the reassuring beard around my mouth.
What do they conceal from the world, this honeysuckle and this beard?
All I can see beneath the sweet-scented tangle above the living-room window is darkness within.
Then I glimpse the shifting colours of the television and its faint reflection on two small inert alien faces.
Cheryl's children.
I long for them not to be there.
I unlock the front door.
For once, I find, Timmy is not asleep.
He is sitting at the top of the stairs, sobbing.
By the exhausted mechanical sound of it he has been sobbing for a long time.
‘Now here's your Dad,’ says Cheryl, standing in the living-room doorway.
‘You tell him you're not going to bed.
It's nothing to do with me.
I don't make the rules in this house.’
She goes back to collect her own two from in front of the television.
They are both younger than Timmy.
‘I'm sorry,’ she says to me, as she bundles them out of the front door, ‘but what can I do?’
I apologize to her.
But then what can I do?
I turn off the television.
The only sound in the house is the occasional last convulsive sob from the top of the stairs.
I go up and sit a couple of stairs below my son.
‘It's not fair,’ he says.
What can I say in return?
He's right — it's not.
‘I hate Cheryl,’ he says.
I remain silent.
I hate Cheryl, too.
That's not fair, either, of course.
Nothing's fair.
I shift myself a stair higher, so that I can reach up and stroke my son's head.
If whatever happened to Summerchild hadn't happened, I think, once again, then…then Timmy and I might have had a rather better quality of life.
10
By three-twenty, which was what the alarm clock by the bedside said the last time I looked at it, I have moved on from thinking about Timmy and Cheryl and her children, and Cheryl, and Timmy, and Cheryl's children, and Timmy, and Timmy, and Cheryl, and Timmy, and begun to think about Summerchild and Serafin, and Serafin, and Timmy, and Serafin, yes, and Serafin.
A very simple thought comes to me, like an angel entering the room.
I could go and talk to her.
What?
Go up to Oxford?— Yes!
She's probably still living in the same house, still teaching, still struggling with the Marmite and the Spinoza.
What, some time next week?— Some time this week!
In the morning!
Go to Paddington?
Get on a train?— Other people do brave and sudden things like going to Paddington and getting on trains!
I've done them myself!
I see myself on the train, in holiday mood, then walking past sunlit honeyed stone walls with doorways opening into quiet inner worlds of lawns and laughter.
I'll go!
But then I arrive outside the house.
Its door is closed and unwelcoming.
Have I phoned to say I'm coming?
Or am I trying to take her by surprise?
I don't know whether I've phoned or not…
I don't know what I'm doing…
She's not there, in any case.
It's the middle of the long vacation.
She's abroad — she's away for the entire year on sabbatical…
No, here she is, opening  the door.
‘Yes?’ she says.
She looks motherly; the hall behind her is full of bicycles.
No, the bicycles went years ago, she looks grandmotherly — she's divorced and the children have left home — this is a different house.
I start to explain that I'm from the Cabinet Office.
I'm writing a report on her former colleague, because suspicions have been voiced that she is the agent of some foreign power — though, I hasten to add, I personally regard this as nonsense, and am convinced he died simply because she somehow…
I don't know…drove him mad…
I sit up in bed and switch the light on, shaken awake by pure embarrassment.
Of course I'm not going to talk to her.
I'm a Civil Servant, not a Police Inspector.
My job is to go to Whitehall, not Oxford, and to read the appropriate documents, not interrogate witnesses.
I get up and listen at my son's door.
I half hope he's awake, so that I can go in and sit with him, and stroke his head.
But, of course, he only wakes when I'm asleep.
I sometimes think that's what wakes him — an obscure sense of loss, an occult awareness that I am no longer conscious.
I creep downstairs and roam pointlessly around.
Now that the lights are on I don't suspect that she drove him to suicide.
The idea is ridiculous.
I don't suspect anything.
I have no idea what happened.
They may after all have been passing secrets to Soviet agents.
Serafin may have been Russian, may have disappeared back to Russia.
The idea that Summerchild was murdered by Naval Intelligence seems at least as plausible an explanation as anything else I can think of…
Natural Man.
Yes.
I do faintly remember some stir about the book.
We might even have a copy of it.
Lynn sometimes used to buy books like that before she…before.
I run my eye along the shelves.
Set texts I acquired at Manchester; set texts Lynn got at Keele; various important books bought since which were going to change the way we thought and lived, but somehow failed to.
The books look dead; no one reads them any more.
No sign of Natural Man.
But there is an ancient paperback by E J Maitland.
Didn't Serafin say he was  her husband?
It's entitled Fair Do's: Studies in the Perception of Social Justice — the kind of thing Lynn used to buy before I met her.
Serafin's being Mrs Maitland, it seems to me, is the unlikeliest thing of all about her.
Not that I know much about him, just that my philosophical friend Kevin Rice despised him.
Too much plain common sense and rugged North Country integrity for Kevin's taste, as I recall.
I take the book down.
It was published in 1973, when Lynn was seventeen.
There's a photograph of Maitland on the back.
He doesn't look much like a philosopher to me.
He's smiling out of a rugged face, with thick black eyebrows and curling hair.
He's wearing a heavy raincoat in the photograph for some reason, though it doesn't seem to be raining, with the collar turned up, and he's got a pipe in his mouth, though there's no sign of any smoke coming out of it.
There's something baldly there about him which inclines me, like Kevin, to distrust anything he says.
He is a Professor, I see from the biography inside, and the E stands for Edward.
I imagine his friends call him Ted.
I open the book at random.
‘What these experiments show us is that human consciousness can be re-set.
The scale on which it registers experience can be adjusted upwards or downwards.
You might think of it like the clock in your hall being set forwards or backwards at the beginning and end of Summer Time, so that it registers nightfall as coming first later and then earlier…’
I can imagine what Kevin would have said about this kind of thing.
I see Ted Maitland going to football matches in his grubby belted raincoat and having grubby affairs with his students.
I seem to remember reading about him recently, living in California, married to someone who is noted for being controversial in some kind of way.
Now that I've seen his photograph and read his prose style, I can't imagine how he and Serafin ever contrived to live together.
The more I think about it the bleaker the home life of Professor and Mrs Maitland begins to seem.
Every door of the house I open seems to reveal the author of Fair Do's (and  no doubt something rather more respectable, to keep up professional appearances, on someone like Kant), tremendously there, as on the back cover of his book, his eyebrows and hair curling coarsely.
Here he is in the bathroom, wearing his grimy raincoat with the turned-up collar.
Here he is sitting up in the marital bed, his jaw ruggedly clenched on his unlit pipe.
This is what Dr Serafin is escaping from every time she pedals furiously to the station to catch the train to London (one of those bicycles in the hall is hers) with the portable typewriter lodged insecurely in the basket on the handlebars.
The little room under the eaves must seem a refuge, Summerchild's diffidence and deference and fine copper hair a welcome relief.
Except that it's four in the morning and Dr Serafin's home life is largely inside my head.
Or entirely inside my head.
Is this possible?
I'm beginning to get very confused about exactly where my head stops and the rest of the world starts.
Which side of the beard is Ted Maitland's belted raincoat on?
I go back to bed.
The curtains are light at the window.
I stroke my beard, as if it were Timmy's brow, trying to soothe myself to sleep.
One thing I think I know now, though — where she has been hiding all this time.
11
March 27th 1974.
Dear Prime Minister,
In spite of the most helpful representations and advice from my staff.
I have decided to continue submitting my reports to you in the informal way I settled upon initially…
Friday morning.
The last day of the week, and the last day I shall be spending up here in my private tower, high above the politics and the Park, where the phone never rings, far from Bartlett and Kyle, cut off from Milmo and Gedge.
There is a carpet of sunshine on the floor and blue sky filling the windows.
The people walking across the Parade down there are in a world of their own; no great glass eyes are turned inquiringly up towards me.
All the strained confusions of the night are over, all the sleepless impatience to get on with the job.
Now that I'm back here at last, sitting on my two boxes with the heap of riddled typescript in my hands, I feel soothed and slowed.
I'm looking out of the window, putting off the moment when there will be nothing left to find out and all this has to end.
I've tracked Serafin down.
She's where I realized in the middle of the night she would be — where no doubt she always was — safely tucked up in Who's Who and the Universities Year Book under ‘Maitland, Mrs E J’.
And yes, she has three sons.
She's divorced, but she hasn't emigrated or defected — she's still a Fellow of Somerville, and still living  at a solid address in North Oxford.
Born in 1930, so she must be on the verge of retirement now.
She hasn't written any more books, or held any more public appointments.
Nor is there any mention of her time with the Strategy Unit.
I've got quite used to Serafin, I realize.
I think Summerchild has, too.
He's sitting here, looking out of the window like me, slightly amused, though probably not very surprised, that his advice has been rejected.
He has a master (or a mistress) with a will of her own — always more engaging for a Civil Servant, whatever outsiders think.
He reads on, to find what new horrors are in store:
…
You will recall that the first task we set ourselves, in default of any clear instructions in the matter, was to decide what exactly we were doing, and that to this end we proposed to examine some of the various concepts involved.
This will constitute what we might term the Prolegomena to the inquiry proper.
We made a start today with the notion that seems to me most central to our inquiry — the one with which, as it happens, I personally have most difficulty.
This is the quality of life.
My original intention was that the entire Unit should participate in the debate…
Just a moment.
What's this about the entire Unit?
Have I missed something?
Apart from Summerchild and a clerical assistant, the Unit at the last count still consisted of one single member, Serafin herself.
Has she appointed more members in the interval, or is she proposing to talk to herself?
…
However, Mr Summerchild has persuaded me that taking part in a discussion of this nature might lie outside Mrs Padmore's job description, and could involve us in difficulties with her union…
Mrs Padmore?
Serafin was proposing to involve the clerical assistant in the discussion?
This suggests a naivety on Serafin's part amounting to a kind of idiocy.
I suppose she suggested it  in deference to the participatory politics of the time.
Even so, it puts her judgement into question, to say the least.
I can't help admiring the skill with which Summerchild got this mad toy out of her hands, by offering her the alternative piety of deference to trade union sentiment.
…
So in the event our discussion group consisted of Mr Summerchild and myself…
Well, if a hostage has to remain behind in enemy hands then it's clearly better that it should be Summerchild himself.
…and if this sounds as though I were conducting a tutorial, then I make no apology.
The tutorial, after all, is in essence the classical way of doing philosophy.
It is the Socratic method, where the philosopher asks simple questions which prompt the inquiring follower to think out the issues involved for himself…
‘Simple questions…inquiring follower…think out the issues involved for himself’?
Madam, if my colleague were not bound by the traditions of the Civil Service — not to mention the obsolescent demands of gentlemanliness and his own natural diffidence — he would walk straight out of that door and never come back.
…
Whether Socrates himself was ever helped towards a clearer understanding of matters by this process Plato does not tell us, but I must say I have always found that a tutorial strongly stimulated my own thinking.
The most illuminating insights in philosophy are almost invariably the simplest, and a great deal of my most original thinking has been done in response to the innocence of my pupils — particularly of first-year students who are still philosophical virgins.
Mr Summerchild (who tells me that he read classics at Cambridge) turned out to be eminently suitable in this respect.
In fact his very first answer put the concept in an entirely new light for me.
‘What do you understand by the phrase quality of life?’
I asked him.
He said he thought it was something to do with washing-machines, which for a start I found deeply puzzling.
I felt rather as I should if, on my asking him what he would like for lunch, he had replied ‘thriftiness’, or ‘thirty-seven degrees Centigrade’.
After a few minutes' silent reflection, however, I saw that the difficulty arose because we had read the phrase in quite different ways.
I had assumed that it meant the characteristic of being alive, livingness, whatever it is that makes life life.
Mr Summerchild, however, was evidently feeling his way towards a quite different sense — the idea of some kind of grading system for our experience, of some variable level of satisfactoriness to which life might attain, and which, as he implied, might be enhanced by various practical means.
As soon as I had seen this reading of the phrase it at once seemed more plausible.
Indeed, I recalled the Government's commitment to ‘work towards’ the quality that we were studying, and could not understand exactly what I had envisaged by the notion of working towards the condition of being alive rather than dead.
So this was the first fruit of our collaboration, the test of our method!
I see it as the so to speak Preface to the Prolegomena!
I imagine she leaned eagerly over the desk towards me, as towards a pupil who has made a good point in his essay, smiling and nodding encouragingly.
‘Yes!’ she says.
‘Good!
Well done!’
And I must not only sit here and endure all this I must read her account of it at the end of the day, and think of something polite to say about it before I find ways of rewriting and neutralizing it.
What do I say, in point of fact?
Isn't this my own handwriting running sideways down the narrow margin?
I turn the typescript…
Yes: ‘I wonder if it might not be helpful to make clear to a lay reader what precisely the connection was between Socrates and Plato.’
What else?
Nothing, apparently.
Nothing more in the margins, nothing at the end.
That's my only comment on all this nonsense.
I don't understand.
What's happening?
Am I becoming mesmerized?
Does this woman, as she leans across her desk murmuring her little words of encouragement, exert some  personal magnetism which is incomprehensible to those who haven't met her?
Or am I playing some deep game, as I was with the choice of accommodation?
Am I tempting Serafin towards her own destruction?
Have I decided to submit all this to the Prime Minister's office as it stands, to lay it all just as it is before Francis Tite and let fate take its course?
If so, it doesn't seem to have worked — there's still sheaves of the stuff to come.
I lift another heap of pages out of the file and something falls out on my knees…
A photograph.
It's a snapshot of a woman with a broad, simple face, her greying hair drawn straight back from her temples.
She is sitting at a desk, smiling out of wide-set eyes, leaning slightly forward and gazing straight into the camera with a kind of fervent intensity.
It's her.
No doubt about it.
I'd imagined her leaning forwards and smiling, but not looking like this, somehow.
She is smiling plainly and openly, without a trace of irony.
She is not smiling like a university lecturer who has just got off the train from Oxford, but like a peasant woman who has just arrived in a hard-class compartment from Saratov.
She has some kind of black shawl over her shoulders.
It should be over her head.
Because, yes, she is Russian.
Openly and blatantly Russian.
And her eyes are bright blue.
So that's what she looked like.
She was — how old?— forty-four.
And she does indeed have some kind of magnetism, even in a snapshot…
The photograph is not very sharp, but the shape of the window behind her is recognizable at once, and in the over-exposed whiteness beyond the glass I can just make out the roof of the Scottish Office and the aerials on top of the Admiralty.
She is sitting exactly where I am sitting now.
The photograph must have been taken from about twelve feet in front of her, where I surmise Summerchild's desk was.
It was presumably taken by Summerchild.
What is going on?
In all my years in the Civil Service  no one has ever brought a camera into the office and started taking snapshots!
I assume he wasn't posing for snapshots himself…
I give the absurd mass of typescript another shake.
Several more items come tumbling or fluttering out over me…
A dentist's appointment card.
Two 5p stamps.
A dried cornflower…
How on earth did all this rubbish get into the file?
And yes, another photograph…
He is sitting at his desk, with the window I'm looking at now beside him.
His face is rather out of focus.
I have the impression that he was moving back, away from the camera.
with instinctive diffidence, even as the photograph was taken.
There he is, though, with his freckles and the ginger cloud of surprise around his head.
He's at least five years younger than her and he has an ironic smile as elusive as hers is guileless.
He looks not like a peasant from Saratov, but a Civil Servant Grade 5 who has just got off the train from Greenwich.
I wonder at what point in this insane course of tutorials did teacher and pupil begin taking snapshots of each other.
I turn back to where I was in the text.
…
We shall meet next week for our first formal session.
This I shall record on tape.
to be transcribed by Mrs Padmore and forwarded to you unedited.
I turn to the next document on the tag and suddenly I am in a quite different and entirely familiar landscape of calm, double-spaced, wide-margined, cleanly typed Government A4.
‘April 3rd 1974’, says the heading.
‘Transcript of first working session’.
I feel even more uneasy to find the alien proceedings wearing such an everyday look.
Before I begin to read I push some boxes across to the place where Summerchild sat facing me and dust them to make him a desk and chair.
I stand his face on the boxes that represent the chair, propped up against the wall behind.
Then I put her face on her desk, supported by a heap of loose  files.
She gazes at him, from as close as she can lean forward.
He looks guardedly back, from as far as he can lean away.
And I make a place for myself where I can watch them both out of the corner of my eye while I read.
12
SERAFIN:…whether it's recording or not.
I'd just better try…
No.
Alexander did explain how to use it but…
I think I must have picked up Paul's one by mistake.
This is how the transcript begins.
Not a very auspicious opening.
I expect the Establishment Division refused to supply her with a tape-recorder (and for good reason, one might think), so she's brought one of her children's instead.
I imagine the batteries are nearly flat.
There's some kind of dried food stuck on the volume control.
The microphone only works when you shake it.
And no one 's told Mrs Padmore not to type all this bit.
I'll just have another…
No.
It looks as if it's recording, but every time I press Play…
The Prime Minister's going to enjoy reading this.
Something to keep him occupied through the odd thirty seconds of the week when he's not actually reading some other report.
…
You see?
It just plays that horrible music.
I'm sorry.
This must be one of Paul's tapes.
I'll try again.
Now, I press Play…
No.
I'm sorry about this…
SUMMERCHILD: Don't you have to press Rewind before you press Play?
SERAFIN: Rewind?
She hasn't pressed Rewind.
Of course.
And by now the Prime Minister has moved on to the next sterling crisis.
Oh.
Yes.
Good.
Thank you…
That's better.
I'm sorry about that.
Now…
To recapitulate: ‘the quality of life’, as you understand it, is some property which is in one way or another promoted or enhanced by washing-machines.
Now, I take ‘washing-machines’ in this context to be a synecdoche (no doubt humorously ventured) for domestic machinery in general.
SUMMERCHILD: I imagine it is.
But, look, I'm not really the best person to ask about this, I'm afraid.
It's not a phrase I've had occasion to use all that much.
SERAFIN: But you have used it?
You've read it, for instance?
SUMMERCHILD: I suppose so.
In minutes and reports, and so forth.
SERAFIN: You've never written it?
SUMMERCHILD: Oh, very possibly.
SERAFIN: Also in minutes and reports?
SUMMERCHILD: I imagine it was.
SERAFIN: Which you regard as being different from using it in private conversation?
SUMMERCHILD: I suspect I do.
SERAFIN: I find your repeated appeal to what you suspect you think and what you imagine you did deeply suggestive.
We tend to assume, I think, in normal usage, that I have to suspect what you are thinking, and to imagine or conjecture what you mean by an expression, but that you have some direct and privileged access to your intentions which enables you to know what you mean.
But you find it quite natural to resort to conjecture yourself to establish what you think and what you mean.
However, that is by the way.
I am taking it for granted that if you used the term, even in minutes and reports, you must have meant something by it.
Yes?
SUMMERCHILD: Of course.
I should imagine I meant…
SERAFIN: ‘Imagine’ again!
SUMMERCHILD: I'm sorry.
SERAFIN: No, no!
This is fascinating!
SUMMERCHILD: I — how shall I put it, then?— I assume I meant…
SERAFIN: ‘Assume’!
Yes!
Good!
SUMMERCHILD: I assume I meant more or less what everybody else means.
SERAFIN: You've no idea how deeply helpful all this is to me in a private capacity.
I think I may now have seen how to proceed in a paper I'm writing at the moment on unconscious intention.
But we're letting ourselves be distracted from the matter in hand.
(If you're interested in following up the question of how we know what's going on in our own minds you might have a look at Duncan: I Know What I Know — or Do I?— Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Spring 1971, or just possibly my contribution to the symposium on recursion in the current Analysis, though this is a little technical.)
Now, back to the actual contents list of your mind (imagined, assumed, or however else established) when you use the term ‘quality of life’.
Let's see if we can locate the boundaries of the concept, as you yourself use it, a little more firmly.
Does the class of things which to your mind promote or enhance the quality of life stretch far enough from the kitchen door to include the family television set?
SUMMERCHILD: Oh, yes.
SERAFIN: You're very definite about that!
SUMMERCHILD: Am I?
Yes, well, let me rephrase that…
SERAFIN: No!
Don't rephrase anything!
What we're after, I think, is what you are naturally inclined to say, without conceptual hindsight.
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, well, I don't really ever watch enough television to have an opinion.
I simply assume…
SERAFIN: Another assumption!
Excellent!
SUMMERCHILD: I mean, since we seem to have got on to household appliances in general…
SERAFIN: Yes, but we have jumped into a really rather different category of household appliance, haven't we?
Washing-machines, and similar sorts of domestic machinery, are intended to save our time and labour.
Now, no one could claim that a television set saves time.
On the contrary — it uses up the time we've saved with the dishwasher and the vacuum cleaner.
And I think one might go on to argue that far from saving labour it creates it — that its function is to give one the task of understanding it.
So let's ask ourselves a naïve question.
Why do people watch it?
SUMMERCHILD: Because, well…
SERAFIN: Yes?
SUMMERCHILD: Because they — I don t know…
SERAFIN: No, no!
Say it!
SUMMERCHILD: This is very silly.
SERAFIN: If by ‘silly’ you mean ‘simple-minded’, then take heart, because simple-minded is what we are struggling to be.
We are aspiring to the state of village idiots, to whom everything is a source of amazement.
So, people watch television because…?
SUMMERCHILD: Well, because they enjoy watching it.
SERAFIN: Exactly.
Thank you.
They enjoy watching it.
Let's leap from the television to the central heating.
Do they have central heating because they enjoy it?
SUMMERCHILD: I think the simple-minded answer is yes again, isn't it?
SERAFIN: Is it?
Do you enjoy it?
Do you sit there thinking, ‘My word, I'm enjoying this warmth!
Goodness, but I find the evenness of the ambient temperature hugely entertaining!’
SUMMERCHILD: No.
SERAFIN: You don't notice it.
SUMMERCHILD: Well, I've noticed it quite a lot these past few months.
I've noticed very distinctly every time it was turned off.
SERAFIN: You notice the central heating if it's turned off.
Yes.
You notice it if it's not there to be noticed.
What should we think if someone tells us: ‘I enjoy roast potatoes, but only at meals where I'm served boiled potatoes?’
SUMMERCHILD: Actually, what I do really enjoy is an open fire.
SERAFIN: Well side-stepped!
So you don't have central heating at home?
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, we do.
SERAFIN: So we can prefer what we're not aware of enjoying to what we are aware of enjoying?
SUMMERCHILD: Possibly.
We can certainly prefer not carrying endless scuttles of coal up from the cellar.
SERAFIN: And thereby have time and energy left to enjoy the open fire which is by our very preference not there to enjoy?
And so it goes on.
For many pages they consider the idea of enjoyment.
They consider it simple-mindedly, of course.
The simple-mindedness of their consideration makes the object of it complex in comparison — so complex that it becomes difficult to understand how mere mortal man has ever managed to enjoy anything.
If indeed he has.
It begins to seem unlikely that there is any such thing as enjoyment.
They consider it (if it exists) in relation to such things as sauna baths and chicken vindaloos.
Held in the mad intensity of their village idiot's gaze not only enjoyment but saunas and vindaloos begin to seem implausible.
Not even in my conversations with Kevin Rice have I come across anything quite so exasperating.
The morning ticks by.
My morning ticks by.
I've no idea where they've got to.
Now they're beginning to wonder if enjoyment is really what's at issue after all.
They have cautiously emerged from the kitchen and bathroom by this time, and moved on to the garage.
SERAFIN: Do you find the word motor car on your list?
SUMMERCHILD: What list?
SERAFIN: The list we have been consulting.
The list that you apparently keep inside your head of things that enhance the quality of life.
(More intriguing byways opening off the main road here!
Let us ignore them.)
SUMMERCHILD: Oh, I think cars are usually included on these occasions.
SERAFIN: Good.
Now, wouldn't it be possible to imagine someone who maintained both that motor cars were on our list of things that enhanced the quality of life and that travelling by motor car frequently took more time and demanded a greater outlay of labour than using various other means of transport?
Even that it was less comfortable — less entertaining — less enjoyable?
If we met someone who held this view he might justify it by saying something like: ‘I prefer travelling by motor car from Oxford to Westminster, let's say, or from —’ Where do you live?
SUMMERCHlLD: Greenwich.
SERAFIN: ‘From Greenwich to Westminster’— which I should think would involve somewhat similar considerations —‘even though it takes longer, even though I can't read or watch television to keep myself entertained at the same time, even though it demands a greater expenditure of concentration and nervous energy — and, one might possibly add, physical labour in pushing and pulling the various levers and pedals involved…’
SUMMERCHILD: Also there's nowhere to park.
SERAFIN: Yes.
Good.
Parking difficulties — so more time — more nervous energy — more pulling back and forth at the steering-wheel and the gear-lever — none of which, he might tell us, he in any way enjoys.
‘Even so,’ he might insist!
‘I prefer this means of transport because I find it consonant with a certain feeling I have about myself — because it expresses a certain style of being that I find congenial — because I find the kinaesthetic sensations it affords, even the physical efforts and nervous tension, somehow involving.’
What are we to say to that?
I think we are perhaps beginning to find the conventional notions of convenience and comfort, of enjoyment and entertainment, inadequate.
We are beginning to find that to explain what we understand by the quality of life we have to introduce a further notion which we could call texture.
Now, can we generalize this?
Can we see convenience, enjoyment, etcetera, as cases of texture?
I wonder whether we can speak of the smoothness of having little to do…the bobbliness of being entertained…the thickness of being warm…the knittedness of being kinaesthetically involved…
I wonder…
The suggestiveness of metaphor once again!
I start to feel life like cloth under my fingers…
Hairiness…
Tweediness…
Clingingness…
Snagginess…
Hm…
SUMMERCHILD: Shall I turn it off?
SERAFIN: I'm sorry?
SUMMERCHILD: The tape-recorder.
I thought perhaps I should turn it off.
You hadn't spoken for some time.
SERAFIN: Hadn't I?
SUMMERCHILD: I do apologize.
I've interrupted your train of thought.
SERAFIN: I was just thinking how often philosophy begins with the promise that if we can manage to get our thinking right about some basic concept we can then go on to restructure our thinking about everything else — and how rarely this later part of the programme is ever reached…
Why — how long was it since I spoke?
SUMMERCHILD: Oh, about fifteen or twenty minutes.
SERAFIN: I think I was also thinking about the tape-recorder.
I  think I was supposing it would be on your list and wondering why.
It's not entertaining us or making us feel comfortable.
It's not saving our time or labour.
SUMMERCHILD: I suppose it's saving Mrs Padmore's time and labour.
SERAFIN: You mean that if we didn't have the machine she would have to be in here taking a shorthand note?
Good.
Good.
So our having the tape-recorder is affecting the quality of Mrs Padmore's life — which, however, has an indirect effect on the quality of our life, given the I think not unreasonable premise that an improvement in the quality of someone else's life offers us some kind of pleasure or satisfaction, or at any rate spares us discomfort or guilt; though whether this is what I had in mind when I borrowed the tape-recorder this morning I think unlikely.
I believe a better practical explanation of my intentions might well be offered once again in terms of texture.
After all, one does the same with clothes.
If I'd been working at home today I should have put on my old skirt and my old pullover, so as to have something comfortably rough and worn around me.
But as I was coming up to London to work in more formal circumstances I selected my new skirt, which is somewhat smoother and less worn, together with my new pullover — oh, no, how odd, this is my old pullover — but — ah, now I remember, yes, worn over a cotton shirt — which again is something smooth.
I believe I picked up the tape-recorder in much the same spirit — because I felt that whatever we did here ought to have a rather spontaneous feel to it, and yet at the same time be noticeably hard-wearing.
That it should be light but long-lasting…translucent but, as one might say, mothproof…
Though just a moment…
What?
SUMMERCHILD: Sorry.
I was turning the tape over.
We'd got to the end.
SERAFIN: Oh yes.
I was just thinking.
I may have taken off in the wrong direction entirely.
Let me think a moment…
What?
SUMMERCHILD: I was putting a new tape in.
SERAFIN: What was wrong with the old one?
SUMMERCHILD: It had run out.
SERAFIN: Again?
They seem to be very short tapes.
SUMMERCHILD: Ninety minutes.
Forty-five minutes a side.
SERAFIN: Yes, you see, I have been attempting to identify and generalize the various things that we perceive as affecting or as constituting the quality of life.
But what they have in common is something both blindingly simple to name and blindingly difficult to think about.
The common factor is that we do so perceive them!
And this is what we should be examining what it is to so perceive them.
Look, the question of what we want is a sociological one, which we answer by asking people, or by observing their behaviour.
The question of why we want it is a psychological one, which we answer by much the same means.
The philosophical question — the deep question — the question that we, I think, are here constituted to examine — is what it is to want them.
I think we shall find ourselves distinguishing between what it is to want what we haven't got and what it is to want what we have got.
We may find the latter is the more elusive and the more central question, which opens out into what it is to like and to love, what it is to be content, and what it is to be happy.
Yes, I believe we may find ourselves forced to approach the whole question of happiness, which philosophers have gone round and about for so long.
The idea of happiness is surely the sun at the centre of our conceptual planetary system — and has proved just as hard to look at directly.
It seems to me possible that here in this room we might between us just conceivably be able to make a first…
How long did you say these tapes are?
SUMMERCHILD: Forty-five minutes a side.
SERAFIN: So what time is it now?
SUMMERCHILD: Five to two.
SERAFIN: Oh, no!
SUMMERCHILD: I didn't like to interrupt you, but if we want lunch in the canteen…
SERAFIN: No time for lunch, I'm afraid.
I've got to be back in Oxford by four for a meeting of the Research Fellowships  Committee…
Also I've got to get something for the boys' dinner first…
Look, if you don't mind a bit of running you could just come as far as the Tube with me and we could continue this conversation on the way.
We'll have to be quick, though…
What's holding you up?
SUMMERCHILD: Sorry — I'm just turning the tape-recorder off.
13
I'm running back to my office to make all the phone calls I should have made already this morning; Summerchild is running just in front of me, a pace and a half behind Serafin, trying to catch the various pearls now flying back unrecorded over her hurrying shoulder.
He is also carrying an armful of her books and papers, and fielding an orange which rolls free from the overloaded briefcase she is cradling to herself.
Another orange goes bounding away up the corridor ahead of them, under the feet of one of Summerchild's colleagues who is approaching from the opposite direction, coming back from lunch.
He recovers it neatly, just as Serafin dives for it herself and sets more oranges cascading.
I see Summerchild's colleague glancing at him curiously.
I catch the colleague's eye as he passes me.
His mouth twitches almost imperceptibly.
I dare say that mine, under the cover of my beard, twitches faintly back.
Not that I don't have the most intense professional fellow-feeling for Summerchild.
It's nearly two o'clock and he has had no lunch.
As I follow them past Security and out into Whitehall Serafin is dropping library books and wild phrases about the metaphysics of desire.
Security gazes after her.
I nod at Security drily…
Hold on, though.
What am I doing out on the street?
I was going to my office!
I go back past Security and get a slightly curious look myself.
I'm going upstairs to the canteen; it's Summerchild who's going up Whitehall.
At least, I assume he is, to get the Bakerloo from  Trafalgar Square.
He'll feel obliged to go all the way to Paddington with her — she'll never manage all that stuff on her own.
He'll find himself going into some supermarket in Praed Street, buying fillets of plaice and frozen broccoli for her sons' dinner…
She'll have lost her ticket…
He'll end up running after her along the platform, bundling books and plaice and Government papers in through the window of the carriage at her as the train moves out…
It's quarter to three by this time and still he's had no lunch…
I can't help laughing…
But what's this?
My laughter suddenly dries up.
I can't open the door of the canteen…
The canteen's shut already!
Of course— it's quarter to three — I'm not going to get any lunch…
Just a moment — what's going on?
It's not quarter to three here — it's quarter to three at Paddington!
Here in the Cabinet Office it's twenty to twelve and the canteen's not shut already — it still hasn't opened.
Then why am I hungry?
I'm not hungry!
I won't be hungry for another hour and twenty minutes yet!
All right so why am I standing outside the door of the canteen…?
My office is where I'm supposed to be.
As I go back downstairs I begin to feel that this woman is making fools of us all — of Summerchild, Tite and Harold Wilson, of Ken Hurren and myself.
It is right that our procedures should be subject to challenge and change, but her idea of turning a Government Advisory Unit into some kind of Oxford tutorial is an absurd perversion of everything that has been so slowly and painstakingly developed over the years.
It illustrates only too clearly the dangers of inviting outsiders to meddle in the machinery of Government.
And the investigations she is proposing to undertake are eccentric even by the standards of visiting academics.
No wonder the report was never published.
No wonder the Government of the day tried to conceal that it had spent public money on bringing some dotty lady down from her high table to tell us what it is to want what we want.
Underlined, of course, which must surely make it mean something.
Perhaps we should launch a new investigation into what it is to underline what we underline.
Or what it is to  speak so emphatically that even the phlegmatic Mrs Padmore feels obliged to underline it.
So this is what the great glass eye thinks may have been leaked to our enemies — an inquiry into the nature of happiness.
Yes, better they should see the plans for a nuclear submarine than this!
‘The sun at the centre of our conceptual planetary system…’
The Americans landed on the moon in 1969; five years later an agency of the British Government is launching an expedition to some metaphorical sun.
A state secret, certainly.
I feel, as I sit here in my own office, with my own files in front of me, a physical sense of shrinking inside my skin.
I am embarrassed.
Embarrassed for Summerchild, of course.
Embarrassed, too, for Tite and Harold Wilson and me.
Embarrassed for the great glass eye, if ever it should find out.
In fact I feel more than embarrassed.
I feel angry.
I am not much given to anger, but there is something indecent about these raw pink naïveties.
The nation where this debate is being launched has just emerged, in the spring of 1974, from a confrontation between Government and unions so destabilizing that some people had been daily expecting to see tanks in Whitehall.
Industry has only just been restored to normal after being reduced to a three-day working week.
Offices are still heated only half the day.
Streets and homes have been plunged into random darkness.
And all this minor misery is occurring in an island set in a leaden sea of even greater misery, in a world which is presumably going to end, sooner rather than later, in some cataclysmic downpour of misery beyond imagination.
Upon this charming scene enters a woman whose marriage is about to break up.
She sits down in a quiet room, provided at public expense, and begins to lecture a man who is shortly to be found dying by the dustbins.
‘Now,’ she says, ‘let's talk about happiness.’
Underlined.
My hands dart indignantly about my desk as if they were offended mice, opening files, annotating minutes, picking up the receiver.
My voice rushes out of its kennel at people like an irritated terrier.
‘Jessel,’ it snaps.
‘Yes…!
No…!
Before  Cabinet on Thursday…
At ministerial level…proceed with some urgency…’
And all the while my mind is thinking how beside the point all this talk of happiness is.
What constitutes the quality of our lives, Summerchild's and mine, is hands opening buff-coloured files, is slow-turning towers, pressure from colleagues, and walking the length of Whitehall.
It's the sense of decisions moving closer, the steepness of the stairs, words, more words.
It's thinking of Lynn and Timmy, and thinking of Lynn not being Lynn any more.
It's the Saturdays going out to the hospital, the smell of floor-wax and urine in the corridors, the helplessness, the moments of despair…
Happiness!
This is the Government service, not a holiday camp!
Happiness!
When even Summerchild isn't happy!
The quiet man with the violin, who goes home to play trios with his quiet and loving wife and his quiet and loving daughter, in his quiet and well-loved house along that quiet and rural lane, with London lying quiet at his feet — and even surrounded by this best of lives he's plainly a depressive!
I, Jessel, saw the heaviness in his legs as he walked up the lane.
I, at seventeen, heard the heaviness in his lungs as he sighed, the heaviness in his voice as he fetched those few reluctant words up from the depths inside himself.
Happiness!
Who told them to start drivelling on about happiness?
No one.
They're blundering about like a ship in the fog, with no terms of reference to steer by.
One day their terms of reference will be agreed and there'll be no mention of happiness anywhere in the document.
They'll find themselves chartered to carry pig-iron and cheap tin trays, just like everybody else; and by that time they'll be down in the South Seas loading rainbows and moonbeams.
I know the kind of people who talk about happiness.
They're the ones with strained white smiling faces and desperation in their hearts.
They're so happy!— Expect tearful phone calls and suicide attempts.
They've found the secret of happiness for all!— Stand by for the labour camps and the mass graves.
I'm over-reacting.
But why doesn't she just shut up and get on with it, like everybody else?
With work, with statistics about the distribution of washing-machines, and evidence from  economists and sociologists.
With life, since we're stuck with it.
With not embarrassing the rest of us.
We've got to get on with it, after all.
I'm getting on with it.
I get on with it over lunch — a sandwich and a green apple from the canteen, eaten at my desk.
I get on with it most of the afternoon, and I've still got a stack of unopened buff envelopes in my hand as I head doggedly back up the little twisting staircase and sit down on my hard box seat to get on with it again up here, a task which now looks likely to keep me here after everyone else has gone home.
Some of us don't have time to ask ourselves what we're doing in this world.
We're too busy listening to the outpourings of others.
What I'm doing at this point, actually, is jumping up and forcing the windows open to get some air into the room.
The high blue summer weather goes on and on and by mid-afternoon it's hot up here under the leads.
There is the sound of a brass band playing somewhere, and a bumble-bee sweeps erratically past, miles above the pollen on the plane trees.
In the lead-lined gutter behind the parapet, just down the slope of the roof beneath the window, is something white with writing on it.
I reach out and recover it.
It's a plastic marker, pointed at one end, of the sort that people stick in flower-pots to identify them.
Pelargonium hortorum ‘Elizabeth Angus’ it says.
Someone in this room once had a geranium on the little sill outside the window, scarlet against the blue of the summer sky.
The plant and the soil it grew in have long since spilled from the toppled pot and been washed away in the winter rains.
The plastic pot itself has gone bouncing away across the rooftops in the spring winds.
Only the words remain, and the notion of that flaunting colour.
Pelargonium hortorum…
I file the marker, on top of everything else, in my Summerchild file.
Summerchild, yes.
The name on the front looks subtly different,.
now that the Pelargonium hortorum document has been added to the record.
He's not indignant, he's not embarrassed.
He's amused by the turn events are taking, like me, even ironically helpful.
I look at his contribution to their first working session.
‘I imagine so…
I suspect I do…’
They're as smilingly elusive as his expression in the photograph on the boxes opposite me, as  charmingly imprecise as the photograph itself.
I go and sit beside him on his boxes and feel much the same as he does.
There she is, in the other photograph, guileless and fervent, leaning forward across her desk, philosophizing away at me from the broad steppe of her Slavic soul.
I lean back in my seat, smiling ironically over the hedge from the little back garden that serves as a soul for the English.
Yes, I believe I'm beginning to enjoy myself.
Some odd irresponsibility is stirring in me as I listen to Serafin's preposterous diatribe.
I am released from the gravity of routine, light-headed in the thin air at the top of the building.
Even before our report has been completed, the quality of my life has been improved.
Summerchild, I am beginning to think, has considerable inner resources.
When we all left the office this morning he was hurrying off to Paddington a pace and a half behind his wide-eyed philosopher, fielding stray oranges and packets of plectra.
Now I see him coming back in the middle of the afternoon, with, I hope, a railway sandwich or two inside him, apparently not in the least put out at being employed as a busboy.
I believe he is already carrying the geranium.
He puts it in the sun on the window-sill.
Where are we by this time?
April.
Inside the glass, then — it will go outside later.
But already I have the impression of warm spring sunshine.
The miseries he mentioned with the heating were in the past.
The terrible winter is over.
Now what does he do?
Well, he collects up the tapes from the tape-recorder and takes them downstairs to Mrs Padmore.
‘How many copies?’ asks Mrs Padmore.
‘Oh, just the one, I think, Mrs Padmore,’ he replies drily, ‘until we've got ourselves a shade more sorted out.’
Because this is a top copy of the transcript in the file, not a carbon.
It was never forwarded.
So far Summerchild has evidently managed to keep everything under control.
Then what?
With Serafin back in Oxford and Mrs Padmore hard at work on the tapes he has a little time on his hands.
He waters the geranium, then picks up the phone.
‘Tite,’ says the voice at the other end.
‘Summerchild,’ says Summerchild.
‘Would it be a convenient moment…?’ 'It  would indeed,’says Tite.
He can hear a new note in the grating depths of Summerchild's voice.
There is slightly surprising news to hear about the Unit, the section of his empire upon which the fate of the whole department may well depend.
From the sound of Summerchild's voice the news is either surprisingly good or surprisingly bad.
So Summerchild locks up his office and goes down the narrow staircase.
In some much larger and loftier room on the first floor, with net curtains at the window and the mulberry tree at the back of the Scottish Office just beyond, Tite waves him to a seat.
I picture a sharp little man, with sharply pointed shoes and sharply pointed ears.
‘Well?’ he says, sharply.
‘Yes, well,’ begins Summerchild, scratching his head in amused perplexity.
‘I think we may have a bit of a problem on our hands…’
Or perhaps he doesn't.
There is a great weight of paper still to come in the file.
‘Well?’ demands Tite, a little too sharply and Summerchild becomes rather less forthcoming than he had intended.
He looks at the window over Tite's shoulder and says something like: ‘Oh…early days yet.’
‘Not trying to fetch in too many people off the street, is she?
That's all I'm worried about.’
‘We haven't got that far yet.
We're still pretty much sharpening our pencils.’
‘Yes, well, keep me posted.’
‘Of course.’
He doesn't want Tite intervening.
I realize that now.
He is evidently enjoying his little flight of philosophical fancy.
Believes he can get the aircraft back on to the ground all by himself when the joy-ride is over.
Has begun, I should say, to feel a little proprietorial about Serafin, in the way we do about our masters, and at the same time a little protective.
Just as Tite himself, it occurs to me, is going to be doing when he goes into the witness-box at Summerchild's inquest later that summer and tells the Coroner — I turn back in my file to the copy I took of the cutting — that Summerchild was working on conditions of employment in the Civil Service at the time of his death.
Just as the Prime Minister, or whoever  briefed him, will be doing a few months after that when he tells the House that the report that Summerchild was working on was the comparability study which has since been published.
Was it Summerchild they were feeling protective about, though?
Or was it themselves?
So when Summerchild steps out up Whitehall at the end of the day he is still hugging their secret madness to himself.
Because I was wrong; he did have secrets; he was carrying a headful of them up Hyde Hill Lane every evening.
And somebody has been covering up for him — smoothing his footprints out of the mud, rubbing his fingerprints off the door handles.
There he goes across the concourse at Charing Cross with the rest of the commuters.
Nine minutes it's taken him this evening, no more — almost as fast as me.
He can't wait to get home to share some sense of his pleasure with Anne and Millie.
And naturally when he gets there he can say nothing.
He smiles a few secret smiles and shakes his head when Anne and Millie look at him.
His inability to explain makes him smile again.
Millie laughs.
Anne watches them both silently.
If spring is like this, what will summer bring?
And next day back he comes — ten minutes from the ticket barrier to Security, even in the morning rush — eager to see what new lunacy is in store at the top of the stairs.
Yes, what next?
I'm naturally pleased to see Summerchild feeling…
I was going to say happy, I realize.
Happier, let's say, and no questions are begged.
We can be happier without being happy.
In fact, the further we are from whatever happiness is, the more scope we have to be happier.
All the same, I can't help feeling a little anxious about this relish he is revealing for anarchy.
I put my Summerchild file aside and turn back to the Quality of Life.
The transfer of Mrs Padmore still threatens on the first page.
I go to the back of the file and sort out the next complete document.
It's more of Mrs Padmore's typescript.
Another Socratic dialogue.
My eye skips down the page.
‘Happiness’ is the first word it lights on — and, uncontrollably, away it bounds at once, as affrighted as ever.
14
But then I go cautiously back to take another look.
I realize with hindsight that the dread word was preceded and calmed by the word ‘notion’.
Yes, ‘the notion of happiness’.
This is what she has been ‘giving some thought to’, she says —‘the notion of happiness’.
And at once all the blood runs out of it.
The wild piping creature that haunts the woods is hoisted up by its heels on the butcher's hook and it's just dead goatmeat ready for dissection.
I am relieved.
I had been fearing, I realize, that she would ask Summerchild if he personally was happy.
I realize something else, too — I am a little disappointed.
I had secretly been hoping to see my colleague tortured a little.
Various ways in which the term has been used by philosophers…
Yes, yes…
References to Mill and Nietzsche…
Fine…
Summerchild mentions Kierkegaard.
Good God.
Much enthusiasm from Serafin over this.
‘Yes, yes!
Good, good!’ etcetera.
Much, I imagine, eager nodding.
Hopes here of a good second, at the very least…
Now a brief diversion into the lives of the saints…
Summerchild rather well-informed about St Teresa of Avila.
He's doing the Civil Service considerable credit, I must say.
All right so far…
Hold on, though.
I think Serafin is starting to edge away from the notions counter.
SERAFIN: Don't you begin to feel you have heard the whole debate before?
SUMMERCHILD: No, I don't think I do.
I don't think I have heard anything remotely like it before.
SERAFIN: Isn't it very similar to the kind of discussion people used to have about ethics?
What is goodness?
What is the good?
Is it analysable?
Is it an absolute?
Is it intuited directly, like greenness or blueness?
Etcetera.
Nowadays, of course, we understand that it was this way of talking about ethical abstractions that made them seem so mysterious.
In everyday life we talk about things being good and bad, and we know perfectly well what we mean.
So what philosophers have said is, Instead of talking about good in the abstract, let's look at the way people actually use words like ‘good’ in non-philosophical contexts.
SUMMERCHILD: As in the phrase ‘good sewage effluent’, for example?
SERAFIN: Yes!
I thought you said you read classics?
SUMMERCHILD: I did, but a friend of mine in college…
SERAFIN: Good!
Well picked up!
If you want to read the discussion of ‘good sewage effluent’ for yourself you'll find it in Hare, The Language of Ethics.
Yes, and there's a rather odd smell in this room…
SUMMERCHILD: I don t think I can…
SERAFIN: Slightly disgusting.
SUMMERCHILD: Oh, the geraniums, perhaps.
SERAFIN: The geraniums?
SUMMERCHILD: On the window-sill.
I thought they'd brighten the place up.
Geraniums, yes.
And not just one, evidently.
Two, three a whole display of them.
And perhaps, as the spring draws on, there will be more floral tributes.
I look round the room.
Now it seems like a conservatory, full of potted camellias and azaleas.
A Ficus benjamina in the corner.
A room vine climbing up the old chimney-breast…
Something else about the  chimney-breast, I realize, has been worrying me for some time now.
Two tiny marks, side by side, half an inch apart, about head height.
I go across and look at them from close to.
Yes, two neat holes, where a pair of steel pins were driven into the masonry to support a picture hook.
There are two more on the wall by the door.
A single one over Serafin's desk.
Another single one over Summerchild's.
They had plants on the window-sills and pictures on the walls.
Not posters, fixed with sticky tape or drawing-pins.
Framed pictures.
They had a hammer to drive the nails in.
And all this provided by Summerchild, from the sound of it.
SERAFIN: Oh yes.
Good…
Because she obviously hadn't even noticed the sudden splash of blood-red petals against the white April cumulus.
…
Where were we?
Yes, as in expressions such as‘good sewage effluent’.
Exactly.
Good!
Good!
SUMMERCHILD: Or as in that expression, perhaps.
SERAFIN: What expression?
SUMMERCHILD: ‘Good!
Good!’
SERAFIN: Good!
Yes!
Very good indeed.
He is politely but quite openly starting to mock her.
Perhaps this is why he is buying flowers and pictures.
He is beginning to feel at home up here.
He has taken Serafin's measure and knows that he is on top of the situation.
Not that Serafin seems to realize.
On she sails like the Titanic:
Well remarked!
So what I propose is that we put the notion of happiness back in its box and restrict ourselves to the word  ‘happy’, which people do in fact use in everyday circumstances.
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, well, I have made a list of organizations which I believe would be interested in giving evidence…
SERAFIN: Good.
Or rather…no, good.
We might at some later stage wish to move on to institutional usages of the word.
I imagine that a psychiatrist, for example, would apply the word to the behaviour of a patient according to rather technical criteria which would indeed provide an analogy with what a sanitary engineer means by good sewage effluent.
But in the first place I believe we should direct our attentions to unschooled lay usages of the word.
SUMMERCHILD: You want what are sometimes called ‘ordinary people’?
SERAFIN: Exactly.
SUMMERCHILD: I don't think that should present any problems.
The department has contacts with a number of opinion-sampling and marketing organizations.
I think we'd simply need to specify whether ‘ordinary’ means selected on a randomized basis or according to a specified distribution by age, sex, class, etcetera.
SERAFIN: Thank you.
But I think for our purposes we might define ‘an ordinary person’ as ‘anyone who is not a professional philosopher’.
A Civil Servant, for example, would be a perfectly ordinary person in this context.
SUMMERCHILD: Very kind of you to say so.
I've explained before, however, why I should be reluctant to involve Mrs Padmore…
SERAFIN: I wasn't thinking of Mrs Padmore.
SUMMERCHILD: So you were proposing…?
SERAFIN: To continue with our present procedure.
SUMMERCHILD: Ah.
SERAFIN: If you'd be happy with that arrangement…
And already we've found ourselves with the word on our lips!
‘I  should be happy with this arrangement,’ you say…
At least, I assume…?
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, yes, yes.
SERAFIN: Perhaps I was a little ahead of myself?
SUMMERCHILD: No, no.
I should be happy with this arrangement.
SERAFIN: Thank you.
So, yes, you tell me you are happy with a certain proposal.
Now let's jump straight in and catch this one on the wing.
A simple question first: how do you know you are happy with this arrangement?
SUMMERCHILD: Well, I think I felt…
SERAFIN: You felt.
Yes.
You were aware of a particular feeling.
Some identifiable affective event occurred inside you.
Can you describe this event at all?
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
SERAFIN: Was it — let's start at the heavy end of the scale — was it a moment of ecstasy?
SUMMERCHILD: I think ecstasy might perhaps be putting it too strongly.
SERAFIN: Let's move down the scale a little.
A surge of joy?
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
SERAFIN: Not a surge of joy.
All right.
Was it a shock of delight?
A wave of pleasure?
A glow of contentment?
SUMMERCHILD: I think perhaps…
I don't know…
I think I do in fact get a certain…well, yes, pleasure out of our conversations…
SERAFIN: You sound a little uncertain!
SUMMERCHILD: No, no…
SERAFIN: You sound as if you are making a cautious discovery about your feelings for the first time.
But you didn't have to stop and examine your feelings before you announced that you were happy with the arrangement!
Am I right?
You didn't  have to focus some kind of internal microscope, as you seemed to do when I challenged you.
You didn't have to hold slides of this unidentified emotional entity up against the illustrations in the textbook before you could declare your findings!
‘Are you happy with the arrangement?’
I asked.
‘Yes,’ you replied at once, ‘I'm happy with the arrangement.’
SUMMERCHILD: No, well, I suppose I…
SERAFIN: ‘…was not conducting any internal examination at all,’ you tell me.
‘I was not identifying a feeling — not reporting upon the  occurrence of an event — I was simply signalling my acceptance of a proposed course of action.
I was declaring my agreement.
I was committing myself to a policy.’
You might have felt nothing at all.
Might even have felt displeasure at the prospect.
Imagine that somehow I knew you regarded the proposed arrangement with distaste.
All the same, you tell me you're happy with the arrangement.
I think you would be just a little surprised if I shouted ‘Liar!’
There would be no contradiction, would there, between your feeling of distaste and your declaration of intent?
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, but when I say I'm happy with something…
SERAFIN:…
I'm using ‘happy’ in one specific turn of phrase, which is some kind of extension of its basic meaning.’
True enough, I reply.
But if we could grasp some of these small particular uses we might be able to follow them back to the main river.
Look after the pennies and the pounds will look after themselves.
Shadow your bagmen and they'll lead you back to Mr Big.
We've put a tail on ‘happy with’.
Let's try following ‘happy about’, and see if he's going to the same address.
‘Are you happy,’ I ask you, ‘about the way we are pursuing this investigation?’
SUMMERCHILD: Oh…
SERAFIN: And you pause.
Are you examining the state of your emotions?
I think not.
You are examining the progress of the investigation.
‘Yes, I'm happy about it,’ you tell me.
SUMMERCHILD: Well, I'm not sure that I am all that happy about it…
SERAFIN: Or ‘No, I'm not happy about it.’
But in either case, aren't you still declaring something rather than reporting on anything?
Aren't you once again in some sense signalling your acceptance of events — or your non-acceptance of them?
Isn't it — look, I know — isn't it like your signing or not signing the minutes of the last meeting?
In fact you tell me you're not happy with it.
You won't sign the minutes.
‘Why not?’
I demand.
You don't tell me it's because you've got a lump in your throat, or an ache in your heart, or a sensation of nausea in your stomach.
You may have all these symptoms and more — and yet they still wouldn't constitute grounds for refusing to sign the minutes.
‘Why won't you sign?’
I ask and you tell me where you think the record is wrong.
‘Why are you unhappy about the way we are proceeding?’
I demand.
And you identify some point or characteristic of our discussion.
Which is?
SUMMERCHILD: Isn't it all a little beside the point?
The thing about being happy is that you're happy.
I mean, when you're actually happy — I mean just happy — not with anything or about anything…
SERAFIN: How about happy that?
Or happy to?
You wouldn't like to trail those two rather innocent-looking characters back to headquarters?
SUMMERCHILD: No, I m thinking about when you're simply…well, happy…
SERAFIN: Hold on.
Let's make sure we're comparing like with like.
What we're examining, if you recall, is particular usages of the word.
So what you're saying is: ‘Let's look at the case where someone says, quite simply, ‘I'm happy.’
Yes?
SUMMERCHILD: Exactly!
If someone says that, then it's because he feels…well…
SERAFIN: Happy?
SUMMERCHILD: Yes!
SERAFIN: He might be lying.
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, yes.
But…
SERAFIN: And you make a gesture which the tape-recorder won't pick up, but which suggests, I imagine, impatience with pedantic nitpicking.
All right— you might be mistaken.
Is that a trivial objection?
Looking at you from the other side of the desk I might feel you have misdiagnosed yourself.
I might feel imagine now that I'm a rather severe confessor, or a psychoanalyst faced with what I believe they call denial, or the flight into health!— I might feel that you are concealing your deeper feelings from yourself.
To which you of course reply that the concept of misdiagnosis implies the possibility of correct diagnosis, and that I am able to discount the evidence of your feelings only by reference to other feelings.
I'd like to come back to the notion of self-misdiagnosis later, if I may, possibly at some future session.
But let's leave aside the whole question of the truth of the statement, which I think is going to lead us, if we're not careful, to the hideout of some other gang altogether.
What I think we might with advantage look at now is not the grounds for saying ‘I'm happy’, but the occasion for saying it.
The reasons for giving utterance to the words rather than not giving utterance to them.
When does one say, ‘I'm happy’?
Why does one feel it necessary to make it public?
People say things to serve some purpose.
What purpose might be served by announcing that you're happy?
What use might the statement have?
People don't suddenly say things out of the blue, without a context.
In what circumstances might you say ‘I'm happy’?
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
SERAFIN: In what circumstances have you found yourself saying it?
SUMMERCHILD: Me personally?
SERAFIN: You personally!
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
(Laughs.)
‘(Laughs)’ is presumably a rare example of Mrs Padmore's editorializing.
I wonder exactly what sounds on the tape the word represents.
Quite noticeable ones, I should imagine she hasn't found it necessary up to now to make any special  record of the other small vatic events — gasps, hesitations, groans, sighs — that the conversation must have involved.
‘(Laughs)’ I take it, therefore, is not a single mirthless bark but a whole sequence of barks.
I imagine it perhaps starting as one, and then escalating, as Serafin waits, smiling eagerly at her pupil, and Summerchild hunts back through his life for the required circumstances, covering his retreat with bursts of fire as he goes.
Thus:(Laughs.)
Pause.
(Laughs, laughs.)
Pause.
(Laughs, laughs, laughs…)
I look away.
My eye falls on the geraniums by the window, which all the way through this conversation, presumably, have been continuing to scent the office air.
With a perfume that she characterizes as slightly disgusting.
And blushing scarlet, of course, as they do so.
I return to Summerchild, who has retreated as far as laughter will stretch and found nothing.
SERAFIN: You never have?
SUMMERCHILD: I can't recall…
SERAFIN: In what circumstances might you find yourself saying it?
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
(Laughs.)
More (laughs)!
Are these the same noises?
Or have we moved from minor to major?
Has my colleague simply got the giggles?
SERAFIN: I see!
(Laughs).
Now she's off!
I understand why the universities have been cutting back their philosophy departments.
…
All right, let me suggest a possibility.
You might say it as a boast — perhaps in the hope of rendering me envious or jealous.
SUMMERCHILD: I suppose I might.
(Laughs.)
SERAFIN: But then you're not the kind of man who would wish to arouse painful feelings in other people, so let's find some more plausible circumstance.
Well.
you might do it to reassure me.
Yes?
Sensing some anxiety on my part about your reaction to the work I am asking you to do, you tell me.
‘I'm perfectly happy here.’
SUMMERCHILD: ‘I'm perfectly happy here…’
Yes, I can imagine saying that.
SERAFIN: Have indeed just said it.
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, though…
SERAFIN: Though only, so to speak, experimentally.
Not as the instrument of an actual assertion.
I understand that.
SUMMERCHILD: Well…
I'm perfectly happy here.
I think I am perhaps…
SERAFIN: To some extent saying it?
To some extent trying it out, but to some extent actually…?
SUMMERCHILD: I'm perfectly happy here.
SERAFIN:…saying it?
SUMMERCHILD: Yes.
I'm perfectly happy here.
Saying it, saying it.
SERAFIN: You've taken the inverted commas off?
SUMMERCHILD: I think I have, yes.
And he has, too.
Or someone has.
I glance back at Summerchild's last remark, and see that the inverted commas before and after ‘I'm happy here’ have been neatly expunged with Tipp-Ex.
Mrs Padmore, having typed the interpretation of the remark, has gone back and altered its semantic status to fit the interpretation.
She is obviously following this insane dialogue with remarkably close attention.
No wonder; in her entire career in the Civil Service she has never typed out anything remotely like it.
SERAFIN: You are not happy about the way we are proceeding, you told us a moment ago…
SUMMERCHILD: Well, I m not absolutely sure I'm happy about it…
SERAFIN: Not absolutely sure you're happy about it.
Of course.
I'm sorry.
Not absolutely sure about that, yet absolutely sure yes?— that you are perfectly happy here.
SUMMERCHILD: Yes, well…
SERAFIN: No, no, this is interesting!
I don't feel any contradiction at all between these two statements.
Because that ‘perfectly’, that ‘here’, are just as limiting in their way as ‘with’ and ‘about’.
It's entirely open to you to reject our way of working but to accept with equanimity the fact of our working.
To which I reply, ‘All right, let's think of the circumstances in which you might wish to say ‘I'm happy’ in the most general sense, without limitation to any implied purpose or situation…’
Well, suppose we were not sitting here engaged in a job of work.
Suppose we were old friends who were meeting again after not seeing each other for many years.
We were at university together.
I stayed on to teach philosophy — you went off to London and disappeared into the Civil Service.
Now here we are, sitting face to face across a table in some little restaurant with a bottle of wine between us…
‘Are you happy?’
I ask you…
SUMMERCHILD: Actually, I do feel a little as if I were coming face to face with my past in some kind of way.
as if I were back at university.
Tutorials…
Discussion groups…
Walking round the streets at night talking to people…
SERAFIN: Good!
Yes!
SUMMERCHILD: A feeling of — I don t know — looking down and seeing the world stretching away over the horizon.
Back into the past.
Away into the future.
Knowing that huge things are going to happen, but not knowing what they are…
Sorry.
SERAFIN: Not at all!
A feeling of wide horizons — open possibilities — this is the atmosphere we need to do work of this kind.
So, we're old friends meeting…
Or — I know!
Yes!
Even better!
We're in love!
Yes?
I sit here gazing into your eyes.
You sit there gazing into mine.
‘Oh, I'm so happy!’
I cry.
‘I'm completely happy!
I'm utterly happy!
I'm wildly happy!’
Etcetera.
Yes?
Isn't this exactly the kind of thing people say when they're in love?
‘Are you happy?’
I ask you.
Isn't that exactly the kind of question lovers ask each other all the time?
‘Are you happy?’
I ask.
To which you reply…
Dots.
Twelve dots arranged in groups of three.
Mrs Padmore's way, if she is being consistent, of representing a notable silence on the tape.
A silence long enough, I imagine, for her to use the fast-forward button.
What's going on?
The dots have brought us to the bottom of a page — an appropriate point, since we have also, surely, reached the nadir of these proceedings, perhaps of all proceedings in the whole history of the modern Civil Service.
I find myself pausing for a few dots myself before I turn over the page to find where all this is leading.
I take it that the proceedings so far are conjecture — that the two of them are not in fact gazing into each other 's eyes — that Serafin is not waiting for Summerchild to supply an answer to her question.
I should imagine she is gazing at the floor, pursuing some thought which has escaped sideways from the main line of march, while he gazes almost anywhere but at her.
Out of the window, probably, at the healing impersonality of the April sky.
With each passing second he is becoming more painfully conscious of quite how far he has been dragged from the track of normal professional propriety.
Perhaps even she has begun to have second thoughts about the ballooning barminess of these proceedings…
No, I know what she's thinking.
I turn over the page.
Yes.
Sorry.
I was just thinking that we might leave hypothesis aside.
I might simply try asking the question, and see how you respond.
So: are you happy?
I knew it.
I knew it!
I lay the transcript aside and lean out of the window.
The  same day is still going on out here, a little older, a little wearier.
The same summer…
I am looking down on the world, but it does not stretch away over nebulous distant horizons.
It stops short at the Palace in the west, and the Admiralty in the north.
I can hear her putting the question in the room behind me.
‘Are you happy?’ she asks him, she asks me.
‘Oh, for heaven's sake!’
I hear myself replying.
But in fact that's not what I reply at all.
Politeness remains, even after all the other laws of human discourse have been abrogated.
‘Oh, reasonably,’ I say with a smile and turn back to my work.
But she is waiting with those wide blue peasant eyes of hers, nodding expectantly.
I believe I hear myself beginning to talk to fill the silence — beginning to explain to her about Lynn — about Timmy and Cheryl…
Shameful thoughts.
A curious little line of figures comes round the side of the Admiralty, walking slowly and wearily through the late summer afternoon in Indian file.
The woman at the head is carrying a clipboard.
The man in the middle has a tripod across his shoulder.
They are bearing the one-eyed god from some unseen station of its progress to the next.
Before I can establish whether they are the same votaries as before they disappear into the Horse Guards.
A salutary reminder.
My report has to be on Ken Hurren's desk before theirs is on the Prime Minister's screen.
I think I can interpret Ken's request for it to be done by the end of the week as meaning in his hands on Monday morning.
That involves finishing it tonight, though.
I go back to the file and find Summerchild's reply.
‘Oh,’ he says, followed by three dots.
‘Well,’ he says, followed by six.
Each dot goes into me like a needle.
‘Yes,’ he says finally.
‘Yes.’
The raw little syllable sits there in all its nakedness.
Yes, full stop.
Not words we use much in the Civil Service, yes and no, even in the most impersonal contexts.
In the presence of a question like Serafin's it seems as indelicate as an oath.
Then again, it's impossible to guess from the transcript  how it was said — whether it was flung down, shrugged off, tossed out, or uttered in some other way that put a hairpiece upon its baldness.
It might have sounded as flippant as the question was importunate.
He says it again.
‘Yes…’
Now he's repeated it, of course, I take it less seriously.
And those three dots after it…
A third yes.
Another three dots.
As good as no, surely.
‘Or rather,’ he continues.
Three more dots, during which, I imagine, he is looking evasively out of the window.
He is doing something, at any rate, which makes Serafin have second thoughts.
‘I'm sorry,’ she says.
‘Perhaps that was an intrusive question.’
Yes!
‘No,’ he lies.
She says nothing.
‘No, no…’ he lies again, to give the first lie some company.
And he goes on gazing out of the window.
What's he doing?
A nasty suspicion comes to me that he is taking the question seriously.
He is not politely evading it — he is actually thinking about it.
Yes —‘I was just thinking…’ he says after a while, then stops again, because he's still thinking.
I believe my colleague is going to confess.
He has broken under interrogation.
He has gone over.
‘I was just trying to think,’ he says, ‘what I do actually……
He in his turn is reduced to twelve dots.
His dots, in fact, appear to indicate a silence that goes on indefinitely.
There is no more text to bring it to an end.
After the twelfth dot, two thirds of the way down the page, the transcript of this long session tails away into blank paper.
I suppose what's happened is this: he has gone on staring out of the window, thinking, and she has gone on staring at him, waiting, with such absorption that neither of them  noticed the tape had run out.
The rest of the session, including Summerchild's confession, or his heroic refusal to confess, has broadcast itself about the little attic room, bounced off the walls, been absorbed in the carpet, faded to silence and passed out of history.
Or has it?
I turn to the next document on the tag.
It is a handwritten minute, from Summerchild to Serafin, dated two days later, entitled ‘A Preliminary Submission’.
The wording of the title sounds reassuring.
I glance down the page.
‘I…
I…my…me…’
It's some kind of personal statement.
My foreboding returns.
I put the file down again.
I am afflicted by that ambiguous unease which is produced by the prospect of starting some unwelcome task — a restless desire either to drink water or to pass it.
I open the door to the little cloakroom in the corner, undecided about which form of relief to try, and hesitate between the brownish lavatory and the greenish tap.
The sight of the greyish kettle beside the gas-ring, and of the yellowish mug which has been drying on the little draining-board for the last fifteen years, makes me think of tea.
Yes, it's tea-time.
I find a box of matches, then follow the piping up the wall from the dead gas-ring until I come to the stopcock that turns the supply on.
Could there possibly be a last antique teabag in the cupboard over the sink?
I turn the cuphook that holds the door closed…
There is indeed a teabag.
In fact there are five, in an upturned cardboard lid.
There is also an eggcup, a biscuit tin, a tin of Colman's mustard and a packet of Heinz cock-a-leekie soup.
A few small green leaves are scattered about the bottom of the cupboard…
How can there be green leaves, after fifteen years?
I pick one up to examine it — then drop it in disgust.
The green is mould.
What the mould is growing on appears to be a cornflake.
A cornflake?
Teabags, yes.
Soup, just possibly.
But cornflakes?
On the upper shelf of the cupboard are four plain white plates, two plain white pudding-bowls, and another eggcup.
In the drawer beneath the gas-ring — a few grey pieces of cutlery, a corkscrew and a lot of corks.
It looks as if they were making some slight effort of their own up here to maintain the quality of life.
I am retracing the footsteps of the lost expedition, tracking them through their abandoned log from one wrong compass bearing to the next.
Now I have found their supplies.
I am trailing them along the line of their tea-breaks and their modest working lunches of packet soup followed by something you eat with mustard.
I am trying to get a sighting of them eating cornflakes and drinking twelve — fourteen — sixteen nineteen bottles of wine.
I make myself a cup of milkless tea, vintage 1974, and take a cautious sip.
It tastes brown and leaves a little dust crunching between the teeth.
I find the flavour…appropriate, and take it back to my cardboard work-station.
The Lea & Perrins box this time, where Serafin sat, so that I can keep an eye on Summerchild.
‘I…
I…my…me…’ he pleads from the manuscript in front of me.
And all the while, from the Saxa Salt box opposite, he watches me read, smiling his sideways smile.
Right.
Let's see what he has to say for himself.
15
Ref QL/es/ss/ 17
CONFIDENTIAL
THE QUALITY OF LIFE: A Preliminary Submission
S Summerchild April 10th 1974
Dr Serafin
With reference to our discussion on April 8th, and the question which was left unanswered at the end, namely as to whether I regarded myself as ‘happy’:
I have to confess that I had not anticipated the direction that your inquiries were going to take and I feel that my immediate responses were fragmented and unhelpful.
You will, I fear, have found my monosyllabic utterances rather unrewarding material for linguistic analysis (which I assume to be the philosophical method you are following)— and my frequent silences even more intractable.
I have, therefore, taken advantage of your absence on academic business to give the matter more thought and I feel it might be best if I set out the various considerations involved in written form.
I assume that what you are hoping for is not merely a simple yes or a no, but some discussion of the matter, and I shall therefore take the liberty of presenting the evidence in some detail and at some length.
If I might interpose a personal remark here (not perhaps too inaptly, given the circumstances!)
I have to say that nothing in my career so far has prepared me for this kind of work.
A Civil Servant is, as you know, here to serve as best he can, in whatever way his masters devise, and  we do pride ourselves on our adaptability.
I am in any case rather intrigued by the project!
But I must ask you to be patient with my navigation in these uncharted waters.
It seems to me that, so far as my feelings about it are concerned, my life can be most conveniently divided into two halves:
1.
Work.
2.
Home.
The latter can probably be broken down again into:
(i)
House.
(ii)
Family.
(iii)
The evening.
(iv)
The weekend.
(v)
Holidays.
At this point I take a sip of my disgusting tea.
I can't help noting that, whatever Summerchild is going to say, he is at least going to say it in his own way.
He has not given up the running battle between them over the question of form, which started out with his victory on accommodation.
Now the fight has shifted to the mode of procedure.
She has picked home ground and imposed the tutorial format on him.
But he seems to have succeeded in executing a ragged but effective withdrawal, hesitating and equivocating his way back at the last session until night fell over the battlefield.
Now he has had a chance to regroup and fall back on to the kind of terrain of which he is master — the written minute.
What a different man he is on the page!
He advances steadily and unhurriedly, with his battle-squadrons laid out in paragraphs i, ii, and iii, in sub-paragraphs (a),(b) and (c), in Introductions and Conclusions, his red hair gleaming like an oriflamme.
If he is going down to defeat, as I suspect he is, he is doing it in style.
1.
Work.
(NB.
I am excluding the present proceedings from consideration here, since they are entirely untypical of what I do.)
I find it difficult to identify any overall feeling about my  work.
I cannot recall actually thinking to myself ‘I am enjoying this.’
I can recall on occasion thinking ‘I am not enjoying this.’
But the occasions were, I think, fairly infrequent.
This relative freedom from negative reaction is what I imagine most people mean when they say they are happy in their work.
On analysis, I believe I can distinguish three characteristic phases into which, speaking very generally, my work falls:
(i)
beginning a piece of work,
(ii)
being in the middle of it, and
(iii)
finishing it.
(i) I foresee with trepidation and execute with unease.
(iii) I look forward to, but then usually fail to take much pleasure in, because (a) having reached it, there is no possibility of looking forward to it, and (b) it brings with it the prospect of (i) again.
Where I feel most at home is (ii).
(i) is behind me, and (iii) is still a pleasure to come.
During (ii) I am usually sitting at my desk, quietly getting on with things.
This quiet progress is both thrown into relief and varied by endless interruptions.
I sigh and click my tongue at these, of course.
The phone again!
Someone else putting his head round my door!
Another committee coming up, another summons to the Permanent Secretary's office!
But I realize, as I sit here in the offices of the Strategy Unit, away from my usual desk and my usual routine, and charged with scrupulous self-examination, that I look forward to being interrupted, and that I also get a certain satisfaction from these sighs and clickings of the tongue.
Since most of my work necessarily consists in (ii) rather than in (i) or (iii), I think I must conclude that on the whole I am happy in my work.
And I think I must conclude that, in spite of the well-established format, something is going seriously wrong here.
This may look like a minute, but it's not a minute, and it's getting less one with every line.
The gyro-compass inside Summerchild has developed some mysterious fault and, unremarked by the crew, the plane is veering further and further off course.
Another thing: does Dr Serafin have full security clearance?
If not it seems to me possible that Summerchild could be opening himself to proceedings under the Official Secrets Act.
I'm not sure, now I come to think about it, whether the Act covers Civil Servants' emotional states and behavioural quirks.
If it doesn't, then it should be rapidly amended.
I take an absent-minded sip from the mug beside me.
Ugh!
A moment of panic.
This isn't coffee!
This is no more coffee than Summerchild's minute is a minute!
What's happening to the world?
Oh, yes, I remember — it's tea…
But it isn't tea, either!
At this point its provenance comes belatedly back to me.
I take the mug out to the cloakroom and tip the dusty brown nothingness away down the sink.
I go back to the minute.
Perhaps we shall be on safer ground with:
2.
Home.
Home, I realize on analysis, is not a concept which has definite geographical or social limits.
For me it begins to be noticeable at the railway station where I get off the train each evening, and becomes gradually stronger, like a magnetic field, as I walk up the hill.
By the time I turn into the little lane where I live it has become so intense that I usually slow down.
There is an analogy here, perhaps, with 1(i) — a desire to postpone (iii), the moment of arrival.
There is also just possibly an analogy between the interruptions I described in (ii) and the unadopted state of the lane.
The various potholes and puddles seem to suggest that the satisfaction of being a road is still something to be looked forward to.
There is still room for the imagination.
(i) House.
By the time I reach it, at this time of year, the house itself is usually nothing but one or two lighted windows in the darkness, with perhaps my wife and daughter (see separate headings) visible inside.
I sometimes stand there in the darkness for a moment, watching them, putting off the moment when I walk up the five tessellated steps to the front door.
The third step is cracked and breaking away at the edge.
Every evening, as I see this crack, I think the same thought.
The thought is about how I must find someone to mend it before it gets any worse.
I am slightly irritated to find myself  thinking the same thought at the same point every evening, but also rather comforted.
This, I believe now that I examine it, is because underneath this thought, like a warm underblanket, is a reassuring additional thought, viz:
‘Every evening, as I see this crack, I think the same thought.’
And underneath that thought (I think!) is another one another underblanket, insulating the underblanket above and which, so far as I can make out through the layers on top of it, runs something like this:
‘Every evening, as I see this crack, I think the same thought: ‘Every evening, as I see this crack, I think the same thought.’‘
Summerchild's third step, I am beginning to realize, is not the only thing which is cracked.
For the first time I can imagine some dim trail of obsession, some weird recursive delusion, leading out of this little room, down the spiral stairs, and out to some wildly mischosen destination…
Across the Horse Guards down there to the doors of the Admiralty…
Actually I believe I remember that crack.
Now Summerchild has mentioned it, I believe I remember looking at it during the long silences in my conversations with Millie.
To me that crack signifies not reassurance but youth and hopelessness.
And I know what he means about the long vistas of precedent, like endless suites of anterooms, that open backwards from these recurring moments.
Every evening, as I lift my key towards the lock of my own front door, the same thoughts formulate themselves — the same sudden loss of courage, in my case, the same leaden fear about what I shall find.
And, yes, the dull weight of that moment includes the dull weight of the same moment the evening before, which includes the dull weight of the evening before that, which…
Back to work.
Or rather back to home.
Now his key is going into the lock:
…with a practised rippling smoothness like a boat gliding over a quiet dark river.
Then I am inside.
There is warmth around me and small sounds from other rooms, of voices, footsteps, a chair scraping, the television.
Above all there is a smell of great ordinariness and naturalness that I should recognize anywhere in the world like a familiar voice.
Now I think about it I believe I can identify a mixture of floor-polish and dust…cooking, certainly…books, yes…a touch of mildew…and an old and comfortable smell which I suppose is from Millie's cello case in the corner.
I put down my bag and open doors until I find my:
(ii) Family.
This consists of:
a.
My wife.
Her name is Anne.
We have been married for eighteen years.
When she hears me come into the room she doesn't look round or say ‘Hello’.
She simply tells me something, as if I had been there all the time.
‘Dorland Henry's dead.’
Or: ‘The Porringers are coming to lunch on Sunday.’
Or: ‘Jane Ryle says she hasn't slept for three nights.’
She is a historian, or more properly a micro-historian, and she is writing a history of our hillside — the road I walk up from the station and the various lanes and alleyways that open off it.
She has been doing it for three years and expects to be working on it for at least another three.
At the moment, though, she has secretly put this aside and, unknown to me, is working on another project entirely — a micro-history of myself.
This is intended as a present to me on my fortieth birthday in July.
I have naturally been very careful not to discover anything about it, but I have a feeling that she has commissioned little tributes from friends and childhood recollections from my sisters.
She has found a number of old photographs that will come as a great surprise to me.
I believe she has even phoned an old school friend of mine whom she avowedly dislikes and asked him for the manuscript of a symphony we once composed together.
This was in the days when we were both planning to be great composers.
I should imagine she is writing an essay herself.
The other contributions are probably mostly of a somewhat facetious nature.
But if I know her she is composing something more like an entry in a good  encyclopaedia , or perhaps a chapter in her own book.
I expect to read a full and objective description  of what's on the site now, together with a documented reconstruction of how it came to be like that.
My eye fell on a page she had left on the kitchen table the other day and I had noted, before I could avert my eyes, a pretty scholarly history of my conversion to double-knotting, after an incident when I was unable to get out of the train at Greenwich one evening and found myself being carried on to Maze Hill, because someone was standing on the trailing lace of my shoe.
There was also what looked like a very perceptive account of how I decide, when I get up in the morning, whether to wear my new shoes or my old ones.
I also found an envelope lying around in the bathroom the other day with a list of numbers on the back, and when I asked her about it, she took it silently out of my hand.
I realized, thinking about it afterwards, that they were the numbers of the various different bus-routes I used on my way to school, together with the relevant extracts from their timetables.
So I open the door to wherever she is, and there she sits with some leather-bound quarto volume of local archives open in front of her, writing about the way I lace my shoes.
I wait.
Without looking up from her work she tells me something she has done or discovered or thought or decided during the day.
‘I saw Mary Seal this afternoon.’
Or: ‘Sally Terris's eldest daughter is getting married.’
Or: ‘I'm going to keep the bicycle pump in the drawer with the secateurs.’
I'm not entirely clear what I do at this point.
Do I reply?
I don't think I do.
Do I say, ‘Oh’?
Probably not; it doesn't seem a very interesting thing to say.
‘Hello’?
No, it's too late in the conversation by this time to start saying ‘Hello’.
Do I offer her some piece of information in return?
I sometimes turn the possibility of this over in my mind, but only rarely does a suitable piece of information present itself.
I imagine I stand just inside the door for a few moments, looking into the corner of the room in a companionable way.
I should describe myself as happily married.
After I have seen my wife I continue on my way to find:
b.
My daughter.
She is called Millie.
She is seventeen.
She is doing A-levels in Latin, Greek and Classical History, and cello Grade Six.
If she is not practising I tap on her door.
In appearance she takes after me, in conversational style after  her mother.
‘I'm going to Athens next summer with Louisa Stair,’ she says.
Or: ‘I hate Mr Margery.’
(Mr Margery is her cello teacher.)
Or: ‘The cat's got fleas.’
What do I say to this?
I believe I say nothing at all.
I nod, perhaps, and look around the room.
She is doing her homework.
But since she is rather ostentatiously concealing it with her arm as she talks I imagine that it is in fact not homework at all, but a contribution to her mother's Festschrift.
In spite of all this secrecy, I happen to know that it takes the form of a humorous catalogue of my supposed states of mind, arranged from one to ten like the Beaufort Scale.
‘State 1’, it begins.
‘Complete stillness.
Book falls out of hands.
Eyes unable to rise above floor-level.
Insufficient energy even to sigh.’
When I saw it the other night, tucked inside the cello part of one of the piano trios we play, she had got as far as ‘State 7 — Moderate Gale: Intervals of laughter.
Words are spoken, including frequent stories of own childhood.
Humming occurs, together with attempts to balance glasses of water on edge of playing cards and to perform unaccompanied violin partitas.’
I feel silently amused at this as I stand there in her doorway.
I am silently pleased to be the object of such closely observed mockery and silently proud of her cleverness in carrying it out.
I probably smile slightly before I go out of the room and come back downstairs to commence:
(iii) The evening.
The first part of the evening consists of:
a.
Dinner: I find it difficult to give an account of dinner.
We eat, of course, which I enjoy.
Sometimes we talk.
What happens when we talk?
Millie says something and we listen.
Sometimes Anne disagrees, whereupon Millie disagrees back and conversation rages.
Occasionally Anne says something, at which Millie disagrees, and we're off again.
Very occasionally I say something myself and Millie glances mockingly at me, then looks at Anne to see how she is reacting.
We respond more with glances, it occurs to me, than we do with words.
For quite long stretches of the meal these glances, with perhaps a few small frowns and smiles, are all we need to sustain communication.
Yesterday evening, for instance, I realized that I was smiling to myself (I was thinking about writing this minute!) and it set off a substantial debate, conducted entirely  in silence.
So far as I can reconstruct events, I was gazing at the water jug when the exchange started; I discovered I was smiling when I realized that Anne was watching me; whereupon I looked at her interrogatively; she looked at the water jug with a slight frown; Millie glanced at each of us in turn, then picked up her dessert spoon and studied that instead; I watched her smiling at the spoon; which made me start smiling again; which made Anne start looking at me again; which…kept us all occupied throughout the main course.
After dinner Millie and I wash up, which brings us to:
b.
The rest of the evening.
This I often spend working (see Section 1 above), or in the kind of silent conversation described in 2 (iii) a.
Sometimes I get out my violin and we all three play some music together, which is a kind of combination of work and conversation — it has all the tense absorption of the one, and all the anxiety to reach the end, together with all the wordless companionability of the other.
And sometimes the evening simply passes and I can't tell you how.
What happens?
Nothing happens.
I read.
Or I half-read.
Or I fall asleep.
Or I just sit there, not even asleep.
There is some truth in Millie's ridiculous Beaufort Scale, I have to admit.
I do have eventless evenings when the book falls out of my hands.
How often do they recur?
I don't really know.
When I am down in States l or 2 it seems to me that I am always there, with all the flags hanging limp and absolutely still, and not a breath of air moving.
Now I am up to something like State 4 (‘Raises dust and loose paper’), according to the only reference to the original scale that I can find in Registry, or perhaps 5 (‘Small trees in leaf begin to sway’) it seems to me that States 4 and 5 is where I mostly am.
I should like for the purposes of this inquiry to reconstruct an average evening, an ordinary evening, a typical evening.
Then I could measure the speed of the wind inside me and know where on the scale I was in general located.
But no average evening comes to mind.
They are all slightly different and all the slight differences cancel each other out.
The almost overlapping outlines become a blur.
The only evenings I can recall are fixed in my mind precisely because they are different from all the others.
I remember the evening when the tank burst and live water  came tumbling and gleaming down the stairs.
I remember the evening when four of our oldest friends came to dinner and no one could think of anything to say, and they all fled in terror.
I remember the burn of shame as we stacked the silent, abandoned plates.
I remember Anne suddenly laughing, which she never does, and putting her hand on my arm.
I remember the evening when Millie mysteriously fell in her room and broke her wrist.
I remember the shock of fear when I heard her scream and the sickening jolt of pain through my stomach when I saw the angle of her hand to her arm.
So all I actually remember is unhappiness?
Not at all.
These weren't unhappy things.
Dismaying, awkward, painful, even sad.
But that's not to say unhappy.
In any case, I clearly remember one evening that was unambiguously happy.
It was last month — our final powercut.
This is why I can see and hear it so clearly — because there was no electric light and there were no electric sounds.
We ate by the light of three candles and our eyes all shone like children's around the table.
Every time one of us leaned forward for the salt the flames wavered and curtsied with ridiculous deference, like three nervous waitresses.
And when we laughed at this they started back in absurd confusion.
If we'd raised our hand to them, or even spoken sharply, they'd all have had instant heart attacks.
I think this was the day you asked me what the quality of life was.
Yes, because suddenly the answer came to me, as I watched the candles.
It was lightness.
I mean in both senses of the word.
It was brightness and it was weightlessness.
It shone and danced in the darkness, and without it there would be nothing; but one hand raised against it and it could lightly cease.
Yes, yes — because that's how the evening started.
I stopped in the lane for a moment, as I often do, before I climbed the steps to the front door, and looked in through the windows.
The lights were off in the living-room, but the television was on and I was amused to see a little bluish-grey man talking seriously to the empty armchairs.
Anne and Millie were both in the kitchen and they were having a serious talk as well.
Or rather, they were having a serious silence.
Millie was standing  at the table with her hands resting on the back of a chair, looking down at the tablecloth.
Anne was at the stove, with her head turned towards Millie.
She was watching her intently.
I had the impression that they had reached a moment of reflection in some important exchange.
Millie's hair was close to the light over the table; it looked like a burning bush.
My hair; Anne's thoughtfulness.
What could be more familiar?
But suddenly they looked like two strangers.
And then they were gone.
Everything had gone.
Anne, Millie and the kitchen.
The little grey man and the living-room.
The house.
The lane.
London.
The world had ceased to exist.
Silently, effortlessly, between one breath and the next.
I was surrounded by blackness and silence.
There was nothing in the world but me.
For a fraction of an instant I thought I had ceased to exist myself.
But then in the next fraction of the same instant I realized that if I thought I had ceased to exist then I existed that the very thinking of this thought was me.
It's ridiculous telling all this to a philosopher.
I had merely discovered what your pupils discover in their first term when they read Descartes.
It's taken me twenty years to catch up.
Though what came into my mind when I realized wasn't Cogito, ergo sum.
It was a picture — a picture of a pearl necklace that my mother used to have, which lived inside the little drawer on her dressing-table, in its own special case lined with black velvet.
The pearls were artificial and when the string broke they got scattered and lost and forgotten about.
But the black velvet case remained in my mother's dressing-table.
I used to take it out sometimes, undo the little golden clasp, and run my fingers over the softness of the velvet inside.
It seemed to me richer and stranger than the pearls themselves had ever been — and richer and stranger still now that they had gone.
So that for a moment was me — a black receptacle on a black night.
Then the external universe began to return.
The outermost limits came first — the sky, with a pale shine of overcast through the bare branches of the trees.
Then my family; or at any rate the beam of a torch moving about in the kitchen.
But what stayed with me all evening was that fraction of an instant when I thought I was dead.
I hadn't been frightened, that was what surprised me.
I hadn't even been  alarmed.
It had seemed the most natural thing in the world.
Lightness, that was the thing.
The lightfootedness with which life comes and goes.
The lightheartedness with which one might watch it happen.
Then after dinner we took the candles into the living-room with us.
We were three glowing faces and three pairs of shining eyes in a houseful of mad black dancing ghosts.
Nobody felt like working.
We sat round the piano with the candles in front of our music stands and played one of the trios we know best.
Behind Anne I could see another pianist, looming hugely over the wall and ceiling, waiting to turn the pages.
Behind Millie a second cellist sawed and fingered in support.
I could feel the presence of the dark violinist at my own back, too.
And everything I couldn't say, everything I couldn't play, this dark violinist could articulate perfectly.
Halfway through the final allegro the world came into existence again, as quietly and effortlessly as it had gone.
We all went on playing without taking our eyes off the music.
But Millie gave a little cry of disappointment, and that's what I felt, too.
I have just rung a colleague in the Electricity Division of the Department of Energy.
He tells me that the power-cut in south-east London that night began at 7.37 pm, and ended at 9.54 pm.
So that was 2 hr 17 min of definite happiness.
Conclusions.
I see, on re-reading this minute, that I promised further sections on the weekend and holidays.
But this will involve an examination of the whole question of walking for pleasure, which is what we most usually do on these occasions.
I realize, now that I think about it, that even our weekend walks in the countryside around London, with their characteristic mixture of dullness and reassurance, are going to take quite a lot of analysis.
But the great hikes we undertake on our holidays, usually in the Highlands of Scotland, or some other bleak, wet, cold hill country that I got to know in the days when I used to go climbing by myself (and there's another subject we might discuss!), habitually entail a complex of discomfort, exhaustion, irritation, confusion, sheer misery and intense exhilaration so closely intertwined that I shall have to leave them to be considered on another occasion.
All in all, I think I have said quite enough for one minute.
Indeed, I have said considerably more than enough.
I have gone much further than I intended when I set out on this report and am already beginning to regret the substantial breach in normal departmental procedures which this has involved.
I think, in the circumstances, I shall not submit this manuscript to Mrs Padmore for typing.
Returning to a more traditional style of presentation, and returning also to the question at issue in the light of the evidence presented above, I should like to offer the following conclusions:
I believe a good case could be made out for saying EITHER:
a)
that, as a man who is happily married, with congenial work and fortunate domestic circumstances, I am happy.
(b)
that, as a man whose responses are so dulled by routine that he can recall only 2 hr 17 min of unambiguous happiness in the past few years, I am not happy.
I think it unlikely that there is any further evidence which would put the question beyond doubt.
What seems to be required now is something more in the nature of a decision.
This decision, if it were not to be entirely arbitrary, would presumably be based upon considerations of style or general policy.
It would be, in fact, in the nature of a political decision and as such one which Civil Servants are accustomed to leave to their masters.
I think, therefore, that I must ask you for a ruling.
16
I shift this extraordinary document across to the stack of papers I have read, then get up and walk about the room.
I am rather shaken, I have to confess.
An audience.
That's all he needed for everything to come pouring out.
All those words he had hoarded for so long and released so grudgingly.
An audience he couldn't see, like the priest beyond the grille, the analyst behind your head.
Even Summerchild, in all his discretion.
She has put little red ticks at intervals down the margin, has this unseen audience, as if it were an undergraduate essay.
‘Good!’ she has written, next to Summerchild's claim to be happily married.
‘Yes!’ she agrees eagerly, beside his conclusion that the issue needs to be settled by a policy decision.
He has offered madness in the form of a minute; she has accepted it in the form of an examination answer.
Outside the window, down in the reasonable world below, the light among the trees in the Park is becoming golden.
The week's work is over.
People are walking towards their leisure arrangements; taking each other 's hands; sitting on the hard, dry grass; beginning the evening together.
They are being happy.
Being happy and not knowing it yet.
Being alive and never quite realizing.
What Summerchild is doing, now he has someone to do it for, is living the last dozen years of his life, which have gone by without his quite taking them in.
He's being retrospectively happy.
He wasn't anything much at the time.
He was  depressed — I saw him coming slowly up the lane, I heard the reluctance of his words to face the world.
And now he realizes that his slowness was a pause for savouring, that his silence was full of unfelt feeling.
He makes another leap, now he's started, and sees three particular candle-flames, three particular shadows, all charged with particular feeling.
But I know what he saw at the time — three mere candle-flames and three mere shadows.
He ate his dinner and said nothing, played his violin and felt nothing, worked when the lights came on again and went to bed without another thought.
And now it all comes bursting out.
Happiness.
Because I don't take his manoeuvre at the end seriously — his request for guidance.
This is afterwards, when he has got up from the couch, when he's making a date for the next appointment and putting on his overcoat in the hall, returning to his ordinary guarded self before he walks out on to the street.
Anyway, we've all written minutes offering our masters a choice of options when we and they both know perfectly well there's only one.
Oh yes, he's happy, all right.
Now.
I suddenly find all those years of dragging footsteps and dragging monosyllables a tiresome indulgence, given the circumstances of his life.
He's like a country gentleman who insultingly dissimulates his wealth beneath ragged pullovers and patched elbows, while the rest of us are struggling to conceal our penury beneath well-cut suits we can't afford.
Yes, he's happy, poor devil.
He's also becoming slightly deranged.
But I imagine this often happens — people are for all practical purposes sane as far as the analyst's door and become mad as they stretch themselves out and explain their sanity.
And he's being less than frank.
He's talks about States 4 and 5.
He says nothing about States 7, 8, 9 and 10.
Millie's evidently seen him with the slates coming off the roof and the storm cones flying.
How does he feel then?
He's a simple manic-depressive, as Millie could evidently see, and he's talking himself up like a balloon from the safe plains of the depression into the thin, high air of the mania.
He's working himself up to walking into the Admiralty and telling them he's getting messages in his head from Russian submarines.
Or that he's happy.
Some embarrassed naval intelligence officer sends for Security, perhaps a doctor.
His deranged visitor won't stop talking.
There is a struggle…
No, but it's ridiculous.
This is the public service.
What imaginable public purpose can be served by all this nonsense?
What is Serafin's report going to conclude, on the basis of the evidence submitted here?
That everyone ought to live on unsurfaced streets?
That we should all fail to maintain our front steps?
That we should cut off the electricity and make everyone live in the dark?
I walk up and down the little room again.
I am quite unreasonably disturbed by the document I've just read, I realize.
I trace part of my feeling to an entirely ridiculous mixture of relief and pique that I don't figure in it myself.
My occasional presence at Summerchild's front gate, keeping Millie from her pious labours on the birthday book and obstructing his view of the cracked step, evidently never reached a sufficient level of generality to impinge upon him.
But my disturbance goes deeper than this.
I can't help feeling a sense of loss and betrayal.
Somewhere behind the massive classical forehead of the Cabinet Office a part of the brain has collapsed and failed.
In the midst of this complex grey order the room I am sitting in is falling away into chaos and night.
And now I come to think of it the light in here is not what it was.
I glance at my watch.
Twenty to seven…
I must get this finished tonight.
But my God — Timmy!
Cheryl…!
No — Friday — weekend — Lynn's mother…!
Phone!
Check!
I run down the spiral staircase and along the empty corridor.
On either side doors stand open to empty offices.
Everyone has left for the weekend.
No need to go back to my own phone — I can use one of these.
As I dial I become aware of the emptiness of the building beneath me, like a great abandoned liner.
Shut away in other odd corners of the vessel, no doubt, are a few more lone souls like myself with work to finish.
We could all be happy, too, if we had audiences, if we  had private tutors nodding and smiling and ticking our work.
We could go all go comfortably demented together…
‘Hello?’ queries my mother-in-law's voice uncertainly, not knowing how to announce herself in someone else's house.
I start to apologize for being held up at work.
She apologizes as well, because she couldn't find any frozen peas for Timmy's tea and he wouldn't eat the broccoli.
I apologize for the lack of peas and for my son's intransigence.
She apologizes because there seems to be no hot water coming out of the hot tap.
I apologize for whatever's gone wrong.
She apologizes because she can't remember where I keep Timmy's clean pants.
I apologize for Timmy's needing them…
Back upstairs I look out of the window.
If I could see the one-eyed god down there now I'd lean out of the window and tell it everything.
About Summerchild and his mania.
About Timmy and his pants…
I'd let them know what we were like in here behind our austere surnames and our net curtains.
But even the great glass eye has closed for the weekend.
I am alone in the world.