

CHAPTER SIX
COEXISTENCE AND COEVOLUTION
At its simplest, the relationship between animals and plants, with the exception of carnivorous plants, which are not restricted to the tropics, is one of eater and edible.
We have seen how animal cycles are often associated with plant ones and how the activity of animals affects gap formation and mortality of plants.
It is now time to examine in more detail the intricate relationships between plants and animals, beginning with ‘predation’ of plants by animals, or herbivory, its extent and plant resistance to it, then the interactions that are more clearly of advantage to plants, namely dispersal of propagules (i.e. genetic material at the diploid level) and pollination of flowers (i.e. dispersal of genetic material at the haploid level).
Both would appear to have evolved from herbivory.
6.1 Herbivory and resistance to it
Some of the earliest known fossil vascular plants, those of the Rhynie Chert of the Devonian 370m years ago, show damage, which might be attributable to biting arthropods.
Cockroaches and dragonflies appeared in the Upper Carboniferous (300 m years ago), at the same time as the giant clubmosses, ferns and seed ferns; beetles are known from the Permian, and flies and wasps from the end of the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous when the angiosperms were diverging from their seed-fern ancestors.
According to Southwood, phytophagy arose from both saprophagy, the consumption of decaying or at least dying plants, and from feeding on fallen propagules including spores and pollen grains, which led to living on the strobili themselves, a route followed by the extinct insect orders, Dictyoneurida and Diaphanopterida.
The earliest known herbivorous vertebrate is the late Carboniferous pelycosaur,Edaphosaurus : it and other early herbivores were large (24m in length) and it has been suggested that size was an  adaptation to low-energy food, as their ancestors were carnivorous and smaller.
It is generally held, then, that there were some 70 million years between the origin of the land plants and any significant herbivory by either invertebrates or vertebrates.
Compared with animal tissues, those of land plants are low in fat and protein (and this is often built quite differently from animal protein), while cellulose is almost universal and the phenolic toughening compound, lignin, is found in all woody ones.
Lignin, the mechanical pre-requisite for erect growth of any size, and thus the origin of trees and forests, is an effective herbivory deterrent.
Tannin, another phenolic derivative, is common in the outer parts of land plants and is instrumental in the inactivation of proteolytic enzymes.
The inedibility of the early land plants to animals and, apparently, fungi led to the great Coal Measures of the Carboniferous and thus to the fuel of the Industrial Revolution and thence the technology for the destruction of those forests' successors.
Indeed, in large part, the problems of digestion have been associated with the rise of the organisms in the other kingdoms in response to these unused resources: bacteria as well as fungi, and, perhaps, their associations with both animals and plants, from rumen bacteria to mycorrhiza.
This then allowed not only the efficient re-cycling of nutrients, enhancing plant growth, but also the opening of a ‘Pandora's Box’ in terms of the exploitation of plants by animals.
Perhaps because of the symbiotic requirement for such exploitation, phytophagy is restricted within the   animal kingdom as shown in Table 6.1.
In addition, there are problems concerning particular nutrients.
Folivores (leaf-eaters) may satisfy their sodium requirement only by consuming soil or water plants, while animals like litter-feeding cockroaches in Amazonia would need to consume 30–40 times their energy requirement of litter to satisfy their phosphorus needs: in fact they eat dead animals as well.
Today, herbivory in the crowns of mature trees in lowland rain forest in geographically distinct regions in the New and Old Worlds leads to 13.8–14.6% tissue loss in the leafy branches of trees, but consistently less in epiphytes, while in Ghana it has been shown that those plants with a rapid flush of leaves are consistently less severely attacked than those with a slower leaf production.
Long-term observations of leaves in Australian forests, using labelled leaves and shoots, contrasted with the usual technique of measuring leaf damage on one occasion, gave much higher herbivory levels, particularly in temperate forests, since such measuring does not account for leaves totally eaten; ‘long-term’(3 months) study showed similar trends in tropical forests, where up to 21% losses were recorded.
Closeness of conspecific plants can increase the rate and there are many examples (see Chapter 7) of increased attack of seedlings associated with closeness to the mother tree.
This is not an exclusively tropical phenomenon: seedlings of Chinese Elm,Ulmus parvifolia , under the canopy of the mother tree at Albuquerque, New Mexico, were found to suffer some 580 times as much attack from the elm leaf beetle,Pyrrhalta luteola , as those beyond it.
Damage due to phloem feeders can also be substantial; leaf feeders can be miners or raspers; there can be root feeders e.g. some insect larvae, nematodes, stem-miners and gall-formers where the allocation patterns of plants are over-ridden.
Moreover, it is not just live tissues that are consumed as bark feeding is widespread among mammals, e.g. orangutans, elephants, rhinoceros and squirrels, besides many invertebrates.
The stomach contents of the small squirrel,Sundasciurus lowii , on Siberut Island west of Sumatra, contain an average 4% bark in which 90% of its food trees are represented.
This animal does not strip bark like other squirrels, but merely removes flakes of the large smooth-barked trees with low levels of hydrolysable tannins.
The concentrations of fats, protein and carbohydrate and the calorific value of the bark of the different species seem to have no bearing on the choice of food.
Of non-flowering plants, it has been argued that ferns have a lower associated insect fauna, though it has long been known that bracken has a large number of associated arthropods.
In Costa Rica, three species of  different genera of ferns were examined and have been found to carry a fauna as rich as that on angiosperms; damage was just as great.
Of fungi, spores, hyphae and spore bodies are eaten by a wide range of invertebrates and fleshy spore bodies soon become infested with maggots; snails rasp them; beetles lay their eggs in them; carrion-and dung flies take the foul-smelling slime of phalloids, while tortoises, rats, pigs, deer, macaques and probably other large mammals, in the Malay Peninsula at least, also eat them.
6.1.1 Plant resistance
Herbivores are, of course, also affected by the carnivory regime, weather, and other physical features, but, in the groups of plants that have survived the animal onslaught, there has been evolution of defensive features, both physical and chemical.
Bark loss is generally repaired by the formation of new bark, the inevitable result of secondary thickening in dicotyledons as the phloem dies.
In some plants, thin roots are produced beneath the bark, thickening and coalescing, as in Ormosia nobilis (Leguminosae), while many palms (monocotyledons) have harder wood on the outside.
Hormone analogues and other anti-herbivore compounds have evolved, followed by their being overcome by certain groups of herbivores, some even using the toxins in their own defence.
For example, some Asclepiadaceae synthesize cardiac glycosides as defence but some danaid butterflies convert them to their own defences against carnivores, mainly birds.
In turn, there are non-toxic mimics of those butterflies.
In many plants, secondary compounds are concentrated in the trichomes and, for example, a ketone is thus concentrated in the hairs of tomato plants, but that same ketone has been found in the defence secretions of termites and caterpillars.
Again, the male adults of certain danaids ingest material from withered Asclepiadaceae and Apocynaceae before mating and without this their pheromone systems are unable to function adequately to ensure successful mating; the dihydropyrrolizidines in their odour is similar to the heterocyclic moieties of the plants' pyrrolizidine alkaloids.
Rubber latex is a physical defence but also contains insecticides; such occurs in unrelated genera in a range of families, such as Apocynaceae, Caricaceae, Guttiferae, Moraceae and Sapotaceae, while, in other families, there are defensive resins and gums.
Latex is avoided variously by insects, e.g. the butterfly,Lycorea cleobaea , avoids papaya latex as the larvae make holes, isolating distal sections of the leaves in which latex flow is therefore  negligible; this also works on figs (Moraceae) and Asclepiadaceae.
Other ‘defences’ such as resins may be actively collected as in the case of those gathered by euglossine bees in their ‘pollen baskets’from Anacardiaceae, Burseraceae and Leguminosae used in nest construction, sometimes with added bark fragments.
Leaf-cutting bees in Malesia take resins from dipterocarps, Chalicodoma pluto, the world's largest bee, using resin to line its tunnels in the active nests of arboreal termites.
The insects may be attracted by volatiles, in the way that heartwood borers are attracted from distances up to 2 km to felled Shorea robusta trees in India, as the resin is collected from wounds in the trunk.
Such resins are known to inhibit the growth of certain fungi.
It is known that attacks on plants by herbivores reduce the quality of the tissues for subsequent feeding.
In poplars, it has been found that there are increased concentrations and rates of synthesis of phenolics within 52 hours of attack.
This is also true in sugar maples, where it has been claimed that undamaged plants near the damaged ones have increased levels of phenolics and hydrolyzable and condensed tannins, suggesting an airborne cue from the damaged to the undamaged, which then become less attractive to herbivores.
Such increases in tannin in browsed Acacia nigrescens in southern Africa have been reported to take place in a few minutes and the production of ethylene during damage has been considered to be the promoter of tannin increase.
With such rapid production, it would be advantageous for a particular plant to do this as browsers would move away from branches near the wounded ones.
Certainly in the tiny weed beloved of geneticists, Arabidopsis thaliana (Cruciferae), wounding and other stimuli promote the expression of touch-induced (TCH) genes: within 10–30 minutes, messenger RNA levels associated with at least four genes increase 100-fold.
Ethylene has been suggested as being involved in some but not all of this, the products including materials of the calmodulin type, materials involved in the metabolism of calcium ions and therefore many growth processes: in this case the change to ‘bolting’.
Although twice as high a proportion of tropical plants contain potentially toxic alkaloids compared with extra-tropical ones and, although these are often concentrated in the young tissues of plants, insects specializing on such tissues may have rather unsophisticated problems compared with those feeding on mature leaves, where so much ‘secondary chemistry’ is manifest.
It should be pointed out, though, that were it not for the attacks through evolutionary time of these herbivores, there would be none of the commercially significant heartwoods, latexes and resins so useful to  humans.
On Barro Colorado Island, herbivory rates and defence mechanisms of young and mature leaves of 46 canopy species were observed throughout the year: leaf properties such as toughness, phenolic content, pubescence, water, fibre and protein contents accounted for over 70% of the variation in herbivory, with leaf toughness most highly correlated.
Mature leaves of pioneers were attacked six times as much as canopy species.
In 70% of all species, young leaves suffered more than old ones, though they have two to three times the phenol concentrations.
It has been suggested that pioneers are able to tolerate high rates of herbivory because of their ‘cheaper’ leaves and faster growth rates.
For a given herbivore pressure, the advantage of defence should increase as the potential maximum growth rate declines.
This is confirmed by nutrient-poor soils such as kerengas in Malesia having no poorly-defended, fast-growing trees.
In Africa, comparison of forest on white sands in Cameroun with that on better soils in Kibale, Uganda, showed that the first had trees with higher concentrations of tannins and other phenolics, though in Kibale there were more species producing alkaloids.
In Bako National Park, Sarawak, it was found that in terms of percentage leaf area consumed, young leaves of Eugenia ochrocarpa (Myrtaceae) were eaten no more than mature ones, the damage being due to edge grazing, mining and holing (in that order in both), whereas the leaves of the dipterocarp Shorea species were not significantly eaten as adults.
Young leaves of both had higher enzyme inhibition than older ones, though levels of condensed tannin were unchanged.
With more nitrogen, less condensed tannin and less enzyme inhibition in the young leaves of Shorea compared with Eugenia, it is not surprising to discover that they suffered more damage.
When forests in the Malay Peninsula (Kuala Lompat) and northern Borneo (Sepilok) were phytochemically compared, and the levels of nitrogen, fibre, total phenolics and condensed tannin, and degree of digestibility by both cellulase and pepsin determined for both young and old leaves of the canopy species from both places, that at Kuala Lompat was found to be more digestible in having higher nitrogen but lower fibre and phenolic levels.
Sepilok is typical of the dipterocarp forests of the region and the trees have high levels of quantitative defences, whereas Kuala Lompat, which is unusually rich in leguminous species by comparison with dipterocarps, has trees with less reliance on them.
The study was carried out on trees of greater than 30 cm girth at breast height and it was suggested that the differences between the sites were due to the soils, the podzols of Sepilok being less fertile than those at Kuala Lompat.
6.1.2 Some mammals
The Colobinae are a group of monkeys with sacculated stomachs with associated bacteria and flagellates, and they show the best adaptations to leaf eating, allowing the use of coriaceous leaves, though all species eat at least some fruit and seeds.
However, there are marked variations in biomass of Colohus spp. in Africa and Presbytis spp. in Asia in different forests and these cannot be explained in terms of the overall degree of herbivory of an individual species or its body size, both of which are known to be correlated with biomass in primates as a whole.
At Sepilok, the biomass is 64 kg per km 2 but 876 kg per km 2 at Kuala Lompat, 153 in Gabon and 1849 in Kibale.
In studies at these sites, correlations were found between feeding and nitrogen levels in young and mature leaves, but a negative relation with fibre; the effect of condensed tannins was less obvious but colobines most frequently ate leaves low in this.
There was no strong correlation between the levels of condensed tannins and  palatability , for, despite the debilitating effect of tannin on digestion in vitro, it is clear that the precise types of tannin, the substrate and probably other substances, besides the possibility of interspecific differences in the tolerances of them, all affect the edibility.
Colobines select foliage maximizing nitrogen and mineral input and minimizing digestibility retardant fibre (and possibly some tannins): alkaloids seem not to be a deterrent as many can probably be detoxified by bacteria in the foregut.
The biomass of colobines shows a close positive correlation with the ratio of protein to fibre at each site, while there is no evidence of predation or disease limiting the populations.
It is likely that the protein/fibre ratios for mature leaves represent the degree to which colobines avoid them and rely on more limited and seasonal resources with a concomitant decrease in population density notably at times when the preferred foods are scarce, especially at Sepilok and in Gabon.
Presbytis melalophos (banded leaf-monkey) at Kuala Lompat and P. rubicunda (red leaf-monkey) at Sepilok spend about half their time eating leaves, favouring high-protein, low-fibre foliage found especially in young leaves.
P. melalophos is able to eat foliage from many canopy species in its home range, while P. rubicunda relies on rare trees and lianes.
As there are many dipterocarps at Sepilok, the rarity of food plants there is held to be the main reason for the greater home range and lower population density compared with P. melalophos at Kuala Lompat: the home range is some 70–84ha compared with 31.5.
It may be that the oleoresins of the dipterocarps have an effect on the bacteria of the fore-stomach of colobines and it is now necessary to study the interaction of these bacteria with fibre  and the wide range of tannins, some of which shield protein from degradation in the fore-stomach, or denature them so as to enhance proteolysis.
On white sands in Cameroun, where tannin levels are much higher, black colobus monkeys avoid all canopy trees and feed selectively on gap species and, unlike other colobines on other soils, have to feed on seeds, which make up half their diet.
Phytophagous bats take principally fruit or flower products, though some take leaves, extracting fluids and rejecting solids.
The sloths, arboreal herbivores with stomachs and digestive systems showing convergence with ruminants, at least the two-toed (Choloepus hoffmani) and three-toed (Bradypus infuscatus) on Barro Colorado Island, feed on at least 31 species, not just one or two as was long-believed, and it is estimated that they consume about 14.7 g dry weight of leaves each day in the case of the three-toed sloth, a cropping-rate of 5.1 g of leaf per kg of sloth per day, whereas howler monkeys crop at seven times this rate.
The low rate in sloths is probably associated with their lower metabolic rate (51% lower than other mammals of comparable size) and daily lowering of body temperature.
The effect is to maintain more animals on the same food supply, but with less metabolically active individuals, so that retention or re-evolution of poikilothermy is part of a syndrome of cryptic, relatively sedentary individuals with relatively high opportunities for contact and mating: 8.5 three-toed sloths and 1.2 two-toed sloths per ha.
Their biomass totals 22.9 kg per ha, 73% of arboreal mammal biomass on Barro Colorado Island and they crop 38 kg leaves per ha per annum(40–60% of their diet), whereas the howlers take 52.8 kg, reflecting their higher metabolic rates and less ruminant-like digestion: they are therefore less efficient, even though at a lower density and biomass and with a smaller percentage of leaves in their diet.
By comparison with that of insects, sloth herbivory there is low: about 0.63% of leaf production, but some ‘modal’ trees, targeted by sloths can lose as much as 7.7% and one tree suffered 20% loss.
Sloth faeces, estimated to contain half the leaf material, are returned to the ground around the trees: the three-toed sloth actually buries them!
The largest living lemur, Indri indri, weighs 9 kg and lives in the Madagascar rain forests, feeding mainly on leaves, 40–70% of sightings being of buds and young leaves being eaten, though fruits, seeds, dead wood and earth (possibly involved in improving the physical texture of the food) are also taken.
Spider monkeys (A teles geoffreyi) on Barro Colorado Island eat leaves, which account for about 20% of their fresh weight intake and provide most of their protein, notable being the protein-rich young shoots of Poulsenia armata (Moraceae) and Ceiba pentandra (Bombacaceae), which  has 25.3% dry weight protein, and Cecropia leaves, especially their petioles, which have high mineral content.
Leaves make up 15% wet weight of the diet of the omnivorous white-throated capuchin monkey (Cebus capucinus) on Barro Colorado Island.
In Gabon, the prosimian Euoticus elegantulus, by contrast, has gums from trees and lianes making up 75% of food intake.
These gums are highly polymerized pentoses that have to be broken down by bacteria, which release nutrients roughly equivalent to the yields from fruits.
Gorillas eat only, or at least concentrate on, 29 species including some with apparent deterrents, including the viciously stinging hairs on the shoots of Laportea alatipes (Urticaceae), but these 29 species lack condensed tannins.
Important all-year-round foods of the lowland gorilla in Gabon include the large ground-living herbaceous Marantaceae and Zingiberaceae, which are also consumed by chimpanzees, pygmy chimpanzees, mandrills and elephant as well as being browsed by duiker, bongo, buffalo and so on.
They are important in the forest, especially in light gaps, representing about 230 kg of food per ha in the forest for such animals.
In western Ghana, the elephant (the forest elephant, Loxod onta africana cyclotis, of central and west Africa, subspecifically distinct from the elephant of east and south Africa) browses some 138 different plant species, mostly lianes for leaves and stems, but also 35 different types of fruit.
The number of tree species with high proportions of ‘barked’ trees is low, but bark of a few species is pulled off in strips up to 10m long as seen in Bombax brevicuspe (Bombacaceae) and Lannea welwitschii (Anacardiaceae).
Through their activity, browsing areas (gaps) are maintained as well as seeds dispersed.
The Asiatic elephant favours rattan, as do squirrels, while young rattans are used in pig-nests.
The ‘deterrent’ compounds of many rain-forest plants are used (and have been fought over in major wars) by humans to flavour food, e.g. cinnamon (bark of Cinnamomum verum, Lauraceae), tea (alkaloids and tannin of Camellia sinensis, Theaceae) leaves, ginger (rhizome of Zingiber officinale, Zingiberaceae) and seeds such as nutmeg (Myristica fragrans, Myristicaceae), cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum, Zingiberaceae), and coffee (Coffea arabica, Rubiaceae), and cloves (flower buds of Syzygium aromaticum, Myrtaceae).
Many others have to be removed (or have been bred out) during preparation of food, e.g. the raphides of many Araceae and the cyanide-containing compounds in cassava (Manihot esculenta, Euphorbiaceae).
What such compounds ‘taste’ like to other animals is difficult to ascertain, but sometimes very different flavours are due to quite subtle chemical differences between compounds, the sweet taste of vanillin, for example, giving way to the hot and pungent zingerone when condensed with acetone and its double bond reduced, while pungency itself can be explained as to its relative strength by the replacement of particular groups in the molecule.
Gymnemins from Gymnema sylvestre (Asclepiadaceae) remove the sense of sweetness in some mammalian tongues, but are not deterrent to caterpillars and have less effect on dogs or rabbits than they do on apes.
They appear to have no effect at all on pigs, rats or guinea-pigs.
Thaumatin, which seems sweet to primates is not perceived thus by dogs, hamsters, pigs or rabbits.
6.1.3 Some invertebrates
Other compounds have been used to fend off micro-organisms, e.g. ‘fever barks’ such as quinine from Cinchona officinalis (Rubiaceae) angostura bitters from certain South American Rutaceae, and timbers such as sandalwood (Santalum album, Santalaceae) and camphor (Cinnamomum camphora, Lauraceae).
They are used to ‘tan’ leather and give rise to the ‘termite-proof’and ‘teredo-proof’timbers so prized in tropical construction.
Humans also exploit the foliage of plants with natural insecticides such as those containing anti-feedant triterpenoids, notably the cucurbitacins in Cucurbitaceae, but especially azadirachtin and other limonoids from Meliaceae, that from Azad irachta indica being very important: even desert locusts will not attack it.
Some of the most spectacular herbivory, besides the outbreaks of caterpillars mentioned in Chapter 4, and other ‘outbreak’ insects of the last chapter, are due to the activities of leaf-cutting ants, the Attini, which occur between 25° north and south of the equator in the Neotropics.
The species of the genus Atta and Acromyrmex cultivate (possibly different strains of) a basidiomycete fungus, Attamyces bromatificus, which allows them to overcome a wide range of plant defences and to be polyphagous in a diverse environment.
They also take sap from cut leaves and this is the principal, if not sole, larval food, sometimes avoiding leaves that would be good substrates for cultivating the fungus, but which are variously repellent to ants.
They attack high-protein leaves, more acidic ones having less available protein, the optimum pH for the fungus (pH 5) being reached when the material is mixed with the ants' acidic faeces: then the fungus can break down the hydrolysable tannin/protein complexes.
Atta cephalotes builds nests up to 150 m 2 in surface area, containing up to 5 million workers, ranging from minima 2 mm long to the largest soldier 20mm long with medians about 10mm long, which do most of the leaf  cutting.
The minima act as nurses and tend the fungus garden fed on leaves.
The leaves are cleaned and the cuticle scratched, thus aiding fungal decay; the ants cut and chew the pieces into fragments, which are mixed with saliva as well as faeces before being put in the garden, the swollen tips (gongylidia) being collected by the ants for food.
The gongylidia undergo enzymatic hydrolysis of their cellular components.
This seems to be associated with the development of lipoproteic particles and the resultant material, unlike the ordinary hyphae, are edible.
The fungus lacks some proteolytic enzymes, which are added in the ant faeces and are derived from the gongylidia, the ants merely acting as translocators, their digestive tracts not breaking them down.
A small piece of fungus is carried by a founding queen in her buccal pouch before her mating flight.
Some plants are immune to attack because of their terpenoids, some of which are volatile and affect the fungus, i.e. plant protection from leaf cutting is achieved by the synthesis of an antifungal agent.
The nests may persist for up to 20 years and such a nest in rain forest can completely defoliate a major tree in a single night.
It takes some 5 or 6 years for a nest to produce sexual insects, so that it would appear that the complete defoliation of the immediate area or the removal of the more palatable species would lead to deteriorating conditions for the ants.
In other words, in the long term, the maximum energy return for a given energy output in the short term would seem inappropriate.
Evidence suggests that, on the contrary, grazing pressure is evenly spread throughout the area exploited, that area is related in size to the size of the nest and that it is defended against competing leaf-cutting ants and that a wide range of plant species is exploited.
When the forest is felled, however, and replaced by monocultures of, for example, fruit trees, with a much reduced number of leaves per hectare, the system breaks down and there is often widespread crop damage.
Among leaf-cutting ant populations under more natural conditions, inter- and intra-specific competition are some of the factors controlling overall numbers.
Aggression leads to the death of founding queens and small colonies (or their emigration).
Ants, which may make up to half of the animal biomass in some habitats, are not always involved in such an apparently one-sided relationship with plants, as we have seen in the case of the myrmecophytic epiphytes.
Ant plants are not necessarily found in nutrient-poor sites and many so-called ant-plant species sometimes have ants in them but sometimes do not, e.g. species of Aphanamixis and Chisocheton (Meliaceae) and many examples seem to show that the presence is due to‘casual’ entrance through wounds suffered by the trees through damage by other animals or tree falls and so on .
The most widespread plant feature that attracts ants, however, is extrafloral nectar, produced from special glands.
Although attractive to several types of insects, such secretions are usually involved in ant attraction and the ants protect their ‘host’ from attack by other animals.
The chemistry involved here is scarcely different from ‘normal’, when compared with the elaboration of ‘secondary’ compounds in defence.
They are found at various points on plants, including fruits as on those of Crescentia spp. and in 15 other genera of Bignoniaceae, and the nectar may make up substantial parts of the ant diet as in the case of the extrafloral nectar of Caularthron bilamellatum (Orchidaceae) of Central America, which comprises up to 48% of the associated ants' diet at some times of the year.
The presence of ants allows Bixa orellana (Bixaceae), a dye plant with nectaries on the nodes and pedicels, to mature twice as many seeds as antless individuals, while Aphelandra scabra (A. deppeana, Acanthaceae) with nectaries on the bracts matures nine times as many fruits as plants deprived of their ants.
Species of Inga (Leguminosae) with them on their rachis have herbivore damage reduced by a third or even a half.
Moreover, parasitoids may also feed at the nectaries and then infect insect larvae by oviposition thereafter and, in Inga, this seems effective in control at altitudes where ants are uncommon.
Ants are also attracted by lipid- or protein-rich food bodies, e.g. lipid in Macaranga spp.
(Euphorbiaceae), protein in Acacia spp.
(Leguminosae) but carbohydrate in Cecropia spp.
(Cecropiaceae).
Piper cenocladum (Piperaceae) in the understorey of Costa Rican forests has a petiolar chamber formed by the adpressed margins of a flattened petiole and this is usually occupied by Pheidole bicornis ants.
Only when the ants are present, however, does the plant produce significant numbers of food bodies, which are lipid-storing single-celled ones developing from the adaxial surface of the petiole.
In this and other ant-inhabited species of Piper in Costa Rica, the ants remove encroaching climbers and it is argued that the plants absorb nutrients from the decaying nest material of the ants.
However, where ant presence promotes food-body production, certain (Phyllobaenus) beetle larvae prey on the ants; such can be found inhabiting plants even in the absence of the ants and their presence causes the food bodies to grow, while herbivore damage seems to increase.
The beetles are clearly parasitic on the system.
The climber-pruning habit is known in several other genera and was first documented in Central American A cacia Spp.
The origin of such pruning is possibly associated with the discouragement of other invading ants, for it is more frequently found  in ant species with stinging rather than other chemical defences.
In Peru, where uncuttable contacts were made to plants of Triplaris americana (Polygonaceae), Crematogaster ants invaded more frequently than otherwise, even carrying off larvae and usurping the resident Pseudomyrex dendroicus.
On Cordia nodosa (Boraginaceae), however, invaders did not increase under these conditions, perhaps because the plant is so pubescent and therefore impassable to large ants in any case: only when lianes occupied by the smaller Crematogaster ants came near did the resident Allomerus demerarae attack.
Liane deterrence may thus be a side benefit and it is possibly attained in other plants by different mechanisms as in the case of some tree ferns, where marcescent fronds may deter both lianes and epiphytes.
In Barteria nigritana (Passifloraceae) in Africa, one coastal subspecies is inhabited by one species of ant; however, the more widespread other subspecies has another ant species, but again not all specimens are infected.
In Nigeria, saplings occupied by Pachysima aethiops have more leaves and branches and less attack than those without but, because the few larger workers have a ferocious sting and the habit of dropping from the crown, it is suggested that they may have been effective against large browsing mammals too; the ants also attack nearby plants and keep the host's leaves clear of debris and epiphyllae.
In Leonardoxa africana (Leguminosae) in Cameroun, there are extra-floral nectaries and swollen internodes occupied by ants in some parts of its range with different ant species involved in different areas.
The ant, Petalomyrex phylax, is apparently restricted to the plant and protects its stem apices from attack.
Indeed, in some sites Leonardoxa trees are unable to reach maturity without the ants.
Another ant species, Catallaucus mackeyi, does not protect the tree and also keeps Petalomyrex ants away: it is therefore a parasite on the system.
The long-lived leaves are not patrolled but have an effective chemical defence.
Daemonorops verticillaris and D. macrophylla (Palmae) are rattans characteristically associated with resident ants in Malesia: their nests are made of plant hairs and sometimes spines as well and they can absorb 185% water by weight.
14C in throughfall is absorbed by the rattan through the nest, and falling debris around its apex, particularly in D. verticillaris, yields nutrients in throughfall and these are also absorbed via the nest.
In other plants, nutrients flowing down stems are absorbed through the root system, but here they apparently pass straight into the stem.
If disturbed, the ants beat on the stem, alerting predators, possibly elephants, with an alarming noise.
Other ‘domatia’ are more substantial structures and are known from over 400 species (half in America, fewest in Africa) in over 30  genera of trees and lianes: in A cacia they are in stipular thorns but in the rest they are in the stems, where the stems are sometimes swollen as in some species of Clerodendrum (Verbenaceae).
These are sometimes naturally hollow with ants biting entrance holes at thin-walled points while others have natural invaginations.
In Cecropia, the pith stops growth before the stem reaches its full diameter and the Azteca queen enters through a thin unvascularized membrane at the top of an internode.
As the brood grows, workers chew through septa in the shoots and kill or seal off other queens, after which the whole tree is taken over.
Even in the absence of ants, the tuber of the epiphytic Myrmecodia develops but the ants, usually species of Iridomyrex, keep broods in smooth chambers, placing debris in warted ones: the release of nutrients may be facilitated by the presence of fungi.
Myrmec odia plants are patrolled by ants, especially along the stems, where they gather nectar and are protected by stipules or spines.
Some ferns are similar, e.g. Lecanopteris spp.
(Polypodiaceae) one of which is spiny, the spines being used in ant ‘carton’ runways.
The neotropical fern Solanopteris bifrons has complex rhizomatous sacs in which ants leave debris and then roots enter while detritus traps of many ferns with polymorphic leaves are often inhabited by ants: the ants get nectar from nectaries on the fronds.
Other such epiphytes include some bromeliads and several orchids, where ants live in hollow pseudobulbs or between the roots.
In Dischidia (Asclepiadaceae), there is a range of form associated with increasing involvement between the different species and the ant, Iridomyrex cordatus.
Dischidia nummularia has lens-shaped leaves with no ant-association, while D. parvifolia in the Malay Peninsula with similar leaves is associated with Crematogaster ants, which, in the mountains, make tunnels at the bases of Leptospermum flavescens trees and take Dischidia seeds inside such that plants germinate in the insect frass there, such that their distribution is thereby associated with that of the tree.
In D. cochleata the leaves are arched with edges pressed against the trunk, adventitious roots and ant broods with debris underneath, while in D. major (D. rafflesiana), the leaf forms a sac into which ants and adventitious roots go, though the nests are elsewhere.
Inside are stomata (the few outside are small and probably permanently closed), which probably gain  from the ants and decaying material, reduce transpiration loss and also improve the oxygen and moisture regimes for the ants.
D. pectenoides (Philippines) has an inturned lip rolled back on itself such that inner chambers are produced in the sacs, though the adventitious roots enter only the outer ones.
The so-called myrmecophytes are found in all continents and are  represented in about 20  families of angiospers, notably Rubiaceae and Leguminosae.
Almost all of them are found in regrowth, e.g. species of Cecropia and Piper, where the chewing off of competing plants is important.
Endospermum formicarum (Euphorbiaceae) is the Arbor Regis of Rumphius, who named it thus because it is untouched by other trees.
The ferocity of ants in attack is a consequence of their haplodiploid sex determination: sisters in a brood are genetically identical with half of one another and half identical with the rest (their fathers being haploid), so that, on average, they are 4 identical to sisters and only half to offspring.
Ant species that are not so aggressive avidly remove insect eggs from foliage and generally ‘spring-clean’ the host.
The ants are broadly-based, e.g. almost all ant-fed epiphytes in Asia are visited by Iridomyrex cordatus, while many different ant species service plants with extrafloral nectaries.
Similarly, Peruvian myrmecophytes appear to have a range of possible inhabiting ant species and these may compete for occupation.
Plants with defence ti-ichomes are suited to the smaller species as the larger ones have to cut a path through them and are therefore at a disadvantage.
In the Malay Peninsula, there is just one ant species, Crematogaster borneensis, for all infected species of Macaranga (Euphorbiaceae).
This ant does not sting and cannot live away from its hosts; although it does not bring in nutrients, it protects the host from herbivore and liane damage.
The queen sheds her wings on entering the internode and seals the entrance, but coccids, attracted by food bodies on the leaves, are cultured within.
Some ant chambers contain fungi and these are kept in check by nematodes (cf. fig syconia discussed below) and many species tend sap-sucking Homoptera: aphids most commonly in temperate regions, coccids (scale insects) in the Old World tropics and membracids (tree hoppers) in the New, and these are a drain on the host-plant.
Domatia on the abaxial surface of leaves are usually small invaginations or hair tufts in the axils of the veins.
Of 32 species studied in cultivation (these representing 18 different families), all but one had their domatia (‘acarodomatia’) containing mites (Arachnida) and 75% of them held mite eggs.
A high percentage had beneficial mites, a much lower percentage had harmful ones.
It can be argued that these associations serve as shelters and nurseries for mites, which, in turn, eat herbivorous arthropods and pathogens, a general theory put forward by Lundstrom over a century ago.
As domatia are found on crops like coffee, the phenomenon may be of agricultural significance.
However, insects such as the harmful scale insects are sometimes found there too.
The weighing up of ‘advantages’ and ‘disadvantages’here and in general is extremely difficult and will change with time and locality.
Furthermore, defences — mechanical or chemical properties such as tannins, which make digestion hard (though the effect greatly varies in magnitude), or toxins such as alkaloids — are no deterrent to some animals.
There may be variations in toxin levels with the season, and animals, in any case, eat different parts of plants with different levels of toxin and, at different stages of their own development, may be able to deal differently with such toxins.
It has been suggested that alkaloid level fluctuations may affect the feeding patterns of orang-utans through the day.
The relationship between herbivores and plants has often been seen as some kind of arms race, but there have been opposing views in that, for example, spittle-bugs in the dry tropics of West Africa, rather than depleting valuable water resources may promote microbial activity beneath particular tree species, allowing them to take up nutrients in the dry season from the surface layers of the soil, provided that other roots can tap a deep water source.
Such are the ‘raining trees’ of Africa.
This attractive hypothesis has been extended to other groups of plants and their ‘consumers’ suggesting that under certain circumstances plants may benefit from those animals that feed on them and, indeed, may positively ‘encourage’such herbivory.
The step from predation to this symbiosis is a short one.
One such hypothesis with respect to tropical trees argues that the solid bole of a tree locks up an enormous amount of nutrients and that, if this could be recycled by ‘employing’ micro-organisms to rot down the heartwood, thus providing a roost for animals whose nests and droppings would subsequently rot too, the roots of long-lived organisms like trees would be prevented from exhausting local resources and competing with other roots, and the chemicals produced to prevent heartrotting would be saved.
The discovery of a species of Guarea (Meliaceae) with its own roots growing up into its hollow trunk, shortcircuiting the nutrient cycle, seemed excellent evidence in support of the hypothesis, though in Jamaica it was found that many such hollow trees were full of roots, but some of them were from trees that were not merely different individuals, but of different species!
6.2 Frugivory and dispersal
Compared with pollination, the process of seed dispersal is more closely associated with the depleting of plant materials.
Indeed, the line between  ‘predation’ and dispersal mechanism is hazy in that plants with a small numbers of seeds in any season may lose the whole crop to ‘dispersal agents’.
Rather than try to disentangle the scores of relationships examined between animals and plants in this area by putting them into categories of predation or dispersal mechanism, an attempt is made to look at the relationships of particular taxonomic groups of animals and their food plants.
The seeds of 50–90% of tropical trees and shrubs are dispersed by vertebrates and much of the vertebrate fauna up to 80% in Peru for example is supported by fruit.
The seeds of herbs may be dispersed by large mammals, which eat and pass plant material in bulk: many such seeds have up until recently been considered to exhibit merely ‘gravity’ dispersal, when looked at in isolation from the rest of the plant.
The leaves of such plants may therefore have ‘fruit features’, even though the original megafauna has been removed from many tropical and temperate habitats.
Such dispersal mechanisms are associated with small seeds, which suffer less damage in the mouth and enjoy a rapid passage through the gut, possibly aided by their laxative qualities as in Plantago spp.
(Plantaginaceae, long-used medicinally by humans).
Moreover, anti-insect toxins may become attractants for mammals as in the case of cabbage and onions in humans.
Fruits are generally protected from ‘wrong’ animals and microbes, and protect the seeds from climatic extremes and predation.
During development, they expand from hard, small and inedible to large, soft and edible, often containing a wide range of compounds toxic to a wide range of organisms.
As they ripen, the toxicity may fall as in Passiflora spp. where the cyanide content declines to 1% of its original strength and oxalates in other fruits may disappear altogether.
Indeed, relative to other ‘prey’, fruits have evolved to be generally accessible, conspicuous and rather digestible when ripe.
In frugivore diets in those Neotropical forests examined, species with black fruits outnumber those with red and, in Florida and Europe as well as Costa Rica and Peru, the proportion of species with fruits of one or both of these colours is some 62–66%.
However, it must be remembered that red and orange are conspicuous to neither insects, nor, probably monkeys, and bats are colourblind.
A complicating factor, so often seen in evolution, involves the ‘cheats’, for there are many species with non-nutritious seed appendages but coloured so as to mimic them, e.g. species of Ormosia and Rhynchosia (Leguminosae).
Fruits contrasting in colour with unripe ones, or with bracts, peduncles or calyces are common, and seeds may contrast vividly with their dehisced fruits or be bicoloured: the combination of black with red occurs in 18% of all fruit ‘displays’ in both  Costa Rica and Peru, whereas red, orange, white and yellow tend to occur alone.
Uniformly blue berries that are familiar in certain temperate Ericaceae seem to be particularly associated with the attraction of pheasants, at least in the Malay Peninsula, where they are found in Pollia spp.
(Commelinaceae), Peliosanthes teta (Liliaceae) and Labisia longistylis (Myrsinaceae) in the undergrowth there.
At one extreme, some plants produce many small, nutritionally poor fruits that attract a wide range of ‘poor quality’ dispersers, while at the other, some produce a smaller number of large, nutritionally superior fruits, dispersed by a limited number of species.
Rarely, though, has it been demonstrated that only one species is associated with dispersal, in contrast to several examples known of one-to-one pollinator-pollinated relationships.
On the contrary, the majority of studies of birds, for example, show that a wide range of species visits particular fruiting trees.
Even the ‘specialized’ high-reward fruits of some Lauraceae may have the seeds dispersed by more than 17 species of bird.
Such birds may vary widely in morphology and taxonomic affinity.
Most studies of this type have yet to evaluate the efficiency of such species as dispersers rather than visitors or feeders, but in cloud forest of Costa Rica, where three pioneer tree species were found to be visited by six bird species, only three left seeds in a viable condition, the ‘seed shadows’, found by radio-tracking, extending up to 500m from the parent tree.
Despite the apparent closeness of the relationship between the three plant species and the three bird ones, this is illusory in that all three plant species are geographically and altitudinally widespread in tropical America, whereas the birds are much more restricted; moreover, the food gained from these plants is a very small proportion of the birds' diet.
Indeed, most frugivores are variously omnivorous, though oilbirds, manikins, bell-birds and cotingas in the Neotropics may be essentially obligate, while many ‘carnivores’ often take fruits.
When non-exclusive fruit-eating passerines (in Israel) were kept on exclusively fruit diets, they lost weight as the protein digestibility increased: they ingested more energy and protein than was required but digested less, suggesting that the fruits may contain agents that reduce the efficiency of nitrogen metabolism, such that dispersal is improved because birds must move away from the fruit source to seek out insects or other animal proteins to balance their diet.
Moreover, the effect of avian frugivores on insect frugivores may be to force the latter to eat unripe fruits or leave the host, lest they be eaten by omnivorous birds.
Again, larvae in fruits may improve the bird diet!
In pollination, the target for pollen is a stigma, which pollinators are  encouraged by a number of lures and mechanical devices to brush, whereas the target sites for seeds are particular points suited to germination.
In few cases a dispersal agent does deliver a seed directly to such a target other than by chance.
Exceptions would be certain Loranthaceous and Viscaceous seeds, which birds remove from their bills by brushing them through bark crevices, or the passage of seeds through an animal to germinate in its dung.
Indeed, many seeds will not germinate unless they have undergone such passage or, at least, had the nutritious outer integument of the seed, an aril, removed.
Again, the deposition of pollen is timed to suit its germination in that stigmas and anthers are synchronized, whereas the site for germination of a seed may occur randomly in time as well as space in the regenerating gaps of forest.
A habitat specificity of a pollinator would improve pollination success; however it can be argued that in a dispersal agent this would lead to increased predation of seedlings.
spread of disease and sibling competition, while it must be remembered that a site suited to germination of a particular tree species is no longer suited once an adult is in that place.
Furthermore, pollinators are directed to suitable target sites for deposition of pollen by a series of rewards at those sites, whereas dispersers are not and indeed, jettisoning of the ‘ballast’ from their food as rapidly as possible is to their advantage: food may take 10 to 20 minutes to pass through a bat or small bird, though up to several months in animals like the rhinoceros.
A plant could in theory ‘specialize’ in a few generalist dispersers, just as a frugivore could specialize on a plant dispersed by many other species.
In short.
there is no theoretical reasoning for supposing that there should be mutual ‘co-evolution’ of dispersers and dispersed plants.
On the contrary, a wide range of dispersal agents would allow a larger number of individuals to strip the tree of fruit at its prime and it would then be distributed to a wider range of habitats and be buffered against any disaster that might overcome the dispersal agent of a species relying on just one such agent.
So far as the dispersers are concerned, being generalist would overcome the problems of poor years of any particular plant species, which, in any case, rarely fruit continuously throughout the year.
Furthermore, the common dispersal agents of tropical seeds are much larger than the pollination agents: few of them complete a life-cycle that would be compatible with the short flower-to-fruiting cycles of plants, more suited in this respect to close associations with insects, as in pollination.
Not surprisingly, therefore, a number of large, principally frugivorous birds undergo marked seasonal movements during the year, in response to local variations in fruit abundance.
6.2.1 Birds
With these general views in mind, the relationship between different groups and their plants will be examined.
Tropical bats and other mammals, particularly primates, and also lizards, may take fleshy fruits from trees, and other mammals and reptiles may disperse fallen fruits, but birds are most important overall, and bird dispersal was probably critical in the advance of the angiosperms.
Mammal fruits are often rather dull-coloured but highly scented, as opposed to the bright colours and relatively little scent of bird-dispersed fruits.
Some frugivorous birds that have been tested (four species of tanager, which crush fruit) are known to be able to detect differences in sugar contents of 8,10 and 12% in their diets and prefer the sweetest, though it must be pointed out that others like manikins, which swallow fruits whole, are less sensitive to sugar content.
Nevertheless, it is likely that birds have selected for sweeter fruits through evolutionary time.
Fleshy fruits of the type birds eat are often thought of as primitive in many features, that is to say that they share more characters with ancestral flowering plant fruits than do fruits with wind-dispersed seeds.
This hypothesis is supported by the fact that most plant families that produce bird-dispersed seeds are of very wide distribution and that several of them are held to be primitive, e.g. Annonaceae, Lauraceae, while several genera conspicuous in this trait are found in both tropical America and Australasia.
Many of the families involved are represented in temperate countries by species with wind-dispersed fruits, e.g. the ashes, Fraxinus, in Oleaceae, many tropical species of which have drupes.
Although the families of plants involved are ancient, they are represented in tropical rain forest to different extents in different continents.
In particular, the two most important families, Lauraceae and Palmae, are richly represented in the tropical Americas and Indomalesia including New Guinea, but poorly so in Africa.
For example, the island of Singapore has more native species of palm than has the whole of the African continent.
This probably explains why Africa is relatively rather poor in specialized frugivorous birds.
The tropical American cotingas (Cotingidae) and manikins (Pipridae), and the birds of paradise of New Guinea, have no African counterparts.
Because fruits have a limited range of presentation possibilities and in many respects mimic one another in attracting birds, the frugivorous avifauna is less diversified than the insectivorous.
For example, in the New World the largely tropical groups, the cotingas and manikins. are together represented by only 140 species, whereas there are 370 species of flycatcher (Tyrannidae) and 220 species of antbird (Formicariidae).
Again, the insectivores in closely related groups can coexist, whereas this is rare in the frugivores.
Birds range from the most unspecialized, which regularly take other foods besides fruits and cannot subsist on fruit alone, to the most specialized, absolutely reliant on the fruit.
Of these, the unspecialized are typically opportunist, taking fruits as and when they become available.
The fruits associated with such dispersers are conspicuous, produced in abundance, and are rather watery, sugary and with little nutritive value, for they have little fat or protein.
As with the plants visited by nectarivorous birds, these plants provide a source of energy but not a whole diet.
The fruits and seeds tend to be small.
These are features of the early successional plants of clearings and forest edge, and, in Europe, would be exemplified by elder, Sambucus nigra (Caprifoliaceae), with its small shiny-black sweet fruits produced in abundance.
By contrast, the most specialized frugivores are attracted in general to the large-seeded fruits, a common feature of later-successional species.
In such plants, the seed is attractive in being covered with a layer of nutritious material.
As it must be swallowed, the layer is not too thick, which may account for the common occurrence of relatively thin layers of nutritious material over a single seed or a few seeds in a fruit.
Such a layer may be derived from carpellary structures, it may be an aril (a third ‘integument’ of the seed), or a sarcotesta, which is a lleshy layer less readily removed, sometimes being an elaboration of one of the other integuments.
Such fruits have high levels of protein and fat and are not very conspicuous.
The specialized frugivore is typically a larger bird than the unspecialized one and may have a very wide gape, but also the capacity to strip the seed and regurgitate the ballast rather rapidly, while the fruit itself must be available all the year round.
The specialized frugivores are, in general, foraging for only a short period of the day — in the cases of manikins and cotingas, for only some 10% of the daylight hours.
(Such species also have social systems in which males spend almost all their time at display grounds while the females spend almost all of theirs performing nesting duties singlehanded.)
In temperate plants, it has been shown that the proportion of two-coloured displays of fruits discovered by birds is greater than that of monocoloured, but that the consumption after discovery is greater when the distinguishing features are ‘natural’, e.g. representing different stages of ripeness, rather than differences due, for example, to artificial painting.
The ‘modal’ fruit in both tropical and temperate regions is a 7–9 mm black or red berry, but as there is a greater gape range in tropical birds, it is perhaps not surprising to find a wider range of fruit and seed size there.
In  temperate regions, there is nothing like the exclusively frugivorous fruit pigeons of the tropics, but many temperate bird species eat little else in autumn and winter.
There are generalists in both tropical and temperate regions and, in the diet of some temperate birds, a single plant species can be most important as in the case of the Sardinian warbler, Sylvia melanocephala, which is rarely found except near fruiting Pistacia lentiscus (Anacardiaceae), but this is highly unusual.
Within the range of a single tree species, there may be very distinctly different assemblages of birds taking the fruits.
In Casearia corymbosa (Flacourtiaceae), for instance, there are ecologically distinct groups of birds on the different sides of a mountain range in Costa Rica.
Overall, it is now generally held that the interactions between fruiting plants and birds in both tropical and temperate regions are loose, asymmetric, variable in time and space, non-obligate and apparently inefficient.
In a moderately seasonal environment, in which several species produce lleshy fruits, there might be expected to be selection for a particular species to fruit out of step with the others, and thereby avoid competition with other species for dispersers.
In Miconia (Melastomataceae) in an area of forest in Trinidad, a set of species with such staggered fruiting seasons, between them, produced available fruit all the year round but among the bird-dispersed (and insect-pollinated) Lauraceae in the lower montane forests of Costa Rica this was not found, although the trees shared many seed dispersers (as well as flower visitors).
Over 7 years, the 22 sympatric species of Lauraceae showed great fluctuations in fruit production and this was apparently unconnected with weather or earlier reproductive behaviour.
The fruits make up some 60 80% of all those eaten by some of the bird species, which, in years of scarcity, respond by migrating locally, turning to previously ignored foods or by delaying breeding.
In these forests, the number of bird species feeding on any particular tree was found to be correlated with its size and frequency but the Lauraceae with large fruits obviously have fewer visitors, though the birds with big gapes tend to be generalists and take fruits of all sizes.
The chestnut-mandibled toucan, Ramphastos swainsonii, the largest toucan species in Central America, eats a very wide range of fruits.
Small seeds pass through the digestive tract but the large ones are retained in the crop for 5
30 minutes and are then regurgitated.
Unlike smaller birds which, though more numerous, go to cover to eat, this bird is ‘fearless’ and defends the tree against other frugivores and may thus, on two counts, be rather inefficient at promoting dispersal of seeds away from the mother tree.
Those  destructive birds that ‘mash’ seeds can take fruits larger than their gape, when compared with those species that swallow fruits, so are less restricted in their feeding than the more benign swallowers.
Because of this behaviour and because large seeds may be more easily dropped than small ones, studies of faecal samples in work of this kind will be biased towards small seed sizes.
In Panama, 60% of the seeds from the understorey tree, Guarea glabra (Meliaceae), were removed by four species of North American migrants, though there was no evidence that any single bird species was dependent on the tree for nutrition, nor the tree reliant on any one species of bird for dispersal.
In the north temperate zone, the latitudinal range of fruiting season seems to be associated with the arrival of the southward-shifting, migratory, frugivorous birds such as thrushes.
In the Mediterranean, where many such frugivores overwinter, bird fruits tend not to ripen until winter, and show some of the attributes of tropical specialized fruits in that they are drier and more nutritious than northern fruits and can provide a complete diet for the birds.
Notable then is the liane, ivy (Hedera helix, Araliaceae), the only member of its predominantly tropical family to reach northern Europe, for it produces unusually nutritious fruits that do not fully ripen until spring (it flowers in autumn) when these are fed to nestlings, whose diets are otherwise almost entirely of animal origin.
Another isolated tropical-type plant in northern Europe is the mistletoe, Viscum album, the only representative of Viscaceae, a pantropical family.
The relationship between the ecologically similar Loranthaceae and their birds — mistletoe birds (Dicaeeidae) of Indomalesia and Australasia, certain small neotropical tanagers and certain small African barbets — seems to be close.
The birds are small like the fruits, and have short, rather stout bills, quite unlike the specialized frugivores discussed above.
The seeds are embedded in a sticky material undigested by the bird's gut and are either voided through the gut, or, as in mistletoe, the sticky seed is scraped off in crevices in bark by the bird, which has first removed the fruit structures.
A similar parallel is seen in the epiphytic cactus, Rhipsalis, the only cactus genus to be found outside the Americas, while birds may also be involved in the dispersal of the fruits of other epiphytes such as aroids and bromeliads.
Many birds eat seeds and are often referred to as seed predators.
Parrots and most pigeons, for example, are notorious seed consumers.
Of the fruit-eating pigeons, obligate frugivores in tropical Australia, one group does not take grit and the seeds are passed through the gut while the pericarp is digested, but the brown and white-headed pigeons have a large  muscular gizzard typical of columbids and take grit, which means that the seeds are ground up and later digested.
An argument for the co-evolution of dispersers and their trees is that they, in contrast, avoid the seeds, though in the past such seeds may have been in some way indigestible, promoting the relationship of today.
Indeed, the seeds of such specialized plants as the Lauraceae of Trinidad are not, in general, attacked by parrots.
Palms seem to have a mechanical defence in the form of a woody endocarp, familiar as the ‘stone’ of a date.
So far as is known there is no toxic substance in palm fruits, but by contrast, the seeds of Lauraceae contain alkaloids: the avocado pear (Persea americana), for example, has a poisonous seed.
Seed-predators that hoard seeds may be effective as dispersal agents: in temperate regions, nutcrackers and jays (Corvidae) store large numbers of seeds and exploit them later, and death or ‘forgetfulness’ of the bird will result in successful dispersal.
Of course, other animals behave similarly.
In tropical America, agoutis (Dasyprocta punctata), like squirrels, scatter-hoard seeds, including those of the Brazil nut, but there is no evidence that they remember specifically where they have buried them.
However, the sites are usually near a buttress or a fallen bole.
The agouti-dispersed palm, A strocaryum stand leyanum, produces seeds that have a much smaller chance of survival if the pericarp around them is not removed and they are not buried.
Burying conceals the seeds from other predators, for which they are an important resource in Central America, while the agouti's peeling off of pericarp before burial may remove any invertebrate larvae therein, before they can get to the seed.
The guts of birds may contain seeds of more than one species of plant at any one time and, in eastern North America the greatest mixing of seeds and consequential passing of seeds in faeces is of seeds from fruits with low nutritional quality and, perhaps not surprisingly, of small rather than large seeds.
Frugivorous birds, by eating fruits of preferred species in preferred proportions, co-ordinate the dispersal of particular species, so that in the long run, the birds will modify their habitats in terms of the nutritional configuration or the spatial arrangement of the local fruiting plants.
This could lead to a mutual reinforcement connecting the dispersal mechanism to the composition of the vegetation.
6.2.2 Dispersal by several agents
Most studies have been carried out by watching just one plant species and drawing conclusions from that, though a study by Leighton and  Leighton analysed a whole forest in eastern Borneo.
Fruiting in general was found to be markedly seasonal, one dry period being followed by a massive flowering and fruiting.
Predator satiation, particularly of primates and some squirrels, which seem to eat almost anything, was notably associated with some trees like many Euphorbiaceae.
Of the predators, fruit pigeons were abundant on figs whose seeds are inviable thereafter, but they avoided, as in the Trinidad example, the large fruits, such as those of Dysoxylum (Meliaceae), which they would appear to be able to deal with (these fruits are dispersed by hornbills).
Because of the seasonality of fruiting, the major question left unanswered is where the dispersal agents come from and where they go to.
This has, of course, important implications for the appropriate sizes for nature reserves.
Of all large and medium-sized trees that fruit in the rainy season on Barro Colorado Island, 85% are animal-dispersed and 12% wind-dispersed.
Of those that fruit in the dry season, 36% are animal-dispersed and 57% wind-dispersed.
Of smaller trees, almost 100% of the wet-season fruiters are animal-dispersed as are only 35% of the dry season ones, of which 21% are wind-dispersed.
In more seasonal regions, as in West Africa and South America compared with Indomalesia, for example, the percentage of wind-dispersed trees in the canopy is in general higher.
When the flora of fleshy-fruited species in a forest as a whole is examined, as at Cocha Cashu in Amazonian Peru, the fruits of the majority of the species (in this case, two-thirds of 258 species, representing a quarter of the total flora and half of the genera with fleshy fruits) seem to fit into one of two categories.
Within many genera, there seemed to be little variation, but, within families, there was rarely uniformity, the two classes being:(i) large orange, yellow, brown or green fruits with a tough outer layer; and (ii) small black, white, blue, purple or mixed colours, corresponding to mammal and bird ‘syndromes’ respectively.
Within large genera, however, a range of form is sometimes found.
In Aglaia (Meliaceae) in the Malay Peninsula, this range seems to be associated with the different chemical constitution of the fruits offered: three species with dehiscent fruits with arillate seeds were taken by at least nine bird species and there was a high lipid content (27–60%); other species taken by primates were lower in lipid but higher in free carbohydrates (reducing sugars and sucrose) and sweet-tasting amino acids.
Although only a handful of species in this large genus (the biggest in the family with perhaps 110 species) were examined, and only a single sample from each, while other nutrients such as minerals and vitamins were not assessed, the results are rather indicative of a pair of chemomorphological dispersal ‘syndromes’ within the genus.
Some plants, however, are known to be efficiently dispersed by two quite distinct types of agent, e.g. the fruits of Faramea occidentalis (Rubiaceae) on Barro Colorado Island are eaten by a range of mammals and birds, but dispersal is said to be principally effected by howler and white-faced monkeys and by crested guans.
At Los Tuxtlas in southern Mexico, the females of the pioneer, Cecropia obtusifolia, more or less continuously produce fruits and 48 species of animal use them: one insect, one reptile, 33 birds (both residents and migrants) and 13 mammals (flying, arboreal and terrestrial).
Seeds from the faeces of three species of mammal were subjected to various light treatments and it was found that passage through two of them reduced the effectiveness with which exposure to far-red light overcame the effects of previous exposure to red light.
The pioneer C. glazioui of the coastal rain forest of south-east Brazil, is visited by three tanager species by day and three species of fruit bat by night, all in search of fruit.
The minute hard fruits are ingested with the lleshy perianth and later dispersed through defaecation, though only 32% of those passed through birds would germinate compared with 78% from the bats.
Fruit bats in Malesia press small-seeded fruits against their palates and drop the dried dross including the seeds.
In this way figs, Muntingia calabura (introduced from the West Indies, but fruiting all year round) and species of Melastoma are dispersed.
The exotic Piper aduncum from South America has probably recently been spread around Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in this way.
Of species dispersed by birds and primates, the latter may sometimes surpass the birds in spreading seeds.
For instance, in Slemmadenia donnellsmithii (Apocynaceae), spider-monkeys may excel over parrots and other birds in this respect in Guatemala.
Fruiting Dipteryx panamensis (Leguminosae) trees on Barro Colorado Island are visited by 16 mammal species, taking pericarp or seeds.
There is predation by peccaries and rodents, which eat seeds (most of the others eating the pericarp and leaving the seeds under the trees): occasionally primates, coatis, kinkajous and so on disperse seeds but only the bat, Artibeus lituratus, the agouti and the squirrel Sciurus granatensis disperse large numbers, the last two being seed predators most of the time, but sometimes dropping or scatter hoarding seeds.
In a study of the Panamanian rain forest tree, Tetragastris panamensis (Burseraceae), visited by a wide range of animals, it was found that three mammal species accounted for over 97% of the seeds removed from the tree, the howler monkey (Allouatta palliata) alone being responsible for 74%.
A number of other mammals and birds probably also disperse a very small proportion of the seeds, while two parrot species are the important seed predators among  several mammals and birds that destroy seeds.
From 19 study trees in one season, fewer than 4% of the total of more than 430 000 seeds produced had a chance of establishing, for 6% were killed by the parrots, 66% fell under the mother trees and 24% germinated in close competitive clumps in faeces.
Even lower percentages are estimated for Shorea ovalis (Dipterocarpaceae) in Malesia, where there was 83% abortion, possibly due to the failure of pollination, while 90% of the survivors were killed by a single insect predator species before being dropped.
Sixteen per cent of the survivors on the ground were then killed by three other insect species and although mortality declined with distance from the mother tree, it was not due to host-specific predation.
In a study of a forest as a whole, the Budongo Forest in Uganda, it was found that 40% of all seeds were eaten by rodents before and immediately after germination and about a further 30% were killed in 2 years by browsing antelope, while there were further losses from seed rot, insect and fungal attack and drought.
The result was some 2% survival of the seeds as saplings in 2 years.
Compared with most of the species mentioned so far, many figs seem to produce fruits almost all year round and are the most important foods of many specialized frugivores in Africa, Malesia and Australasia — the siamang (Hylobates syndactylus) in Malaya spends a quarter of its feeding time in fig trees.
A Ficus liane in southern Cameroun was visited by one species of fruit pigeon, four of hornbill and three of greenbul, two of monkeys and two of squirrels over 9 days; the greenbuls alone ate 17332 syconia.
Their gizzards are gentle when compared with those of fruit pigeons, which generally destroy the seeds.
In the New World, bird species are less restricted to fig species, even if fruit is available continuously, as was found for individuals of two Ficus species in Panama, which, between them, produced fruit all year round.
In both these species, though, the major fruiting peak occurred when most other species were not in fruit, and it is suggested that the two species fruit asynchronously at relatively short intervals.
This would seem to be linked with the capacity to provide egg-laying sites all the year round for the obligate fig-wasp pollinators, as well as to the year-round provision of food for the specialized dispersal agents such as howler monkeys and bats, which may travel long distances, in the case of Artibeus jamaicensis in Mexico up to 10km, to feed on figs.
Janzen calculated that in a fig ‘seed’ shadow in Costa Rica created by bats depositing ‘splats’at the density of some 10perm2 over 2500m2, there were 367500 fig seeds dispersed.
By contrast, wind-dispersed species in a Mexican study normally fruited during the dry season, producing a large amount of seeds, which were  simultaneously dispersed on days with low relative humidities.
Such species thus give rise to wide and uniform seed shadows.
Megachiroptera are known to feed upon fruit of 145 plant genera, often secondary species and usually with sweet rather than oily fruits.
Large fruits like mango and papaya are consumed in situ and the smaller ones taken away, especially if the bat is disturbed.
The large Pteropus vampyrus (weight 800 g) can carry up to 200 g, Pteropus travelling up to 50 km to forage.
Nevertheless, the plants are dispersed by a range of other agents including primates and even water.
In forests with very seasonal production of fruits and seeds, as at Cocha Cashu, there are periods of scarcity when frugivores turn to a limited range of food sources, sometimes referred to as ‘keystone’ species.
At Cocha Cashu, 12 species provided 80% of the animal biomass with food and it is argued that the carrying capacity of the forest is governed by the abundance of these species, the most important of them being figs.
6.2.3 Some marsupials and primates
In a secondary forest near Cayenne, French Guyana, five of the six nocturnal mammalian frugivores (effective dispersers rather than predators) were found to be marsupials: 13 of the 26 plant species with a major role as food sources for nocturnal mammals made up approximately half of the total basal area of the forest and 25% of the number of trees there.
The trees were found to exhibit three types of phenology:(i) low fruit production over a long time (usually pioneers);(ii) synchronous but irregular fruiting (associated with predator satiation of rodents, the seeds being larger than those in (i); and (iii) synchronous regular cycles with successive and partly overlapping fruit production (providing a year-round supply for the frugivores).
The lean period at the beginning of the dry season with few available fruit resources is tolerated as the marsupials store fat.
New World primates are red-green colourblind and spider-monkeys eat the seeds of Virola spp.
(Myristicaceae) corresponding in their colours to a ‘bird syndrome’; V. surinamensis is dispersed by both birds and water.
Of capuchin monkeys in Amazonia, brown capuchins with heavy jaws can open palm fruits and can survive the dry season on them, though the whitefronted capuchins cannot, such that in the dry season, 90% of their food is figs.
The figs are widely scattered in the forests, however, so a troop ranges over much more ground than does one of brown capuchins.
The effect of passage through the primate gut has been examined in the tamarins in Amazonian Peru, where it was found that germination  success rates were about 70%.
The seeds tended to be large and heavy and passed through the gut in 13 hours, the passage time inversely correlated with specific gravity of the seeds and had an indirect effect on the distance that seeds were dispersed away from the mother tree.
Of the ‘preferred’ fruit trees, the distributions of the adult trees of three of them closely resembled the seed shadows made by the tamarins in a way not unlike that of the birds mentioned at the end of section 6.2.1.
Howler monkeys can detoxify several chemicals that many other New World monkeys cannot: unlike others, they can also eat unripe fruits.
Generally, unripe fruits are rendered unpalatable by the tannins that precipitate salivary mucoproteins and cause astringency.
In ripening (commercial) fruits, the tannins form large complexes with pectins and the astringency is lost.
In the Old World, chimpanzees can deal with unripe fruits, breaking open tannin-rich mature fruits or eating unripe ones.
Howlers on Barro Colorado Island eat large quantities of fruit, notably figs, though different Ficus species have different amino-acid contents in the protein fraction of fruits and leaves (40% of their intake is leaves).
At Los Tuxtlas, howlers spend half their time collecting fruits of 19 species with a preference for those of certain Moraceae and Lauraceae.
Ninety per cent of the seeds in their faeces belonged to just eight species of tree and one liane, the rest to 15 other liane species.
The germination success, compared with a control with 35% was about 60% for seeds from the faeces.
Nevertheless, besides dispersing some species, howlers waste a large amount of fruit and seed material.
Figs are also important in Old World primates, troops of siamang taking up to 13 kg of small ones within 10 days in the Malay Peninsula.
Although the orang-utan of Sumatra and Borneo is primarily a fruit-eater, it takes a wide variety of foods including leaves, young shoots, flowers, pith and bark and occasionally mineral-rich soil, insects and possibly small vertebrates and birds eggs.
Plants in some 34 families were used in Borneo over a period of 16 months and all but 5 were sources of fruit.
The apes fed on a wide range of foods at all times of the year, but when fruit was scarce, they spent more time travelling and turned to less nutritious plant materials as well.
Of the 28 chief fruit species taken, 18 were rare (fewer than two trees per ha), six occasional (two to four per ha) and four had four to eight per ha.
Individuals of a few species like durians provide food for several orang-utan meals, but most are cleared by one animal in a single meal.
In rainy weather, they sometimes concentrate on the less nutritious foods rather than search for more fruit, but in fruiting trees seem not to pay much attention to other frugivores though they eat most, and that wastefully.
Because of the  scattered distribution of food, the orang-utan population is split up into small dispersed foraging units and the flexible nature of orang-utan society allows them to exploit irregular fruit distribution better than territorial monkeys or gibbons, for example.
The monkeys live largely on leafy shoots and eat fruit when it is available, while the gibbons have become largely specialized for diets of figs.
Furthermore, the orang-utan can tolerate a wide range of bitter and sour fruits and high alcohol levels and its strong hands allow it to open spiny or hard fruits like durians and legumes.
The Sumatran orang-utan seems to be an important dispersal agent for some Aglaia spp.
(Meliaceae) but durian seeds are so damaged that ground-walking animals are thought to be the principal effective agents possibly sun-bears, or even tigers.
Man has also been suggested — it has also been pointed out that the fruits favoured by him and the ape are the same.
Certainly the absence of commercially significant rain-forest fruits in the New World, compared with the Old, is because the primate fauna in the Old World has flavour preferences nearest to those of humans.
Possibly, then, the orang-utan has been excluded from the ground through competition with man, and has become arboreal, perhaps also as a result of being hunted for 30000 years by its competitor.
6.2.4 Fish and ants, wind and water
Dispersal agents not mentioned so far include fish.
Some seeds of rheophytic plants are fish-dispersed and fish dispersal gets round the perennial problem of how plants can move ‘upstream’.
One such rheophyte is Dysoxylum angustifolium in the Pahang River basin in West Malaysia.
In the same family (Meliaceae), in the allied genus Guarea in South America, G. guidonia is fish-dispersed.
This mechanism seems to have arisen in parallel in these plants.
Growing in the same river as D. angustifolium, but in other places as well, is another rheophyte in the same family, Aglaia yzermannii, which may also be fish-dispersed.
In the case of the Dysoxylum, the fish flesh is rendered rather unpalatable by substances from the seeds.
The indigenous people avoid these fish during the tree's fruiting season and, if other fish predators do the same, the tree could be said to be operating a Securicor system for its offspring.
In the peat-swamp forest of Sarawak, the commercially important Gonystylus bancanus (Thymelaeaceae) is distributed by a small catfish, the strange flavour of whose flesh at different times of the year is attributed to the tree's arils.
There are probably well over 100 000 km2 of flooded forest in Amazonia with rather predictable seasonal floods, with periods of inundation in  different places lasting up to 6 months.
Some characin fish there are seed predators as they crush seeds, which are not destroyed in the gut itself.
There are 30 predator species but many so-called predators have been found with whole seeds in their guts, e.g. Colossoma brachypomum, which can reach 20 kg in weight, with seeds of Astrocaryum jauary (Palmae).
A given species or even genus tends to specialize in that at the same time in the same area, the same plant species is exploited, and this takes a great toll of water-dispersed seeds such as rubber.
As dispersers in these forests, fish are probably more important than any other animal group, because of their larger biomass and feeding at night, as well as in the day.
The important groups are the frugivorous characins and catfishes, though even piscivores have been found with viable seeds, perhaps eaten by the herbivore prey in the first instance.
Fleshy fruits, including figs are taken and over 100 species are known to be dispersed in this way.
Many of the fish species migrate from one river system to another: they can travel 20–30 km upstream in a single day and seeds can remain in their guts for 1 7 days.
Characins migrate only upstream, but their young are displaced downstream once more; they are less good as dispersers than catfish, however, as the latter have weaker jaws.
In these nutrient-poor waters, the fishes may be reliant on such vegetable input and, in turn, the homogeneity of the inundated forest of Amazonia may be related to this fishy connection.
Invertebrates are less conspicuously involved in seed dispersal, but there are many examples of ant-dispersed seeds in temperate countries, e.g. species of Carex (Cyperaceae), Ulex (Leguminosae), and Viola, whose seeds are attractive because of oil bodies, often rudimentary arils.
Carunculate seeds are perceived by ants, which see in ultraviolet light, because the caruncle reflects ultra-violet light, the fluorescent compound probably being a phenolic.
A recently reported tropical example is of two arrowroot relations, Calathea spp.
(Marantaceae) in the Mexican rain forests.
Of the 21 species of ant attracted to the arillate seeds, there are predatory carnivorous ponerines, which bear off the seeds, like animal prey, to the nest, where the nutritious arils are removed.
The aril-less seeds have higher rates of germination than the undivested ones and the distribution of seedlings matches the ants' behaviour patterns.
The hemi-epiphytic Ficus microcarpa of Malesia has a caruncle around the fruit inside the syconium; when it is removed, the fruit is less likely to be ant-transported and those with it removed had a higher germination rate.
Remarkably, the primary dispersal is by vertebrates, in whose guts the caruncles are not destroyed.
After primary dispersal by a range of vertebrates in a dry-seasonal forest in Costa Rica, the fruits of F.  hondurensis are known to be re-arranged by several ant species.
Ants may hinder dispersal, however, as in the example of the aggressive arboreal weaver ant, Oecophylla longinoda, which reduces the dispersal of F. capensis syconia in West Africa by deterring night visitors such as bats.
The plumed seeds of Dischidia parvifolia (Asclepiadaceae) are wind-dispersed but, if they land in the vicinity of ant nests, they are gathered and taken into tunnels, where they germinate and their roots gain access to nutrients in the insect frass.
In Amazonia, taxonomically diverse groups of angiosperms grow on the carton nests of ants, forming arboreal ‘antgardens’, which may be up to 1 metre across and 2 m long.
Several of the plant species have extra-floral nectaries but almost all the plants can be found growing away from the ant nests and the ants can form nests without the plants so that, despite the apparent advantages to both plants and animals, the relationship is not obligatory, though Codonanthe spp. are not found away from the nests.
The seeds of the epiphytes have arils, while those of Codonanthe seeds, unlike all other New World Gesneriaceae, closely resemble ant pupae.
The seeds are brought to the nest, though the gardens are sometimes colonized by other plants, e.g. Anthurium sp.
(Araceae), which offers nothing to the ants.
The seeds of most of the plants have a smell of vanilla; nine of the 10 epiphyte species examined in Amazonia had the same volatile oil and a second, unrelated, compound in six of them.
Compounds similar to these are known to retard fungal and bacterial growth.
They thus protect the ants against nest pathogens in a way similar to that of the fungistatic resins collected by bees for their nests.
Other dispersal mechanisms on the forest floor may include rat dispersal, which has been claimed for Curculigo spp.
(Liliaceae) in the Malay Peninsula, while, on Fanning Island in the central Pacific, Pandanus tectorius is effectively dispersed by a land crab, Cardisoma carnifex, which moves fruits and discards the seeds.
Ocean currents are important for other coastal plants such as some mangroves (though none of these has reached the isolated archipelago of Hawaii), while seeds of the forest lianes, Entada (Leguminosae), are washed even as far as Europe.
In Australasia, seeds such as these germinated in North Island, New Zealand, after some time in the sea and 21 months in soil.
In the Amazon, there are many water-dispersed palms and legumes: propagules of Montrichardia arborescens, a characteristic aroid, and even rubber, stay afloat for 2 months.
Again, in Amazonia, there are some waterballistic understorey herbs, their seeds being bounced by raindrops, e.g. Monolena spp.
(Melastomataceae), while in the Malay Peninsula, raindrops run down the longitudinally dehisced capsules of Didymocarpus  spp.
(Gesneriaceae) carrying away the minute seeds.
Along the margins of the immense rivers of Amazonia, there takes place wind-dispersal with alate drupes of Triplaris surinamensis (Polygonaceae), winged seeds in Couratari spp.
(Lecythidaceae), plumed ones in Salix martiana and S. chilensis, and seeds in carpel hairs as in Ceiba pentandra.
Storms can disperse seeds and fruits via high altitudes as in dipterocarps in the Malay Peninsula, where one recorded storm deposited 3 — 4 per m 2 possibly over several km 2 .
Lianes tend to have a higher percentage of wind-dispersed species than do trees, though hemi-epiphytic lianes tend to be bird-dispersed.
The rarity of lianes on truly oceanic islands, e.g. Mauritius and Galapagos Islands (one or two only), can be explained by wind-dispersal not being efficient enough to get them to islands.
However, wind-dispersal is important in orchids, where air occupies much of the space within the testa, three orchids reaching Krakatau after its 1883 eruption, by 1896, 25 by 1933.
Air-dispersal probably accounts for the distributions of some liverworts, though many spores are not long-lived in a desiccating atmosphere, but the presence of certain hepatics on Ascension Island, St Helena and Tristan da Cunha seems to confirm it.
Within a climatological belt, the spread of bryophytes with spores smaller than 25 –m is probably by wind though birds and insects may be important over short distances.
Vascular-arbuscular mycorrhizae are spread as spores by wind, water and animals both invertebrate and vertebrate, the longest distances perhaps being achieved on birds' feet, as well as by the more familiar root contact and infected plant material.
However, for ectomycorrhizal fungi in southwest Australia at least, dispersal is by marsupials and germination of spores is unsuccessful unless they have passed through a digestive tract.
In northern forests, the dispersers of e.g. Fagaceae also eat ectomycorrhizal fungi and seeds planted by them also have ectomycorrhizae.
In mast fruiting, there are increases in dispersers in anticipation pigs (flowers) or jays (green cones) but pigs also take fungi, e.g. truffles, which exude sex pheromones.
In northern forests, the formation of most sporocarps is associated with fruiting generally and mast-fruiting in particular.
Perhaps the mycorrhizae direct the pigs in their spectacular migrations in Borneo.
6.2.5 ‘Anachronisms'
Although parrots have been treated as seed predators, they are not always so, for they appear to be the principal dispersal agents of seeds of several species of Parkia (Leguminosae) in the Neotropics as, well as certain  Lecythidaceae there, even though they are partly destructive.
It may well be that the gum that surrounds the seeds of these species of Parkia and not of the seeds of the Palaeotropical ones is important here.
Some other Parkia species are dispersed by agoutis and it is possible that others may have been adapted to dispersal by large terrestrial herbivores that are now extinct.
About 10000 years ago, over 15 genera of Central American large herbivores became extinct so that the megafauna, previously comparable with that of Africa before the decimations caused by man, largely disappeared.
Those that became extinct included gomphotheres (mastodon-like proboscidians), ground sloths and equids.
The plants that these animals dispersed may thus be seen as vegetable anachrorlisms and the introduction of horses and cattle in historical times seems to have locally restored the ranges of such trees as jicaro (Crescentia alata, Bignoniaceae) and guanacaste (Enterolobium cyclocarpum, Leguminosae), which may fall in this category.
The absence from tropical Australia of plants whose dispersal is, or was, associated with large mammals may explain why few, if any, indigenous fruit species there are worth developing for horticulture.
However, in southern Australia, there are some southern rain-forest species still with large diaspores, and fossil evidence suggests that the extinct cassowary relations, the Dromornithidae, were there in the Pleistocene.
These large birds could have been the original dispersal agents.
Of the extant ‘megafauna’, the smallest of the five living species of rhinoceros, the Sumatran rhinoceros, Dicerorhinus sumatrensis, eats wild mangoes and other fruits as well as browsing many gap species.
In lowland Nepal, the greater one-horned Asian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis) takes the large hard and dull fruits of Trewia nudiflora,(Euphorbiaceae), which are unattractive to birds, bats or monkeys.
The fruits are an important food source and the seeds remain in the gut for 37 days.
Such treatment does not improve germination (they are protected by a hard endocarp during their animal passage), but seedlings grow up in dung piles in clearings: the species is shade-intolerant.
The tree regenerates elsewhere, where there are bison and wild cattle or even domestic buffaloes and cattle.
Such anachronisms are likely to be common in those regions from which the large forest animals have been lately removed and may, in any case, be a common feature in evolution.
Some of the woody lobelioids of Hawaii have thorns and toxins, apparently noxious to the type of herbivores not found in these islands, but possibly on the mainland where their ancestors came from.
Surprisingly, Hawaii has plants with extrafloral nectaries, though no ants are native there.
In a national park, 33 such species were found: one endemic (Acacia koa, Leguminosae) though six other indigenous species were pantropical coastal plants, but three others with such nectaries elsewhere in their range did not have them in the Hawaiian populations.
In the archipelago as a whole 11 of the 1394 endemics have these nectaries as do a number of indigenous non-endemics.
No other relationship with other insects has yet been demonstrated, but much of the fauna may be lost, in which case there is some short-term ‘phylogenetic inertia’.
If this is not the explanation, then the inertia is even greater, the nectaries being relict structures from the ancestral colonizing plants.
The Hawaiian endemic bird pollinators of Freycinetia arborea (Pandanaceae) have died out, but the plant's pollen is still to be found in the head feathers of museum specimens.
Pollination is now effected by a Japanese white-eye, Zosterops japonica, introduced in 1929.
Another Pacific anachronism associated with birds is the tree Pisonia grandis (Nyctaginaceae), found from Madagascar to Polynesia, but on Niue Island is in decline as it is guano dependent and sea birds are decreasing in numbers there.
Dispersal agents must have changed with time as in long-lived taxa such as Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgoaceae) and Podocarpaceae, which were probably dispersed by long-extinct groups of reptiles, while in the largest genus of plants with fleshy fruits in New Zealand, Coprosma (Rubiaceae), comprising 29% of all such species there and 50% of the species of fleshy-fruited shrubs, 52 species are dispersed by birds, bats, lizards and formerly the moas, now extinct.
As with the Japanese white-eye pollination on Hawaii, seed dispersal on Three Kings Island, New Zealand, is now effected by introduced bird species.
Another example of a dispersal anachronism is the extraordinary palm, Lodoicea maldivica, now restricted to small areas of the Seychelles.
This tree is familiar to botanists because it has the largest seed known, as well as one of the largest leaves.
The leaves of palms in general are often used for thatching and are relatively durable compared with most tropical foliage.
The leaf litter of this remarkable plant is therefore bulky and relatively persistent.
A single fallen leaf can smother a wide area of seedlings and it is perhaps no surprise then to learn that it has such a large seed, which could not only penetrate this mass but have enough stores to supply a seedling as it grew up through it.
Nevertheless, these large seeds are rather unlikely to be moved uphill by dispersal agents, particularly as there are no large animals on the island where the palm grows.
It seems then (possibly retarded by a cotyledonary stalk up to 3 m long), to be slowly moving  downhill as a species.
The seeds are not resistant to salt water and immersion kills them.
In short, this species is ‘adapted’ to going extinct.
How did it reach the Seychelles?
A clue may be found in the geology of those islands, for some of them are granitic and part of the Gondwanaland, which linked India and Africa when they were adjacent.
Is it then a relic of the greatest antiquity?
6.2.6 Specificity
Where there is great specificity in seed-dispersal, a state of affairs that seems in general very rare, the disappearance of the dispersal agent is the road to extinction for the plant.
Elephants, which lack colour vision but have a strong sense of smell and favour large, smelly, dull fruits, are the only animals able to swallow the pyrene of Panda oleosa (Pandaceae) and collected seeds do not germinate unless passed through an elephant, in whose dung they germinate.
The seed content of droppings throughout 1 year in a rain forest in Ivory Coast comprised some 37 species of trees and five of herbs.
Of the trees, only seven are known to be dispersed by monkeys or birds as well.
Some 30% of the trees whose dispersal agent is known in these forests are dispersed by elephants.
It may well be that other such cases as the Panda represent extreme forms of the ‘anachronisms’ and that, formerly reliant on a number of dispersal agents, only one of these is now left.
Again, the flightless cassowaries to 1 .5 m tall survive in Australia (one species), New Guinea and the neighbouring islands.
In northern Queensland, their dung heaps (up to 1 kg each!) were examined and found to contain 78 species of seeds, of which 70 were viable.
Although passage through the gut did not improve germination rates, it must be remembered that the birds are the only frugivores large enough to deal with some of the fruits, e.g. Casuarius casuarius in Queensland taking Beilschmiedia (Lauraceae) fruits and passing the seeds more or less intact even though they are 6 cm diameter and weigh 52g.
A celebrated, final, example is that of Sideroxylon (Calvaria) sessilijlorum (Sapotaceae), only geriatric trees of which could be found in Mauritius, to which island it is restricted.
An inspired guess was made that the failure of the seeds to germinate was because its seeds had not passed through the gut of the dodo (Raphus cucullatus), extinct since 1681.
This led to forced feedings of turkeys, and, after being voided, resultant germination of seeds of the tree which was on the verge of extinction, though this may have been exacerbated by the depredations of introduced monkeys, which take unripe fruits.
By contrast, the flexibility of plants (as in the examples of the Freycinetia  and the Three Kings Island flora discussed above) in terms of dispersal agents can be seen in two Neotropical studies.
In a broad-scale study of cloud forests, it was concluded that random colonization had played an important part in determining the species compositions of different ones and that the predominance of widespread species of successional habitats elsewhere reflected a high rate of generalist dispersal.
In the second, three submontane tree species common to Trinidad and Tobago were examined, the assemblages of frugivores in the two islands being very different, with passerine dispersers predominating in Trinidad, parrots and other predators on Tobago.
On Tobago, the fruits of the tree species had significantly more thickened layers and higher frequencies of multiple seeds and so on.
Selection by the different avifaunas seems to have generated these infraspecific differences and the tree species survive in both islands.
Although not immediately apparent in studies of ‘variable’ plant species, it must be expected, in view of the non-uniform disperser fauna in tropical regions, that wide-ranging species will probably be shown to have such patterns.
Nevertheless, such patterns reflect not only the present fauna, but in the cases of long-lived trees, the fauna of the past.
In short, in the context of the modern fauna, many trees may appear to represent the ‘living past’.
6.3 Florivory and pollination
In the previous chapter, it was noted that some groups of trees employed in turn the same species of pollinating insects, suggesting that within certain constraints these were generalist in their flower-visiting.
This contrasts with the often-repeated one-to-one association of certain orchids and their insects and of the hundreds of species of figs and theirs.
How closely knit are pollinating animals and plants in rain forest?
In the wet forests of Costa Rica it was found that some 90% of tree species were insect-pollinated, approximately the same percentage as in dry forest, so the insects will be considered first.
6.3.1 Insect pollination (entomophily)
For insects, plants represent humid but well-drained surfaces and increase the amount and diversity of living space while for some, they represent food to browse, or a repository to bore into in egg-laying.
Early pollinators were attracted by pollen and probably had grinding mandibles: they also took ovules and developing seeds.
They were probably derived from predominantly predacious groups adapted to seeking pollen, which is high in protein, and the foraging behaviour of modern predacious insects and pollinators is similar.
Pollen and ovule eating may have begun in the Carboniferous, the first ‘modern’ group with such mandibles, the Coleoptera, appearing in the Permian, with Diptera and Hymenoptera in the Triassic, and Lepidoptera in the Lower Cretaceous.
There appear to have been trends in the fossil gymnosperms leading to increased protection of the ovules.
By the Cretaceous, insect damage is very pronounced as in the example of hundreds of cycad cones that have been examined: 22.2% of them had damage especially noticeable in those with mature pollen-bearing organs.
Many different groups are involved in the pollination of modern angiosperms and, in rain forest, this seems to be rather bound up with the level in the forest at which the flowers are presented.
In Costa Rica, the large and medium-sized trees are associated with generalist insects and not bats or birds, the almost exclusively tropical pollinators.
Only 3% of species there were visited by bats: a similar percentage was recorded for wind-pollinated trees.
Hummingbirds and hawkmoths are largely associated with trees producing flowers near the forest floor, where noctuid moths are found to be important pollinators in the smaller species of Meliaceae and butterflies in such families as Rubiaceae.
The scent-sensitive Lepidoptera are thus associated with the strongly-scented flowers in the relative calm there.
Almost all the insects examined are generalists, particularly small bees that visit a wide range of the trees with rather small ‘unspecialized’ flowers.
The stratification could be summarized as follows: large bees in the emergents, smaller bees in the lower reaches with other generalist insects, and near the forest floor everything, including wind, as pollinator.
In West Malaysia, there seems to be a clear distinction between the pollinators above and those below the canopy.
Below, the flowers have minimal visual lures and are produced over extended periods, or even continuously, while others are strongly scented and produced more periodically.
In the canopy, the flowers are larger and more conspicuous, as in almost all of the emergents.
The pollinators in the lower regions are nonspecific and include meliponid bees, solitary wasps and butterflies and also unspecialized beetles, midges, flies and thrips, all rather short-range pollinators.
Most of these are also found in the upper canopy, although that is dominated by the wide-ranging bee, Apis dorsata, with Xylocopa bees also conspicuous.
Sunbirds and bats, which live outside the forest, also work the flowers at this level.
Xylocopa and the sunbirds are mostly found in the forest fringes, foraging on gap-phase plants though they move to the  mature forest trees during flowering periods.
In the lower reaches of the forest, then, there is a constant but low level of presentation of a few flowers dealt with by low but more or less constant densities of animals, whereas in the upper layers, the flowers are more conspicuously advertised and draw such animals as birds, which are wider-ranging and with good sight, as well as the local, more stationary pollinators from lower in the forest.
The trees of the lower reaches are thus generalized in their attractions while trees like the dipterocarps get the local fauna and the bee Apis dorsata.
Some trees such as Polygalaceae, two subfamilies of Leguminosae, Papilionoideae and Caesalpinioideae, have floral structures restricting access to the nectar or pollen to Xylocopa bees, a mechanism familiar enough in the temperate representatives of these families.
Some of the dipterocarps, as was mentioned in the last chapter, are visited by thrips though these trees are strongly self-incompatible.
Other ways in which outcrossing may result include the consequences of the aggressive behaviour of some of the pollinating bees, which may force other pollinators to withdraw from a particular tree and seek another, though short-distance pollinators are often territorial and may see off new arrivals, thus reducing crossing.
In mass-flowering, the thrips with their rapid breeding cycles and build-up of numbers can form a very high percentage of the pollinators.
Possibly such mechanisms can be used to explain where the pollinators come from in species-poor forests such as the Shorea albida forest in Sarawak when the dominants flower.
Despite this apparent stratification, certain groups of plants are very restricted in their range of pollinators.
Palms, which may vary in size from emergents in the montane forest of the Andes to treelets 30cm tall in the Madagascan rain forest, are thought to be pollinated largely by beetles and sometimes bees, and not, as was formerly believed, entirely by wind.
Indeed, many trees that look as though they might be adapted to wind pollination are known to be pollinated by insects — like Mallotus oppositifolius (Euphorbiaceae) in West Africa, which has an attractive sweet scent — and it has been suspected that even forest grasses are animal pollinated.
Examination of particular species seems to show elaborate systems for enhancing cross-pollination.
Many tree species are dioecious, although sometimes the rudiments of the opposite sex are found in the flowers.
Such is the case in the majority of the Meliaceae, for example.
The dioecious Xerospermum noronhianum (‘X intermedium', Sapindaceae) in West Malaysia has a prolonged sequential development of flowers on each inflorescence as well as the sequential development of the inflorescences  themselves, making a small number of flowers available at any one time but ensuring economy by not producing excess flowers within a short period (these would not be pollinated owing to the low density of pollinators).
The major pollinators are short-distance generalists and the fidelity is maintained by the simultaneous flowering of trees of both sexes within close proximity.
Furthermore, it was observed that female trees flowered less frequently: 22% of the known females in a 5-year study flowered more than twice, compared with 35% of the males.
This could be argued as promoting the crossing between different parent trees in successive seasons.
In Costa Rica, 333 of the approximately 400 tree species at La Selva were examined and 65.5% were found to be hermaphroditic, 11.4% monoecious and 23.1% dioecious; of 28 species examined in detail, 24 showed self-incompatibility, either in the stigma or style in distylous species, in the ovary in most of the monomorphic ones.
Insects collect pollen and, in the case of, for example, beetles, solid food bodies in or about the flowers.
In a species of the palm genus, Bactris, the fleshy petals and sepals are eaten, while the fleshy bracts of a species of Freycinetia (Pandanaceae) are eaten by birds, which are thought to pollinate it.
Insects also collect nectar as a ‘liquid reward’ a category that may include stigmatic secretions; these may be involved in insect nutrition as well as in pollen-tube germination.
The extent of nectar production is apparently associated with pollinator size and there is variation in its sugar content and dilution.
In dioecious species, the sugar proportions are different in male and female flowers.
Humming-bird flowers have high sucrose/hexose ratios, while passerine (sunbirds, white-eyes, honeyeaters and honeycreepers) flowers have a lower ratio these birds also take fruit-juices, which are highly hexosedominated.
Hexose-dominance is found in bat flowers in the Americas though is perhaps less obvious in the Old World: again there is a similarity with fruit sugars.
Moth flowers are sucrose-rich and narrow-tubed butterfly flowers are similar but ‘bee and butterfly’ flowers with shallow tubes are hexose-rich.
Bees may get sucrose- or hexose-dominated nectars, but this is complicated by the fact that some plant families have either sucrose- or hexose-dominated nectars.
The attraction for the bees may be conditioned or due to‘taste’ but it must be noted that nectars contain things besides sugars, particularly lipids, amino acids and proteins as well as alkaloids, non-protein amino acids and phenols.
An example showing that such categorizations and generalizations are perhaps unwise is that of Inga vera var spuria (Leguminosae), which is first visited by moths and humming birds (high sucrose), but 4 hours later produces a sour odour attractive to  bats, perhaps due to fermentation by micro-organisms, the resultant diminution of sucrose making the ratio suitable for the bats.
Several Passifloraceae present pollen and nectar at different times of day and share the same pollinators, while certain nectar-less Bignoniaceous lianes mimic nectar producers, by flowering at the same time as, or just after, those that are pollinated.
Mistletoe flowers appear to mimic nutritionally rich fruits, the fruits of the previous season being more or less contemporary with the new flowers.
Again, Epidendrum ibayuense (Orchidaceae) produces nectar-less flowers all year round in Panama, apparently mimicking the flowers of Lantana camara (Verbenaceae) and Asclepias curassavica and attracting Monarch butterfly pollinators.
On the other hand, the ‘robbing’ of nectar, familiar in temperate plants is also prevalent in the tropics and bees may attack bird-pollinated flowers.
Although it has been argued that nectar might contain repellents to ants that otherwise predominate on sugary substrates in the tropics, it is found that ants will take this nectar when it is presented to them, though the floral parts of such flowers may be less palatable.
Indeed, pollen exposed to ants for a short time has reduced germinability and shorter pollen-tubes: such pollen leads to lower seed set.
It has been suggested that in their nest-building and brood-rearing habits, ants secrete large amounts of antibiotics, which check pathogens and it is these that affect pollen, while bees and wasps do not, so it is not surprising that ant pollination systems are rare.
Myrmicacin is found with plant hormones in a secretion produced by the thoracic gland which disrupts the flow of components to cell walls and cell division is disturbed.
However, some of the many other glands and secretions on ants may also be involved.
Bees (Apidae) Probably the most significant of insect pollinators are bees.
Within a single tree family, there can be a wide range of bee pollinators, as in the Lecythidaceae of Amazonia, one of the most important families there, with different morphological flower types and rewards associated with different bee sizes.
The most primitive state is where the stamens are united basally and are numerous, curving inwards in a symmetrical flower as in Gustavia spp., some of which are self-sterile; small to medium-sized bees like species of the stingless Trigona leave pollen on the stigma and become dusted with new pollen from the stamens where they forage.
In Cariniana, there are similar pollinators but the androecium is somewhat one-sided, while in Couroupita, it is very irregular in that, besides a ring of stamens with fertile pollen around the stigmatic surface, there is a one-sided ligule bearing stamens with sterile pollen curved back  over the others.
These flowers are visited by larger bees such as species of Xylocopa, which land on the hood-like ligule and forage underneath it for pollen.
In so doing, bees rub their backs against the stigmatic surface and effect pollination and also collect fertile pollen.
In the Brazil nut, Bertholleria excelsa, and Eschweilera spp., the hood is pressed down on the fertile stamens and bears only staminodes with nectar at their bases: only a strong bee can lift the hood — species of Xylocopa and female euglossine bees.
Most specialized is the condition in Couratari spp., where the hood is coiled under itself, concealing the nectar, which can only be reached by the long-tongued female euglossines.
Generalist bees are usually faithful over short periods, one species of trigonid bee near M anaus for example visiting 33 species in 21 plant families in 1 year, though at any one time, over 60% of the individuals of the species had only one pollen type and over 23% had only two.
Trigonids are very common in south-east Asia and tropical America.
They can make up to 141 foraging trips a day, comparing favourably with commercial honey bees, which can manage 150.
In Malaysia, they have pollen sources throughout the year, mostly in the understorey; they have a memory for food sites, can forage up to 1 km from base and can recruit other foragers.
Trigonafulviventris usually forages alone but, if rewarded several times at a site, will bring recruits, their number dependent on the molar concentrations of sucrose — the first bee marking the surroundings with an oily pheromone from its mandibular gland.
The recruits recruit others, colonies sometimes fighting over a resource, though individuals of this species usually give in to those of other more aggressive Trigona species.
In Amazonia, bees collect pollen from some species that have ‘buzz’ mechanisms as in Mouriri spp.
(Melastomataceae).
The bees shiver their indirect night muscles, which (‘buzz’) vibration promotes the expulsion of a cloud of pollen grains from the tips of the anthers over the insects.
Such systems are known in at least 6–8% of all angiosperms and are represented in 71 plant families with poricidal anthers, those notable in the tropics being Solanaceae.
On Barro Colorado Island, Drymonia serrulata (Gesneriaceae) produces more nectar per day than has been reported from any other bee-pollinated flower.
The effective pollinators are a pair of Epicharis spp. but there are glandular trichomes inside the corolla, secreting oils that are deposited on the anthers, but this is collected only by Trigona pallens, an ineffective pollinator.
However, the oil helps pollen adhesion on other insects and this may be important in ‘buzz’ flowers as well.
Several plants, especially Malpighiaceae and Memecyloideae of Melastomataceae, offer oils from  glands on the calyx (these are vestigial or absent in Old World plants).
The oil is collected by Centris bees and is full of glycerides, which are later mixed with pollen in the hives.
Such oil flowers and their bees are most abundant in neotropical savannas and forests and are known in 79 genera of plants in 10 families.
The oils are energetically twice as efficient as carbohydrates and, although the bees are highly specialized, flowers very like modern Malpighiaceae, complete with oil glands, are known from the mid-Eocene.
Most remarkable, perhaps, are the euglossine bees, of the neotropics, of species of which, mark-recapture studies show that the solitary males of Eulaema spp. can live for 2 months.
Males and females can be kept in captivity for several months, the males surviving without the lloral fragrance compounds to which they are attracted.
They ‘trapline’, moving directly from one food site to the next, apparently remembering them from previous days, and are fast fliers, visiting plants producing (few) flowers over long periods.
Some captured males with orchid pollinia are believed to have flown some 45–50 km in seeking the orchids.
The males have dense tufts of hairs on the tarsi of the forelegs, picking up oils by capillarity; the hind tibia, corresponding to the pollen basket of the female, serves as a storage organ for scent.
The odours are the sole attractant for the bees and this can be detected up to 1 km away across water, though perhaps less in forest.
The scent is transferred to the tibiae in night, the bees re-alighting and collecting for up to 1 hour.
Particularly important for these bees are certain groups of orchids, each species of which may offer 2–18 (mean 7–10) different compounds, some of which are unattractive on their own; however, eugenol, methyl salicylate and vanillin are highly attractive individually.
The attractants appear to change geographically and seasonally, while it is perhaps the blending of compounds that restricts the number of bee species attracted, although there are overlaps between them and the bees' choices also vary geographically and seasonally.
The geographic differences may be genetic or reflect the age of insects or the availability of resources.
The seasonal and geographical differences in orchids on the one hand and bees on the other are incompletely congruent.
On Barro Colorado Island, pollinator specificity occurs in fewer than half of the orchid species and host specificity of the bees is also rare.
There are other fragrance sources and it is argued that the relationship is not mutually obligatory but as all the euglossine genera are involved, it is suggested that the orchids have exploited a pre-existent behaviour pattern in the bees.
The scents are possibly modified to pheromones in mating, for bees carrying scent apparently attract other  males, so that about five display together whereupon the female chooses her mate.
The flowers of some plants, e.g. some Calathea spp.
(Marantaceae), do not open spontaneously and may be opened only by euglossines.
Some Eulaema bees regularly pollinate, while others learn to trip the flowers without effecting pollination.
Of orchids, euglossines visit some 625 species in 55 genera, especially in the subtribes Stanhopeinae and Catasetinae; they also visit some Gesneriaceae and a number of Araceae as well as rotting logs, to which they are possibly attracted by fungi.
In many of the orchids, the bees slip and fall through the flower or into a trap, for example in Stanhopea candida in Amazonia, pollination is by Eulaema moscaryi, which ‘falls through’ the flower after collecting the scent; in so doing, it brushes against the pollinia and in the next flower these are lodged in the stigmatic cavity.
Eulaema ignita also collects scent but, being the wrong size, does not brush against the pollinia and is therefore a robber.
Not all bee-pollinated flowers are obviously pollinated by bees.
Bagging experiments in Panama on Luehea seemanii (Tiliaceae), which has! lowers opening at night, suggestive of a nocturnal pollination syndrome, showed that diurnal visits by bees were responsible for higher numbers of fruits and seeds set.
Whether such, perhaps resulting from crosses with male plants not far away, would have survived competition with those possibly derived from crosses with more distant fathers, in a mixed infructescence is not clear but this example and several others show how unrestrictive certain ‘syndromes’ are.
Thrips, beetles, flies, butterflies and moths Of dipterocarps, trees in many genera are first visited by Apis bees, later by meliponid bees, and then by various other insects.
In Shorea sect.
Mutica, a single tree can produce 4 million flowers over 2 weeks.
The thrips eggs are laid between the petals and the larvae feed on these organs.
By the time of anthesis, there is time for four generations and a single insect can by then have given rise to 4000 juveniles: they get trapped between the anthers and the petals as the! lowers open and, as adults, feed on the pollen.
They carry on average only 2.5 grains each and, as the corollas fall in the morning, they ny back up to the canopy, where they effect pollination, any slight wind drifting them to other trees.
Of beetle-pollinated plants in the tropics, the aroids visited by scarabs are thought to have near-specific volatile attractants like those used by the euglossines.
In Amazonian Annonaceae and Nymphaeaceae, beetle pollination tends to be fortuitous by contrast, e.g. scarabs on  Nymphaea spp. in lakes, though in Victoria amazonica, there are four species of dynastid beetle attracted by scent and temperature (11° above ambient): these become trapped for 24 hours and feed on starchy carpellary appendages before leaving with pollen.
In Annona sericea, the flowers have thick fleshy petals that never quite open.
At about 7 p.m., the temperature rises more than 6CC above ambient and there is a strong smell like ether and chloroform attractive to chrysomelid beetles, which push their way to the stigmas, pollinating them.
The stigmas fall, the stamens moving into their place, dehiscing and powdering the beetles, which may be copulating; then the stamens fall as do the petals, one at a time, releasing the insects.
In many palms, there is also a rise in temperature at the beginning of anthesis, associated with beetle pollination: in Astrocaryum mexicanum at Los Tuxtlas, there is a wide range of pollinating species, besides many other herbivorous visitors and this suite is shared with other palms in the same and different genera represented there.
The babassu palm (Orbignya phalerata) in Brazil is pollinated by a beetle, Mystrops mexicana, perhaps supplemented by wind.
Several cultigens are similarly flexible, e.g. coconut, in that pollination is thereby ensured in both open and closed habitats.
In Amazonia, flies pollinate flowers of species of Aristolochia (Aristolochiaceae) and some orchids, and midges pollinate cocoa, in the decaying fruits of which they breed.
This also occurs in other Sterculiaceae, notably Sterculia chicha.
In northern Borneo, Rafflesia pricei, a species in a genus including the largest-known flowers, R. arnoldii (R. titan, Rafnesiaceae) up to 1 m across and all its species parasitic on lianoid species of Tetrastigma (Vitaceae), is pollinated by carrion flies (bluebottles), attracted by sight and scent.
The flowers offer no reward and deceive the insects by appearing to offer food and perhaps a brood place, so that the plant is doubly parasitic on the liane and on the bluebottle.
The flies, mainly female Lucilia papuensis, visit male flowers, enter the anther grooves on the central column of the flower, the pollen being precisely positioned on the thorax.
In female flowers, the flies are wedged in tightly, the thorax pollen being rubbed off on to the stigma.
Lepidoptera are frequent understorey pollinators as we have seen, butterflies by day and moths at night, e.g. within the family Chrysobalanaceae in Amazonia, butterflies visit Hirtella spp. (flowers opening in the day, many with a showy appearance, usually pink or purple, stamens few) whereas the related Couepia spp. are moth-pollinated (flowers opening at night, few at a time, white, stamens numerous and more copious nectar).
Moths can be strong fliers, hawkmoths in Costa Rica, for example, travelling up to 15 km with pollen and can live more than 2 months.
Long-tongued species are particularly well-represented in Madagascar, and about 10% of all the orchids in that island, i.e. some 70 species, have nectar-spurs, up to 8cm or longer.
Five angraecoid species were found to share the same pollinator, Panogena lingens, but ethological and mechanical mechanisms apparently restrict interspecific pollination despite mixed pollen loads.
Fig-wasps The most celebrated ‘one-to-one’ interactions involve the genus Ficus (figs) and its pollinators, the wasps of the Agaonidae, related figs having related wasps.
They cannot exist, or at least, procreate, without one another , and in some senses approach a dual-organism, like a lichen.
Very rarely is there more than one species of wasp involved with any particular fig species, an exception being F. ottoniirolia, apparently visited by different wasp species in forest and in open country in West Africa.
One or more females, possibly attracted by a pheromone, enter the young fig (an inflorescence known as a syconium), losing wings and antennae, and possibly fungal spores as well in forcing an entry through the tiny ostiole at the fig apex.
The female removes pollen from pollen pockets and pollinates up to hundreds of stigmas; she attempts to oviposit down styles and then dies.
In the oviposited flowers, the ovules are stimulated to produce only endosperm on which the larvae feed, a process not unlike more exposed gall formation in other plants.
The CO2 content is higher within the syconium than outside it and its level is believed to control the hatching of the larvae; it is affected by bacterial activity and this in turn is affected by nematodes in the syconium.
The males, which are wingless and with reduced legs and eyes, emerge as the seeds mature, locate the females, copulate and help the impregnated females out of their florets.
The females then fill their pollen pockets from newly-opened anthers and leave through holes in the syconium wall cut by the males, who then die.
The co-operation is understandable in evolutionary terms as the males and females in a single-female syconium are brothers and sisters.
If there is no pollination, the syconia (except in cultivars) are aborted.
In isolated trees, however, intracrown asynchrony could lead to (self-) pollination.
During the early male phase of Ficus religiosa (India to south-east Asia), the internal atmosphere has 10% CO2,10% oxygen and some ethylene and the male insects are active under this regime, the females inactive.
After puncturing the syconium wall, the atmosphere returns to normal, the males are inactivated and the females emerge.
The change in atmosphere ensures development of both fig and pollinator: in other species, e.g. F. carica, the  domestic fig, copulation takes place under normal atmospheric conditions, and in yet others, the females emerge while still enduring relatively high CO2 levels.
In short, there are many variations on the theme set out in the last paragraph.
The system may have developed from seed parasitism, but it itself is now parasitized by other wasps ovipositing through the syconium wall.
Some other wasp species, apparently derived from pollinating agaonids, enter through the ostioles but do not carry pollen, though they have pockets; there are also weevils and moth larvae.
In consequence, between 20 and 80% of ovules are killed by pollinators and other insects.
In South Africa, ants visiting Ficus sur to tend homopterans deter parasitoids of the figs, thus enhancing pollination success, but some ants feed on arriving pollinators, while some birds eat them as they emerge.
Moth and beetle larvae eat developing and mature larvae respectively in the fig.
However, pollinators arrive and leave en masse, unlike the interlopers, who may thus suffer more from the predators than the pollinators do.
Pollinators trapped on Ficus retusa in Costa Rica, showed 99% fidelity, giving strong support to the idea of there being a pheromonal cue.
They arrived in a l-day burst coinciding with the presence of receptive but unpollinated syconia.
That dispersal agents can travel further than the pollinators can be attracted is the explanation for the Ficus pubinervis population of Krakatau, where it is a canopy dominant, never setting ripe fruits.
In New Zealand, the introduced Australian F. rubiginosa produced no ripe fruits for many years, but its pollinator has now been introduced, perhaps by wind, and fruits are set.
Whatever the volatile attractant to the syconia may be, it is likely that the parasitoids find it attractive too.
6.3.2 Bird pollination (ornithophily)
Bird pollinators include unspecialized nectar eaters, which opportunistically visit many different kinds of flower, generally small ones, and specialized nectar eaters, which concentrate on a few kinds of flower, mainly larger ones.
Nectar never provides a complete diet for any of these birds, which also eat insects or other animals but, as nectar is replenished as it is removed, birds may defend clumps of nectariferous flowers.
In different continents, different groups of birds are nectarivorous — largely hummingbirds in the New World, sunbirds and sugarbirds in Africa and honey eaters in Australasia.
There is little overlap in the families of plants the different  groups visit and, in those families, the flowers may look very different.
For example, in Australasia the flowers are of an open type compared with the tubular form, brush-type or explosive mechanisms of bird-pollinated flowers elsewhere.
In short, it would seem that the relationship must have evolved over and over again.
This is borne out by work on more temperate plants, for many of the hummingbird-pollinated plants of western North America belong to genera that are predominantly (and it is believed more anciently) insect-pollinated.
That bird flowers are similar in colour and nectar to fruits might suggest otherwise, however.
It is often repeated that hummingbird flowers are red, part of the ornithophilous ‘syndrome’, and indeed, red does seem to be preferred by these birds.
Nevertheless, it may well be that such birds are conditioned to this colour and it has been shown that nectar quality can overcome colour prejudice.
Again, it has been argued that colour contrast and other factors may be important because red contrasts well with green and many hummingbird plants with bluish leaves have yellow flowers, the complementary colour.
In Puerto Rico, long-tubed flowers with high nectar levels are associated with long-billed hummingbirds, while short-tubed ones produce enough nectar for small birds, but not big ones.
Any amino acids in the nectar are probably of little importance and nectars high in them are avoided by the birds.
The nectar is merely a high-energy source.
Hummingbirds are large pollinators and potentially, therefore, very destructive: mechanisms reducing damage to the flower include the development in many groups of the inferior ovary, concealing the delicate ovules well away from probing beaks, as in Fuchsia (Onagraceae), and the red fruit-like spurs in Norantea guianensis (Marcgraviaceae) in Brazil, the rest of the flower being inconspicuous.
The unspecialized hummingbirds range over herbs to trees, which produce many nowers with little nectar to attract pollinators.
In a mass, however, the birds sometimes defend the nowers and thereby reduce cross-pollination.
Few canopy trees in Costa Rica are bird-pollinated and those that are, are visited by passerines such as orioles, which travel in groups: hummingbirds would turn trees into individual feeding territories and thus reduce pollination.
The specialized hummingbirds do not normally maintain feeding territories or defend patches of flowers but ‘trapline’ to flowers on other plants of the same species.
These plants are mainly large herbaceous ones or lianes or epiphytes, mostly different in form, then, from those attracting unspecialized hummingbirds.
In the more seasonal forests, hummingbirds may be migratory, but in all forests they tend to breed at the time when the flowers on which they depend  are most abundant, though as with the thrips and the Shorea species, there is some staggering of flowering times and avoidance of competition for pollinators between plants.
Bird nectar thieves like the flower piercers are found in many species, but the bromeliads with thick protecting bracts are almost immune to their attacks.
It has been argued that the dilute nature of the nectar in such flowers deters some bee robbers that may be unable to concentrate it: the birds would prefer concentrated sugars.
It has more frequently been suggested that dilute sources will promote visits to many nowers and thus out-crossing, though it is difficult to see how such a mechanism could arise, and perhaps it is more satisfactory to surmise that visits by a pollen-dusted vector to several flowers on one plant are promoted, leading to cross fertilization of more.
Nectar flow in the red-flowered Brownea rosa-de-monte (Leguminosae) of the Panama forests is known to be influenced by interference from stingless bees and lepidopteran larvae, though, in general, flow in this species decreases through the day during which any flower is presented.
Although the inflorescences last just 1 day, their production tends to be synchronized within localized groups of trees.
Other nectar-thieves include tamarin monkeys in north-eastern Peru: these feed on nectar of the bird-pollinated Symphonia globulifera (Guttiferae).
In Erythrina spp.
(Leguminosae), the differences in the morphology of the flowers and inflorescences are associated with the different, passerine or hummingbird, pollinators.
Flowers visited by passerines are twisted such that they face back to the peduncle, on which the perching bird stands: hummingbird flowers differ in being tubular and sticking outwards making them readily accessible to hovering birds.
The passerine species have nectar with low (about 7–10%) sugar content, while hummingbird flowers have up to 38%, though the passerine ones have higher amino-acid concentrations.
A very specialized example is found in passerines in India, where Dendrophthoe (Loranthus) longiflora (Loranthaceae) is pollinated by sunbirds.
The nowers remain closed until the bird squeezes the bud, which explodes open, offering nectar (but possibly no insects unlike most sunbird flowers) and is pollinated; if not visited, the flowers fall off.
6.3.3 Bat pollination (chiropterophily)
Bats visit a range of plants and these are visited by a range of bats; plants transferred from the New to the Old Worlds and vice versa are visited by the local bats.
Of those that pollinate a small percentage of tropical rain forest trees, a minority feed exclusively on floral resources.
Of these, in West Malaysia, two species roost singly in trees and ny short distances to  feed upon trees which produce a few flowers all year round, and the third, Eonycteris spelaea, roosts, in large colonies in caves and can ny up to at least 35km from them to feed and take food from a wide range of flowers scattered in space and time.
Flagelliflory, the presentation of flowers on long peduncles, occurs in several unrelated groups and is generally associated with bat pollination, but a whole family of plants in a wide range of habitats in tropical America has all its species bat-pollinated with the flowers projecting above the canopy; namely the Caryocaraceae.
Within a genus exhibiting flagelliflory, Parkia (Leguminosae) has the greatest variation in its pantropical range in tropical America.
The unit of pollination is a capitulum of flowers; of the 11 species studied, nine were bat-pollinated, the capitula with flowers opening for 1 night, secreting copious nectar and being bright red or yellow or both, with characteristic scents: they are visited by eight species of bat, some of them nectar thieves.
One section of the genus Parkia has no nectar-producing flowers and is probably wholly entomophilous: the capitula are visited by insects, especially trigonid bees.
The internal classification of the genus is founded on the arrangements of the nowers: heads of only fertile flowers for one entomophilous section; similar but with a distal zone of nectariferous ones in another; the distal ones are fertile and separated from the proximal staminodal ones by a zone of nectariferous ones in a third.
These latter two are bat-pollinated and the capitulum can be pendulous or erect; the staminodal flowers sometimes form a fringe acting as a landing platform for the bats.
They land head downwards in America, upwards in the Old World (it would be interesting to know the behaviour of bats in America when confronted with P. globosa, long ago introduced from Africa).
Red capitula held against the sky appear black to the colour-blind bats, while yellow ones (seen as white) are those displayed against the foliage.
Of sympatric species, those flowering together deposit pollen on different parts of the bat body, thus avoiding interspecific pollination, and some have staggered flowering times.
Concurrently, though, the destructive bruchid beetle populations which damage seeds moved from one fruiting species to another.
It would therefore appear that the ensuring of successful pollination must override the importance of losses due to seed predation.
Indeed, such compromises may be widespread.
Bat-pollinated plants, e.g. species of Oroxylum (Bignoniaceae) and Duabanga (Sonneratiaceae) in Borneo, are possibly most conspicuous along river banks where, incidentally, wind-pollinated trees such as species of Octomeles (Datiscaceae) and Casuarina (Casuarinaceae) are also found.
Wind pollination in Peninsular Malaysia is rare and the introduced  wind-pollinated Pinus caribaea does not set seed there, except on mountain ridges or on the coast.
This is reflected in the pattern of distribution of the indigenous Coniferae, viz. species of Ayathis, Dacrydium and Podocarpus (sensu lato), which are concentrated in such places with one species of Podocarpus on the tops of steep limestone hills.
These are the only places with regular air movements, though this raises serious questions about how the trees of the gymnosperm forests of the past were pollinated.
6.3.4 Other mammals
Non-flying mammals have for some time been suspected to be pollinators in a number of vegetation types outside the tropics and, in recent years, this has been proved to be so in both South Africa and Australia.
It is now known that three species of forest plant in the Amazonian forest of southeast Peru are visited by up to seven species of diurnal and six species of nocturnal non-flying mammals in the dry season.
Heavy deposits of pollen were found on the facial fur of these animals.
They might be considered likely to feed on flowers at a time, such as the dry season, when there is a scarcity of fruit.
Of the species observed, the canopy liane, Combretum fruticosum (Combretaceae), was seen to be visited by primates including the pygmy marmoset, while the tree, Quararibea cordata (Bombacaceae), was visited by large primates, opossums and kinkajous.
It was notable that in the Peruvian forest some four genera of marsupials were involved, members of the group that comprises the non-flying mammalian pollinators of Australia.
Three species of rodent are reported to pollinate Blakea species (Melastomataceae) in the cloud forests of Costa Rica: the nocturnal anthesis and nectar production suggests bats but the lack of scent and cryptic nowers hidden in the foliage do not and, indeed, the nowers are not visited by bats in the harsh, windy environment.
6.4 The milieu for ‘mutualism'
The intergrading interactions between plants and animals, herbivory, dispersal and pollination, present several conflicts summed up as defence versus attraction.
For example, in Parkia (discussed above), the sequential use of pollinators versus the sequential susceptibility to bruchid attack on the seeds.
In continuously flowering species such as Muntingia calabura, trees are attractive to beneficial agents, pollinators and dispersers, at the  same time.
The potential conflict in this species is removed because the flowers are pollinated above the branches by bees, the pedicels lengthening and becoming erect, to be lowered in fruit, when bats disperse the fruits from below the branches.
This tree is one of the most commonly planted shade trees in India and elsewhere, yet only very lately has its phenology been fully investigated.
The various animal-plant interactions cannot be isolated from one another, therefore.
In reviewing some of them in this book, it has been found that several complicating features arise, beside the straightforward failings of human beings wishing to pigeon-hole phenomena or experiences into neat categories: ‘strategies’ or ‘syndromes’with classical-sounding names.
Firstly, then, as we have seen, tropical rain-forest ecology is fundamentally dynamic; it is not ‘stable’.
Even in the short term, dependent on local circumstances, the numbers and behaviour of dispersal and pollination agents can change such that short-term observations are sometimes very misleading.
An example of dispersal agents, which is the male toucan in Costa Rica, which defends sections of fruiting trees against all other frugivores besides his mate, displacing them by threat; however, when food is abundant, this does not occur.
Again, the behaviour of predators may affect the pollinating activities of animals such as bats, encouraging them to make short visits repeatedly, rather than long ones.
The ramifications in terms of outcrossing are clear.
Pollinator assemblages for any particular plant vary in space and time, both seasonally and year by year, which is perhaps not surprising in view of animal cycles and the fact that the environment ‘perceived’ by a plant species is irregularly and somewhat erratically structured, i.e. has a strong stochastic component.
The inevitable consequences in terms of the frequency of pollen deposition on stigmas, the numbers of grains and the ‘quality’ of those grains from the ‘point of view’of the maternal genotype may lead to selective abortion of embryos.
In a Mediterranean example (Lavatera latifolia, Malvaceae), Hymenoptera delivered more pollen-grain more often than Lepidoptera or Diptera; Lepidoptera tended to ny longer distances between consecutive flowers than Hymenoptera or Diptera.
Bees pollinated frequently and with large loads but generally promoted geitonogamy, whereas butterflies pollinated less often and with smaller loads but usually cross pollinated; flies pollinated infrequently, with small loads and generally promoted geitonogamy.
Within each group, however, there were exceptions.
In years with more bees, there is clearly a different quality of pollination and this varies with the time in the season considered, but poorer quality pollination at other times is better than none, so that specialization with one pollinator per plant species is unlikely to evolve.
Nevertheless, specialization in some groups of plants does occur, as it does in some of animals, such that the broadly different ‘syndromes’ of pollination and dispersal have evolved repeatedly in different families and genera of plants and are apparently incipient even within some species.
However, when observed over long periods, many species are found to be generalist in that individuals of them are capable of taking advantage of ‘specialist’ interactions at any one time: the ‘anachronisms’show this, as do the generalized pollinators on islands where plants have ‘left their pollinators behind’, e.g. a cetoniid beetle, Mauseolopsis aldabrensis, visits 58% of all flowering species, native or introduced, of all colours and morphology, on the coral atoll of Aldabra off the African coast, but it shows a remarkably high degree of constancy in its foraging flights.
Secondly, many of the ‘interactions’ are actually mediated by other organisms, usually micro-organisms, whether they be involved in allelopathic phenomena in succession, or are gut microbes in primate stomachs, or mycorrhizae, or fixing nitrogen, or living in ant nests or fig syconia or the guts of termites, or perhaps involved in promoting pig migrations.
Clearly we need to know more, for example, it is reported that the red leafmonkey (Presbytis rubicunda) in northern Borneo, like other primates, eats soil, usually from termite mounds, but the soil has been analysed only chemically with no clear-cut conclusions: what about the micro-organisms and their products?
Thirdly, is the inevitable consequence of good arrangements the presence of cheats, including mimics, thieves, parasites, parasitoids, nectar-robbers, toxin-users, and, of course, the whole pyramid of carnivores based on the herbivores, some of which (as in the case of the hapless fig-wasps) have been mentioned above, notably birds and ants.
The relationship between ants and other animals, particularly their farmed Homoptera feeding off the host plants is complicated in itself but, in the Old World Tropics, mosquitoes of the genus Malaya are associated in their habits with certain ants, which run up and down tree trunks carrying the honey-dew they have taken from their aphids.
The mosquito hovers a couple of centimetres from the trunk and suddenly alights in front of the ant.
It does not touch it but vibrates its wings: in response the ant opens its jaws, between which the mosquito pushes its proboscis and steals the honey dew.
And what eats the mosquito'?
So far as ants are concerned, a single pangolin can eat up to 73 million of them, or termites, in 1 year, while ant eaters on Barro Colorado Island attack termite and Azteca ant nests; of arboreal nests, 91% of the termite ones and 37% of Azteca nests are attacked each year.
In addition some 16% of the termite nests are abandoned annually, usually following tree falls.
A much-investigated system is that of the fig syconium, which is a microcosm until its wall is punctured.
Few systems are closed for so long: bromeliads, epiphytes of the Neotropics, with ‘tanks’ of up to 2 litres can contain up to seven species of algae, as well as bacteria, protozoa, rotifers, flatworms, oligochaetes and other invertebrates such as crabs, insect larvae etc. as well as tadpoles.
Nepenthes pitcher-plants bear pitchers with fungi and slime-moulds, protozoans, desmids, diatoms, rotifers, oligochaetes, crustaceans, insect larvae and even tadpoles, with spiders positioned above the liquid awaiting a catch and the small primate, Tarsius spectrum, in Sabah, feeding off trapped insects.
Some animals live only in the pitchers, others (a minority) are also found living elsewhere.
Misumenops nepenthicola, a spider, lives there and captures flies; if these are distasteful they are (sometimes) thrown back into the pitcher; if disturbed, the spider goes down into the liquid on a thread, its armour and a bubble of air making it immune to the digestive juices there.
But most of these ramifications are beyond the scope of this volume, though they provide the ‘milieu for mutualism’.
To take a final example, leaf-cutting ants have been extensively investigated but Atta nests have conspicuous mounds of refuse nearby and this is derived from the fungus gardens; when the nests are near river banks, streams are used as disposal sites.
In slow-flowing streams in the seasonal areas of Costa Rica, the debris accumulates and affects the frequency of the characid fish, Astynax fasciatus, a generalist feeder.
Pools with the detritus would be expected to harbour more fish, but then predation from the belted kingfisher, Ceryle alcyon, increases.
Conversely, refuse on the surface occludes predator vision and predation can sometimes be low.
The ripples from each ecological ‘splash’ overlap and intermingle, the ripples varying in speed and height with time.
Nevertheless ecology has started with that which is obvious to the eye and is increasingly concerned with what is not.
Until recently, the ecological significance of pheromones and olfactory clues in insects, as in the pollination systems of figs and orchids discussed above, was little considered.
However it is not merely the invisible that points to our ignorance.
Our knowledge of the basic natural history of some groups is still lamentable.
For example, some of the most memorable features of fieldwork in the Old World Tropics from Madagascar eastwards, leeches, are so little known that their behaviour towards animals other than humans is unrecorded.
There is much to do.
CHAPTER SEVEN
SPECIES RICHNESS
Not only trees but almost all groups of animals and plants exhibit their greatest variety in the tropics in terms of the number of species recorded there.
How is it that the tropics generate, or at least harbour, so many species and how is it that these can coexist?
The answer to the first question involves an analysis of speciation, which in turn leads to a consideration of the ecological conditions under which such speciation might have taken place, and the answer to the second also involves an analysis of the physical and biotic influences on the organisms concerned.
A prerequisite of speciation is variation, and if the variation patterns within species are examined, some ideas of the possible modes of incipient speciation may be gained.
As was explained in Chapter 5, some tropical tree species seem to be very homogeneous in their morphology over wide ranges, even including populations widely separated from others with little possibility for gene exchange.
Examples of this are species now in populations in southern India and far away in Malesia, like the yam ally Trichopus zeylanicus (Dioscoreaceae).
Other species seem to be separable into geographical races based on their morphological features.
These are usually given subspecific rank.
The segregation may be more precisely ecological than geographical in (say) forest and savanna races of trees in Africa.
Yet other species exhibit variation patterns that defy analysis of the sophistication of present-day biology.
Such are the ochlospecies of White, a term coined to convey the annoyance such species cause taxonomists, and including some of the ebonies (Diospyros spp., Ebenaceae) of Africa.
Although there is much to be said in favour of the notion of evolution by discrete jumps in plants, particularly through allopolyploidy involving small numbers of individuals, current orthodoxy holds that the greater part of speciation events occurs through the isolation of fragments of an initial population, the change of these fragments in response to the conditions in their isolation and, with the breakdown of isolation, the co-existence of the newly speciated populations in one locality.
Clearly, many partially speciated populations will come together and then merge once more.
The ochlospecies is not readily explained, however, while apomixis is another phenomenon to be taken into account.
It occurs in several dipterocarps (see later) and also some Garcinia spp.
(Guttiferae) in the understorey of Malesian forests: these set seed without pseudogamy.
Already we have seen microspeciation occurring in trees in Trinidad and Tobago (section 6.2.6), but it has also been suggested that in crossing major faunal boundaries, plant species may undergo so-called ‘cryptic’ speciation with major differences in fruit sizes and so on, associated with different dispersers; i.e. obscured rather than obscure in that herbarium material is rarely preserved with fully ripe fruits and complete field notes.
Of course, such examples may represent changes undergone since the arrival of different faunas rather than the arrival of plants in different faunal regions.
In view of the conclusions of the last chapter, it is likely that such patterns will be archaic and also confused by local fluctuations in dispersal agents and this may be exacerbated in regions of geological instability, e.g. New Guinea with confusing variation patterns as in the tree Chisocheton lasiocarpus (Meliaceae) and the herbaceous Impatiens hawkeri (Balsaminaceae).
Certainly within tree populations, there are family groups in mosaics of genetically and phenotypically distinct patches, making up ‘populations’.
These distinctions are marked by morphological features such as leaf shape, thickness and pubescence, bark properties and biochemical features such as relative amounts of sugars, amino acids, terpenes and tannins.
In turn, this makes them differentially susceptible to pathogens and herbivores.
Such patterns may be the result of Sisyphean fitness and not represent irreversible tendencies to speciation, i.e. the formation of ‘populations’ of plant genotypes, representing the best available to arrive at a particular point under the prevailing biotic and physical features at any one particular time.
Crossing with other such genotypes inevitably leads to the breakdown of this optimum (hence the name) and formation of new genotypes to be filtered by the new conditions.
Nevertheless, speciation appears to be greater in regions of geological instability or great physiographic diversity with rapid climatic gradients as  in Madagascar.
New Guinea has both such features, whereas Africa has been very stable in this regard, while contact with Laurasian floras has been restricted by desert barriers and this contrasts with the intermingling in other tropical regions.
Other places, particularly the tropical Far East have been very unstable over the last 15 million years.
The richness of the Malesian flora, for example, may be partly accounted for by the Laurasian elements in the lowland rain forest and the Gondwana elements in the heath forest and in montane communities.
In the Neotropics, richness is due to the combination of Amazon-based groups and those based in the northern Andes, these latter being poorly represented in Amazonia.
Almost all lianes and canopy trees in the lowland neotropics are in Amazon-centred taxa; epiphytes, understorey shrubs and palmettos mostly belong to Gondwana groups with Andean-centred patterns.
Of trees with Laurasian affinities, almost half of the families represented have wind pollination, while none of the Gondwana ones do; many of the northern-Andean ones are hummingbird-pollinated, while those with pollination by large-or medium-sized bees tend to belong to Amazon-centred groups.
The woody, wind-pollinated Laurasian groups have not speciated greatly in South America, but almost half of the neotropical flora belongs to the Andean-centred groups of epiphytes, understorey shrubs and palmettos, all of which are poorly represented in Africa and, to a lesser extent, Asia.
Highly frugivorous birds like toucans and cotingas have radiated with the Amazon-based canopy-trees and lianes, while the Andean fleshy-fruited understorey flora has been associated with the radiation of manikins, tanagers and bats, making these faunas greater than those in Africa or Asia.
The low patchiness of fruit associated with the richer ‘fruit-floras’ in America has resulted in the evolution of more diverse communities of frugivores with reduced dietary overlap, relatively small body size and sedentary ranging patterns, whereas in Asia, where fruit seems to be rarer in space and time, with fewer species, there are fewer frugivores with broadly overlapping diets (e.g. terrestrial and brachiating primates), larger body size and more mobile ranging patterns.
Africa is somewhat intermediate in this respect.
7.1.1 Refugia
It has been widely argued (but see later) that within the lowland Neotropics, the fragmentation of populations took place as a result of climatic and associated vegetational changes in the last 2 million years.
The changes seem to have been alternating periods of humid conditions and aridity.
It is    argued that during the dry phases, the humid forests would have been fragmented into island-like refugia (Figure 7.1) of isolated blocks of forest.
The organisms would then come back into contact, merge again or coexist as new species.
There is some (disputed) geomorphological evidence for such contractions, supported by palaeobotanical work.
Much evidence comes from the mapping of the distributions of rain-forest organisms, most notable being those of various tree families by Prance and his co-workers.
Although the detail of the distributions varies, the broad pattern is the same.
Similar schemes have been drawn up for several mammalian groups, certain butterfly genera, various reptiles and amphibians while a good deal of work has been carried out on the distributions of the avifauna.
All these give some idea of possible refugia, sometimes referred to as centres of dispersal.
That the modern distributions of organisms could be explained in terms of ecological rather than historical factors was rejected, as no clearcut correlations between the distributions and any ecological factors such as precipitation or soil factors could be discerned.
In Mexico and central America, eight refugia have now been recognized; in the terra firme rain forests of lowland south America, 26 centres of endemism have been identified, 15 in the great block of Amazonian-Orinoco-Guayanan rain forest.
Today, the forest is at a maximum, so that it is the drier forests that are today's ‘refugia’.
In these, some species appear to be uniform, e.g. Tabebuia impetiginosa (Bignoniaceae), while others such as T. ochracea, are divisible into several subspecies indicating active differentiation.
It has been argued that differentiation in refugia is less marked in trees than it is in insects or birds, because of their different life spans, but such theory provides an explanation for the now sympatric occurrence of 12 species of Eschweilera (Lecythidaceae) near Manaus.
Similar explanations have been put forward for the distributions of herbaceous plants, as in Ischnosiphon spp.
(Marantaceae), where cycles of dryness have been invoked to explain species relationships and distributions.
The distributions of forest passerines in Africa show centres of endemism, centres of richness and disjunctions, which have been fitted to refugia theory, but close examination of the geographical ranges of subspecies of the Heliconiini and Ithominae groups of butterflies gives 44 centres of endemism in tropical America, though the two groups have very different ecological characteristics.
The richest centres have the most complicated mosaics of different habitat types reflected in topography, soils and vegetation.
However, the patterns of species diversity do not coincide with those of endemism and one of the present ‘refugia’ seems to have been underwater 5000 BP and its endemism must have arisen subsequently.
7.2 Species diversity
Several hypotheses to explain the coexistence of so many species have been proposed.
Some place emphasis on biotic, others on environmental factors.
Of biotic arguments for explaining greater tropical diversity, one of the most familiar is that there are more ‘niches’ than in temperate latitudes, arising from more habitats or more resources, but these hark back to environmental arguments ultimately.
Usually, however, it is argued that there may be a finer division of these habitats or resources or, in short, that tropical species are more specialized.
Added to this is the historical argument that in the tropics more of the available ‘niches’ are filled and that, because of ice ages or other environmental factors, temperate habitats are not yet saturated with species.
Much of this ‘niche theory’ is rooted in zoological studies, so some animal examples will be considered first.
Species co-existence levels in rain-forest mammals (and reptiles) are lower than in birds, whose locomotor abilities allow them access, at a low-energy cost, to food unavailable to species confined to terrestrial or arboreal substrates.
Moreover, there can be many bats and small-to medium-sized mammals (arboreal) from the smallest marsupials to the smaller monkeys, in contrast to the larger mammals confined to the forest floor where food is always scarce, and therefore there are fewer species of them.
Between closely related taxa, resource partitioning is found as in the case of squirrels in Gabon, where two of the nine coexisting species are found in special habitats, the other seven being taxonomically rather diverse: four of these are essentially arboreal, the other three ground foragers, and in each group there are differences in size such that food is partitioned by hardness and size.
The weights of 66 species of mammalian primary consumers in Gabon are nearly uniformly spread over a range of five orders of magnitude, the 11 shrew species alone covering three.
The ways in which resources are partitioned are many, as, for example, on Barro Colorado Island where there are as many as eight variables of importance in just the food of coexisting ‘surface-gleaning’ bats.
Among primates, orang-utans, gibbons and siamangs in west Malesia have differences in body size, permitting coexistence.
The gibbons are chased off by siamangs as they dominate through size, though they require a lot to eat over a small area; the gibbons travel longer distances for small resources.
Of the 46 species (16 genera) of American primates, all but 10 (2 genera) occur in Amazonia and up to 14 (12 genera) can occur sympatrically in Amazonia: the importance of size in resource partitioning is evident.
In the most diversified locality examined, in south-east Peru, size has effects on not only diet and prey search but also capture methods, vertical position in the forest, habitat use and locomotory patterns, the larger primates apparently differing in diet as to the percentage of fruit versus leaves for example.
A ‘community’ of bats in Queensland comprised two subunits: four species in the closed canopy and five in gaps, while three other species used both.
The gap specialists are fast fliers whereas those in the canopy are slower and more manoeuvrable.
The bat community on Barro Colorado Island is perhaps the most complex assemblage of sympatric mammals anywhere in the world, comprising 35 species, which can be arranged in nine feeding ‘guilds’, based on diet and mode of food gathering.
Within the guilds, food resources are partitioned spatially and temporally as well as by size and quality.
At the Brown River in southern New Guinea, 83 coexisting bird species were examined: resource partitioning allows a high number of frugivore species (few mammals there) and there is a size range among them.
There is a similar range of related carnivores but these have no great bill-size differences.
The frugivores seem to have wider ‘niches’ in rain forests than elsewhere, but the converse theory that the habitat lends itself to finer division into niches seems to hold for the carnivores.
Also in New Guinea are sympatric birds of paradise apparently dealing with fruit in a similar way, staying in the trees for only a few minutes, perhaps through fear of predators.
On examination, it was found that two species were largely insectivorous, two largely fig-eaters and five were generalist frugivores.
Fundamental to the idea of finely divided ‘niches’, however, is the notion that there are finite or limiting resources, whereas in trees in the tropics with abundant light, water, CO2 and a conservative nutrient-cycling system, this seems as inappropriate as it does in the case of tropical corals making up species-rich reefs, where food is not readily seen as limiting when compared with space to occupy.
Another and very fashionable biotic argument is that of ‘predation’; that there are more predators and greater predation in the tropics than in temperate regions, and that these are matched by more defensive or avoidance mechanisms.
The prevalence of predation appears to be correlated with the relative lack of seasonality, for, in temperate countries, winters prevent a good deal of predation.
Nevertheless, it would seem that this ‘explanation’ is merely a restatement of the facts of tropical high diversity in that if there are more species, there will be more species of predators.
Of environmental arguments, attention is focused on those features of the environment that are peculiar to the tropics.
Firstly, the tropical belt is a large region and for marine organisms, for example, the sheer size of the  available area for diversification is greater, though, as we have seen, tropical rain forest occupies only a small part of the tropical land-surface, and thus a very small fraction of the tropical global surface.
Nevertheless, the range of environmental heterogeneity in the tropics from the foot of the Andes to their peaks is greater spatially than in temperate regions, even if the environment in temperate regions varies greatly temporally.
The absence of the rigours of an annual drought in tropical forest is correlated with high species-richness of both forests and within individual genera of plants.
We are left, furthermore, with the heterogeneity in the tropics engendered by disturbance through storms or other violent environmental factors such as fire and the seasonal changes of weather, some of which, like short droughts, are unpredictable.
Cyclones are seen as a force that prevents the ecological succession of coral reefs from terminating in less species-rich assemblages (in those reefs, the earlier stages are more species-rich).
Furthermore, the importance of predation can be seen as yet another element in the disturbance picture.
In summary, time, space, resources, competition and predation, may play a part in explaining the biological diversity of the tropics.
7.2.1 Environmental heterogeneity
In Amazonia, the density and species-richness of non-flying mammals is positively correlated with soil fertility and undergrowth density.
What is the evidence for some microenvironmental differentiation of rain forest supporting a diversity of species, each in the case of trees with very specific requirements in terms of nutrients, soil water content and so on?
Firstly, individuals do not all occur randomly in a forest and often there is much clumping as we have already discussed.
Furthermore, a monograph of any large tropical group will show varying degrees of recognition of the ecological requirements of different species.
Of the 51 species of Chisocheton (Meliaceae), in Malesia for example, one species is restricted to peat-swamp forest and another to limestone, while, in dipterocarps, Shorea curtisii is always found on ridges and slopes apparently associated with particular water relations in the forest.
Similarly, in the igapo forests, that is those inundated by black or clear water, in Brazil, the species distributions are thought to reflect differential tolerance of flooding.
In Sri Lanka, the abundance of Dipterocarpus zeylanicus is associated with particular levels of soil potassium, that of D. hispidus with nitrogen and phosphorus, while Artocarpus nobilis (Moraceae) and Campnosperma zeylanicum (Anacardiaceae) are found only where D. hispidus, the local dominant, is not.
In the dipterocarp forests of Borneo, the  variation in species patterns is correlated with HCI-extractable phosphorus and magnesium where these levels are lower than about 220 ppm of phosphorus and 1200ppm magnesium.
Above these levels, such correlations are less evident and over-ridden by a correlation with topography.
Below these levels, species richness is linearly positively correlated with soil magnesium, but above it negatively so.
It is suggested that the critical levels coincide with those below which the rate of litter accumulation exceeds its breakdown and that the ecological optimum may represent that of the dipterocarps' mycorrhizae.
At higher nutrient levels with higher water-retaining capacity, trees with a higher heat load in the canopy, i.e. with densely arranged large leaves, are at an advantage and shade out others, depressing species-richness.
This example shows that environmental factors cannot be cleanly isolated from biological ones.
When 46 forest sites in Costa Rica were examined it was also found that there was a negative correlation between soil nutrient availability and the richness of tree species.
In other words, the highest species richness was found under ‘poor’ growth conditions.
Under very low nutrient conditions in general, however, species numbers are low as they are, contrariwise, under greenhouse competition experiments with high nutrient levels.
An example that pinpoints the problem was exposed when a map of all trees over 20 cm diameter at breast height in 2 sq km of the semi-deciduous forest of Barro Colorado Island was made.
It showed that most species are patchily dispersed, while many appear to be randomly distributed and a very few are uniformly distributed.
Most of those that are clumped, however, are in groups not associated with the topography, while some species are restricted to particular kinds of site: Ocotea skutchii, for example, is always on slopes.
In short, some heterogeneity and aggregations may have a physical explanation, others not.
In the neotropics, the question of the maintenance of diversity of the rich epiphyte flora has been considered to have a partly physical explanation, though the germane physical features are generated by living hosts, i.e. the nature of bark surfaces.
7.2.2 Biotic factors
Among seven species of fruit pigeons in tropical Queensland, the diets of the birds change with the seasonal fruits, each species with a different suite of plant species.
Coexistence is reinforced by nomadism and migration, but the diets overlap at times of both high and low fruit availability.
Indeed, of the biotic explanations of how existing plant species avoid competition, some are based on time-sharing of animal agents.
For example, over a season, six species of Shorea are visited in turn by species of thrips, which are believed to be their major pollinators.
Thus with nonspecific pollinators, competition is avoided and there is no problem of the build-up of pollinators at any one time of year to satisfy any one plant species.
The problem comes with the first-flowering species.
However, apomixis through pseudogamous agamospermy has been confirmed in a species of Hopea (Dipterocarpaceae) and inferred in two of Shorea on the presence of polyembryony or triploidy, e.g. S. macroptera, which is the first of the section to flower, when the pollinator numbers have not yet built up (see section 6.3) and would experience the greatest vicissitudes if dependent on insects.
Similar time sharing is known in dispersal.
In Trinidad, 19 species of the pioneering Miconia (Melastomataceae) fruit successively, providing fruit for dispersing birds throughout the year and staggered batches of seedlings that avoid interspecific competition.
Although this example has been questioned, there could be ‘shiftwork’ in other examples — in that there is a segregation of animals between night and day.
Biotic explanations for both clumping and diversity have been adduced.
The habits of some animals lead to the deposition of many seeds in one place.
This is especially noticeable with frugivorous bats, which, in a dry forest in Costa Rica, produce seed shadows of a mixture of species around fruiting trees in which they roost.
Again, agoutis in south-east Peru store fruits of Astrocaryum, a palm, in hoards, which may lead to clumped distribution as well as to the ‘clumped’ behaviour of white-lipped peccaries, which in turn disinter this food.
By contrast, it has been argued by Janzen that species-specific ‘predation’ of juveniles growing around their mother will lead to a progressive decline in density of successful saplings towards the mother.
This might then account for the apparently non-environmentally controlled distribution pattern in which other species could insinuate themselves in the holes of the forest ‘lattice’ devoid of the first species.
This has been extended in the case of specific fruit and seed predators to account for the frequency of dioecy in some forests.
In dioecious species, regulated in numbers by such predators, a high level of gene exchange could be maintained by the presence of a number of male trees that would not be attractive to these predators.
‘Predators’ can include fungi and vertebrates as well as invertebrates.
Of insect attack, that by bruchids of Scheelea zonensis (Palmae) in central America is greater, the nearer the mother plant and early survival of Virola surinamensis there is enhanced by being away from the parental crown, as seedlings closer to the bole suffer attack from weevils.
Faramea occidentalis (Rubiaceae) seeds dispersed as little as 5 m from the mother  there have a distinct advantage over those beneath her.
Seedlings of Platypodium elegans (Leguminosae) also in central America die of damping off as a function of distance from the mother in their first year, when the mortality rate can be up to 81%.
Experimental work on Barro Colorado Island showed that decreasing density of seedlings and increasing distance from the mother reduced the incidence of damping off.
Seedlings of another legume in Panama, Dipteryx panamensis, survive in light gaps best, under adults worst.
Damage to the apical meristem shows similar patterns with respect to distance from adults and density of seedlings as the pathogen damage in Platypodium, though in Dipteryx it is due to insect herbivory and tree or litter fall.
In other parts of the tropics, similar patterns have been found in Aolaia seedlings (Meliaceae) in Malaysia and Pandanus tectorius on Fanning Island in the central Pacific.
Such mortality at La Selva leads to uniform distributions of Iriartea gigantea and Socratea durissima (Palmae) and Pentaclethra macroloba (Leguminosae) from initially clumped ones.
At the ‘community’ level, most of the 300 or so species populations studied in the large plot on Barro Colorado Island discussed above show positively correlated survival with distance from reproductive adults up to 15 m.
In plots in the Queensland rain forest, seedling recruitment of subcanopy trees and understorey species was found to be lower for common than for rare species: for canopy species there was no such correlation.
It was found that growth and mortality were no greater in dense stands of conspecifics than in others.
At very small spatial scales, there seemed to be trends in recruitment, growth and mortality that fit the general hypothesis in promoting species richness, but at larger scales, besides the smaller species mentioned above, there were no such discernible trends.
There are certain general observations that might favour the predator argument.
In chalk grassland in Britain, for example, the removal of grazers, such as rabbits or sheep, has a devastating effect on the fine-leaved bouncy turf rich in species.
In a few years, the sward may become dominated by the coarse tussock-forming grass, Brachypodium pinnatum, and eventually the vegetation turns into some form of scrub and possibly woodland.
On the other hand, an increase in grazing pressure leads to the elimination of all but a few very tough species.
At the maximum plantspecies diversity, the grazing lowers the competitive ability of certain species, allowing, under the same conditions of soil, aspect and so on, the coexistence of the smaller species that otherwise could not exist there.
What is perhaps most remarkable about this grassland is that it is only  maintained under active management even rabbits were introduced by the Normans and, although it resembles some periglacial assemblages of plants, it must have been reconstituted after the forest maximum unless there were extensive grazed glades in that period.
In short, it is possibly not very old.
Palatable seaweeds in North Carolina have improved fitness if growing with unpalatable competitors less susceptible to herbivory, i.e. one competitor seeming helpful to another, the abundance of the less palatable leading to increases in abundances and numbers of other species.
The edible species grow at times of high predation as epiphytes on the less palatable.
In the absence of herbivores (fish and urchins among them), the palatable species grow less when epiphytic, though the less palatable are little retarded.
A series of observations first put together by Gillett is perhaps nearer our subject.
It is well known that it is difficult to grow plantation rubber (Hevea brasiliensis, originally from Brazil) successfully in the forest lands where that species grows wild, and it grows best in Malaysia; cocoa, which is also native to the New World, grows best in West Africa, cloves from Indonesia, in Zanzibar, and so on.
The argument runs that in the absence of their predators, performance is better and that when such predators, be they animal, fungus or other pathogen, catch up with the crops or evolve to attack them, disaster follows, as occurred in the coffee harvests of Malaya at the beginning of the century and in the banana-growing countries of Central and northern South America before that.
The corollary is seen where alien plants, contrary to expectation, appear to oust native plants in species-rich environments, where every ‘niche’ would appear to have been filled by species evolving more or less in situ to fit those environmental factors.
Examples are Hakea (Proteaceae, Australia) and pines that have been able to take hold in the Cape.
Exotics may appear to compete better with indigenous vegetation in Britain: possibly the success of sycamore can be seen in this way.
The principle is, of course, the essence of biological control: the introduction of the predators or other pests of plants getting out of control may lead to their collapse in numbers.
The most successful example is probably the reduction of American prickly pears (Opuntia, Cactaceae) in the rangelands of Australia by the introduction of the moth whose larvae feed on such cacti in the Americas.
7.2.3 Combinations of factors
A biotic effect may be attained via an environmental one as in the case of allelopathy favouring particular associations of plants, mentioned in  Chapter 3.
Furthermore, of those explanations that incorporate biotic and microenvironmental as well as disturbance effects, the most balanced account is that of Grubb, who used the term ‘regeneration niche’ to cover all the factors that affect a plant during its career from fertilized egg to death.
According to this view, differences at any point in the natural history of the plants will allow their coexistence and an examination of related species' response to potential germination sites, shade tolerance, pollination or dispersal mechanisms and so on will disclose these differences.
These then are features of species or subdivisions of them, by geography or sex for example, leading to a consideration of the form of organisms, so that differences in morphological features may reflect different lifestyles in closely related species, which can coexist.
In the neotropical Lecythidaceae for example all species have large circumscissile capsules, but such uniformity disguises a wide range of variation in the texture of the mesocarp, degree of dehiscence, and development of the aril into a fleshy or winged structure, with the result that different species are dispersed by birds, bats, monkeys, rodents, wind, water and possibly fish.
Another example, the Brazil nut (Bertholletia excelsa) has an operculum or lid that opens inwards so that animals have to get the seeds out, while in Gustavia the mesocarp is brightly coloured so that, once damaged, it is attractive to animals.
In others the seeds hang out on funicles and are dispersed by bats; others have persistent calyces that allow the fruit to float.
Germination features may differ, as in species of Shorea (Dipterocarpaceae) where, in Malaya, S. curtisii requires moister conditions than do S. Ieprosula or S. parviflora.
It is also more tolerant of low light intensities following establishment and is thus able to regenerate under the shade cast by the palm, Eugeissona tristis.
Clumps of particular species may reflect past tree falls in this way.
In Costa Rica, the size of clumps of Cryosophila guagara palms corresponded to the size of light gaps created by fallen trees.
In the lower montane forests of Costa Rica, however, 23 tree species within the same family, Lauraceae, have the same insect pollinators and bird dispersers.
There is little evidence for phenological character displacement and thus avoidance of competition, though fruit removal rates decline when many species are in fruit, i.e. there is competition for dispersal agents.
In a similar case of a montane forest, between 56 tree species in several families, this time in Jamaica, there was, again, only slight interspecific temporal separation in the use of animal pollinators and dispersal agents, thus ‘niche’ separation in this sense is slight and the coexistence of the 56 species cannot be explained in this way.
Nevertheless, in ordinations of vegetation, the regeneration characteristics  of assemblages of species may give meaning to the observeddistribution of vegetation types, rather than the terrestrial features of the environment.
This was revealed in Whitmore's classic study of the vegetation of Kolombangara in the relatively species-poor rain forest of the Solomon Islands.
The aim was to make a classification of the forest types of the island using 12 selected large tree species when, as a blessing in disguise, the forests were hit by a violent cyclone.
The regeneration strategy of each of the 12 species was worked out and the percentage occurrence of certain of these differentiating the forest types on the island reflected different meteorological regimes.
The element of environmental compared with predation disturbance is undoubtedly one that maintains diversity and if this is removed, the species total may fall.
Since 1923, on Barro Colorado Island the numbers of species of reptiles, amphibians and birds have fallen since the effect of the secondary habitats associated with agriculture, prevalent there beforehand, has diminished.
A similar effect is seen in British woodlands where the maintenance of traditionally disturbing management (like coppicing) keeps up species numbers of animals and plants, whereas abandoning of such management leads to a decline.
Geomorphological data support the idea that the western parts of Amazonia are under severe and constant erosion with surface losses of 2–3cm per century, or 3–10cm in the life of a tree, leading to great instability in the forest.
Lake sediment records in Ecuador suggest that there was regional flooding of western Amazonia 1300–800 BP, i.e. major hydrological disturbance, which raised the water level as far east as Manaus, while savanna regions seem to have persisted on the northern edge of the basin throughout the late Quaternary.
The areas to the south-west and east, today enduring fluctuating intensities or durations of dry seasons, have a history of such.
In northwest Amazonia (Venezuela), there is evidence for fire disturbance over the last 6000 years, with charcoal deposits under terrafirme forests as well as caatingas, and some of the fires may not have been anthropogenic.
The effects of drought, floods, erosion and fire on the forest of different types — savanna-like in the north, seasonally-flooded in the centre, with a seasonal climate in the south and south-west, a dry one in the north-east and the perhumid climate with species-rich forest in the west — has not yet been fully assessed.
There is no reason to think that disturbance was any greater in glacial times, though there was a cooling and 10–20% less precipitation in the monsoon rains that could have allowed savannas to take over in what are today ecotonal areas.
Unlike Africa or Asia, however, there have been throughout the great diversity inducing system of the great rivers driven by Andean precipitation.
Although outside the Amazon basin, there is evidence for glacial or lateglacial aridity, in the Galapagos, the Guyana Highlands and the Caribbean coast, but the sites are far away.
Refuge theory would predict that where forest now stands today, there would have been savanna and that the higher wetter country would have been the ‘refugia’ in glacial times.
The only site so far fully examined, at Mera (Ecuador), seems to show that there was a minimum temperature depression of 4°C between 35 000 and 26 000 years BP when the forest was replaced by a moist forest with Andean elements, implying forest descent of at least 700 m, the pollen spectrum there being unlike any in modern Amazonia; there are, for example, high percentages of alder (Alnus, Betulaceae) pollen.
Colinvaux therefore suggests that the so-called refugia were thus denied to some rain-forest species presently there, i.e. the supposed migrations to them of lowland species in inducing today's diversity is questionable.
The refuge theory has also been questioned in terms of the botanical information originally used to formulate it, in that it has been suggested that the ‘refugia’ may represent regions where collecting has been at its most intense.
It has also been argued that the highest diversity is found in elevated sites most protected from fluvial erosion.
7.2.4 An element of chance?
In our attempt to understand the diversity of tropical forests, using largely the example of the trees, we have had to take into account all the features of the plant that would appear to reflect the forces of natural selection in terms of physical factors: meteorological, topographical, pedological, and biotic ones.
Added to this must be an element of chance in that not everything can be evenly distributed nor is disturbance predictable, as reflected in the ‘first come, first served’ stands of pioneers.
This is best exemplified by islands, however, and by Krakatau, with its suspended succession, showing that with a chance introduction of some late successional species, diversity would probably increase.
Again, an examination of the isolated neotropical cloud forests by Sugden, shows that under certain conditions, the role of chance in terms of long-distance dispersal may be as important as the environmental factors in promoting diversity.
The woody floras of those forests that are surrounded on all sides by arid woodlands consist of species with wide neotropical distributions and many of them are found elsewhere in a wide range of habitats while few are restricted to montane forest.
Many of them are pioneers, characteristic of early successional sequences elsewhere, and are well adapted for long-distance dispersal, so that under isolated circumstances such pioneers can form ‘mature’ communities, even though the level of disturbance is low.
Birds in central Panama seem to track microclimatic optima, such behaviour producing dynamic (non-equilibrium) assemblages or ‘communities’ in space and time, but this is not stochastic as each species seeks optima in the current context of environmental conditions.
Even in chalk grassland in Great Britain, non-equilibrium models may best explain the coexistence of plant species and, in lowland rain forest, there is still disagreement about the importance of chance establishment of trees.
Moreover, there is some confusion about the level of selection in that a genetically linked population is composed of particular trees on each of which selection acts, and differing in space and time in terms of biotic neighbourhoods as well as genotypes.
In terms of genotypes, competition between individuals of a very polymorphic species may be less than between related ‘jordanons’(selfing lines) or apomictic lines, even though these be isolated genetically from one another.
Outcrossing promotes diversity suited to high biotic uncertainty and does not invariably lead to specialization of species but, on the contrary, may lead to greater generalization of a species and therefore similarity between species of a tree ‘guild’.
Species may therefore come and go from guilds without causing havoc there.
Hubbell and Foster argue that such thinking could lead to a return to the classical views of rain forest and speciation espoused by Corner, Fedorov and van Steenis.
In conclusion, it may be remarked that, besides chance effects, the greatest diversity is found where there is an unseasonal climate, topographic and edaphic heterogeneity, and where the nutrient levels are lo–, but not too low, and where predation and other disturbance is high but not too high.
As for an explanation of local heterogeneity, however, T.C. Whitmore at the end of his study of the Kolombangara forests, may be quoted.
‘It can therefore be seen that variation from place to place in climax tropical lowland rain forest, which has for so long intrigued and challenged ecologists, is not open to any single or simple explanation.
Rather, it is due to a complex interplay of extrinsic and intrinsic factors, which are not unique to the tropics and which have to be resolved individually for any particular forest.’
7.3 Practical problems
That there should be about 400 woody species in a hectare of South American or Malaysian forest has led to problems not only in accounting    for such diversity, the main subject of this chapter, but also in actually measuring the richness of such forests.
Sampling is likely never to be comprehensive in terms of the total number of species recorded from an area (Figure 7.2) unless almost the whole area is used as the sample.
The time involved is also a major factor: in the 10 m x 10 m piece of forest in Costa Rica, discussed in Chapter 1, the analysis took 192 man-hours, in other words, a full hectare would take one man a decade!
In a recent study, 10% of Barro Colorado Island was used in sampling and only 80% of the known flora was found.
The problem then arises that a sample of such size, or indeed any large plot, will mask any microtopographical diversity in the forest and thus any local species assemblages under particular microenvironmental conditions.
In an attempt to reach a practical solution, Brunig and Klinge worked in Amazonian forest that was estimated to have some 700 plant species, excluding cryptogams, representing 70 families.
In view of the problem of the masking of environmental heterogeneity, they found that small plots of 40 x 50 m were the most profitable in terms of time and information gained (even though they recorded only 500 common tree species in 35 families), and that for phytomass studies small plots were adequate.
Nevertheless, they stressed that any sampling design should be rigorously stratified according to site conditions and the stage of regeneration of the forest, and that measurements of parameters such as stand height, basal area and tree density in the areas around plots should also be taken.
In this way, they argued, a reasonable picture of forest diversity and structure could be built up.
CHAPTER EIGHT TRADITIONAL RAIN-FOREST USE
The forest is a peculiar organism of unlimited kindness and benevolence that makes no demand for its sustenance and extends generously the products of its life activity: it affords protection to all beings, offering shade even to the axeman who destroys it.
(Gautama Buddha)
Primate societies are remarkable among relatively long-lived and large-brained animal groups in that they have the capacity to store and retrieve much independently acquired information about their environment.
In the case of hominids, this has traditionally been attributed to selection for hunting efficiency in the Pliocene.
It has been plausibly argued that this, perhaps too male-centred explanation, begs the question of what led to the increasing mental complexity necessary for hominid evolution in the first place, particularly when the older ancestors seem to have been tropical forest primary consumers.
Milton has suggested then that the extreme diversity of plant foods in tropical forests and the way in which they are distributed there in space and time has been a major selective force in the development of advanced cerebral complexity in certain higher primates.
The capacity to use young leaves with a high protein content may have permitted the emergence of large primates in the first place, but primates capable of remembering the sites and fruiting and leafing patterns of a wide variety of plants, could move more directly to such food, when and where available, more efficiently than those searching randomly.
Cohesive social units foraging a particular area over several generations would enhance efficiency by transmitting such information among closely related animals.
Similar selective pressures associated with foods from the second trophic level may also have been of importance in the later development of the hominids themselves 
8.1 The fossil record
Most fossil evidence of early man comes from East Africa and, until recently, Africa has been almost unchallenged as the place of divergence of man's immediate ancestors from other hominids.
New evidence from the Middle East suggests that it may not be so simply explained, while a recently published account of a biologist's view of the myths embedded in Genesis lends some colourful support to a broadening of outlook.
The thesis of that view is that man originated in rain forest and not in the more open habitats associated with the African finds.
Possible early human ancestors existed in Pakistan two million years ago, while the much earlier Sivapithecus from India and Pakistan is held by some to be ancestral to all the great apes including man, or perhaps just orang-utans and man.
An even older Sivapithecus (17 million years old) has been claimed for Kenya as being ancestral to the hominid chimpanzee-gorilla lineage a relationship which is confirmed by molecular studies — and the Asiatic orang-utan lineage; whether this animal is to be considered congeneric with the later species of Sivapithecus is disputed, however.
The fruit-eating primates of Africa seem to have been the origin of the human stock, one way or another, whether the immediate ancestors were derived from an Asiatic ‘Homo erectus’ or not.
Olive baboons in Gabon defaecate in their home areas, thereby concentrating edible-fruited species, and the Liebermans speculate that the early hominids did the same because there is evidence that there were proto-gardens around occupation sites and that animals were unaware how edible plants came to be there; a phenomenon known as the ‘Eden Syndrome’.
Today, rambutans (Nephelium lappaceum, Sapindaceae) are distributed this way, growing up around deserted encampments of forest people in the Malay Peninsula, and several other fruits gathered there can only be swallowed as the flesh is either difficult to remove or the seeds are too fiddly to extract (as in blackberries, blackcurrants and tomatoes in modern society sewage farms raise good tomato plants): for example the mata-kuching (Dimocarpus longan) and the rambai (Baccaurea motleyana, Euphorbiaceae).
The distribution of such trees in the forest represent, at least in part, old cultivation sites, camps or once-only latrines.
This is, of course, scarcely different from the effects of frugivorous birds as set out in Chapter 6.
The early Malays may have learnt the ‘Malay knot’ made by birds, perhaps by copying the animals, while their medicinal knowledge may have been common with that of other species: monkeys in the Malay  Peninsula eat jelly surrounding the germinating seeds of Scaphium spp.
(Sterculiaceae) and seeds are soaked overnight today by humans and used as a febrifugal mucilage.
That from related plants is an important ingredient of modern western bowel-regulating preparations.
The forest does not offer the grazing typical of animal husbandry, however, and neither the plants nor the animals of domestication are forest organisms.
Pre-agricultural man as a forest dweller would have left no trace, although, like D'Arcy Thompson, who argued that sacred groves, as revered in many tropical countries today, were the inspiration for columned buildings (hence the Greek temple and all modern architecture), it has been entertainingly argued by Corner that traces of forest life are embedded in modern society.
He considers that the range of form in Pacific war clubs shows a gradation from the wrenched-up sapling, with its roots as spikes, to the mace of regalia.
The digging stick of the forest becomes a spade, still with a wooden handle; lianes lead to ropes and string, bark and palm fibre to textiles, palm leaves to thatching and bamboos to piping.
But the trick of firing the forest and thus a mechanism for massive clearing, is associated with seasonal forest, where man must have first made his mark.
Modern human fossils 100000 years old are known and humans were widespread in southern Africa by 50 000 years ago at a time when Europe was still populated by the related Neanderthals.
Homo sapiens sapiens seems to have replaced the Neanderthals in a few thousand years about 30000 years ago.
Until lately, it was held that America was not reached until about 12 000 years ago and the southern tip of that continent in less than another 1000 years, but evidence recently gathered suggests that humans were in the Americas 32 000 years ago.
There have been people in Australia for the last 40000 years and claims for their presence there in the last interglacial have been made.
Emigrations to both America and Australia were overland but after the ice-caps melted some 10000 years ago, those populations became isolated from the others.
All these groups seem to have been nomadic or partly so.
In Malesia, they seem to have made use of the limestone caves for shelter and may well have forced the orang-utans of the region to live further up in the canopy, for it is certainly true that in the Pleistocene, the orang-utans were much more terrestrial in habit.
It is difficult to assess the effects of the first true humans in rain forests but it has been argued that the Australian aborigines may have been responsible for the removal of some of the Araucaria forest of tropical Queensland, leading to the advance of Eucalyptus there, as well as locally exterminating much of the megafauna.
It may have been that the Palaeoindians moving through America from 
Eurasia removed much of the Neotropical megafauna of the Pleistocene, but if humans were there in significant numbers as long ago as recent evidence suggests, then it is difficult to explain away the collapse of that fauna.
Nevertheless, less than half of the mammal fauna of Java, for example, survived the mid-Pleistocene and the arrival of humans.
8.2 Early agriculture
Truly forest people still survive in the dwindling rain forests of the three tropical masses: the Amazon Indians, the pygmies of the western part of Central Africa, and groups in the Andaman Islands, parts of West Malaysia and Borneo as well as the Philippines.
Forest people are generally small and hence have a low maximal work capacity.
They suffer from many parasitic diseases, and have high levels of infant and child mortality.
An example of forest knowledge is that of the ‘hunter gatherers’ on the Philippine island of Mindanao, who recognize 1600 categories of plants.
Although the Andaman Islanders still do not know how to start fire from scratch, wholesale clearing of other parts of the tropics has long been practised.
Hominids have been using fire in Africa for some 1–1.5 million years, but whether the early firing was the work of species of Australopithecus or Homo is not clear.
There is evidence for forest clearing 11000 years BP in Taiwan and of agriculture between 14000 and 8000 BP in Thailand, and New Guinea by 9000 BP, though tools much older than this have been claimed for the island; rice was being grown in Sulawesi by 6000 BP.
The ‘Hoabinhian’ culture of southern China and Indochina to Peninsular Malaysia and Sumatra seems to have brought into cultivation candle nut (Aleurites moluccana, Euphorbiaceae), betel nut (Areca catechu, Palmae), species of Canarium (Burseraceae) and Terminalia (Combretaceae) for their fruits, cucumber (Cucumis sativus, Cucurbitaceae), the bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria, Cucurbitaceae) and the betel pepper (Piper betle, Piperaceae) between 8000 and 3000 BP.
In Sumatra, the northern highlands seem to have been begun to be cleared about 17500 BP but the firmest evidence is from 6200BP, while the central regions may have begun being cleared some 7500BP but certainly by 4000BP; both areas had major clearances by 2500BP, perhaps associated with irrigated rice culture.
The clearances in neighbouring Java started at least as long ago as 4800 BP.
In Borneo, Neolithic man (4000 BP) grew crops such as sago and kept domestic pigs (Sus scrofa) and dogs.
Pollen evidence shows that even in the Amazon basin, maize was being grown some 6000 years BP and that there was forest  clearance a thousand or possibly three thousand years ago at Lake Victoria in Central Africa.
It must be remembered, though, that the majority of modern African forest dwellers are secondary invaders with knowledge of agriculture and iron tools, and may have been there only some 2000 years.
The form of farming known as shifting cultivation has gone hand-in-hand with the clearances in New Guinea over, at least, the last 5000 years.
As with the clearance of the forest of the British Isles since the last glaciation, those areas with the ‘least resistance’, i.e. with shallow dry soils, have been cleared first.
In such places regeneration is slowest, as can be seen from those areas of dry monsoon forest, long cleared away in East Java or around Angkor in Kampuchea.
In time, plants were domesticated and selected so that they differ greatly from their wild ancestors, some so much so that their ancestors cannot now be recognized.
In Asia, such ‘cultigens’ include the coconut, which may have had its origin on the Great Barrier Reef, and the mango, the talipot palm, Corypha umbraculifera, its leaves used as writing paper, and the betel nut with narcotic fruits.
Plants now known only in cultivation but whose ancestry is fairly clear include sugar cane and rice and bananas, which are sterile triploids, many of those involving hybridity between a rain-forest species, Musa acuminata and M. halbisiana of drier forests.
Man may have reached coastal New Guinea as long ago as 50 000 BP and penetrated to the Highlands there by 26 000 BP.
The 9000-year-old agriculture there is now based largely on cultigens, including taro and bananas of south-east Asia, arriving before 4500 BP, but earlier phases could have been sustained using native species, including indigenous bananas, yams, pandans and sugar cane.
These are largely propagated vegetatively and such ‘vegeculture’, based on cassava, may have antedated seed culture in northern South America.
Vegeculture in the Neotropics as well as in southeast Asia, was replaced by seed culture, which is more suited to territorial expansion but originates in the more seasonal subtropics.
Moreover, for foraging humans, tropical rain forests are too food-poor, although such foods are available to other primates, because they are too far up in the canopy, deep in the ground or the human gut is not capable of digesting them.
The earliest colonists of the Amazon seem to have practised farming as well as hunting, gathering and fishing.
The pygmies of Central Africa cannot find enough food in the Zaire forests and, indeed, there seems to be no unambiguous ethnographic account of any people living solely off forest products and the only tropical areas where it is believed that such people might have lived are in central Malesia.
Anthropologists increasingly  agree that until agriculture had evolved there could have been no modern ‘rain-forest man’.
For a very long time, western humans have been blinkered by a Rousseauian notion of national purity with no pollution from outside.
8.3 Hunter-gatherers?
The belief in ‘isolated’, ‘primitive’ hunter-gatherers, rather like the notion of ‘pristine’forest favoured by biologists, is now being replaced by the theory that there seems to have been hundreds and thousands of years of interdependent contact with farmers and even ‘states’.
That the 25 groups making up the 15 000 hunter-gatherers of the Philippine Negritos practise minor desultory cultivation and intensive trading with non-Negrito agriculturists is not recent as has often been argued, for eighteenth-century reports indicate trade of forest products for rice, tobacco, metal tools, beads and pots, as well as shifting cultivation by the 1740s at the latest.
Trade with China from the Malay Peninsula and Borneo by the fifth century is well-documented; the Philippines were involved shortly afterwards, while rice had been cultivated on Luzon, not far from the Negrito sites, since at least l400BC; linguistic evidence also suggests long interdependence.
The Late Pleistocene humans in the Philippines seem to have lived in the savannas, so that the pre-historic Negritos probably did not move into the forest until they had seasonal access to cultivated starchy food unavailable in the forest itself and they evolved a lifestyle to collect forest produce for trade.
The pygmies seem to be similar, though some groups may have been forced by warfare into occupying the forests of central Africa.
The Punan groups of northwestern Borneo may have taken up their lifestyle initially from demand for various forest products prized by the Chinese over 1000 years ago.
Indeed, combined with the elevated notions discussed above, has been an intellectual imperialism for the ‘primitiveness’ perceived in such peoples becoming an excuse for colonialism and extermination.
The controversy over the Tasaday, a group of 26 allegedly ‘stone-age’ cave-dwelling people ‘discovered’in 1971 and pronounced a hoax in 1986 is based on the all-or-nothing ‘cultural purity’argument of anthropologists.
Headland has persuasively argued that, just as with the pygmies above, there was just not enough food for such groups in the forest itself; in this case, the people seemed to have been trading wild meat for goods including carbohydrate and, indeed, may have grown it themselves in the past.
Although pre-hominids left the forest, the first wave to return could only  live there in symbiosis with peoples in monsoonal areas.
Nevertheless, they modified the forest by nomadic behaviour and shifting cultivation, if they became truly independent.
As they could no longer live in trees and needed the plants with which they had co-evolved in the more seasonal habitats in the beginnings of agriculture, at least vegeculture, those who did not cultivate had to trade.
The second wave to return was European and could not manage without seeds and brought commensals and trading aspirations as well as religion.
This second wave was most successful in the ‘Neo-Europes’ of temperate America, Australia and New Zealand but was perhaps much less so in the tropics because of micro-organisms, which the societies based on shifting cultivation there, had evolved to avoid.
Purseglove has argued that Indian crops were known in China 4000 BP and African ones in India and vice versa a thousand years later.
The Malesian region saw a rise in navigation and seamanship unrivalled elsewhere until recent times, so that by 1500 BC, or earlier, the south-west Pacific had been reached.
Later these people reached all the inhabited areas of the Pacific and possibly America, it having been argued that they may have had a considerable influence on the rain-forest peoples of the New World, evidence coming from great similarities between certain groups in Borneo and central America, similarities greater than between these peoples and their geographic neighbours.
They possibly introduced certain banana species and there are similarities in terms of longhouses, head hunting and blow pipes.
Such contacts may also explain similarities between aspects of 18C BC China and the Olmec, the first great American civilization, notably in the use of jade.
In the New World, there was movement of crops between Mexico and coastal Peru by 1000BC and, a few hundred years later, the people of southern Arabia were trading down the coast of East Africa.
Important commodities were spices, the control of which was largely responsible for European involvement and exploration leading to the Spanish and Portuguese colonizations and ultimately to the Dutch monopoly of nutmegs and cloves in Indonesia by the end of the eighteenth century.
Contact with mariners from China from before Ar) 300 led to trade in a number of commodities in the Asiatic tropics, notably resins, birds' nests, poisons, medicines, latex, pelts, ivory and rhinoceros horn as well as rattans.
All are still traded today, the rattans being the stems of climbing palms largely used in ‘cane’ furniture-making and sometimes referred to erroneously as bamboo.
By AD 500, there were probably bananas in Madagascar, imported from Asia, though some authorities believe Madagascar was not in effect colonized by man until 500 years after that.
By AD 700, there  were coastal settlements in East Africa, made by the Arabs on slaving enterprises into the interior, and, along their routes, the mango, initially from India, became naturalized.
The next phase of exploitation of the forest, the export of materials, is bound up, then, with the collecting activities of the early forest people.
Contrary to what was to happen in the modern period (and still continues), the first objects of trade were not logs but what are sometimes rather dismissively referred to as ‘minor forest products’.
Intensively studied in this respect has been the Malay Peninsula, where there was trade with China, particularly in ivory and incense wood (Aquilaria malaccensis, Thymelaeaceae), the decaying heartwood of which is saturated with resin (the aloe or ahaloth of the Bible), in the period AD 420–589.
By 960–1126 there was trade in these between China and south-east Asia generally and it was extended to caradamons, which had been exported to Europe from India since Roman times, rattans, camphor, dammars, bananas and Dalheroia parviflora (Leguminosae) a liane with heartwood used in joss sticks; the seeds of Adenanthera pavonina (Leguminosae) came into use as weights for goldsmiths and a system (Ganda) based on seeds half as heavy (another legume, Abrus precatorius) in India is derived from it.
With the arrival of the first Europeans, the Portuguese, the all-important spices were traded at source: pepper from the Malabar Coast of India, cinnamon from Sri Lanka and cloves, nutmeg and mace from the Moluccas.
With trading settlements and ports of call at Goa, the Cape and Lisbon, the Portuguese undermined the economy of the Mameluke Empire to such an extent that it was taken over by the Ottomans in 1517.
The Portuguese also took Indian Ocean coconuts from their settlements in Mozambique to the Atlantic at the end of the fifteenth century, then from the Cape Verde Islands to the Americas: there is a great worry now that such a genetically narrow-based population could collapse in an epidemic.
The original forest peoples of the tropics have been greatly reduced or, at least, the territory through which they could formerly move has.
It is alleged that in the Philippines, for example, it is being lost at a rate of 3 ha per minute.
At the time of the Spanish contact, there was about 90% forest cover and the population was about half a million; by 1945, the forest cover was some 75% and the population 19 million; by 1976, the cover was down to 38% and by 1980 27% and that partly disturbed.
On the island of Luzon, the Agta people in the 1980s were down from about a thousand in 1936 to 609.
Their high death rate is due to malnutrition, through ecological change, as well as introduced diseases.
With an increasing non-Agta farming population, the Agta now view themselves as landless squatters in  their own ancestral lands.
Their most important protein sources are from the sea as land mammals are now in decline.
New forces they have had to contend with include, as Headland so graphically puts it, obvious imported elements as the ‘green revolution’, new diseases, multinational corporations, government roads, World War II, missionaries, government agencies sent to ‘civilize’ the Agta, and international market price fluctuations of copra, as well as less obvious items such as modern medicines, radios and televisions, dynamite, insecticides, shotguns, alcoholic beverages, baby bottles, assassinations of national politicians and the influences of changing Euroamerican furniture fashions.’
8.4 Some rain-forest societies
Amazonian ‘pre-contact’ settlements were, in many cases, large and sedentary, particularly along rivers.
The introduction of diseases by Europeans much reduced the population, perhaps by as much as 95%, the epidemics spreading ahead of the ‘contact’ via a network of trading routes, which connected the peoples to the Andean civilizations.
The sites of many former settlements, on ‘black earths’, are now covered with forest but the savannas of Roraima are partly due to man-set fires and the open campina scrub on sandy soils was once cleared.
Today the large populations are in varzea rich in fish and turtle protein, much smaller ones on the terra firme, but they have now been in decline for some 500 years since the European invasion.
A number of the more resilient groups have been intensively studied.
It is thought that there are some generalized cultural patterns that can be recognized.
They have extended families of a man, his wife or wives, pre-adolescent children and married sons (patrilocal residence) or daughters (matrilocal), and their children, in a communal house.
The house acts as a cemetery as well as a communal living and working space; it is built near a river for bathing, travel and food, and often in a cassava garden with Guilelma gasipaes palms and other fruit trees.
Old house sites are regularly revisited as important food sources.
Young of many animals are kept as pets, notably macaws and other birds including chickens.
A group of such households makes up a village and between such groups there is usually hostility from simple avoidance of one another to open warfare.
At puberty, males become warriors and killing an enemy is often a prerequisite of attaining full adult status.
Women and children may be captured from other groups and incorporated.
It is instructive to compare the ways the forest is exploited by two  groupings of Amerindians far apart on the terra firme of Amazonia, the Jivaro, in the west under the slopes of the Andes, and the Kayapo in the east.
The Jivaro occupy some 65 000 km 2 in the eastern lowlands of Ecuador and comprise some 20 000 people, women outnumbering men by about two to one.
In spite of common language and culture, there is no permanent social or political cohesion.
In fact, blood revenge and warfare are more intense between the constituent subgroupings than they are between them and other groups.
Each village consists of a single house of a patrilineal extended family with 15–46 members.
The house is abandoned when hunting is unproductive, the local fields are exhausted or the head of the village dies, so that in general one site is used for about six years.
The Jivaro depend largely on agriculture and do not eat many wild plants, though they hunt a lot.
Inter-village hostility may include the abduction of women or the murder of a member passing through alien territory, while a series of deaths in a village may be interpreted as the result of sorcery on the part of other villages.
Such events require that the adult males take blood revenge and a single death restores the balance.
Total warfare, though, aims at the annihilation of the enemy village, the death of all its inhabitants, the burning of the house and its contents and even the uprooting of the crops.
It is plain, then, why men are in the minority.
Sorcery and warfare lead to a thinly distributed, but quite large, mobile population.
If the population declines, then so does the level of revenge killings and warfare.
The population is also regulated by periodic suspension of sexual relationships for 3–6 months after the taking of a head and also from the time of birth of a child until he is weaned, i.e. 2–3 years.
Each man has two or more wives and because adultery on the part of females carries the death sentence, the birth rate is rigorously controlled.
As the whole system is headed by a man, it is likely that the village has to move more frequently than if it were headed by a woman.
What seems barbarous is admirably suited to the rain-forest environment, for the scattering of the groups, their rigorous population control and their constant movement mean that the forest is nowhere completely depleted and recovers through cycles of regeneration before being farmed once more.
The system represents a remarkable evolutionary adaptation of human behaviour patterns to the conditions of the rain forest.
The Kayapo of Para, Brazil, unlike the Jivaro, live in a seasonal climate with a marked dry spell each year.
The general pattern is the same in that the village is the largest political unit and that the cultural and linguistic inter-village similarities do not prevent hostility.
In this group, the extended family may include some hundreds of people, while the time of greatest  status for a male is that between puberty and parenthood.
This has led to the adoption of a wide range of contraceptive techniques including the use of oral contraceptives (the biological origins of which are now eagerly sought by pharmaceutical companies).
They also practise mechanical forms of abortion.
Monogamy is universal but adultery frequent.
The group subsists on gardening and hunting.
The full status for the male is achieved only after killing an enemy, who, by definition, is anyone not a member of the home village.
In this group, though, not every man need kill, for a blow dealt to the body during a war is sufficient.
In major assaults, the village is burnt and the women and children captured and incorporated in the community.
The Kayapo population density is 20 times that of the Jivaro and the villages are maintained indefinitely in one place only, at the cost of a periodic temporary increase in community mobility.
In the dry season, groups of families travel out into the forest, moving camp every few days and living off wild foods, thus more uniformly exploiting the environment at a time of scarcity and the risk of irreversible depletion of the local forest.
Parallels between these two patterns of human behaviour and those of pioneer trees on the one hand or leaf-cutting ants on the other are clear.
Moreover, there is a coincidence between centres of dispersal and enclaves of diversity among Amazonian languages and the plant and animal ‘refugia’, but humans have been there for perhaps only 6000 years.
Archaeological evidence shows that occupation of the lowlands in the last 3000 years was achieved by long-range dispersals from the north-west of groups with three ceramic traditions, though these declined in complexity as they could not be sustained by the terra firme environment.
8.5 Humans as ecosystem modifiers
The forest peoples of Borneo include groups who plant rattans as part of the shifting  cultivation (swidden) cycle, the palms being planted as the gardens are left fallow after 1 or 2 years of crop production.
After 7–15 years the cultivators return to a mature rattan garden: the rattans are harvested and foodcrops planted.
In the 1970s, the rattan industry based on Calamus manan and C. caesius was worth US$2 billion a year in the furniture industry.
The financial return has disrupted the system in that the cycles have become shorter and shorter and palms were increasingly being taken from uncultivated forest.
Indonesia has banned the export of raw rattan and this has encouraged other countries, like Sri Lanka, to emulate the rattan swidden' method.
Shifting cultivation in the Malay Peninsula is known from at least 6000 BP.
The 6000 surviving Orang Asli are divisible into three groups: the 2000 nomadic foraging and trading Semang (who may have been the first to arrive), with temporary camps in the forest; the Senoi with shifting cultivation; the Proto-Malays who replace the forest with their own gardens and fruit trees.
The Temiar Senoi, for example, will stay up to 15 years in one settlement until travelling to more and more distant areas of cultivation becomes too troublesome, when they will move.
Although there is a Temiar area over which this is carried out, there is no personal land tenure, though particular fruit trees may have owners.
Such is the case with durians, which are deliberately planted and may be inherited.
When a new site is chosen for cultivation, the undergrowth is removed, and later the trees, with an adze.
The stumps and roots are left as are many big trees for superstitious or practical reasons (the two may be the same in many cases).
Such a tree is the mighty tualang (see Figure 5.7), Koompassia excelsa, which has hard useless timber but harbours bees' nests.
In Sarawak, figs are considered to be homes of spirits and the Iban people will not fell them, even when clearing forest for rice culture; they are also preserved in Africa for similar reasons.
Also left are useful fruit trees, which are thus under selective pressures.
The dead material is left to dry, is then burnt and left to cool; planting in the fertilizing ash takes place after the first rain.
The Temiar transplant young petai (Parkia speciosa, Leguminosae — grown for their edible seeds) seedlings into their gardens after the rice harvest and are reliant on bamboo for many purposes: house building, blowpipes and cooking pots for example, as well as knives to cut the umbilical cord in childbirth.
Some bamboos are cultivated, some cared for, others gathered from the wild, e.g. Bambusa wrayi, a montane species, which is much favoured: clumps are owned by particular Temiar groups.
Trading in dammars, incensewood and rattans sometimes yields financial returns so high that the people abandon cultivation in its favour.
Over-exploitation of rattan does not indicate a high ‘conservation of resources’ sense, nor does their attitude to animals, of which they keep a wide range of pets from rats to tigers.
The protein part of the diet is supplemented by hunting using bamboo blowpipes with the nerve poison strychnine, an alkaloid from species of Strychnos or from Antiaris toxicaria, the upas tree (Moraceae), or venom from toadskin or snakes.
Trapping and fishing are also important.
Temiar gardens consist of a wide range of plants, apparently grown haphazardly and far from the regimented uniformity of plantation agriculture.
This is typical of shifting-cultivation systems throughout the  world.
A similar system obtained in North America, where the Indians lived in villages, making clearings and foraging for firewood and other produce, setting fire to much of the forest to drive and enclose game.
They planted food and medicinal plants, migrated seasonally and moved their villages.
The villages were moved because of the depletion of firewood stocks (the Indians believed the English had arrived because they had run out of firewood at home).
American chestnuts (Castanea dentata, Fagaceae) were planted in the villages; Prunus nigra (Rosaceae) and possibly Gymnocladus dioica (Leguminosae) were also planted.
Most of what the first Europeans saw as original vegetation in north-eastern North America was manipulated regrowth.
Moreover, shifting cultivation was still being practised in Czechoslovakia, for example, until the late 1970s at least .
Shifting cultivation is very variable in terms of the numbers of species grown.
In central New Guinea, for example, there are monocultures of taro (Colocasia esculenta, Araceae) in small gardens; there is no general burning but the plantings are of several cultivars and the cropping period is brief, the fallows long.
In contrast, certain tropical peoples grow an enormous range of plant species.
An outstanding example is provided by the Lua of northern Thailand who grow at least 120 different crops: 75 for food, 21 for medicine, 20 for ceremony and decoration and 7 for weaving and dyeing, a diversity that mimics the diversity of natural vegetation.
The breadth of the food base is also seen in settled communities in the Malay Peninsula, where villagers may collect some wild fruit species but grow many in and around the village.
Whitmore recorded 29 types of tree around such a village in Trengganu, noting that 12 of them were identical with wild forest trees, such as the rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum, Sapindaceae) and the sentul (Sandoricum koetjape, Meliaceae), a further six appeared to be selected and improved forms of wild trees, five were cultigens like the betel nut, and three were exotics, like the papaya (Carica papaya, a New World cultigen).
Even a formerly nomadic group, the Paumari in Amazonia grow 14 cultivars of the easily transported cassava and some other groups there grow up to 400 different types of plants (cultivars as well as cultigens); some clear fell the forest, others merely ‘weed’ it.
Returning to the Kayapo, we find a well-developed ecological sense, as these people understand animal plant interactions and the similarities between natural and man-made gaps.
They use over 250 species of fruits and many hundred others provide edible parts; they cultivate some 17 cultivars of cassava, 16 of sweet potato, 13 of bananas, 8 of maize, 6 of annatto (Bixa orellana, Bixaceae, a dye-plant), 6 of arrowroot and 6 of rice.
The ant parts used to paint women's faces in the maize festival are from the ants that are attracted to the extrafloral nectaries of cassava and keep insects off the beans that are trained up the more robust maize.
The Kayapo also create ‘forest fields’ of semi-domesticated plants, at least 54 species of them, which are collected in the forest and replanted near established camp sites.
Some are planted to attract birds, some alongside paths in the forest and others are planted while the Kayapo squat to defaecate.
Such plantings are transitional to full-blown gardens.
Old gardens are not abandoned but are visited and cropped for up to 30 years; these also attract game and facilitate hunting.
Such amounts to a kind of agroforestry type of manipulation of the environment and is known to be practised by other groups, e.g. the Bora of the Peruvian Amazon.
With the higher populations of Amerindians in the past, such groups must have had a major effect on the structure of the forest.
The woody monocotyledon, Cordylinefruticosa (Agavaceae), is involved in ritual and magic from eastern Asia to eastern Polynesia and is planted around gardens, being readily propagated from stem fragments.
It has accompanied humans in the western Pacific from the earliest times.
It is particularly commonly seen in highland New Guinea, an island where spineless forms of the sago palm, Metroxylon sagu, have been selected; several fruit-trees are encouraged if not actively cultivated there.
These include Finschia chloroxantha (Proteaceae), Terminalia kaernhachii (Combretaceae, possibly naturalized in Polynesia) and Inocarpusfagifer (Leguminosae), while species of Artocarpus and Pandanus are also planted in bogs and gullies.
Widespread in the Pacific is Broussonetia papyrifera (Moraceae), originally from Asia and now grown from China and Japan through Malesia to America, where it is naturalized: it is the basis of Polynesian tapa cloth, which is made from its bark.
Ornamental plants have also been selected and sometimes become feral, notably the forms of ‘croton’, Codiaeum variegatum (Euphorbiaceae) and the red-leaved forms of Acalypha tricolor (A. wilkesiana, Euphorbiaceae) and other plants.
The relationship with humans may be such that plants are no longer clearly ‘wild’ or ‘cultivated’, the forests including several ‘cultigens’like the betel nut or Uncaria gambir (Rubiaceae), an important tan source in Asia; similar could be said of the date in north Africa and Arabia.
Other plants, though not cultivated, may be encouraged as in the case of Madhuc a longiJolia (Sapotaceae) with edible flowers and valuable oilseeds, owing its persistence and wide distribution in India to human activity.
The history of the domestication of many of the fruit trees of the tropics may therefore never be disentangled, though it is known that some of them at least, like the duku and lanseh, forms of Lansium domesticum (Meliaceae), are apomicts.
It is interesting to note that among the fruits taken by birds in southern Europe, it has been shown in the case of Smilax aspera (Liliaceae), there is selection in favour of greater pulp: seed ratio (with a loss in seed numbers) in those conditions of high competition for dispersers, which, faced with an apparent glut, select the most nutritionally valuable.
In the tropical cultigens, the same effect is achieved in a different way, but such selected lines of fruit trees become symbiotically associated with human beings.
The effects of humans can go far beyond this, in moving plants away from their natural range so that they appear ‘native’ in their new homes, often with the advantage of no pest pressure.
Besides the mango mentioned above, there is the tamarind, Tamarindus indica (Leguminosae), which has been spread through the Old World tropics, such that its origin is now obscured.
In the highlands of New Guinea, the nitrogen-fixing Casuarina oligodon (Casuarinaceae) is much planted as an essential part of the sweetpotato fallow but is probably not native there.
Again, species of Gigantochloa (Gramineae) in western Malesia were probably taken by humans from Burma, where the genus is certainly native, and other bamboos may also have travelled along the ancient maritime spice routes between China, India, Sri Lanka and Indonesia.
Bambusa vulgaris has been carried throughout the tropics so that its home, too, is no longer recognizable.
Indeed, coastal trading may be the only explanation for the peculiar distributions of some species, e.g. Exotheca abyssinica (Gramineae) in tropical East Africa and Vietnam and may account for that of Stylosanthes humilis (‘S. sundaica', Leguminosae), which was perhaps taken from Brazil to Malesia by the Portuguese.
Spreading to New Zealand by Maoris of the karaka nut, Corynocarpus laeviyata (Corynocarpaceae) from Vanuatu and New Caledonia is the only reasonable explanation for its disjunct distribution.
It is not only the botanist.
who is troubled by the culture of tropical civilizations before the intrusion of western man.
Remarkable disjunctions in the distributions of neotropical birds have been explained by their deliberate introduction to new areas by pre-Columbian bird-fanciers.
Thus Haemig has argued that between 1486 and 1502, the great-tailed grackle (Quiscalus mexicanus) was introduced from its original home in Veracruz to the Valley of Mexico by the Aztec Emperor, Auitzotl.
Similarly, the painted jay, Cyanocorax dickeyi, in western Mexico is found some 4000km from the possibly conspecific white-tailed jay, C. mystacalis of Ecuador and Peru, and may thus be another pre-Columbian exotic introduction.
Again, tiger teeth found in Bornean caves are believed to have been placed there by man and not to indicate the former presence of the animal on that island.
CHAPTER NINE
THE CHANGING FOREST TODAY
We have already observed.
that the most luxurious vegetation of spontaneous growth affords us certain proof that the soil which has produced it will prove equally favourable for the production of the usual objects of culture (George Finlayson Mission to Siam and Hué…in the years 1821–2 (1826) p.57)
By the time of his explorations in South America (1799–1804), von Humboldt's suggestion that the Amazon should be deforested on a large scale to improve agriculture was part of the European view of how tropical territories might be developed.
With the establishment of colonies as opposed to trading posts, came the need for production and exports over and above what had sustained the earlier economic relationships between the West and the tropics.
In the Amazon, the numbers of Indians declined, ceasing to be a threat to western expansion, so that by the second half of the last century, they were becoming more of a curiosity, regarded as anachronistic impediments to progress, which had to be educated on Christian lines on the one hand, the true lords of the territory to be given their freedom on the other.
In Brazil, there came a romanticism of Indian life, though by the time of the establishment of the Republic in 1889, they had few rights and the rubber boom brought entrepreneurs to the uppermost headwaters of the Amazon followed by railways and telegraph lines.
Developers hired murderers to exterminate Indians while in the coastal cities a pro-Indian movement gathered strength and by 1910 an ‘Indian Protection Service’ was formed.
By then the population of Indians, about a million, was just over a quarter what it had been at the time of the European colonizations of the sixteenth century.
Many groups have entirely disappeared except as blood mixed with immigrant blacks and whites, but some tribes resisted, to the despair of well-wishers imbued with the inevitability of Euro-Christian civilization.
They rejected the new ideas offered to or forced  upon them, convinced that their ancient ways were more appropriate to the forest in which they lived.
In general, however, the needs of tropical territories meshed into the modern economic order, have meant that the first wave of human invaders in the rain forest have had to take second place to the exploitation of the second wave.
The effect on the indigenous peoples has been debilitating in that their loss of faith in, for example, indigenous medicine has been combined with a realization of the ineffectiveness of western medicine in treating psychosomatic illness.
Besides the introduced diseases, they have suffered demoralization as qualities such as prowess in hunting, traditionally so significant, are no longer valued.
The dominant cultures have very often not understood their ways, have gaped at their nakedness and laughed at the rituals they do not understand.
But most significantly they have lost the use of their traditional lands.
This has been due to agriculture and forestry activities, which must now be considered.
9.1 Forest conversion
9.1.1 Farming and gardening
The slash-and-burn type of shifting cultivation has been used continuously for some 2000 years in Indomalesia, each patch being cropped for only 2 or 3 years, the people at a density of some five or fewer cultivators per km 2 .
It is a practical and successful way of using land used throughout the tropics under different names, where poor soils, steep slopes and heavy rainfall obtain.
It is successful where temperate zone type methods are not, and is generally held to be the most efficient in terms of soil recovery.
Formerly considered the bane of tropical forests, perhaps in part as a way of keeping the ‘peasant’ economy distinct from the (colonial) plantation one, despite the fact that such was freely integrated in the system of exporting natural products, e.g. most of Indonesia's pepper, coffee, coconuts, tobacco and rubber is grown thus, it is now praised, possibly too much so, as a result of the increasing romanticization of forest living, for shifting cultivation is changing.
With the arrival of western man, who took spices and introduced new crops, has come plantation agriculture and a reduction in the mortality rate.
Smallholder agriculture has led to the concentration of people being three times that that would support shifting cultivation in some areas.
There is insufficient time for the land to recover between cultivations and, largely through the agency of western man, exotic weeds become established and   encroach on the smallholdings.
Inevitably, more forest land is brought under cultivation to counter this (Figure 9.1).
Before man started burning the forest, fires were the result of lightning, which is common in the tropics, and possibly of falling rocks and, in wooded savanna, fermentation under compaction.
In New Guinea, in the seasonal forests of the Gogol Valley, is evidence of major fires, for Intsia spp.
(Leguminosae), which readily regenerate after fire, make up some 25% of the log volume there.
In Africa, it is argued that man was using fire at least 50–55 000 years ago, taking coals from camp to camp and using the fire to smoke out bees from their nests in honey-hunting, or driving game.
This probably also occurred in the drier types of forest and savanna.
Nevertheless, tropical rain forest may be flammable at the edges, so that savanna may spread.
It has been calculated that because of burning, only some 60% of Africa potentially covered with forest actually bears it today.
Fires set to control weeds on degraded pastures also spread, particularly to selectively logged areas as in Para, Brazil, as the gaps left have tracks connecting them and plenty of fuel: such have had devastating effects in Borneo during seasonal droughts (see section 2.2.2).
The effects of fire are to increase light intensity at the ground, affecting germination but also the fauna and flora of the soil.
There is an increase in evaporation and  rain has more impact.
Nitrogen is rapidly lost but immediately available potassium, magnesium and calcium increase as input from the ash.
Run-off is increased, especially on slopes, and there may be marked compaction or other deterioration of the soil structure.
Burnt sites improve grazing and tend to concentrate herbivores such as elephant and buffalo or antelope, some of which, in turn, attract concentrations of carnivores.
Increased clearing in the Ituri forest, Zaire, seems not to have much affected the abundance of 16 out of 19 mammal species examined, though okapi, yellow-back duikers and leopards are less abundant.
After burning in the Indomalesian region, grasses appear and, if these are left without grazing or burning, will slowly be replaced by the forest.
If there is grazing or cutting, the grass composition may change and, if burnt, it may become dominated by lalang (Imperata cylindrica) a grass that is very difficult to eradicate.
Continuous use of the land for cropping leads to declining yields, such that rice production, for example, may be halved in 3 years, partly due to nutrient removal, erosion, the physical deterioration of the soil and partly to the multiplication of pests and diseases and an increase in competition from weeds.
Relic terraces and raised fields in the Mayan lowlands of Central America have been interpreted as indicative of a settled, sophisticated, intensive, prehistoric agriculture, rather than shifting cultivation, which collapsed for just these reasons.
Of the many explanations for the collapse in the ninth century after such intensive cultivation without metals for 6–16 centuries, the most plausible is that it resulted from sustained failures of maize due to a leafhopper-borne virus, maize mosaic virus, which may have originated in northern South America at roughly the same time as maize was brought to the Caribbean by the Arawak about the time of Christ.
Indeed, archaeologists now believe it was due to agricultural mismanagement combined with a booming population, for investigation of a major palace in the site at Copan, Honduras, has revealed that there was only a small contingent of specialist workers employed in constructing the elaborate structure, in other words that this was not enough to overburden the economy as is sometimes alleged to be the cause of the collapse of that civilization.
Certain soils, like the Kalahari and Benin sands of Africa carry good forest, but, if cleared, only two worthwhile crops can be grown.
The luxuriance of tropical forest deceived many colonists from Europe, their efforts being commemorated by scrub and bare rock, nowhere more markedly than the ‘Joden Savanna’ of Surinam, the result of a short-lived farming attempt by Jewish refugees 150 years ago.
The traditional forest cultivators are now being joined in many parts of  the world by subsistence peasants, new arrivals, pushing further and further into the forest, often along paths or tracks cut by lumbermen.
In Peru, for example, people from the Andes are moving down and across as a front into the Amazon plain.
It has been estimated that in the early 1980s there were 240–300 million people involved in shifting cultivation who occupied perhaps half of the total tropical land surface.
They were converting the forest at a rate of some 100000 km 2 per annum.
The greatest effect is in Indomalesia, where some 85 000 km 2 are thought to be lost each year.
In short, farming is reducing the rain forest by 1.5% of its area annually.
This rate is likely to increase as many of the countries with moist forests — Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, Kenya, Madagascar, peninsular Malaysia, Peru, Philippines, Thailand, Uganda, Vietnam and all of West Africa and Central America — have high population growth rates.
Furthermore, pressed by urban problems and sometimes apparently with other motives, several countries, such as Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia (where, since  1905 , at least 2.5 million people have been moved from crowded Java, Bali and Lombok, to the ‘outer’ islands — an official figure where two or three times this number may have emigrated unassisted) and Peru are promoting transmigration schemes so that it is projected that the number of forest farmers could double or increase even more than that.
It has been argued that continuous agriculture could be maintained if a closed nutrient cycle could be achieved, the canopy not perforated so that leaching would be prevented and the forest floor would not deteriorate, and if nutrients were added to equal those exported as crops and the diversity of species maintained.
The problems to be added to this list of desiderata, making this theoretical model almost impossible to attain, include the problem of all year-round warmth, so that there is no respite from pests and diseases, a rapid breakdown of litter and subsequently enhanced leaching after the harvest of the crop.
Furthermore, the social aspirations of the cultivators themselves in a climate where actual and potential production per man per year is less than in temperate countries, and such simple facts as the rapid rotting of produce, have to be taken into account.
The mixture theory is also matched by the fact that, in practice, many crops have had their natural resistances, whether they be chemical or mechanical, or indeed temporal like staggered germination, bred out.
The question then comes back to tackling the problem of how yield could be improved using traditional methods.
Such ideas as the use of more legumes or other nitrogen-fixers and the ingenious use of nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the floating fern, Azolla, in paddy fields in southern China offer a ray of hope.
Remarkable systems used by Chinese farmers in western Borneo merit  further attention.
Here grains, pepper and rubber and many vegetable crops are interspersed with fishponds and livestock grazing, enabling the people to make permanent use of impoverished soils.
Farming, then, is the biggest devourer of rain forest.
Perhaps the region that has received most attention in the press in this context is Amazonia.
Formerly the Amazon region was more thinly populated than the Sahara, containing perhaps some 50000 people, and importing food.
The government's plan was to cut a 70m wide swathe through the forest for a major highway and that 100km both sides of this was to be developed.
Every poor family that moved there from the crowded east of Brazil was to have about 100 ha and a small house.
There was to have been an ‘agropolis’ every 50 km and a ‘ruropolis’every 150 km.
All the colonists were supposed to feed themselves, though each of the plots was supposed to be left half-covered with forest.
Such an idea led to isolated fragmentation of the forest, but in the 10 years up to 1977 over 11000 km of roads were built and settlers moved in.
Land was given away and there were tax incentives to exploit the area, though increasingly it was large-ranching projects and multinational interests that took more and more land.
By 1977, then, there were 300 cattle ranches and 6 million head of cattle, while a fifth of the forest had disappeared.
In the 7 years up to 1977, 7389 families were established as opposed to the goal of 100 000 by 1974, largely because of poor agricultural yields, in part due to the use of the wrong rice cultivar for Amazonia, problems of storage of produce and of predators and pests, in an imported technology that was too temperate-oriented.
The timber was burnt rather than used or sold.
Such large companies as Volkswagen, which burnt down 120000ha, became involved.
It was found that certain valuable cash crops like coffee, cocoa, oil palm and pepper grew well along rivers and that under the forest there was probably enough iron ore to meet world demand for 400 years, large deposits of bauxite, gold, nickel, copper and tin.
Thought of as a model for Amazonia, the great Jari scheme, where 4 million ha of land were bought along the Jari, a tributary of the Amazon, was planned to combine the mining and smelting of bauxite with logging, rice-growing and the establishment of plantations for pulp, as a world shortage of paper was envisaged.
Over 4500km of roads, four towns, an airport, railway, a port, schools and hospitals were built, the pulp mill came from Japan and was floated thence up the Amazon.
Timber had been removed without nutrient replacement and there were major weed problems in the rice.
Bulldozers were used to clear 1.6 million ha for Gmelina arborea (Verbenaceae), which can yield up to 30 m 3 per ha per annum, but the best stands yielded only 14 t, the scheme overall only 3–6 t.
Pines and  Eucalyptus were tried but the pines produced only 6 t.
Planting began in 1969, but in 1981, 15 years after the scheme had begun, the whole was sold off for a fraction of almost the billion dollars that had been invested in it.
The stress on mineral extraction has left the settlers (now almost 10 million as was estimated early in 1982) in effect abandoned, and their fate is reported in terms of disputes over land, the sowing of their land with weed seeds from the air and even the poisoning of their drinking water.
A scheme, more successful from the settlers' point of view, was that in part of Ecuadorian Amazonia, where a ‘settlements first; roads second’ philosophy prevailed.
It had more egalitarian holdings, less interest by speculators (because of its remoteness) and, as the government authority tended to be weak, the settlers were more self-sufficient in setting up schools and cutting tracks and so forth; moreover, it was less costly for central government.
However, to lay claim to the land, settlers were compelled in such a milieu to be seen to clear it of trees, so the result was ecologically undesirable.
A further factor in the clearing of forest leading directly to farming is warfare.
From 1962 to 1971 during the Vietnam War, the Americans spread some 72 million litres of herbicide from the air, mostly Agent Orange and similar preparations.
About 36% of the mangrove forests were destroyed; 10.3% of inland forests besides cultivated and other lands were sprayed, some of them repeatedly.
In many areas, the recovery has been so slow that cultivators have been able to move in, while fires have been an added retardant to recovery, sometimes resulting in the familiar Imperata savanna.
9.1.2 Logging and silviculture
Wood is the most important commodity in international trade after gas and petrol, though most of it is used in the country of origin and much of it very close to source, being the only source of fuel for warmth and cooking for a third of the developing world.
In the 1980s, the world wood requirement was some 3000 million m 3 , of which, following earlier figures, some 47% was used as fuel (80% of it in the developing world), 43% for building and other ‘solid wood’ purposes (two-thirds of this in the developed world) and 10% for paper (some seven-eighths of this used in the developed world).
It is estimated that the demand by the turn of the century will be 6000 million m 3 .
So far, tropical moist forests provide little more than 10% of the total wood used as solid wood and pulp, but as temperate forests become depleted or increasingly under pressure of the ‘environmental’ lobby to be managed for functions other than production, attention will inevitably be focused on the tropical resources.
Indeed, temperate forests are worth up to 50 times more in return per unit area and some tropical countries are net importers of timber.
Nevertheless, Japan is two-thirds wooded but imports half her pulp, and the United States grows half as much again timber as it needs and could easily become self-sufficient in hardwoods.
In 1950, 4.2 million m 3 were exported to the developed world, in 1980 some 66 million m3, and this could be 95 million m 3 by the end of the century.
Even now exports surpass local consumption, and Japan takes over half of them.
Until lately, her major source has been Indomalesia, which is the origin of some 75% of the trade in tropical hardwoods.
It is alleged that by 1989 30% of the world's tropical sawlogs in trade were from the Malaysian state of Sarawak, where forest was being lost at a rate of 3 ha per minute and the resistance of the local Punan to this had been contained.
Certainly, world production and export of tropical logs and wood-products is dominated by Malaysia, Indonesia and Philippines and, in 1984, this trade was worth $4 billion dollars a year.
The bulk of it was unprocessed but there have been moves towards processing it away from Japan and the industrialized countries of the region.
Recently it has become possible to convert simultaneously wood chips of a hundred or more hardwood species into paper pulp, which is important, as it is estimated that paper consumption will increase more than that of timber.
The average citizen in the developed world uses over 155 kg of paper per annum(325 kg in the United States), whereas in the developing world, the average citizen uses less than 5 kg.
It is estimated that demand in the developing world will increase by some 2.75 times per citizen and that in the developed world some three times, so that the proportion consumed in the tropical world is going to increase.
Some parts of the developed world, much of western Europe for example, are self-sufficient in pulp, but Japan is heavily dependent on foreign sources.
At first, very few species were extracted for export.
In South America, the mahoganies, Swietenia spp., were much sought after, so that today, they have suffered through genetic erosion to such an extent that often they are not worth exploiting, only those of poor form having been left in the forests to set seed.
Some species have been almost exterminated, e.g. Per.sea theobromifolia (Lauraceae), formerly the ‘mahogany’ of Ecuador is now known from only 12 trees.
In other forests only the greenheart, Oeotea rodiaei (Lauraceae), was exploited, the rest of the forest unused.
In the Brazilian Amazon, exploitation was first in the varzea and igapo, but, since the 1970s, in the terra firme as well.
Before the building of roads, it was peripheral and resembled that practised for the previous 350 years.
In 1951, six species accounted for 89% of the harvest, 24% by volume being O. cymbarum and another 40% the meliaceous timbers — Cedrela odorata.
Swietenia macrophylla and Carapa guianensis cut close to the high water mark and floated downstream on the rising waters.
Although there were losses to insects during the wait for the rise, some 60% of the logs travelled 1500 km.
By 1973, there was still only 20% of the total from terra firme, but towards the end of the decade the proportion was over 40%, mainly C. odorata and S. macrophylla; only some 20–40 species were acceptable to sawmills.
Only some 50 of the thousands of species in the Amazon as a whole are commercially exploited, though up to 400 may have some value.
Africa exports only 35, of which 10 make up some 70%.
So poorly known were the timbers in West Africa, that at the beginning of the century the houses and offices for British colonial civil servants were built from imported coniferous timber.
In Indomalesia, there is concentrated interest in fewer than 100 species with exports of 12 or so.
lt is remarkable that despite these low numbers of species, little is known of their biology and one, the sebastiao-de-arruda, a well-known timber export from Brazil since the last century, has only lately (1978) been botanically identified and given a Latin name: Dalbergia decipularis (Leguminosae).
In Trengganu, in the Malay Peninsula, the percentage of trees used in the 1970s was 4.5–26.3%, the number of actual trees being 2.5–12.5 per ha.
Because lianes often tie together several trees, felling of one tree may lead to considerable damage to others, while logging tracks (Figure 9.2) may take up to 10% or even 30% of the forest area.
It is estimated that in south-east Asia, some third or two-thirds of the residual trees are damaged irreparably while up to a third of the area is left as bare ground, often compacted by the forestry machinery.
It is argued that greater care in extraction would lead to a higher price of the timber but, in hill-forest in Sarawak planned systems using directional felling are said to reduce logging damage by half without incurring additional costs.
Nevertheless, logged forests are fireprone and, in Borneo, this has led to the devastation discussed in Chapter 2.
In those fires in Sabah, 38–94% of the trees in logged forests were killed, 19–71 % in unlogged nearby, with more than 80% mortality of saplings in both.
The effect on arboreal animals is largely to force them to leave logged forest and, as forests diminish, to promote their overcrowding.
This is indicated by more frequent calling and, in the orang-utan, to fewer young, as the secondary forest is less acceptable to the apes, which prefer the   strangling figs of the ‘primary’ forest.
Where selective logging is at a low density (10 stems per ha) in Pahang, West Malaysia, infant mortality in all primates is greatly increased, perhaps because of injuries due to the female adults having to make greater leaps from crown to crown across gaps or abandonment in the face of human presence or possibly reduction in available food.
Nevertheless, the indications are that the populations recover if not disturbed again.
Of ground-living mammals in Malaya over half of the species are forest animals and the elimination of the forest leads to the elimination of almost all the mammalian fauna except for a few rats.
Added to this is the pressure from wild-life traders for skins, eggs, live birds, and butterflies, much trafficking in which is now illegal, but nevertheless rampant.
Perhaps even more destructive than these has been the effect of orchid collectors, particularly in South America in the last century.
Large horticultural firms sent out or subscribed to the activities of professional collectors, who often employed local people to bring orchids to them and there was little hesitation in felling a tree to get a good specimen.
It is alleged that one British collector had 4000 trees felled in tracking down one particularly rare species in Colombia.
Despite resistance of markets to novelty and indeed diversity and the fact that few mills can handle a diversity of timbers, the advent of techniques for  pulping mixtures of species means that the diversity of the rain forest becomes less of a problem.
Small areas can be exploited intensively and more and more may be capable of being processed; for example, one plant in Colombia produces pulp, adding tropical hardwoods to long-fibre coniferous chips (30%).
Although timbers with high levels of latex, silica or high density are avoided there; another plant in New Guinea can now utilize wood from up to 200 species, including dead and defective trees, so that yields have already increased by some 300%.
On the other hand, desolation in these areas is total.
This plant exports the chips to Japan for processing but the scheme to replace the original forest with plantation to sustain the plant indefinitely has foundered because it has not been demonstrated that timber-growing is a worthwhile economic activity that does not threaten ownership of the land.
Moreover, with more recycling in Japan, long-fibred coniferous pulp from the Pinus radiata plantations of New Zealand and Chile is necessary for this, and increased imports from USA in the form of chips to help redress the balance of trade, there is little incentive for the plant owners.
It has been suggested that rather than rely on plantation, natural regeneration should be encouraged by clearing 200m swathes through the forest.
Narrower strips, perhaps 50 m wide have been suggested as appropriate in Amazonia, such strips being gardened for some years and replanted with trees as well; seed and mycorrhizae sources are close by.
Until fairly recently, tropical silviculture has largely relied on natural regeneration.
‘Refinement’ or the reduction of competition from non-usable species, often leads to a considerable increase in the area occupied by the crop, so that once this is cut, there are lots of gaps for pioneers.
Sometimes these are valuable, as in the case of Funtumia elastica (Apocynaceae) in Uganda, a source of rubber.
Systems involving the repeated return to the forest and removal of the best trees are referred to as ‘polycyclic’.
These cause repeated damage to the forest, including saplings of desirable species, and lead to the problem of genetic erosion of the crop, and are also difficult to administer.
Compared with the continuous damage, though small clearings, of polycyclic systems, monocyclic ones involve clearing large areas at one coup but there is then less disturbance in the time thereafter.
In Malaysia, for example, there was a change from polycyclic buffalo extraction to monocyclic mechanical extraction: now, dependent on the site, the range of possibilities with these as extremes is considerable.
When natural regeneration is difficult or inadequate, it may be supplemented artificially by  planting out nursery-raised trees —‘enrichment’— in gaps, lines or groups.
In most extreme cases, close planting may require the clear-felling of the forest.
In 1980, only 4.4% of tropical forest was under active management, and half of that was in India.
Of the 828 million ha of productive tropical forest left in 1985, only some 850000 or so were demonstrably under sustained-yield management in the producer countries of the International Timber Trade Organization.
Indeed, there has been widespread belief that management is not really feasible despite the fact that, in terms of producing a naturally-regenerating stand of timber trees without any sign of soil deterioration, there has been success for over a century, beginning with teak in southern Asia.
Dawkins has suggested that, for success, the desired species should be commonly occurring pioneers, that there should be relatively easily controllable climbers, while ground-cover must be maintained.
However, ‘mega-mechanization’, short-term financial calculations discounting the sustention of biological and soil factors (and thus favouring plantations), inadequate provision for silvicultural programmes or even the removal of the successful forests themselves have made the systems seem not to be viable.
To establish a tropics-wide base for sustainable timber production, permanent ‘forest estates’ have to be established in the producer countries, with high public profiles and proper controls and more co-operation between the trade and environmental movements to create the best conditions for such management in appropriate forest lands.
Ecologically-based silviculture classifies the regeneration characteristics or syndromes into three major but overlapping categories, viz. (i) the pioneers (partially fire-tolerant) and the gapfillers (fire-sensitive), both incapable of establishment or growth in the shade, e.g. Albizia, Tectona (teak), Ochroma (balsa), Macaranga;(ii) trees of the consolidation phase, which are only capable of rapid growth when exposed, i.e. are light-demanding later in life, e.g. Swietenia, Shorea, Triplochiton (obeche), Khaya, Carapa; and (iii) the trees that are shade-bearers throughout life and are incapable of rapid growth in the sun. e.g. Ocotea.
The pioneering syndrome was discussed in Chapter 5, but in terms of silviculture, its important features are the relative longevity of seeds, the large annual growth increments — 2 –10m in height (10m in Paraserianthes (Albizia) Jalcatoria), 10–20 cm in bole diameter the short lived nature of the tree and the light, perishable wood.
The second group has shorter seed longevity and rarer seeding, germination in the open in some or in the shade in others, trees  living for 100–300 years and producing light to dark woods of medium weight.
The last group is the least known: the trees grow very slowly, live at least 300 years and produce dark, heavy, close-grained wood, much of which is unusable.
The manipulation of forest successional cycles can be seen as the ecological basis of tropical silviculture.
The first-stage trees are largely used for pulp, while the second-stage ones are the bulk of the tropical timber industry.
Many of these timbers are referred to as ‘mahogany’ of which some 200 sorts, many not true mahoganies (Meliaceae) but with timber features like them, have been listed.
The third-stage timbers have specialized, if any, uses.
Notable is greenheart, used for locks and harbour fittings and ports, as in the Panama Canal, for it withstands sea water well.
Restrictions on silviculture in the tropics are most striking in the area of soil properties; for example, the pisolites of parts of West Africa are some 10 m deep with no obvious horizons and, although trees grow well at first , they later collapse and the removal of the forest leads to desolation resembling a gravel pit.
Building on the experiences of mixed tree and herbaceous cropping, or agrisilviculture, elaborate ecologically-based schemes have been proposed, using a succession from grass and herb crops to shrubby and mixed perennial crops with an understorey of shade demanders.
Such a system in Central America begins with maize and beans followed by cassava and banana and palms, then cocoa with rubber and, finally, timber trees of the Meliaceae.
Pressures for increased production are forcing out the naturally regenerating forests as commercial propositions, though very specialized woods are difficult to grow otherwise.
Plantations favour pioneers such as the pines, Pinus kesiya and P. merkusii, in the Indomalesian region.
Plantations outyield by almost 10 times managed ‘natural’ forest and these pines have a long fibre suitable for pulp, but hardwoods, notably Eucalyptus spp. yield higher total amounts of dry matter, and the most productive may yield up to twice that of the best pines.
Much research is now directed to the vegetative propagation of high-yielding clones, despite the potential danger of growing genetically identical monocultures over wide areas.
Though increasing rapidly, plantation probably still occupies less than 18 million ha in the tropics (about 15% of the world's plantations), an area of the same order of magnitude as that lost to agriculture annually.
Of all such plantations, 85% are of pines, teak or Eucalyptus.
9.1.3 Ranching
In 1940, there were about 400000 km 2 of forest in Central America and this was reduced to about half by 1987, compared with perhaps 500000km 2 standing at the time of the arrival of Europeans in the early sixteenth century, when there was a large population: the Mayas with shifting cultivation and intensive terraced agriculture.
With slavery and introduced disease, the population was reduced by 90% within two generations and, by 1550, there was a plantation economy exporting sugar, cocoa, indigo and cochineal but large amounts of the land originally cultivated reverted to forest.
After independence in the 1820s, an expanding plantation economy removed the forest and became dominated by coffee and bananas, with a dangerous reliance on a few exports.
With world price fluctuations in these commodities, diversification was sought by the 1940s, firstly cotton and then cattle.
Beef demand in the United States increased to a level equivalent to 60 kg per head per annum by 1976, but increasing prices there encouraged commercial interest in Central American beef.
However, such beef is lean as the animals are fed on grass rather than grain, so that it is fit only for the fast-food trade, one third of this meat goes into hamburgers.
The trend was reversing by 1980 with American consumption falling and exports from Central America halved by 1985.
Nevertheless, between 1950 and 1975 the amount of pasture doubled and between 1966 and 1978, perhaps as much as 80000km 2 of Brazil's forests disappeared in the formation of ranches.
After the burning of the forest, pioneer trees appear and it is burnt again, and again the following year.
The grass is then sown and it is periodically burnt thereafter to improve palatability.
With the addition of legumes and appropriate management, it is alleged that pasture productivity can be maintained but the grasslands are quickly invaded by inedible weeds such that by 1978, 20% of the pasture area in Amazonia was degraded.
There are also major problems with compaction and the abandoned ranches become covered in a stunted tangle of indigenous pioneers and exotics.
9.1.4 Fuel
At present, only a small part of the fuel used in tropical countries is taken from tropical rain forest, little of it from ‘primary’ forest.
Usually, it is gathered in scrub or secondary vegetation or local woodlots are utilized.
Nevertheless, local supplies may become exhausted and, with an increase in  the use of charcoal, particularly in urban areas, forests far away are beginning to be affected.
Thus forests far from Bangkok are being converted into charcoal, as are those of northwest Kenya for the Nairobi market.
The reduction of fuel availability leads to the use of dung, some 400 million tons of which are burnt in Africa and Asia alone each year.
On the face of it, this seems good, but it must be remembered that each tonne used for fuel instead of as a fertilizer means a yield loss of some of 50 kg in grain production, for example.
9.2 The prospects
An attempt at modelling the future role of tropical forests in the world economy had the export of tropical hardwoods doubling between 1986 and 2000 with the opening up of industries in other countries.
This demand was extrapolated from the projected growth in such countries' gross national product.
There was a projected shift of leading exporters from south-east Asia to tropical America as domestic consumption increased in the Asia-Pacific regions and as stocks became depleted.
Because of the time needed to grow trees, plantations already established would not, before 2020, be capable of balancing that removed from natural forests, which would, in consequence, be under continued pressure.
Imposed management is a necessary desideratum, as 11.3 million ha of mature forest land is being lost annually.
Of this, 5.1 million is being converted to forest fallow, of which, in 1982, there was 409 million, with only 1 million ha of unforested land being taken over by natural regeneration.
Looking at different parts of the tropical world, it has been noted that by 1981 only 20% of all rain forests including tropical ones in Australia remained when compared with the total at European settlement (1788) and that there were only a few thousand ha left in northern Queensland, all accessible forest outside National Parks having been (or likely to be) logged, leaving an archipelago of ‘refugia’.
By 1983, Costa Rica had lost 78% of its wet lowland forest and all of its dry; by 1987 the Indonesian rain forests had been reduced from 65 million ha to 20 million and the Philippines from 16 million to one, though both countries had by then banned the export of unprocessed logs.
Only 5O of the Madagascar rain forest presently survives and little remains of the Atlantic coastal forest of Brazil.
Myers has estimated that by the end of the century, at present rates, there will be only two relict blocks: western Brazilian Amazonia and Zaire, with smaller ones in New Guinea and the Guyana Shield of South  America, but that these are unlikely to last beyond 2050 because of cultivation as, for example, the population in Rondonia in south Brazilian Amazonia increased from 1100 in 1975 to well over a million by 1986, with an increase in cultivation from 1250km 2 to 10000 in 1982 and 17000 in 1986.
With such projections, then, over the next few decades, the world will lose the bulk of the rain forest remaining today.
Many thousands of species of plants and animals will become extinct.
Myers estimates a rate of loss of species from tropical rain forest at 10000 a year and compares this to a major ‘evolutionary spasm’, but unlike previous ones such as the end of the dinosaurs, the present phase has the plants as well as the animals in decline.
The explorers' accounts of the unending forests of the nineteenth century will seem as fabulous as mediaeval bestiaries.
Politics and economics have heeded the advice of biologists and conservationists but little.
Even where money could be made through tourism by conserving forests with their complement of birds and other animals to attract visitors, the animals have been shot and agriculture has encroached.
This has led to the regazetting of boundaries and the diminishing of reserves.
In this gloomy state of affairs, attention is being focused on the possibility of rehabilitation of habitats.
This idea has borne some fruit in temperate countries, where spoil-tips, gravel-pits and other industrial eyesores have been returned to some sort of semblance of native vegetation with its associated fauna.
What are the possibilities in the tropics?
9.2.1 Soils
In the Upper Rio Negro Region of southern Venezuela, a study on the recovery of caatinga forest was carried out.
Two plots were cut and one of these was burnt after cutting.
Shortly afterwards, an area nearby was bulldozed to make way for radar-tracking equipment.
The sites were reexamined (Figure 9.3) 3 years after the initial disturbance, and recovery measured in terms of vegetation composition, biomass, nutrient accumulation, soil characteristics and nutrient leaching.
The cut site was densely populated with many species of forest trees, the tallest of which had developed as coppice, while the burnt site had a loose canopy of pioneering Cecropia spp. 7m tall, and the bulldozed site had a thin layer of herbs, notably Xyris sp.
The nutrient levels in the soil were higher, even 3 years after disturbance, in both the cut and cut-and-burnt sites, than in the surrounding untouched forest, probably because of steady transfer of nutrients from the forest ash to the soil.
In the bulldozed plots they were    lowest of all, because the topsoil had been removed.
The above-ground biomass in the cut site was 1291 g/m 2 , in the cut-and-burnt 879 g/m 2 , while in the bulldozed only 77 g/m 2 .
From these figures, it was calculated that it would take some 100 years for the cut and cut-and-burnt sites to attain biomass levels of the original forest, while for the bulldozed forests, it is estimated that 1000 years would be needed.
Two forests in Costa Rica, one wet and one dry, also received cutting treatments.
Biological features of the colonizing vegetation were seen to change with time and from the rate of change in these features a time for ecosystem recovery was calculated.
Using mean seed weight, which increases with time, as a parameter, it was found that the dry site would take about 150 years to revert to the conditions obtaining in the original forest, whereas in the wet forest, the figure of 1000 years was obtained once again.
This is far longer than in temperate ecosystems.
On the Rio Negro in Amazonia it apparently takes 80 years to reach half the mature biomass, suggesting that a return to forest is possible.
Total stocks of calcium and potassium increase, apparently because of atmospheric input, phosphorus through mobilization of insolubles in the soil and nitrogen partly by biological fixation.
Nitrification is higher under slash-and-burn regimes than under primary forest in southwest Venezuela and is apparently regulated by ammonium activity.
In northern Queensland, soil under rain forest had markedly higher organic carbon, nitrogen, acid-extractable phosphorus and exchangeable calcium, magnesium and potassium than soil under a 41-year-old plantation of Araucaria cunninghamii.
The loss of nutrients here is probably due to the original clearing of the forest and subsequent uptake by the crop.
Soil-nutrients have been found to be at similar levels as under mature forest, at least so far as phosphorus, organic carbon and nitrogen are concerned, though the pH and cation concentrations are higher.
Lowuse sites were found to be depleted only in nitrogen though the heavily used ones were depleted of potassium and magnesium and possibly of calcium and phosphorus as well.
The soils of the secondary fernlands of southwestern Sri Lanka are dominated by Dicranopteris linearis.
Rain-forest litter in situ is reduced by 63% in I year, but only by 41.7% in the fernland; fernland litter is reduced by 24.6% in the forest but only 15.7% in situ.
Immobilization of nitrogen occurs in both types in both sites but phosphorus is immobilized only in the fern litter.
Burning of the Dicranopteris, which acts as a nutrient-conservation system, leads to its shooting out from the rhizomes but trees cannot get established.
For the growth of a forest, the fires have to be stopped and some enrichment planting of  early successional species tried, e.g. Canarium zeylanicum (Burseraceae), Artocarpus nobilis (Moraceae) and Vitex pinnata (Verbenaceae), etc. to restore the tree cover.
Losses of soil through erosion vary greatly: under closed forest it may be 2.55 t per ha per annum in Trinidad, less than a tonne in Java or 0.41 in French Guyana, while under secondary forest in Madagascar it was nil, but up to 9 t when cleared and cultivated.
Under Eucalyptus plantation it was 0.025 but, under other crops, up to 59 t.
Loss of organic matter in the upper layers of the soil was found to be at a rate of 9% per annum in the first 2 years in Trinidad, while after clear-felling and burning in Ghana, up to 13% was lost per annum and up to 33% of the cations.
On volcanic soils in the Solomon Islands, even higher figures have been recorded.
In 22 years, croplands in Costa Rica lost 60% of their calcium and 25% of their magnesium even though the fields in the first year were higher than the surrounding forest in these ions, through ash input.
In Colombia, a forest of known bioelement constitution was subjected to treatments leading to burnt and unburnt fallow.
These treatments led to cation losses of 100–240 kg per ha per annum calcium and 30–80 of magnesium, for example, but it was estimated that such would be restored through rainfall input over 10–20 years of fallow; the 1300 1400kg of nitrogen appears to be more easily replaced as fixation rates of 100–150 kg per ha per annum were recorded.
When forest is cut in Amazonia, cations from the burn de-acidify the soil, releasing phosphorus from iron and aluminium compounds, but leaching rapidly removes the cations, only 18% of the standing crop potassium remaining after 3 years, while in crops only 3% of the nitrogen was incorporated (only 1 % in the edible parts), 12% of the calcium (1% in edible parts) 24%, potassium (4% in edible parts) and 5% of the phosphorus (1% in the edible parts).
As the cations are leached, the acidity rises and the phosphorus becomes re-locked with the iron and aluminium, so that in some cases at least, phosphorus is the first limiting nutrient.
In the Rio Negro region, there is a large increase in leachate of potassium, magnesium and nitrate in the first 2 years after burning, but, by the fifth year, it is not significantly different from those in undisturbed forest, when the general nutrient levels are similar to those in mature forest.
Fires associated with cultivation volatilize 300–700kg nitrogen per ha from vegetation and surface-litter and a further 500–2000 disappear from the surface soils in the next year or two.
If overall losses are estimated at 1000 kg per ha per year, then the 20–25 million ha under shifting cultivation or permanent conversion from forest to other uses, generate more than the total nitrogen  delivered by rivers to the oceans.
At Turrialba in Costa Rica, the mineralization of nitrogen is higher in secondary forest there than in most forests so far measured elsewhere.
With disturbance the rate is further increased by two or three times and then decreased to comparable levels after 6 months or so, the short-lived increase representing 300–400kg nitrogen released to the site.
The nitrogen level in the microbial biomass was only 50% of the original 1 year after clearing and remained low; little mineralized nitrogen was lost to the atmosphere by denitrification but much may be retained low in the soil profile.
From a practical viewpoint, it has been found that Eucalyptus deglupta becomes established best in enrichment sites rather than after clearing or burning, apparently because of greater nitrogen availability in the unburnt system.
Such reduces the need for supplementary fertilizers.
Amazon soils cannot provide nutrients from the parent material as can soils in temperate regions because the Basin has a Tertiary deposit of kaolinite derived from the sediments eroded from the surrounding highlands, but in some areas are patches of black soil, developed by the Indians for intensive cultivation by addition of organic matter.
Such patches still retain high levels of fertility.
Interest has therefore been taken in the effect of adding fertilizer in an attempt at rehabilitation.
In a study, again in Costa Rica, the vegetation biomass, nutrient content and species composition were measured during the first year after clear-cutting of plots, some of which were treated with commercial inorganic fertilizer (70kg N, 87.5kg P and 166kg K per hectare) while others were planted with the pioneering Cecropia obtusifolia, as seedlings.
These latter plots produced the highest biomass and nutrient standing crop while neither of these features was enhanced in similar plots that had been fertilized.
The plots allowed to regenerate naturally were dominated by shrubs and trees on the unfertilized ones, though by herbs on those that had been fertilized.
These latter had the lowest biomass and the lowest nutrient standing crop.
In short, fertilization enhanced neither the build-up of biological materials nor the capture of nutrients by it.
It merely retarded the successional process by enhancing the competitive ability of the herbs, in this case Phytolacca rivinoides (Phytolaccaceae), which dominated.
A similar retardation has been recorded from Fiji where the fertilizer applied was some 195 kg P per hectare.
Continuous agricultural crop production on tropical rain-forest lands hinges on the application of fertilizer and rather sophisticated advice and soil analyses year by year for success.
Tropical soils often have too little zinc for rice or citrus, or molybdenum for legumes while reclaimed peats  have too little copper for many crops, while there are low levels of nitrogen and phosphorus almost everywhere.
Some nitrogen-fixing trees are useful, e.g. Inga jinicil (Leguminosae), used as a coffee-shade in Mexico, fixes more than 40 kg nitrogen per ha per year, though I vera fixes none.
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria inhabit the rhizosphere of some tropical grasses but the amounts fixed for sugar-cane and rice, about 30kg per ha per year at a maximum, are unlikely to satisfy crops, though they may be of significance in pasture and natural ecosystems.
After clearing there seems to be a predictable cycle: firstly a phosphorus deficiency, then nitrogen, then phosphorus again.
Nitrogen is abundant to begin with but there is an initial shortage of phosphorus because of its immobility, but nitrogen soon falls through leaching and uptake.
Later, roots reach deeper phosphorus and this therefore is not limiting though nitrogen is, but later still all the phosphorus available has been taken up and is being recycled.
Therefore in the early stages nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer will improve growth, but the sooner the deep-rooted mycorrhizal species become established, the quicker there will be self-sufficiency in phosphorus, though phosphorus is likely to be limiting as the agroecosystem matures.