

Five
Willi, at first, couldn't see the appeal of the designs submitted by Madge Grimsilk.
‘Lehar is always Viennese,’ he protested.
‘Even when the operetta is set in Paris or St Petersburg, it is always Viennese in style, with traditional Viennese costumes and turn of the century sets.
You can't have a Lehar operetta with the audience sitting in a fairy ballroom.
Think of those wonderful productions at the Volksoper!
I am told that even in London, at Sadler's Wells and the Coliseum, they copy our Viennese style.’
‘Oh, Willi!
All those red velvet curtains and golden tassels, and settees with little golden legs.
Aren't you tired of those productions?’
‘No,’ said Willi stubbornly.
‘I like Luxembourg to be the way it always has been.
It doesn't have to be quite the same, one doesn't always have to have red and gold.
But the style should be the same.’
‘With our budget it would be a thin imitation of the Volksoper productions, Willi.
You know how much all those lavish ballgowns cost, all those urns and chandeliers and marble staircases and pages in imperial livery.
Miss Grimsilk has found a way of giving us something exciting and original at very  little cost.
It was more than I could hope for.
Just look at the carnival scene.
Luiza will be a stout elderly witch instead of a Columbine.
Much more suitable.
And your little dancer, Suzi Hoflin — you were quite right about her legs — she will make the whole thing look enchanting as a watersprite or a dragonfly instead of a ballet dancer in a mask.’
‘I should never have done that,’ Willi said gloomily.
‘Suggested Suzi as our dancer.’
‘Why ever not, my friend?
It was a good idea.
She's not exactly Pavlova, but what do you expect from a country girl who runs a dancing class?
But she moves well and is very pretty.’
‘Georg is very angry with me.
He is very cold when he is angry, very polite and correct.
He and Suzi have quarrelled and Georg believes it is all my fault.’
Busacher shrugged.
‘Children!
Mere children having a lovers’ spat.
You mustn't let your son intimidate you, Willi.
You are always telling me tales of him rebuking you.
It is your farm, after all.
You shouldn't let him depress you like this.’
‘It's all right for you.
You've never had any children.
You don't know the emotional hold they have over you.’
The Direktor was silent and when Willi looked at him he was staring down at his glass, a disconcerted expression on his face as though Willi had said something embarrassing.
‘Is something wrong, Franz?’
‘No, no.’
‘I expect I shall get used to the designs in time.
You know more about these things than I do.’
‘Of course.’
‘And Georg will come round…
I hope.’
‘Yes.’
They were sitting in the Direktor's music room, overlooking the mountains.
It was the middle of March and the snow had receded even further up the slopes.
The winter had been mild and in the Direktor's garden the green sheaths of daffodils stood well above the ground.
The two men were waiting for Gesner, the production manager, and the two members of the Gemeinderat who were on the theatre committee.
Six chairs had been placed around a small antique card table and in front of each chair were papers topped by a sheet of figures.
Willi removed the top sheet from one pile and placed it in his briefcase.
‘That's Gesner's place.
No need for him to see the balance sheet.’
‘I don't see that it would do any harm,’ said the Direktor glumly.
‘It might make him accept a cut in his fee — out of sheer good will and concern for the Hochhauser Season.’
‘Ha!’
‘The figures are only here to prove one thing.
Our other three productions for the Season can have very little spent on them.
We shall have to do three old ones from the last couple of years and get the costumes and sets from Vienna as usual.
We'll have to use all our rehearsal time for Luxembourg too — we can't possibly afford to have the full cast up here for longer than three weeks and we'll need that for the new production.’
‘What about Aschmann?’
‘She is coming next week.
Once I know what the other operettas will be, I shall work with her every day.
Some of the older ones will come a little earlier at their own expense.
Luiza and Freddi haven't worked all winter, so feel they might just as well rent out their Salzburg apartment and come up here to wait for rehearsals to begin.
I might see if I can persuade them to do some practice bits with Therese.’
‘Next week!
She is coming next week?
Where will you put her?
At the Franz Joseph?— no, that wouldn't do, Gesner stays there in the summer.
You will have to try one of the other hotels.
Perhaps I should book a suite for her, as Burgermeister, you know.
I can insist that she has the very best attention…’
‘Willi…’
‘The Franz Joseph is our grandest hotel, of course, but after that…
I suppose the Hochhauser Palace is not too bad.
It is not very close to the theatre but we can arrange for a car to take her back after every performance.’
‘Willi — she is staying at the Goldener Adler with Luiza and Freddi.
No need for a car.
It is very close to the theatre.’
‘Therese Aschmann?
Staying in a Gasthaus, with the rest of the cast?’
‘She says she will be quite comfortable there, and of course it is very inexpensive.
As a matter of fact she asked to be with Freddi and Luiza.
They are friends from the old days.’
Willi looked very dubious, but at that moment they heard voices in the lobby outside.
Frau Schmidt came in and said the gentlemen were here and please, should she bring coffee in now or later.
‘Now, please, Frau Schmidt.
We should like the coffee as soon as possible.’
The committee men slapped Willi on the shoulder, shook the Direktor's hand, stamped around the music room a bit, making flattering remarks about the view and the garden.
Stefan, a thin, grey-faced, middle-aged man with stomach ulcers who had been production manager since the Hochhauser Season had begun, sat down at the table, looked at the balance sheet and the final sentence at the bottom and took a bottle of tablets from his pocket.
‘Stomach still bad, Stefan?’ asked the Direktor kindly, and his production manager nodded.
‘Got some new tablets to get me through the Season supposed to be revolutionary — solve all problems.’
‘Frau Schmidt will be bringing you your usual glass of milk in a moment.
Gesner is late, of course.
We may as well sit down and begin with sorting out what we can afford.’
The committee men took on a new authority.
In Franz Busacher's villa they were always slightly awed.
It was the best private house in Hochhauser, and after all, he was an internationally famous name.
Artistically they felt out of their depth here, but when it came to spending the town's money they knew a lot more than Herr Busacher did.
And they weren't having him go over budget, as he had six years ago.
Willi Zimmermann took the chair.
‘We've been financially solvent for the last five years, and the surplus has all been allocated to the new production of The Count of Luxembourg.
The State grant remains the same, although in view of our rising reputation there are rumours it might be increased next year, especially if we make a success of the new production.’
A gratified rumble went around the table.
‘For the rest, you see in front of you where the money goes.
Singers’ fees have had to be raised a little to keep pace with inflation and union rates.
Maintaining the building is covered by the State grant, but there is very little left over for anything else.
‘Can't we raise the price of the tickets?’ one of the committee men asked.
‘We did that last year.
I don't think we can do it again so soon without a very noisy protest from the Tourist Board.’
‘So,’ said Stefan.
‘We come to what we more or less knew in the first place.
It's three revivals of previous productions involving as little work and expense as possible.’
The door opened and Karl Gesner entered with a flourish, turned, took the tray from Frau Schmidt who was just behind him, and placed it on the table.
‘My dear Frau Schmidt!
Allow me.
Gentlemen — forgive!
I am late.
I drove down from Vienna.
And here, a little something to enjoy with our coffee.’
He took a bottle of schnapps from his pocket.
The Direktor relaxed slightly.
Gesner had decided to be  charming, which was a relief.
Stefan looked at the schnapps and winced.
He reached out his hand for the glass of milk and took a large gulp.
The committee men shook hands with Gesner and preened.
He too was a star and it was pleasant to be able to mention that they had drunk schnapps with him at Direktor Busacher's house.
‘You've missed the depressing bit, Karl.’
‘We have no money, as usual?’
‘None to spare.
It will have to be Luxembourg, and three old ones that we've done quite recently, so that we don't have to waste too much time rehearsing them.’
‘No problem.’
Gesner opened the bottle of schnapps.
Frau Schmidt twinkled in again, this time with a tray of glasses, and Gesner smiled up at her.
‘I hope you've brought one for yourself, Frau Schmidt.
You must take a glass back to the kitchen to drink whilst preparing the Direktor's lunch.’
Frau Schmidt looked gratified but slightly overwhelmed.
‘Well no, Herr Gesner, I didn't bring a glass…
I didn't think…’
‘Have mine,’ said Stefan through his milk.
The schnapps was poured, the glasses dispensed, and Frau Schmidt sent simpering back to the kitchen.
Willi spooned several dollops of thick whipped cream on to his coffee and studied the Gugelhupf on the tray.
‘Shall I cut it?’ he said, and sliced eagerly in without waiting for an answer.
‘So,’ said Gesner, smiling affably round the table.
‘Which three productions shall we resuscitate?’
‘Fledermaus is out of the question.
It was four years ago and Ingrid couldn't cope with Adele.
I think we shall have to look at just the last two years.’
‘Gypsy Baron,’ said Gesner blandly, staring into his coffee.
The Direktor gave him a sharp glance.
‘Impossible, Karl.
You know very well Therese could not play Saffi.
It's a very young role and she has to lead the gypsy dance routine.
It's an energetic part even for a young singer.
Therese couldn't possibly manage it.’
‘I'm sure she could,’ Willi said vehemently, brushing crumbs from his stomach.
‘I saw her play Saffi twenty years ago at the Volksoper.
She was miraculous.
I would love to see her play Saffi again.
And it is Strauss!
It is always good to open the season with a Strauss.’
‘And it is one of my most popular roles,’ purred Gesner.
‘Every seat was sold out for every performance when we did it last year.’
‘I repeat, Karl,’ said Busacher coldly.
‘There is no possible way Therese could play Saffi.’
‘Then let her sing Arsena,’ smiled Gesner.
‘Ingrid will make a gallant attempt at Saffi, I'm sure, and Therese can stand quite still by the farmhouse, thus saving her energy, and sing Arsena as best she can.’
He knew, and the Direktor knew, just what sort of gallant attempt Ingrid would make.
It would do — just — although they would have to shorten some of the solos and adapt the range.
She would look all right and would throw herself into the dancing with undisciplined enthusiasm.
With  luck it would be a mediocre performance.
It was the kind of situation Gesner loved.
With Therese — who might or might not be able to sing — tucked away into a thoroughly unsuitable but static role, and Ingrid struggling along opposite him, there would be nothing, but nothing, to remove attention from Gesner.
He would flow unchallenged through his role of the Gypsy Baron, his ego fed on the ripples of admiration seeping back at him from the auditorium.
The committee men rumbled approval.
The Direktor felt, not for the first time, deeply resentful of the fact that they had any part in choosing the programme.
‘You did say, in Vienna,’ Gesner reminded him, ‘that you would be prepared to let Ingrid have a lead role in one of the productions.
You obviously have Therese in mind for Adele in the new production of Luxembourg — so much more suitable for her, an older woman — I would have thought you could let poor little Ingrid have her moment of triumph in Gypsy Baron.’
‘I don't see why Aschmann can't play Saffi,’ repeated Willi with dogged persistence.
‘Well she can't!’ snapped the Direktor.
‘It is out of the question.
All right.
We will let Ingrid play Saffi and Therese will sing Arsena.
And then we will follow it, quite naturally with Countess Maritza.
It is always best to do the two together — Gypsy Baron followed by Countess Maritza.
The audiences love the connection.
Half the English and American ladies don't realize until they've seen  it that it is linked to the Baron, and if we make a feature of that in the advance publicity we can suggest double bookings for consecutive nights.
You're quite right, Karl, when you say that every seat was sold out last year for Gypsy Baron.
So, if we advertise the two linked operettas on consecutive nights we shall sell out for Maritza as well.’
‘It is not one of my favourites.
’ Gesner was caught and couldn't think quickly enough how to veto Busacher's choice.
One of the committee men came to the Direktor's assistance.
‘Quite my favourite of all the Kalman operettas,’ he said enthusiastically.
‘And how would it be if we offered a slight reduction for buying the two tickets together?
That would make it a very attractive proposition.’
‘I don't like Maritza — all that Hungarian music is so banal.
And the screeching violin solos.
I was quite embarrassed when we did it two years ago.’
Yes, my good man, thought Busacher maliciously.
And you may well be embarrassed this year too, though not because of the violin solo.
Therese could be rather good as Countess Maritza.
It was a sophisticated role.
The Countess, like the Merry Widow, could be played at almost any age providing she was elegant.
And Maritza had the best solos too.
Possibly the twenties costumes wouldn't be too kind to Therese, but they'd do something about that when the time came.
‘Good,’ he said quickly.
‘That's a splendid idea, about the ticket reduction.
So that is settled, Gypsy Baron followed by Countess Maritza, and The  Count of Luxembourg for our new production.
Just one more.
Any suggestions?’
‘Der Zarewitsch,’ Gesner put in hurriedly, and Busacher's heart sank again.
Gesner was obviously determined to sabotage the whole Season.
The man was a fool…did he think it would do his reputation any good to appear in weak productions?
He'd been so adamant in Vienna about not looking ridiculous with the ‘fat old Frau’ and now he was suggesting productions that were totally unsuitable.
‘Not a good role for Therese,’ he said wearily.
‘Then perhaps Ingrid again?’
‘No,’ said Busacher.
‘You know she doesn't have the voice, and she'll already be covering two heavy roles if she is to lead in the Baron and sing Juliette in our new Luxembourg.
That's as much as her voice will stand, and we'll have to cut quite a lot of those anyway if she's going to get through the Season intact.’
‘Zarewitsch is a cheap production,’ said Willi thoughtfully.
‘Virtually a two-hander — one doesn't have to put a chorus on stage unless one wants to.
We could save a lot on costumes if we did that.
Trim it down a bit from two years ago.’
The Direktor prepared to fight, and then he recalled that brilliant clear voice singing ‘Einer Wird Kommen’ at the audition.
The melodies of Zarewitsch were some of the loveliest and most powerful Lehar had ever written.
Not household-humming tunes like Merry Widow or Luxembourg, but surprisingly moving.
And because they were  not so well known the audiences were always enchanted and wondered why they had never heard them before.
Of course, Therese would look ridiculous in the part — nothing they could do about that, a boy's costume was a boy's costume — but the voice, that electrifying voice rippling up and down through the registers without effort.
And if Gesner could forget his jealous ego and sing the way he was capable of singing, it could prove a powerful musical piece.
Suddenly he decided to take a chance: somehow they would get Therese on to the stage in that ridiculous boy's costume and let her sing.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘Therese shall sing Sonja.’
Gesner was surprised.
‘You're happy about that?’ he asked.
‘Perhaps one of the new singers would be better — that little creature who did small parts last year, dark hair, pleasant little tinkling voice?’
‘No.
Therese can sing Sonja.
She's coming to sing the leads, and sing them she will.’
 Gesner looked suspicious.
He had the feeling he had been outmanoeuvred but, on the face of it, he seemed to have come out quite well.
Maritza and the new Luxembourg were better for Therese than he liked, but he'd got her pushed out of the Baron and she would really look very silly singing Arsena, which was the juvenile role even if it was fairly static — and she would be even more ridiculous playing Sonja in Der Zarewitsch.
He decided to bide his time.
Once rehearsals started it would become obvious that Therese couldn't support a  romantic juvenile lead like Sonja, and they would have to do something.
If not Ingrid, then the little thing from last year.
There were several youngsters in the chorus playing understudies who would jump at the chance of having a stab at Sonja.
‘So that is settled.
Stefan, can you see about ordering the old sets and costumes?
I'll give you the cast list but it is more or less the same as last time.
A couple of new young ones in the chorus, but that's about it.’
‘I shall not require the hired costumes this season,’ said Gesner.
Stefan darted a suspicious glance across the table at him.
‘I had the chance to purchase, very reasonably, a full set of operetta wardrobe from the Volksoper.
Some slight alterations needed.
Stefan, perhaps you would be good enough to arrange for them to be collected from my apartment in Vienna and brought down here for the wardrobe woman.’
‘But they won't look right with what we're hiring,’ said Stefan.
‘They will look magnificent,’ said Gesner.
‘They belonged to Mandrika.’
Busacher blinked.
Mandrika had been one of the giants of the Volksoper and the Staatsoper.
Like Gesner he had been a big handsome man and his costumes had been lavish and spectacular.
He had retired last year and was now only doing concert work.
How on earth had Gesner persuaded the Volksoper to sell him the costumes?
‘I was intending to ask the committee for something towards my purchase.’
‘Forget it,’ said Busacher sharply, and thank God, this time the committee men and Willi thundered in behind him.
Phrases like ‘unauthorized purchase — not the responsibility of the company’ rumbled around the room.
When, finally, Gesner and the committee men and Willi had left, Stefan and Busacher began the arduous and long overdue task of organization and paperwork.
‘We must get the advance billing done as quickly as possible,’ Stefan said reprovingly.
‘They're embarrassingly late.
The Season opens in May, and apart from the fixed Luxembourg dates we've made no other announcements.’
‘Unavoidable.
We nearly didn't have a season at all until we got Aschmann.’
‘Do you want me to put her billing in the advance announcements — Aschmann starring as Adele in the sensational new Luxembourg — that kind of thing?’
The Direktor hesitated.
Things could still go wrong, even at this late stage.
Only one thing was certain.
Gesner.
‘No.
Just announce the productions and give a vague whoofle-pouffle — something like, four enchanting productions starring Karl Gesner, world famous tenor.
Then list the rest of the cast below but put Therese's name at the top, same size lettering as Alfred's.
He still brings in a few of the old fans.
And Stefan, try to write up the Luxembourg so that the emphasis is on that and it detracts from the fact that we're resurrecting those three  tired old numbers we've so often done before.
You can make a great point of the exciting English designer, say something like — a revolutionary departure: English artist brings fresh and startling look to classical Viennese works.’
‘That will ensure she gets bad notices,’ said Stefan gloomily.
The Direktor thought of Madge Grimsilk's totally impassive face and personality.
Would that passionless person mind if she got bad notices?
Stefan pulled out his folder of balance sheets.
‘We can more or less estimate the costs of the old productions now,’ he said.
‘It will be the same as last year, plus about five per cent.
I went through everything last night.
Knew we'd have to do the old ones, so I dug out all the figures of the last two years’ productions.’
Stefan was invaluable.
They really couldn't have managed without him.
‘Orchestra rates have gone up,’ the glum voice continued.
‘But I had to book them in January.
Couldn't leave it any later.’
‘Splendid, Stefan!’
‘And — I suppose it's true?
Gesner's fee is bigger this year, as always?’
‘I'm afraid so.
But on the whole I think so far we've brushed through quite well with him.’
Stefan grunted, rummaged in his folder, and produced yet another sheet of figures.
‘We've been approached by some welfare organization about group bookings.
You know, the handicapped and people in institutions.
They undertake  a booking of a minimum of fifty seats once a week if we will give a special price.
They take care of the transport and looking after the invalids.
I thought it a good idea.’
‘So it is,’ said Busacher approvingly.
‘We're by no means sold out for every performance, in spite of Gesner.
Fifty guaranteed seats once a week will give the advance bookings a most healthy look.
Well done, Stefan.
What would we do without you?
Stay and have lunch with me.
I have quite a few exciting things to tell you about this year's season.
I think you will be pleased.’
Stefan belched.
‘Could I have another glass of milk, Herr Direktor?’ he asked, and Busacher knew the Season had really begun.
Six
On the morning of the day when Therese Aschmann was due to arrive in Hochhauser, Willi spent a long time getting ready before he went to meet her at the station.
The Direktor had suggested that it was not necessary for Willi to go, that in fact it would be much better if it were just him, Busacher, and no-one else.
Willi had been deeply shocked.
‘It would be quite disgraceful not to meet her!
A great star like Aschmann arrives in Hochhauser and there is no-one from the theatre committee to greet her.
The entire committee should be there!’
‘No, no, Willi.
She would hate that.
She is very shy.
She does not want to be treated like a star.’
He had given up trying to explain to Willi that Therese was no longer a star, had not been a star for eighteen years, and even then had only been a small rising star.
He could never quite work out whether or not Willi was being deliberately naughty.
He'd told Willi the plain facts.
Willi had appeared not to listen.
But he'd done this before and then suddenly, by a single comment, Willi would reveal that he had been playing a game all along.
Willi also had the most appalling memory when it came to forgetting things he wanted to forget.
‘One cannot have the star of the new Season arriving, and the Burgermeister and Founder of the Hochhauser theatre not there to greet her.’
‘All right, Willi.
As you wish.’
And so Willi was squeezing himself into his best suit, the one he wore for daytime ceremonial occasions, and had spattered himself lavishly with aftershave cologne, and spent a long time arranging the frill of curls round his bald crown.
When Georg came in to lunch, covered in cow muck and mud, the converging smells caused Frau Trauffer to wave her hand in the air and give a disgusted ‘Phaw!’
‘I don't know which is worse,’ she said plaintively, dumping the goulash down on the table and turning to the sink to strain the noodles.
‘I'm not fond of the smell of cow dung, but at least it's an honest smell — where did you get that scent, Herr Zimmermann?’
‘In Vienna.
It is French.
Very expensive.’
Frau Trauffer grunted.
Georg ignored them both and padded across to the table in his stockinged feet.
‘Georg,’ said his father nervously.
‘Are you busy after lunch?’
‘Why?’
‘I wondered if you would drive me down to the town in the van.’
‘Why don't you take the car?’
‘Because I want to collect a bouquet from the florist.
It will not fit into the car.
If you would take me to the station, passing the florist on the way, it would be very helpful.’
‘Why don't you take the van yourself?’
‘Because I do not know if I shall be coming back this afternoon.
I may persuade Fräulein Aschmann to join me for tea at the Franz Joseph.
And the last time I did not return with the van in time for evening milking you were very cross.’
Georg dug savagely into his plate.
That morning he had walked over to the Hoflin farm and asked Suzi to go to the cinema with him that evening, after her class.
He had found himself begging and it made him feel undignified.
Suzi's answer had not been one of unalloyed enthusiasm.
‘I will come with you,’ she said kindly.
‘Because I do not want us to stop being friends.
There is no need for us to quarrel and I see no reason why we cannot — occasionally — go out together.
But you must understand that it really isn't any fun spending an evening with someone who is cross all the time.’
And now, here was his father also accusing him of being cross.
‘What do you mean, Pape?
Cross?
I am never cross.
Just because I don't go around laughing my head off all the time or…or spending money on bunches of flowers too big to fit into the car, it does not mean that I am cross.’
‘Of course not, Georg,’ his father smiled fondly at him.
‘Just serious, eh?’
‘Someone has to be serious, Papa.’
‘And you are serious enough for both of us.
I am very lucky — you do all my worrying for me.’
As that was exactly what Georg thought, several times a day, he felt slightly mollified.
‘So will you drive me to the station, past the flower shop?’
His small round face crinkled up like a naughty baby and, through his irritation, Georg found himself having to stifle a grin of his own.
He always felt that if he allowed his father to see that he could wheedle Georg, it would be the thin end of the wedge.
‘Very well, Papa.’
He refused to smile but — he told himself — he was by no means cross.
Why did everyone accuse him of being cross?
When they got to the florist and Georg saw his father emerging he really was cross, so cross he leapt out from the driver's seat and intercepted Willi on the pavement.
‘For God's sake, Papa!
What on earth have you got there?
How much did it cost?
Wouldn't a normal bouquet, even a large one, have been enough?
Do you know how much flowers cost at this time of the year?
Not even spring flowers!
Hothouse flowers!
Carnations, in March.
And lilies!’
He poked a frantic finger into the blooms as he spotted a huge madonna lily, and then another.
‘How many lilies are there?
Two, three…six!
Six lilies, and all the rest.
There must be a month's milking money there!’
‘Can you open the back of the van, Georg.
If I let go the wind will blow it over.’
Georg's mouth firmed into a thin, disapproving line.
There was no point, no point whatsoever in saying anything now.
They couldn't take it back to the florist.
It was quite obvious they had been ordered specially in advance.
Grimly he opened the  back of the van and made no effort to help whilst his father tried to manoeuvre the basket across the rest of the pavement.
The basket was about a metre deep and the back of it had been built right up high so as to support the bank of flowers.
The offending lilies and several branches of mimosa were about level with the top of Willi's head.
‘You look absolutely ridiculous, Papa.
Have you any idea how silly a short man looks trying to carry flowers bigger than himself?
You're making an absolute fool of yourself.’
‘Thank you, Georg.’
‘And what is she supposed to do with them?’
‘They will cheer up her room at the Goldener Adler.’
Georg slammed the door shut, climbed back into the driver's seat, started the engine, and put his foot on the accelerator even before his father was properly in.
In thunderous silence he raced to the traffic lights and had to brake hard as the lights changed.
‘Georg, are you happy?’ asked his father mildly.
‘No.
Not when my father spends good farming money to make an ass of himself over an actress.’
‘I am not speaking of the flowers, Georg.
I'm speaking of every day, every week, your life.
Are you happy, Georg?’
‘Of course,’ he snapped.
‘That's good,’ said Willi.
‘I am very happy, nearly always.
I would like you to be happy too.’
Suddenly Georg hated his father, hated Suzi, hated Suzi's parents, and most of all hated the  theatre and this wretched actress who was arriving.
He pulled into the station car park, slammed on the brakes, and made no effort to get out of the van.
In his rear mirror he watched his father struggle with the doors and manhandle the basket on to the ground.
He steadied it with one hand whilst with the other he slammed the doors, then holding the handle of the basket, he tottered away.
His right arm, the one on the handle, was completely submerged in blooms.
From the front you probably wouldn't even be able to see him.
It would look as though a mountain of flowers was moving through the car park all on its own.
The flare of hatred vanished, to be replaced by the now familiar wave of misery that had descended on him when he had broken up with Suzi.
For a moment he allowed himself to slump forward over the wheel, wanting to blame the world for his despair but knowing, because he was not unintelligent, that the despair stemmed from something lacking in himself.
He was constantly ashamed of his father, embarrassed by him, infuriated by him.
He was always surprised to discover that other people didn't feel this way about him.
He couldn't understand why his father had been elected Burgermeister or the head of the theatre committee.
He constantly came across people who adored his father and he couldn't think why they did when he was such a silly little man who made such a fool of himself.
Why did everyone like his father?
He took his handkerchief from his pocket and blew his nose.
Willi had vanished.
So had the  flowers.
Slowly Georg got out of the van, looked around to make sure there was no-one who knew him, then he walked quickly across to the station restaurant, entered, and hid himself quickly in a booth that had a view of the rails.
Luiza and Freddi were there, Luiza muffled up in a huge and unflattering beaver lamb coat that had seen better days.
As they stamped their feet against the cold, Busacher strode towards them, and behind him Alfred, the company baritone who had sung with Therese in Die Fledermaus twenty years before.
Willi staggered round the end of the car park, puffing, red-faced and sweating in spite of the old wind.
‘Magnifique!’ breathed Luiza, looking at the flowers.
Willi beamed, righted himself and the basket, keeping one hand lightly on the edge to balance it, and rubbed some pollen from the shoulder of his overcoat.
In the distance along the line, the train took shape.
Franz Busacher glanced at Willi and tried, for one last time, to prepare his friend for the shattering of an illusion.
‘Willi, don't let her see if you think she's badly changed.
Twenty years is a long time.
Don't let her see you're disappointed.’
Willi tweaked a carnation out of the basket, broke the stem off with his teeth, and tucked it into his buttonhole.
‘Here she comes,’ he said happily.
The train stopped, doors slammed, a man further up the line lifted out two suitcases and placed them on the ground.
Therese appeared, stepped carefully  down from the train, smiled at the man who had helped her, then looked about her.
It was six weeks since Busacher had seen her, and she'd certainly fined down, not a lot, but enough to make a difference.
Her face was thinner, not altogether a good thing, and she'd had her hair coloured too, a sort of pale version of the colour it used to be.
It had been styled rather well, as though she'd gone to a really good hairdresser and it suited her, was soft over her forehead and short at the back.
She wore the blue suit and the bright shawl and carried a rather shabby grey coat over her arm.
She smiled as she came towards him.
‘Dear, dear Franz!’
He kissed her warmly on both cheeks and caught again that elusive scent that was special to her.
He felt excited and happy that she was here.
They had spoken several times on the telephone and he had rediscovered many things about her, things he had forgotten — her pleasant manners, her humour, her gentleness, and above all her dedication to her music.
He knew he would be able to work with her the way he like to, not a barnstorming nonstop battle which was the way he had to work with Gesner, but an exciting exploration of just what new heights could be achieved.
Mostly, he supposed, he was happy because she was going to be the most startling singer he had put on to the Hochhauser stage.
He couldn't wait to begin.
‘Some old friends, Therese!’
‘Luiza.
And dear, dear Freddi.
How long it has been, but really, you look just the same.
And  Alfred!
It is such a reception committee.
I feel quite like a star, all these old friends!’
She was filled with happiness, although during the past six weeks she had suffered from indecision and doubts.
Once she had signed her contract, fear had overtaken her.
Supposing she couldn't do it?
Supposing she let them down after dear Franz Busacher had connived and wheedled to make her acceptable to Gesner?
She had frightened herself still further by asking those of her friends who knew the theatre gossips what the latest on dit was on Karl Gesner.
Story after story had followed, each one more ghastly than the last.
Even allowing for delicious exaggeration it still added up to a horrifying picture and she began to wish she hadn't even tried to get into the company.
Strangely enough it was a tiny thing that suddenly gave her confidence again — her hair.
She had discovered the name of a really good — and expensive, but never mind!— hairdresser.
He had tutted and twitched and tweaked, then proceeded to do more for her than she had thought possible.
It was foolish, just to feel different because of her hair, but excitement had begun stirring within her.
Now, at last, here in Hochhauser, looking her best, with her dear, dear friends from the past, she knew it was all going to work.
‘Therese, this is Willi Zimmermann, Burgermeister of Hochhauser and founder of the Hochhauser theatre.
He is a great admirer of yours.
Willi, Therese Aschmann.’
‘Well, of course it is Aschmann,’ cried Willi.
He stared at the divine creature of his dreams and  twenty years vanished.
‘Madame…
I cannot tell you…so many years ago…the happiest time of my life.’
An unexpected, swift and quite sharp longing for Gerda swept over him.
It was almost a physical pain and for a moment he felt shocked because it had been many years since the agony of losing Gerda.
He couldn't speak, and, to his horror, he felt tears welling up in his throat.
Aschmann was looking at him, slightly puzzled but smiling still.
He pulled himself together and gestured with his free hand towards the flowers.
‘Dear Madame.
These are for you, from the grateful town of Hochhauser.
And as well as our gratitude, please accept from the Burgermeister the humble admiration of…’
He felt the presence of Gerda so strongly he couldn't finish.
What a silly old fool he was.
Therese held her hand towards him.
‘How beautiful, how kind of you all.
I did not expect such kindness…
I promise to sing for Hochhauser as well as I can.
Such a lovely old town — I know I shall be happy here.’
He was a comical little man but as she smiled and tried to say the right things —‘Oh!
Mimosa.
How lovely.
One of my favourite flowers.
And lilies and carnations…in March…
How wonderful’— she had a vague feeling of comforting familiarity, as though she had known him before.
He bounced and bowed and smiled, and suddenly she thought, Uncle Dimitri!
Of course, that's who he reminds me of, dear Uncle Dimitri.
I wonder if his father…but no, he is older than I am.
He could not  possibly have a Russian father.
But it gave her another flare of confidence, this elusive and somehow warming reminder of her childhood.
It was a good omen, surely it was a good omen?
‘And now, it is too cold to stand here.
Therese, you would like to settle into your room.
We have a car waiting.
And perhaps, later, we could all meet for tea at the Franz Joseph.
Willi, I am sure you would like to join us.’
Willi nodded emphatically.
Franz pulled Therese's arm through his and began to lead her up the track towards the car park, but she stopped and looked back.
‘My flowers.
I must not forget my lovely flowers.’
‘Allow me.’
Willi plunged his hand back into the blooms and began to retrace his steps to the station car park.
The basket wouldn't fit into the back of the Direktor's car, nor into Freddi and Luiza's Volkswagen.
‘No problem,’ said Willi nobly.
‘You go ahead to the Gasthaus.
I will have them delivered at once.’
‘So kind!’
Georg had sat and watched and glowered.
He couldn't hear anything, but he could see his father covered in pollen and then he had watched the actress get off the train and a lot of kissing and hugging, and everyone behaving the way theatre people always did behave.
And it was obvious the actress thought his father was ridiculous.
She was laughing at him.
He distinctly saw her laughing when she first caught sight of Willi covered in  pollen.
Why should Willi always make himself look so ludicrous so that people laughed at him?
He watched, felt indignant but also justified because he was right.
And then, as they all stood laughing and chattering in the cold wind, the sense of desolation swept over him again.
It was like watching a party to which he hadn't been invited.
They all looked so happy, the fat girl in the fur coat, and the new actress, and all those old men.
He didn't want to be invited to the party but it would have been nice to have friends like that who came to meet you from Vienna and were delighted to see you.
Of course, he'd never had time to make friends.
He'd been working too hard in college, and even harder since he'd been running the farm.
Supposing, he thought, with a stab of fear, he was never going to have any friends?
He watched them disappear from his view, his father still waddling along with that bloody basket.
How was it that his father could make friends and he couldn't?
He came out of the station restaurant into the bitter wind and strode across the car park.
Willi was standing alone, rather nonplussed, with his basket.
‘Wait here, Papa,’ Georg said wearily.
‘I'll bring the van round.
I suppose you would like me to deliver it to the Goldener Adler.’
Willi beamed.
Every day they worked on the old scores.
Therese had been studying them as soon as the Direktor had telephoned her with the news of the productions  and her roles.
At first they worked in the Direktor's villa, then moved to the icy theatre, where his last fear was removed.
Therese's voice, in a theatre, was even bigger, more fluent and lyrical than he had hoped.
The liquid notes rose and flowed round the chandelier, already removed from its dust bag ready for the Season.
Some days Luiza, Freddi and Alfred joined them and they began to walk her through parts of the productions.
Without Gesner and the rest of the cast they couldn't do a great deal, but the Maritza scenes with Freddi could be rehearsed and several other small fragments of the three old operettas.
She had taken, without comment, her secondary role in Gypsy Baron but even then, when he heard her sing Arsena, he felt that familiar surge of excitement.
All right, many of the audience would find it puzzling to have a middle-aged woman playing the juvenile role, but some of the audience would recognize just what they were hearing.
For the music lovers, the serious devotees, Arsena's music would dominate the entire production.
Willi frequently turned up for the sessions where Therese was working with Luiza, Freddi and Alfred.
Willi often did turn up for rehearsals, had often done so.
In the early days Busacher had tried to discourage him.
He did not approve of ‘amateurs’ attending rehearsals.
But the Burgermeister, usually so jovial and noisy, had proved to be exceedingly sound, never saying  anything at all at the rehearsal other than to praise the faint-hearted at the very end.
Later, over their wine at  the Franz Joseph, he would make the odd tactful comment to Busacher.
‘Our poor Luiza didn't look too happy paired with Rudi in the ball scene.’
Something Busacher should have noticed for himself, but which he had been too busy to observe.
Of course Luiza shouldn't be paired with the lanky and very young tenor; they'd have to replot the run-up to that part so that she came into the ballroom with someone else.
They were always tiny points that Willi raised, but useful, and Busacher, over the years, sometimes found himself asking Willi's opinion on a production.
On four separate occasions when the problems involved finance, Willi had somehow managed to wheedle an emergency sum from the Gemeinderat.
He was excellent at charming wardrobe ladies, new young chorus members straight from music school, and surly, battered old musicians in the orchestra pit who had seen it all before.
He had, during one terrible crisis, taken off his coat and acted as Sparks to the electricians and stage crew without causing any kind of trouble with the unions.
Just once or twice, when he remembered, Busacher wondered how Willi managed to find the time to do all these things, and be Burgermeister, and put in a least a modicum of hours on his farm.
He presumed that that surly young son of his did most of the running of the dairy business.
He was quite happy for Willi to sit through some of Therese's practice sessions, for Willi's overwhelming admiration for Therese's voice — and  Willi, in spite of his romantic overview, did understand about voice — was doing wonders for Therese's confidence.
The Direktor stopped going home for lunch.
So did Willi.
Every day a group of them, sometimes Luiza and Freddi, sometimes  Alfred and Stefan, sometimes the entire party, would troop off to the restaurant.
Every day Busacher watched Therese growing a little more animated with her friends, a little more confident, a little more like the girl she had once been.
She had lost nearly a stone in weight and her face looked somewhat drawn, but she laughed a lot, especially when Willi was around.
On the day he was going through Der Zarewitsch with her, Willi didn't turn up.
There was no need for the others; nearly all her numbers were either solos or duets with the absent Gesner.
Although it was the end of March, a swift late fall of snow made the theatre icy.
Therese was huddled in nearly every garment she possessed, slacks, jumpers, her shabby grey coat and the multicoloured shawl.
A small electric fire stood near the piano on the stage.
Busacher had his cloak pulled round his legs and at intervals held his hands in front of the fire to thaw them out before playing again.
‘Just the duet, once more, Therese, then we shall finish for today.’
He began playing and let Therese go through it once on her own.
Then, because he was feeling happy, confident and delighted with the speed at which she had learnt everything, knew, musically, all her roles, he began to sing Gesner's  part himself in his cracked old basso voice.
Therese grinned at him.
They'd had a long, hard, cold morning's work and levity took over.
He boomed out, slipping in all the glottal stops and nasal sobs of an appallingly melodramatic tenor.
He didn't have a good voice but he was never off-key.
Therese sang back, matching every sob with a shrill one of her own and giving an extra heartrending tremolo here and there.
Busacher put in a few whirly violin runs on the piano and crescendoed unnecessarily loudly, paused too long, gasped, she joined him, and together they sailed into the finale and burst out laughing.
A frantic round of applause came from the back of the theatre.
‘Bravo!
Bravo!’ cried Willi.
‘I couldn't have done better myself!’
‘I think you probably could, Willi,’ said Busacher dryly.
Willi, surprisingly, had rather a pleasant tenor voice.
‘Now, I must leave.
The  divine Miss Grimsilk has already arrived in Hochhauser — at her own request, unmet and unheralded — and will be coming to see me at one.
Spare a thought for me, dear friends.
She will be sharing my luncheon.’
He wrapped his cloak more tightly around him, pulled on woollen gloves, sang a final note into the air, and left the theatre.
Therese followed the fire flex along the stage and pulled the plug from the socket.
It was the first time she and Willi had been alone together.
‘Lunch?’ he said, raising his eyebrows.
She hesitated.
She had, like everyone else, become very fond of the little Burgermeister.
He  was enormous fun and there was also that elusive and comforting reminder of Uncle Dimitri.
Perhaps that was why she didn't want to lunch with him alone, away from their usual theatre crowd.
If she got to know him too well, the Dimitri element would probably vanish.
And he was also sometimes a little overwhelming (Uncle Dimitri had been like that too).
He was prone to over-effusive compliments which made her feel embarrassed.
And Uncle Dimitri or not — she wasn't sure how to behave with a man near her own age any more, even a nice uncomplicated one like this.
She wasn't sure she could cope if he became sentimental or tried to pry into her past.
‘I really should go back to the Gasthaus and practise.’
‘Nonsense!
You must have lunch, even if you work all the afternoon.
Come now, today we will abandon the delights of the Chu Chin Chow.’
(Luiza had developed a passion for Chinese food and Hochhauser's first and only Chinese restaurant had done a roaring lunchtime trade as a result.)
‘Today we shall eat like real Viennese.’
‘Perhaps…yes, it is most kind of you.’
Outside it was almost warmer than in the theatre and they walked along the road keeping a slight distance between them.
Willi was about four inches shorter than she was and tended to take bouncy steps.
He was well known in Hochhauser and several times they were stopped and she was introduced to yet another friend, another business or civic colleague.
At the Franz Joseph he was  greeted with great style and they were led into the terrace restaurant, to a table with a magnificent view over the whole of the Hochhauser valley, once more covered in snow.
They ordered, sipped drinks, and Therese was conscious that it was the first time for years she had eaten a meal alone with a man.
A rather awkward silence began to stretch between them and she strove for something pleasant to say.
‘Everyone has been so kind in the company.
And Hochhauser itself has been so welcoming.
Is it always like this?’
‘Always.
That is why everyone comes back to Hochhauser.’
‘It is  a little strange…that you, the Burgermeister, should spend so much time in the theatre.’
‘Not strange at all.
One: the theatre is now the most important part of the Hochhauser economy, the tourists, you know.
Two: I am the founder of the Hochhauser Season, with my dear Franz of course, and am responsible for seeing that all continues well.
And three: I have always loved the opera, the operetta.
The best moments of my life have been with music.’
‘Did you ever have secret yearnings to be a performer?’
‘Never.’
‘Tell me of your best moments with music.’
He continued smiling at her but she sensed a slight withdrawal.
She was relieved.
She preferred there to be a reserve between them, however small.
‘Ah!
Here is our soup, and the wine…’
He  whisked a pair of spectacles from his breast pocket and studied the label.
‘Splendid.’
‘Tell me,’ she said, fussing with soup spoon and bread.
‘Tell me about Gesner.
Is he always unpleasant to his leading lady?’
‘Always.
It will be far worse with you but it will not matter, it will not worry you.
You will be above it.’
She wished she shared his confidence.
She felt again that slight frisson of foreboding that came every time she thought of Gesner.
‘Why will it be worse for me?’
‘Because you are the greatest voice Gesner has ever sung with.
Because you are Aschmann, the star, the most wonderful diva Hochhauser has ever seen.’
She shook her head angrily and said, ‘No, no.’
‘No?
You do not believe so, Fräulein?
I cannot think why.
Perhaps because you cannot hear yourself, cannot see yourself.
I remember, twenty years ago, thinking you were greater than any of them!’
‘But Willi!
That was twenty years ago.
I have changed.
And I never was…what you thought I was…never!’
Willi put his spoon down and stared at her.
He had forgotten to take off his spectacles and he peered over the top of them.
‘You were the most wonderful thing I ever saw,’ he said firmly.
‘You were then, and you are now.
When you are on the stage I shall be able to see no-one else.
It will be as though twenty years have  slipped away, and Gerda is sitting by my side at the Volksoper, and Georg is at home, a nice normal, cheerful little boy, and our farm is beginning to make money at last, and the future looks wonderful.’
Therese smiled.
‘You're talking about youth, Willi.
Not me.
Your youth, when you were both young and full of…the excitement that happens when one is young.
Nothing can bring that back.’
‘You remind me so much of Gerda, you know that?
Not that you are alike, although she was beautiful too.
But you were so much part of our youth.’
‘What did Gerda look like?’ she asked gently.
He pulled out a wallet and took a photograph from it, smoothing it with his fingers as though to keep it perfect.
Then he handed it to Therese and she saw a small, round-faced young woman with bright eyes, and fair hair and the beginning of a double chin.
‘A lovely lady,’ she said quietly, and handed it back to him.
‘How long is it since she died?’
‘Nineteen years.’
‘And you never wanted to marry again?’
‘No…
Sometimes I thought it would be nice…to have someone.
But for a time I could not do that to Georg.
When he was little he was very possessive, first of his mother, then me.
And by the time he was older, I was old too.’
‘Nonsense, Willi.
You will never be old.’
The soup plates were removed.
Willi's huge knuckle of ham with Sauerkraut and Knödel  arrived.
He beamed down at his own plate, then cast a glance of concern at hers, a plain grilled escalope with tomatoes.
‘Are you sure that will be enough?’
‘Quite sure.’
He picked up his knife and fork and looked utterly content.
‘You, Therese, were married, were you not?’
She couldn't believe he didn't know it all.
She thought everyone in the world knew, then she realized she was, indeed, behaving like a star, expecting not only that her nine-day scandal in the theatre would still be common knowledge after all this time, but also that he would know the details of her life since.
It had been in all the national papers, but news is quickly forgotten, and at that time Willi must have been mourning his wife, trying to cope with loneliness and a small son, submerged in his own misery.
‘I'm divorced, as you know,’ she said briefly.
‘My husband was a singer.
I expect you know that too?’
‘I think Franz mentioned it.
Ah, yes.
It was bad for you.
Now I remember.’
‘He became…unwell and gave it up, the stage.
I haven't seen him for many years.’
Even talking about Friedrich made her catch her breath, swallow, bring the shutter down in her head.
That was the only way she could cope with Friedrich, by blocking him out from her mind.
She pushed her plate away, not hungry any more.
Willi was infinitely preferable when they were in a crowd, when he was being the life and soul of the party.
‘Some dessert?’
‘Thank you, no.’
‘Coffee?’
‘Thank you.’
‘You will not object if I have dessert?
They do very special pastries here.’
She smiled.
The tart was brought, a huge confection of pastry, strawberries, pineapple, banana, built round a pyramid of cream.
The base was the size of a cheese plate.
‘More cream, Herr Zimmermann?’
Willi beamed.
The waiter placed an enormous bowl of whipped cream on the table and Willi spooned lavishly, then picked up his fork, paused and beamed again.
Therese burst out laughing and Willi waved an admonishing fork at her.
‘The second happiest moments of my life,’ he said seriously, ‘have been eating the Franz Joseph's Matterhorn Torte.
They are an emotional experience.’
As he plunged his fork into the confection Therese reflected that it was very difficult not to like a man who enjoyed life as much as Willi Zimmermann.
When the Direktor arrived back at his villa Madge Grimsilk was already waiting for him.
He opened the door quietly and for one second saw her unobserved, leaning against the stove at the end of the hall, her model on the seat beside her.
She looked thin and cold and rather frail.
If it had been  anyone else the Direktor would also have said that there was something a little pathetic about her.
At once she sat up and crossed her hands in her lap.
‘Forgive me.
I am late.
I did not think you would be here so promptly.’
‘I took a taxi directly from the station.’
‘You haven't yet checked into the Gasthaus?’
‘No.’
‘Right.
Well, I'm sure you are ready for some lunch.’
‘I would prefer that you looked at the model first.’
Mentally the Direktor raised an eyebrow.
He had never been told what to do by a designer before.
‘As you wish.’
It had a huge box top over it and she carried it into his study, supporting it underneath.
It must have been awkward getting it all the way to Hochhauser from London.
She placed it on the desk and removed the lid, then the tissue paper underneath.
There was his jewel-box of a theatre in miniature, with a sparkling ceiling and hung with fairy garlands.
The stage at the end was an alcove in the ballroom, a big one, but still just a part of the whole.
Swathes of coloured gauze separated silver benches, and a twisting staircase on one side had a cobweb of azure spangles hanging over it.
Backing it all in the distance was the mysterious forest.
Madge Grimsilk took a small hand torch from her bag, pressed the button and placed it behind the forest at one side.
At once a faint impression of  medieval city spires and domes appeared in the right-hand corner.
‘It's a lighting trick, of course,’ she said.
‘The buildings have been there all the time on the backcloth but they'll only show up when lit, and the alcove, for Act One, will be altered thus.’
She slid all the gauze curtains and silver cobwebs along their runners at the top, removed the benches, popped in a Pre-Raphaelite easel, couch, and a stained-glass window behind the staircase, and it was Brissard's studio, as though designed by Hans Andersen.
‘It is brilliant!’
‘Thank you.’
‘And so economical!’
‘I was given my budget.’
Did the wretched woman never smile?
He had just given her a triumph and had got no more reaction than if he had held a door open for her.
Less.
If he had held a door open for a Viennese woman she would have charmed him.
‘I've incorporated all the changes you wanted.
Is there anything else?’
Busacher gave up.
‘Nothing, thank you, Miss Grimsilk.
You have done everything I asked most efficiently.
Now shall we have lunch?’
‘I eat very little lunch.’
‘You may eat as little as you please.’
She did glance at him then, rather warily, as though suspecting him of trying to ridicule her.
‘Some wine?’
A silly question.
‘No, thank you.’
He poured himself a glass and led the way  through to his large music room.
Frau Schmidt had set a table in front of the open fire.
Frau Schmidt liked to do things properly and was an incurable romantic.
When she learned there was a lady coming to lunch she had laid an extremely pretty table, with Hungarian embroidered table linen, the best glasses and a delicate posy of snowdrops and violets.
Busacher pulled the chair out for Miss Grimsilk and she suddenly flushed, plonked herself down, and jerked the chair in under her knees.
As she picked at her food he studied her across the table.
Difficult to tell how old she was.
She could be anything between twenty-eight and forty-eight.
He had noticed before how slowly the British matured.
The men never looked anything until they were at least forty, and the women, especially the thin ones, went into a condition of permanent desiccation in their mid-twenties.
Occasionally they had a brief flowering in old age, but that was it.
Miss Grimsilk had a clean good skin, clean good hair of an indeterminate brown, used no make-up and wore trousers and jacket that were excellently cut and of clean good British wool, but of a miserable dirty slate-grey colour.
Her blouse was grey too.
How could all those wonderful, light, fairy designs have come from this dreary-looking lady?
‘When can I meet Fräulein Aschmann?
I have yet to design her costumes.’
‘You will meet her this evening.
She is staying at the same Gasthaus as you.
And if you wish to begin early with your costume-maker you can measure  three of our soloists who are also staying at the Gasthaus.’
‘That would save time.
Herr Gesner's measurements I have already.
I have designed for him before.’
‘Really?’
‘He sang in London the winter before last.
In Rigoletto.
The Duke.’
‘Ah, yes.’
That would account for the fact that the drawings of Gesner's costumes were so magnificent, so suited to his style and size.
She obviously had a flair for putting people in what suited them, not always true of designers.
‘Tell me, Miss Grimsilk — I am most intrigued where did you learn your German?
You speak it like an Austrian.’
There was such a long silence that he looked up from his plate.
The colour had drained away from Miss Grimsilk's face.
Her enormous grey eyes (they would have been rather striking if only she had used some make-up) were staring at him with the expression of a trapped rabbit.
‘I learnt German at school, also later at college.’
‘But not Viennese German.
German, as taught in British schools, is of the correct variety.
Not our lazy vernacular.’
‘I…
I once knew someone…quite well, who spoke Viennese.’
Ha!
A man, could it be a man?
No, surely not.
Miss Grimsilk had surely never, ever known a man ‘quite well’ unless it was her father.
He studied her more closely.
Perhaps he was wrong.
Her severity  stemmed from self-control, not old-maid prudishness.
Her guard was up all the time and she lacked a sense of humour.
But perhaps under that stoic, stringy frame lurked a welter of passion.
‘Presumably if he spoke Viennese, he was Viennese?’
‘He was…he had Viennese parents.
He is English now.’
So, it was a man.
He had cleverly inveigled that out of her without her realizing it.
‘Was he in the theatre?’
‘I haven't seen him for some time.’
And that is no answer, Miss Grimsilk, thought the Direktor.
He was quite enjoying his lunch after all.
Could it have been Karl Gesner?
What a thought.
No, impossible.
Gesner was only in Britain for fleeting engagements.
And Miss Grimsilk was not his type.
She suddenly rose to her feet, pushing her chair back and reaching for her bag.
‘Thank you for lunch, Herr Direktor.
I shall not stay for coffee.
I have a great deal to do.
I have a meeting with your production manager, and the wardrobe department, and then I would like to meet Fräulein Aschmann.
I believe I can also see the girl who will be your lead dancer at some time?’
He was disappointed.
But she was here for a little while now, and would be coming back in mid-April to get Luxembourg on.
If he had any energy left over he might well indulge in a bit more naughty meddling.
‘Tomorrow, at the theatre.
Her name is Suzi Hoflin, and she and a couple of her pupils practise  on the stage from nine until ten.
Then Fräulein Aschmann and the other soloists arrive and the dancers have to leave.
Karl Gesner and the rest of the soloists arrive next week.
The chorus, the week after that.
You will have to work from measurements they sent in to Stefan.
We cannot afford to get them all here for a costume call.’
‘I understand.
I shall be at the theatre at nine tomorrow morning.
Thank you for the lunch.’
She shook his hand briefly and left the room.
He looked out of the window and, a few moments later, saw her walking down the path to the tall wrought-iron gates that screened his house from the road, clutching her model as though it were a tray of very precious cut crystal.
Seven
On the following Monday the other soloists arrived and rehearsals proper began.
Karl Gesner was three-quarters of an hour late.
It was still very cold and everyone was muffled up in coats and scarves and gloves.
Gesner wore a coat with a fur lining and a Russian fur hat.
Stefan, sucking his miracle tablets at the back of the stalls, muttered to the Direktor, ‘He's about fifty years out of date.
Who does he think he is…
Gigli?
I bet Domingo doesn't dress like that, even in the coldest theatres.’
Gesner didn't bother to greet anyone particularly.
He waved a hand vaguely in the air and said, ‘Ciao!’
‘He does think he's Gigli,’ said Stefan viciously.
‘Quiet please, everyone.
I thought, as it is our first morning and we shall want to get used to each other again, we should run through the score of last year's production of Gypsy Baron.
We shall be opening the season with the Baron.
Everyone exactly the same as last year, except Therese sings Arsena, and Ingrid sings Saffi, which she understudied last year.
You've been working on it, Ingrid, yes, with your teacher?’
‘Oh yes, Herr Direktor!’
‘We shall have separate practice sessions from now on, when I have worked out the timetable.
But for today we shall go straight through, just to warm up.
Everything as last year.
There will no be changes.’
He played the accompaniments himself at this stage.
Later in the week a répétiteur would come down from Vienna to take over the piano and help with individual coaching.
‘So, please, Karl.
Act One solo, ‘Als Flotter Geist’.’
The piano sounded thin in the cold theatre, then Gesner's voice, rich, strong, flowed into the auditorium like cream pouring from a jug.
It was a good voice, the Direktor thought grudgingly.
It was very nearly a great voice and sometimes, when Gesner was on form, when he was forced for some reason to try hard, it was a great voice.
He darted a brief glance towards Therese and saw she had a surprised little smile on her face, the smile of a professional who discovers she will be singing with a partner well above average.
‘Rudi, Alfred, Freddi…’
Act One continued, the dialogue between melodies fumbled along but most of it not too bad.
He really wasn't too worried about this revival, in spite of the casting of Ingrid and Therese.
He and Stefan had worked out a performance programme so that Ingrid wouldn't have to sing two big roles on consecutive nights.
He didn't want her cracking up in the middle of the Season.
‘Therese.’
He gave her a big, warm, encouraging smile.
In a way this was her debut, in front of the full team of soloists, in front of Gesner, who lounged at the side of the stage talking to Alfred.
Alfred, embarrassed, raised his finger to his lips but Gesner took no notice.
Therese's pure golden voice lifted into the air, up into the chandelier, effortless, joyful.
Gesner stopped talking and turned round, his eyes narrowed.
For the first time since he had entered the theatre he looked hard at Therese.
It was difficult to see any change in her, muffled as she was in coat and scarves, but one change he did recognize.
She had confidence.
And that voice was nothing like the voice he had heard on the tape of church music.
This sound was richer, more vibrant.
This was an acting voice and she knew how to use it.
He felt a surge of rage, realizing that Busacher and Hans had played a trick on him.
The voice continued, finished.
Nothing was said but he could sense the optimism all round the company.
When an operetta company was as…thin as theirs was, they depended on their lead tenor and soprano to pull the show together, make it a success.
Every single operetta really stood on the lead performances, on his lead performances.
The rehearsal went on and he watched her all the time.
Yes, she had confidence in her voice, but what would she be like when she got out there in front of that terrible voracious animal, the audience?
What would happen to her then?
And whatever the voice, she was still a tired middle-aged woman with a bad figure.
When they broke for coffee Gesner went over to her, clutching his paper cup in his hand.
‘When Franz begins to give you your plotting for Arsena, you must ask him to find you static positioning,’ he said without any preamble.
‘We have to do that for Luiza — find her a seat or a place she can lean against whilst singing.’
‘I think I might just be able to totter from chair to chair,’ she said, smiling sweetly at him.
‘I was thinking of the look of the thing.
You are supposed to be eighteen years old.
If you don't move you won't be noticed so much.’
‘I shall do as the Direktor wishes.’
She managed to keep the smile on her face.
‘Have you seen Ingrid dance?’
‘No.
I have only met her this morning.’
‘She's excellent.
Very graceful, very lively.’
‘Then she will be a very good Saffi.’
He turned and walked away.
He felt unsure.
Close up he could see how she couldn't possibly be a rival, whatever they did with wigs and make-up, but that voice was alarming; or was it?
Perhaps it was just a fluke, perhaps she could sing like that once, and then the voice would tire.
He'd come across that before now.
He decided to wait and see what happened in the other rehearsals.
He heard the Direktor calling them back to work again, and he crossed to Ingrid who was nervously studying her score, her lips moving as yet again she went over the part she already knew in minute detail.
‘Our duet, Ingrid,’ he purred.
‘You are going to be the star of the Season.’
It was said loud enough  for Therese to hear and he had the satisfaction of seeing a slight flush creep over her face.
But her smile still held firm.
They alternated rehearsals that week between Gypsy Baron and Countess Maritza, the two opening productions of the Season.
Gesner was taking a lot of trouble with Ingrid in the Baron.
In the duets he cheated for her, sang some of her more difficult phrases with her to drown her inadequacies, and frequently stopped the piano to suggest changes of key.
Suzi Hoflin came in with two of her pupils and put Ingrid through a reasonable enough gypsy dance routine.
It was no more than adequate but Gesner was ecstatic.
‘Such lovely girls!’ he enthused.
‘So pretty and vibrant and energetic…and so young!’
Ingrid was in fact twenty-nine, which was young compared with Gesner, but not young for a dancer and she found the routines rather a strain, especially when she had to sing at the end of them.
But she tried.
And at least Gesner was determined it would work.
The Maritza rehearsals were becoming more and more disastrous.
When Therese was on stage without him, he talked all the time.
Called to order he was silent for a moment, then resumed his loud comments which disconcerted Therese, however hard she tried not to let them.
In the Varasdin duet with Rudi, the second tenor, when they were working on a very simple foot routine, Therese caught her heel in the hem of her trousers and tripped.
A loud snigger from the  auditorium suddenly destroyed her.
Her hand went to her mouth and she stopped singing.
‘Are you all right, Therese?’
‘I'm sorry, Rudi…
Could we have a short break please…my heel.’
She walked very quickly to the side of the stage, was absent for two minutes, then returned.
‘We'll continue with the waltz duet.
Karl, Therese.’
They stood, side by side, wooden, facing the front, Gesner singing splendidly, Therese unsure, afraid.
Busacher mastered an urge to knock their heads together.
‘This is supposed to be a love song.
Could you manage to appear a little…involved with one another ?
Could you begin the song with a gap between you, and Karl, move towards her, your hand outstretched.
And Therese, take it slowly, then draw close.
And will you please look at each other as though you are in love.
Karl, please do it exactly the way you did it with Hanna in the last production.’
They began again.
With an air of disdain Gesner proffered a hand on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
Therese clutched it, moved closer, stared bravely up into his face and faltered at the total contemptuous sneering disdain she saw there.
The duet dwindled to a finish.
Therese stood silent.
Gesner shrugged his shoulders.
‘That was quite dreadful,’ said Busacher quietly.
‘What do you expect?’ said Gesner derisively.
‘I told you how it would be.
It is like performing with  a potato.’
He raised his hand to his face and with careless insolence began to pick his nose.
Tiredly, Busacher realized he would have to lose his temper.
It was the only thing that worked with Gesner and he had been saving it for when they went into rehearsal on Luxembourg.
But perhaps it would be better to tackle this huge problem now before it went any further.
He took a deep breath, then slammed the piano lid down so hard the notes reverberated all round the theatre.
‘I will not have it!’ he screamed.
‘I will not have it.
I am the Direktor of this Company!’
He lifted the piano lid, and banged it again.
Boom!
Boom!
‘I will have my singers doing as they are told.
I will not have rudeness nor constant undermining of this company.
I am finished!
I am leaving!
Karl, Therese, I shall see you separately this afternoon.
Stefan, continue the rehearsal.
I do not care what any of you do any more.
Please yourselves!
Karl, you can do what you want and let the audience think you have gone mad.
I no longer care.’
He deliberately pushed his chair so that it fell over, walked down the stage steps and up the gangway of the auditorium.
His heart was pounding, even though it was all a sham.
It was getting harder and harder to fight Gesner.
In the foyer he leant against the wall for a moment, breathing deeply.
Willi came in from outside, took one look at Busacher's face and walked hurriedly towards him.
‘I have my car outside.
Come.
Get in.
I'll run you home; or would you rather have a brandy?’
‘A brandy, Willi.
I shall be all right in a moment.’
Willi's strong, stocky body inserted itself under the Direktor's arm and he supported him out through the theatre door towards the car.
Busacher slumped into the passenger seat and sat catching his breath.
Willi unscrewed the cap from a metal flask and passed it to him.
After a while the pumping of his heart began to slow down.
He turned to Willi, but Willi held up a hand.
‘We shall just sit quietly for a moment.
Say nothing.
Just rest.’
‘This is getting too much for me, Willi.
I used to be able to do this and come out chuckling.’
‘Shall I get a doctor?’
‘There is no doctor for this complaint, to cure me of Karl Gesner.’
‘Say nothing.
Just rest.’
They sat quietly.
The street took on a sense of unreality, the posters outside the theatre announcing the new Season, a huge photograph of Gesner, some bonbon papers blowing along the pavement, a surly young man sidling up to the front of the theatre.
‘Isn't that your son, Willi?’ asked the Direktor, his thoughts suddenly diverted.
Willi quickly started the car.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘But he won't be very pleased if he thinks I've seen him lurking.
Let's get you home.’
‘I'm all right now.
I had to lose my temper.
As you know it's the only thing that brings Gesner to heel.
It is very curious the way it works, but it does.’
Willi glanced at him in the mirror and thought he still didn't look too good.
‘Don't you think you should go home for the rest of the day?
Stefan and old Anton can take the rehearsal.’
‘I shall have to go back.
I've said I want to see Therese and Karl at separate interviews this afternoon.
Therese, of course, needs nothing but another injection of confidence and some sympathizing over Gesner.
Gesner needs his usual are-we-going-to-have-a-season-or-aren't-we lecture.’
‘Why don't you go home anyway, and I'll tell Gesner he must report to your house at a certain time.
That will make it seem even more serious.
In fact I think it would be a good idea if I was there, and possibly Gaston and Julius from the theatre committee.
We could all sit in a row behind your big table; impress the gravity of the situation upon him.’
A little colour came back into Busacher's face.
‘I ought to be able to handle him on my own, Willi.’
‘No.
He's been getting steadily worse for years.
I think we need a concerted attack this time.’
‘It would have some impact,’ Busacher agreed gratefully.
‘Could you arrange it, do you think?’
‘Of course.
It's settled.
I'll take you straight home to rest and I'll organize Gaston and Julius to come just before five, and I'll tell Karl he is to report promptly.
No need to worry about Therese.
I'll look after her.’
‘Thank you, Willi.’
They drove silently to Busacher's house and Willi helped him indoors, relieved to see some of the old vigour returning.
‘May I use your telephone, Franz?’
Busacher waved his hand towards the study and disappeared into his studio.
Willi paused, thought for a moment, then dialled his own number, spoke to Frau Trauffer, then dialled his friend the florist and then Gaston and Julius.
He felt rather pleased with his organization.
Just before he left he opened the door to look at Busacher.
Franz was seated in an armchair with a glass in his hand.
He smiled reassuringly and said, ‘Thanks, Willi.’
Back in the theatre the entire stage was silent after Busacher had slammed out of the auditorium doors.
He didn't lose his temper very often, but when he did it was always with Gesner, and it was dramatic.
There was a sense among them, even the innocent ones, of naughty children who had gone too far and had been abandoned by their parents.
Even Gesner, the star, looked a little sheepish.
They couldn't have a season without him, but quite definitely they couldn't have one without Busacher either.
And it was fine when Busacher was paying him attention, rebuking him for talking during someone else's numbers, railing at him for rudeness, for lack of participation.
It was all right providing he wasn't ignored and abandoned.
It was all the fault of that bitch they'd brought in.
How could they expect him to perform with someone like that?
It was all her fault.
‘Therese, Freddi, Rudi, your Act Three opening.’
Stefan knew he couldn't cope with the traumas of continuing where they had left off.
He was only the company manager.
It wasn't his job to try and  get Gesner and Therese to sing together.
Anton, the old répétiteur, even older than Busacher, sat down at the piano and the thin embarrassed voices began to tingle into the air, picking up a little courage as they went on.
It was something, thought Stefan, darting a quick glance at Gesner, who looked very slightly uncomfortable, that for once he wasn't talking.
At least the Herr Direktor had accomplished something.
Therese, under the fixed smile and the determination, was beginning to wonder if she ought to withdraw now, before they got too far into rehearsals.
She didn't really know if she was going to be able to take any more, and still give a worthwhile performance.
It was difficult, even though she had been told all the problems of Gesner, to continue to hold oneself together in the face of such blatant hatred.
To feel oneself so disliked, so vulnerable, never knowing what new piece of venom would manifest itself next, needed someone more arrogant, more…theatrical than she was.
It had all gone — the thin veneer of self-confidence, the determination that she had been so proud of acquiring and nurturing since that first audition in Vienna.
She had tried, but the rehearsals had gradually taken on the menace of trials of endurance.
On the days when she knew she had to practise duets with Gesner, she lay awake the night before in a sweat of fear.
It was more than just fear of Gesner's contempt.
Similarity with that other man who had tried to destroy her threatened  to break down the shutter in her mind with which she blanked out memories of Friedrich.
Of course, one didn't drop out of an engagement simply because one was not strong enough to take insults and hatred.
But her very presence seemed to be wrecking what chance the company had of any success.
Look at the Herr Direktor this morning.
Exploding into a temper, the sort of temper she had never seen in him before.
She was suddenly afraid, not just of Gesner but of the catastrophes that might occur to the whole company because of the tension.
She got through the rest of the morning as best she could.
Stefan was very careful not to rehearse any numbers that she and Gesner had to perform together, but she still felt afraid.
If he went on like this she wasn't even sure she would have enough composure to return to Vienna and resume her church and radio work.
All she longed to do at this very moment was run back to the Gasthaus and hide in her room.
Pride and a sense of dignity kept her from letting any of them see how terrified she was.
She sang as well as she could, hitting the right notes — she never had any problem with that — but it was pretty dreadful singing, so lifeless and uninspired, not the way she had been singing during the weeks before Gesner's arrival.
When they broke for lunch she left the stage very quickly, anxious only to go back to her room.
Footsteps followed her.
It was Luiza, trying to hurry in spite of her hip.
‘Therese…shall we go to the coffee shop…have a sandwich?’
‘Thank you, no, Luiza.
I can't.’
‘Don't let him do this to you, dear.
He's a bastard.
We all hate him really…just that our jobs depend on him…but we're all on your side.
We really are, love.’
Therese swallowed hard.
She didn't want anyone giving her sympathy, otherwise she'd be blubbing all over the stage.
‘Thanks, Luiza.
It's not your problem.
And I don't want anyone taking sides.
This is Hochhauser, not the Middle East.’
‘Well, I just don't want you getting all upset.
You're so good…we all think so…’
‘Thanks.
I must go now.’
She almost ran to the stage door, opened it, leaned on the outside.
‘Oh, no!’
Willi Zimmermann was standing by his car door, beaming, holding it open.
‘No.
I must go back to my room.
Thank you, but please leave me.’
As she went to walk past, Willi grabbed her by the arm and pushed her, quite roughly, into the passenger seat.
Foolishly, the roughness from one who had been so kind was the last straw, and tears suddenly welled into her eyes.
Willi took no notice but walked around to his seat and started the engine.
He said nothing at all and she averted her face, staring out of the window, hoping he hadn't noticed.
As they set off she realized they weren't driving back towards the restaurants of the town centre and Willi's beloved Franz Joseph hotel, but up to the mountain road that led over the pass and into the next valley.
Willi changed into a lower  gear.
She hadn't even noticed, locked up in the theatre with Gesner and her misery, but it was a glorious day, cold, with a huge blue sky, not a cloud anywhere on the mountain tops, and the pines of the tree line glowing green against the snow.
They went higher, up the steep winding road, snow banked high on either side of them and no traffic at all coming down from the pass.
Twenty minutes later Willi pulled the car into a clearing and got out.
She stared stonily ahead until he opened her door and beckoned her forward.
‘Come.
I want to show you the valley.’
Because it would have been childish to refuse she stepped out and went to stand beside him on the snow.
In front of them the valley dropped sharply away from the road.
Tiny fields, green and white where the snow was melting again, led down to the outskirts of the town.
It looked quite small from this angle and one could see all of the bicycle factory.
‘You see that building there, on one side of the ridge, with the big barn and the red roof?’
‘Yes.’
‘That is my farm.
All the land on that side of the ridge is mine.
It belonged to my grandfather, but he lost it when the Creditanstalt crashed in the twenties.
He lost all his money and had to sell the farm and go and work in an abattoir in Vienna.
He hated it, my grandfather.
He'd always been a dairy farmer, you see, like I am.
He hated butchering cattle.
He was the one who brought me up, more a father than a grandfather.
‘My father was called up when the war broke out.
He died in Russia.
I was only four when he went away so I don't really remember him.
Mother went to visit her relatives in Hungary, near Szeged, and got caught there when the Russians advanced.
She never came back.
My grandparents were my parents.
I wish the old man had lived to see me get the farm back.
He left a little money, he had managed to save a small amount, though God knows how in the war and just after.
And then I worked in an hotel in the Tyrol as soon as the tourist industry opened up and saved some money to put with Grandfather's.
Gerda and I got a bank loan, and I was able to buy the farm back.
We've more land now.
We bought the section running down on the east side eight years ago.’
She looked at the smoke coming out of the Zimmermann chimney.
On the lower slopes was a large herd of cows.
‘Are those cows all right in the snow?’
‘We bring them inside in the bad weather.
You see the smaller farmhouse, on the other side of the ridge?’
‘Yes.’
‘That is the Hoflin farm…where Suzi Hoflin lives with her parents.
Georg is hoping to marry her and unite the farms.’
‘A very practical young man,’ she said politely.
She was feeling calmer.
Up here, on the top of the pass, Gesner and the theatre didn't seem so important — not important at all when one thought of losing one's farm and parents in a war.
‘Yes, I'm afraid he is,’ said Willi gloomily.
He stared down at the Hoflin farm, then clumped back to the car.
‘Get in,’ he said.
‘Now we shall go and look at my farm.’
They drove slowly back down the mountain road until they came to the track that led up to the Zimmermann farmhouse.
The ground was soft and squelchy when she got out of the car, and she felt mud oozing over the top of her shoes.
‘Do you want me to walk round the farm?’ she asked, alarmed.
Willi chuckled.
‘Straight indoors.
I'll clean the mud from your shoes when we're inside.’
He opened the kitchen door, and a cheerful middle-aged woman gave Therese an inquisitive stare.
‘Frau Trauffer.
Here is Fräulein Therese Aschmann from the theatre who has mud all over her shoes.’
‘Off at once, please,’ said Frau Trauffer sharply.
‘You must go through in your feet.’
Willi led her into a huge living-room with a window looking over the valley.
A table was set for two.
A bottle rested in an ice bucket, and on one of the settings was a posy of spring flowers.
‘My son was very cross with me for burdening you with the basket of flowers.’
He winked at her.
‘So here is a more modest offering.’
Slowly she picked up the flowers, not knowing what to say.
Willi was busy undoing the wire round the champagne cork.
‘There are some days,’ he said, ‘when champagne is not for celebration, but for bracing the spine, putting back heart, restoring the ego.
Today is such a day.’
The cork popped and Willi skilfully caught the first fountain in a glass.
‘I do not want you to say a word until you have drunk at least two glasses.’
He took a large gulp from his own glass and gave an ecstatic sigh.
‘Excellent.
One feels so depraved drinking champagne in the middle of a working day.’
She felt curiously distanced now from all the problems of the morning.
Up here, in Willi's mountain farmhouse, with no shoes and her old rehearsal clothes, it was all very unreal.
She was tired, emotionally and physically tired, and the champagne made her cease to worry about whether she was right to allow the Burgermeister to cosset her with flowers and champagne.
She stretched back in her chair and blocked the morning out of her mind.
She was good at blocking things out.
‘You are very kind to me.’
‘Do you want to talk about Gesner?’
‘No.’
‘Then we shall not.
I shall tell you, instead, of the time Gerda and I saw you on the stage in Vienna.’
She didn't really want him to recreate the past like that.
There were too many shadows between that time and this, but as she listened it wasn't her past that came back to her, it was his.
She got a glimpse of a different life, a different marriage between two good, kind, ordinary people — perhaps  not so ordinary when one thought what they had done with their farm.
She began to see herself, the self of those twenty years ago, as just a part of Willi and Gerda's pleasure.
She had done what actors and singers were supposed to do — provided enchantment for a brief passage of time.
To Willi and Gerda she had been no more than a romantic inspiration, a cardboard figure of tinsel who ceased to exist when the curtain came down.
What became real to her was not Therese Aschmann, but the tiny diamond and garnet engagement ring Willi had bought in a shop at the back of St Stephen's Cathedral, and Gerda's delight, and the luck they had had in getting two cancellation seats at the Staatsoper for a performance of Figaro, and the elegance of their hotel, and the toy truck they had bought for Georg, which had been so large they'd had trouble getting it home.
She felt transported into their safe, happy world, felt as though she were part of it.
‘So you see, dear Therese, when I learned you were to come here, and then I saw you, exactly the same as you were twenty years ago, you can perhaps understand how I felt…’
It was embarrassing, the way he kept on about her being the same as she was twenty years ago.
His foolish exaggeration made her feel uncomfortable.
In any other man it would have seemed like meaningless and artificial flattery, but Willi was incapable of being artificial.
As she studied him closely over her coffee cup she wondered why he said those things, then decided he could no more  help it than he could help having three portions of everything.
Willi didn't know the meaning of restraint, not in any aspect of his life.
By the time he had taken her back to the theatre she felt totally removed from the morning, quite calm, controlled, almost as though she was nothing to do with the Hochhauser Season but had just come back from a week in Vienna staying at a luxury hotel.
The row of figures behind Busacher's desk disconcerted Gesner for a moment.
That fool, the Burgermeister, was there, and the two members of the theatre committee.
But he had no intention of letting himself be intimidated.
He flung himself into a chair without waiting to be asked.
If they thought he was going to stand in front of them like a naughty schoolboy, they were mistaken.
‘I thought we were to have a private discussion…about Aschmann,’ he said insolently.
‘No, Karl.
We are not having a private discussion about Aschmann.
We are here to have a committee meeting about the Season, and about your attitude, and indeed about whether we can go on with the Season at all.’
‘I cannot go on with that hideous old Frau.
You have made a very bad decision and something must be done.
She must be got rid of.’
‘Very well, Karl.
I have already telephoned Hans about your attitude, which I anticipated would result in this kind of ultimatum.
Hans has announced his intention of suing the company, and  also you.
Your signature is, of course, on the contract we all signed in Hans's office.’
‘I was trapped into it!’ blustered the tenor.
‘No doubt that will all come out in court, also the fact that you refused to rehearse with Aschmann past the first week.
The case will, naturally, destroy the Season entirely.
Hans has announced his intention of fighting for as big a settlement as he can get.
He has said he does not care what it costs him, he is standing on a matter of principle.
I expect you know he has no love for you…your reneging on the Munich contract some years ago meant several of his singers lost work.
He thinks you are an unreliable and subversive influence in the theatre, and he will be only too pleased to make an example of you.’
‘Ridiculous,’ stammered Gesner.
‘All over the little problem of changing the soprano.’
‘That is not the problem.
You know that quite well, Karl.’
‘Pay her off.
Give her the fees.’
‘We can't afford to do that,’ said Gustave, scandalized.
‘Neither can we afford a court settlement.’
‘You are deliberately undermining the morale of this company because you do not want to work with Aschmann,’ Busacher continued.
‘You know very well, because you are not a fool, that we cannot use Ingrid any more than we are doing already.
Our audiences put up with a lot, but they will not accept total inadequacies for every performance.
You also know we have no chance of getting anyone else.
That has been made quite clear, categorically clear, by everyone in Vienna.
Apparently Hanna Brunner has offered to come forward and give evidence in court about your behaviour to your fellow artistes, and Hans has said he is making it plain to all the other agents that none of his clients will be allowed to sing in Hochhauser and he recommends that they do the same.’
There was a shocked and disapproving cluck from the committee men.
‘So, Karl.
Will you please tell me what you are trying to achieve?
Is it your wish to totally destroy the Company in a lawsuit that will bankrupt us?’
Gesner didn't answer.
‘Is it your wish to so demoralize Aschmann that she cannot perform and you are therefore left without a leading lady for three operettas?’
‘Understudies…’ muttered Gesner knowing he was being ridiculous.
‘Understudies…yes.
You know about our understudies.
You know the standard.
You are happy to appear in a season of rapidly declining productions?
You do not mind your reputation disintegrating along with the rest of the Company?
I have to say that I do mind about my reputation.
If Aschmann becomes unable to perform — as a result of your deliberately destructive influence — I would at once have to issue a statement making it plain that from now on I disassociate myself entirely from the Hochhauser Season.’
There was an agitated rumble from the two committee men, who weren't entirely in the picture.
Willi had given them the briefest of explanations for their presence being required but they were becoming as alarmed as Gesner by this talk of lawsuits and the resignation of Franz Busacher.
‘Surely it would be simpler to get another tenor!’ panicked Gaston.
‘If Herr Gesner is unhappy, perhaps it would be simpler to let him leave.’
‘Then I shall sue!’ shouted Gesner.
‘Yes.
You have sued before, have you not, Karl?
Litigation is not unknown to you.
You have quite a reputation in our profession for providing the catalyst of many a legal battle.’
Gesner was extremely frightened.
He could not think what had happened for things to have become so out of hand.
His efforts to destroy Therese had been purely instinctive: a fear of the star quality of her voice, a distaste for her appearance, the fact that he would appear foolish performing romantically with her.
He wasn't quite sure what he wanted…
Therese kept down, in the background, her voice modulated into no more than competence…
Busacher indulging him, letting him do as he wished as usual…everyone treating him as the saviour of Hochhauser.
He couldn't afford another lawsuit.
He couldn't afford any rumours getting out that he had deliberately destroyed the Hochhauser Company.
That would be the end of any engagements elsewhere, just when he was beginning to get back on the international circuit.
‘I don't understand what all this is about,’ he said, in the tones of a reasonable and patient man.
‘All I want is to sing in Hochhauser as usual.
I wish  we had someone better than Aschmann, but if that is the best we can do, then we shall have to manage.
I do not understand why — because of her little temperaments in the theatre this morning — we are having all this talk of lawsuits and resignations.
I just do not understand at all.’
He shrugged and raised his hands with the air of a man prepared to be tolerant and forgiving.
He smiled charmingly at the two committee men.
He even smiled at Busacher and Willi who did not smile back.
‘Good.
That is settled then.
There will be no more talk of Aschmann leaving and from now on rehearsals will be conducted professionally.’
‘It was not my fault this morning…’
‘There will be no more talking and laughing during Therese's solos.
No gratuitous rudeness.’
Busacher knew that was almost impossible to implement.
Gesner was a master of the devious insult.
‘And some serious attempt at convincing performances with Aschmann.
That will be all.
You can leave now.
Rehearsals promptly at ten tomorrow.
You will not be late.
We shall go through all the Maritza scenes with you and Therese.
I shall call no-one else.’
Gesner groped for a suave exit line, something to make him feel the star of Hochhauser again, but the four serious faces were all staring at him blankly, totally devoid of any warmth or admiration.
He gave another little shrug and muttered ‘So ridiculous!’ then left the room.
All the way back to the Franz Joseph he blustered to himself, justified everything he had done, and thought how dreary  and provincial they all were.
But he was conscious too of a small knot of apprehension in his stomach.
He was, of course, totally capable of dealing with the situation.
If they wanted him to sing with that ugly old bitch, then sing he would.
But he would have to try and be a little more compliant, throw a little more charm around.
It was easy enough to do.
He went straight to the bar in the Franz Joseph.
He needed a drink and that old swine Busacher hadn't offered him anything at the villa.
Sitting up at the bar was Ingrid and the little dancer — two pretty girls, just what he needed.
‘The most enchanting sight I have seen today…may I join you?’
He was sensible enough to know he couldn't get away with flip, funny conversation, trying to compete with the young.
His style was older, smooth, charming, experienced and no-one had laughed at him yet.
He was well aware that he made young men look badly dressed and ill-mannered.
Ingrid smiled at him a little tentatively.
Like the rest of the Company, she knew Gesner could be a swine.
But he was being jolly nice to her and she really couldn't think of anything else except her first leading role.
She ate, slept, and drank Saffi.
She was sorry for Therese Aschmann, but she had no energy left for anything except getting through her own part.
She was beginning to experience the soloist's panic of realizing that the success of the show rested on her shoulders.
‘Suzi and I are going back to her dance studio and she's going to put me through the dance routine again.’
Suzi, leaning against the stool, smiled at him more warmly.
He was extraordinarily handsome and he was the star of the Season.
She had missed the worst of the scene this morning.
Gesner decided she was about twenty-two or -three, younger than Ingrid, who looked quite good until you saw her against a really pretty girl, like this one.
His eyes wandered down.
Marvellous legs too.
‘Your dance this morning was delightful,’ he said, to Suzi more than Ingrid.
He smiled into her eyes, then lightly touched her under the chin with his finger.
‘You are very talented.’
Suzi blushed.
‘Thank you.’
‘And very, very pretty.
I think you have some Hungarian blood.
Am I right?’
Suzi blushed even more deeply.
‘No…
I don't think so.
My parents were both born here, in Hochhauser.’
‘Well…
I'm quite sure there is a Hungarian great-grandmother somewhere.
The high cheekbones,’ he ran his finger from her chin to just below the eye.
‘The heart-shaped face.
The eyes that tilt slightly at the corner.
Enchanting!’
He waved to the bartender, knowing that he couldn't expect her to make any coherent reply to such compliments.
She just sat there flushed, slightly embarrassed.
‘What would you like to drink?
Ingrid?
Suzi?’
‘Oh, no, we don't want any more.
We're leaving now and going to rehearse again.’
‘I was going to invite you to share my dinner here.’
‘We'll be working.’
‘We won't be working for the whole evening, Ingrid,’ said Suzi quickly.
‘You can't possibly do more than an hour, not after a full day's rehearsal.
You'll be exhausted tomorrow.
We could always come back in about a couple of hours.’
Gesner looked at his watch.
‘Eight-thirty…yes?!’
Suzi dimpled up at him.
She really was exceptionally pretty.
‘That would be lovely, wouldn't it, Ingrid?’
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
He was the star and it was really terribly nice of him to buy her dinner for her, and at the Franz Joseph too.
She didn't earn much and dinner was usually a bowl of soup and a cold platter at the small restaurant next door to the Goldener Adler.
As they hurried away he saw Suzi look back over her shoulder, as he'd known she would.
The rehearsals continued, subdued but in an orderly way.
Gesner totally ignored Therese when they weren't on stage together, but he at least kept reasonably quiet when she was performing, and if he passed derogatory comments about her at least they were audible only to those close to him.
On stage there was a professional if uninspired attempt at singing together.
There were odd moments when, for no reason, the two voices lifted off, as though they were nothing to do with the two people who didn't like one another.
When that happened Busacher began to hope again.
Those two voices were incredible, and could be sensational if they  both forgot everything except the performance.
On Friday Madge Grimsilk was sitting at the back of the stalls again.
She had been there a few times throughout the week but Busacher frequently forgot her.
Sometimes she wandered quietly about with measures and notebooks, but mostly she just sat and watched and listened.
At the break on Friday she approached him with her drawing pad.
‘May I speak with you, Herr Busacher?’
‘Of course.
Are you well?
I'm afraid I have had little time to entertain you or introduce you to Hochhauser.
I hope you have not been too lonely.’
‘Not at all.
I've been busy.
I have a great deal to do.’
‘Of course.
What did you wish to speak of?’
‘The designs for Therese's costumes.
In Luxembourg.’
‘Splendid.’
‘You were right, of course, about it being impossible to carry through the fantasy look and dress Therese as a fairy heroine.
But we can make her look part of the magic theme.
See…’
It was almost an exact drawing of Therese.
She had caught the tired nervousness, the apprehension in the face.
She had also caught the very faint remnant of warmth, gaiety, that he thought no-one but himself had recognized from the old days.
There was something vaguely familiar about the costume.
‘I've seen this before,’ he said slowly.
‘I've based it on the photograph of Rosa Ponselle as La Gioconda.
Therese cannot be Snow White or  Cinderella, but she can be Queen of the Night.
She's quite tall, and she has good legs.
And Angèle Didier is supposed to be an opera singer, an experienced woman of the world.
There is no reason why she shouldn't appear older, and slightly wicked!
I've designed all her costumes in either dark sapphire or emerald.
That way she'll stand out from all the light colours around her.’
The drawing reminded him not only of Rosa Ponselle's photograph, but also the wicked queen in Snow White.
It was high-necked and had long tight sleeves and a straight line to the floor, where it flared out at the back into a huge swirling fishtail train.
There were points of light, glass stones he supposed, all over the dress, and the neckline and tail of the train were heavily encrusted with glittering theatre tat.
The finishing touch was supplied by a high pointed tiara.
In the drawing Therese appeared to be about seven feet tall and not at all overweight.
It was a clever illusion, but it was more than that.
This was the way Therese would have looked if she had never left the stage, never married Friedrich, never had years of misery and failure.
‘That is for the ball scene.
This is for the marriage scene.’
The same line again, but in blue and silver, a huge swirling cloak that swept out several feet behind her, the ends weighted with silver stones.
She was the infinitely alluring, forever mysterious older woman who knew everything there was to know about love, sex, and romantic liaisons.
She  was every adolescent schoolboy's dream.
‘And, Herr Busacher, I think something must be done about her costumes for the other productions.
I know you have no money for anything but the hired costumes and I am prepared to waive my fee for designing extra clothes for her.
If she has to wear the hired 1920s costumes for Countess Maritza it will be disastrous.’
Busacher was taken aback.
‘That's very kind of you, Miss Grimsilk.’
‘I think I shall be coming in a little under budget on Luxembourg so perhaps any surplus could be spent on the other productions.’
‘Certainly Maritza,’ he said.
‘You are right.
That could be one of her best roles, but the twenties costumes will not be kind to her.
Arsena in the Baron…it does not matter.
The hired clothes will have to do.
But…if you could look at Der Zarewitsch?
The boy's costume in Act One.
If there is any way that could be modified?’
He smiled at Madge who had suddenly revealed unexpected human traits.
‘That boy's costume defies the most skilful of designers.’
Therese suddenly appeared above them on the stage.
She seemed quite cheerful.
‘Are you looking at Madge's drawings, Franz?
Aren't they incredible?’
‘You've seen them?’
She shouldn't have done that.
Not before he had seen them.
‘My fault, Franz.
I wheedled a look out of her after we'd shared a bottle of wine last night.’
Madge Grimsilk's face didn't even flicker.
It was  as impassive, as cold as ever.
She flapped her sketch pad shut.
‘If that is satisfactory then, Herr Busacher, I'll have the costume-maker begin work on those designs.’
‘Thank you,’ he answered, bewildered, and was even more surprised when Therese called down from the stage, ‘Coming for coffee, Madge?
I've got a cup here for you.’
‘Excuse me,’ said Madge, and left him alone pondering on the strangeness of women and of Madge Grimsilk in particular.
Eight
As the first night of the Hochhauser Season approached, Suzi Hoflin found herself increasingly torn between dread and a curious sense of wild exhilaration that was only partly to do with the excitement of appearing in a professional production.
Many times, in the middle of the night when she could not sleep, she was faced with the slightly guilty realization that she was behaving rather badly, but in the daytime it didn't seem to matter.
She pushed all serious thoughts to the back of her mind and climbed back on to the helter-skelter of excitement and self-confidence induced by the undisguised admiration of Karl Gesner.
She had never wanted to hurt Georg.
She had spoken the truth when she said she couldn't imagine her life without him.
He had always been there and when she was little she had worshipped him with all the adulation of any little girl for a big, brave, older brother.
She wasn't being quite fair either when she said — to herself — that that was how she thought of him, as a brother.
Even when she was tiny she hadn't really thought of him that way, and when she was older, about thirteen, she had secretly been terribly proud in front of the other  girls when Georg, who had never seemed to go through a spotty adolescent phase like other boys, used to wait for her outside school so that they could walk up the mountain road together.
Once, when he had been late and a crowd of louts from the factory had started to shout at her, calling out about her legs and what they'd like to do to her, Georg had come storming down the road on a bicycle, jumped off, and knocked two of them down before the rest ran away.
She'd felt like a princess.
She couldn't quite remember when it was that she'd realized Georg took it for granted they'd get married as soon as she was old enough.
Possibly it was when she'd said how much she'd like to go to school in Vienna and learn how to dance.
Georg, walking along beside her, his hand resting in a comradely way on her shoulder, had laughed.
‘Dancing is no use to a farmer's wife,’ he'd said, but even then it wasn't a surprise.
Somehow, over the years, without ever asking her, he had made it plain that her future was mapped out.
And it was then, when she was thinking about going away to Vienna, that she had begun to feel trapped.
She loved her parents, and her parents' farm, and she loved Uncle Willi, and Georg, and their farm, and she would hate that world to change.
But when she thought about the future, about staying at home, then marrying Georg and just moving over the ridge, and starting there and then to have babies and spend every day in the dairy the way her mother did, a terrible sense of panic overtook her.
Surely  there was more to life than that?
Every time you looked at a magazine or newspaper, or turned on the television, there was the world of the young as it was today.
The world belonged to the young.
Their music dominated all other music, their lifestyle was brave and fun and independent.
They went around the world with backpacks and no money, and they left home and lived together without getting married, and many of them became superstars when they were still only in their teens.
And what had she, Suzi Hoflin, ever done?
Stayed at home.
Passed her school exams, played with Georg, helped her mother in the dairy, and never given either of her parents a moment's worry.
Frau Hoflin, a sensible woman, old-fashioned, but not so old-fashioned that she couldn't see the signs of rebellion beginning to germinate, pressed for the safest ‘revolt’ she could think of.
Three years at a nice school in Vienna, not too liberated, but at the same time not a convent school.
A rather lively and interesting school, as it turned out, with quite a few theatrical sons and daughters as pupils and an emphasis on the performing arts.
Frau Hoflin knew her daughter well.
Suzi was never going to backpack round the world or become a rock star, and if she had been forced to go and live away from home — to study nursing, for instance— she'd have mouldered away from homesickness.
But at the same time she was young, and she wanted to have some fun before she became exactly like her mother.
In Vienna quite a few of them had gone around  in a crowd together, boys and girls.
She'd had a couple of little fumbling and innocuous affairs, nothing serious, and she never dared breathe a word to Georg.
In fact, the reason they had never become anything more serious than fumbles was because, compared with Georg, the boys seemed very young and silly.
Still, it had been the most enormous fun, the café groups in the mornings, the theatre parties, the concerts they'd put on themselves.
There had been a time when, like everyone else at the school, she had said she wanted to be a professional dancer, or an actress, or anything else that was exciting and totally different from working in a bank or being a dairy farmer's wife.
But when it came to it, when she had to make the decision about leaving home for good, throwing herself into the wide world and trying her luck, she felt unhappy.
Leave Hochhauser for good?
Those wonderful mornings in summer when the larks rose high over the mountains and you woke to the sound of cowbells and the sun streaming in through the window?
Leave all her friends, the ones she had known all her life?
Leave Mama, and Papa, and Uncle Willi, and Georg?
The principal of the school had suggested the answer.
She had passed all her dancing exams.
She had acquired her teaching certificates.
Hochhauser was becoming an increasingly affluent little town with a new emerging middle class who were prepared to spend money on life's smaller luxuries, so why not begin her own little dancing academy?
With relief Suzi had departed back to Hochhauser, feeling she hadn't  altogether lost face amongst her fellow students after all, her choice of career was still quite artistic and adventurous, it was still ‘show business’ in a way — but also overjoyed to be going home.
And then Georg had closed in on her, a grumpier, more disapproving, hectoring Georg.
A Georg who was constantly finding fault and who, in some curious way over the three years of her absence, had become mean.
When she thought about living the rest of her life with that bad-tempered, stingy, humourless Georg, she felt like bursting into tears.
The Hochhauser Season had come along just at the right time, a time when she needed a little excitement, a little glamour, a little of the old camaraderie that she had known with her friends in Vienna.
The Hochhauser Season had given her the courage to defy Georg — not to quarrel with him, she didn't want to do that — but to make it plain she was now her own woman, with her own life to lead, a life that might or might not include him.
She had never, in a million years, meant to take Gesner seriously.
She knew all about Gesner — he'd got a girl pregnant last year and everyone in the Company said he was appalling to the new leading lady, although she hadn't noticed it herself.
She was rarely there for the full rehearsals.
She took her dance calls with the chorus, and had separate sessions coaching the soloists.
She'd done a bit of elementary choreography for Therese and Gesner, but he seemed to be all right, a bit standoffish and dignified perhaps, but then he was the star.
It was because she'd never taken him seriously that the whole thing had come as a surprise.
Like everyone else even remotely connected with the Hochhauser Season (and over the years she had listened to quite a few of Uncle Willi's stories) she had accepted the image of Gesner the seducer, the monster of conceit, the arrogant and selfish star of the company.
It had come as quite a surprise to discover he was charming, very generous, and enormous fun to be with.
She began to wonder if all those other stories about him had been not a little exaggerated.
The evening he had taken her and Ingrid to dinner had been wonderful.
He'd bought them champagne.
He'd been funny, telling stories against himself of fiascos he had survived in the theatre, and he'd been flattering in a subtle way.
Several times she'd caught him staring at her with a warm, smiling expression in his brown eyes, and if she hadn't been so sensible it would have made her feel quite wobbly.
The following morning, in her pigeonhole at the theatre, had been a sealed envelope.
‘I adore Ingrid, but I do spend a lot of time making love to her in the Baron and a man needs a change.
Your turn.
Can you get away at five?
We'll drive over to Baden for dinner and I promise to get you back before your mama realizes that Big Bad Gesner has abducted you over the mountains.’
The note had made her giggle and she'd seen absolutely no harm in going.
After all, he was only one of the Company and if she could go out and eat with Ingrid or Rudi, why not with Gesner?
And the thought of swooping all the way to Baden in his Alfa Romeo was quite dreamy.
It made a change from Georg and his old van.
Gesner had flirted with her quite outrageously during the dinner (more champagne) and had made no secret of his intense interest in her life, and particularly of the men in her life.
He wanted to hear all about Georg and about the boyfriends in Vienna.
He asked her, smiling over the top of his glass, if she had ever been to bed with a man and when she said ‘not exactly’ he had burst out laughing and touched her cheek with one strong brown hand.
He really had very nice hands, large but well-shaped with just a shading of dark hair on the back of his wrists.
She had quite expected him to stop the car on the way home and make a grab at her and she was all prepared to cope with it, had her little speech ready about what a wonderful evening she'd had but at the moment she was concentrating on her career and didn't really want to waste time on that kind of thing.
So she was relieved, but at the same time a little chagrined when he didn't stop the car at all but drove her to the bottom of the footpath that led up to the Hoflin farm.
‘I will happily drive you to your front door, little one,’ he said dryly, ‘but I have the feeling you would prefer not to waken your parents with the  noise of the vulgar Alfa revving off into the night.’
‘Er…
Oh, it's no distance at all up by the path, only a few moments…yes…
I think that would be better…and thank you, it's been a lovely evening, wonderful!’
Gesner beckoned her forward to the open car window.
He pointed to a place on his cheek.
‘I am not quite the Hochhauser rapist I am made out to be, but I expect a little peck, just here, on the cheek.’
She leaned forward and kissed him quickly.
He smelled of something very expensive and sophisticated.
Nice.
The following evening (that was three expensive dinners in a row, which made a contrast to Georg's grudging once a month treat at the cinema) she had insisted that this time they talk about him.
After all, she was grown-up enough to know that to please a man you needed to listen to him, and in fact it was no hardship at all to listen to Karl (unlike Georg, who spoke only of the farm).
He had met many famous and exciting people, he'd had a rich and varied life, some of it rather sad.
He told her he'd been married once, long ago, but had been so bitterly hurt that, although he loved women, couldn't live without them, he had never been prepared to trust his life to one ever again.
She would have loved to know what the erring Frau Gesner had done, but he had suddenly looked so stern, so sad, that she hadn't the nerve to ask.
They'd seen each other every day since then; sometimes, because of rehearsals and because Gesner had so much work to do, it was only for a  drink at the Franz Joseph.
Other times it was dinner; twice he took her dancing, the smoochy old-fashioned sort of dancing, not a disco, the sort where she was right up against him and his hands held her in a strong, commanding kind of way.
When he finally did kiss her, properly kiss her, she was more than ready.
Inevitably, the rest of the company, the rest of Hochhauser knew what as going on.
They couldn't avoid being seen together and she braced herself for the blast from Georg and from her parents.
But Frau Hoflin, who had been infinitely wise in her daughter's education, was equally wise on this occasion.
She prevailed upon Suzi's father to keep his mouth shut and she said, just once, laughing, ‘I never thought the infamous Gesner would conquer you, Suzi!
He really must be a remarkable man!
I can't wait until he gets round to me — I must be the only female in Hochhauser not on his list.’
‘Mama, really!’
Suzi was shocked.
‘I'm not that old, Suzi.
I might even be younger than Gesner.
There's no reason you should be shocked at the thought of him taking me out.
We're of the same generation.’
‘Mama.
You're married!’
‘Of course I am, darling.’
Frau Hoflin patted her daughter's cheek.
‘I'm only joking.’
She had said no more.
She had made her point — that Suzi was one on a long, long list, and that Gesner was her parents' generation.
She only hoped the affair hadn't gone too far for those things to cease to matter.
The interview with Georg, too, while unpleasant, hadn't been as terrible as Suzi had feared.
She still saw him, made a point of popping over to say hullo to Uncle Willi and sought out Georg in the dairy or the office.
Georg was prickly and proud.
‘I hope you're coming to see me on the first night, Georg.
I can get you a ticket if you like.’
‘Thank you.
No.’
Suzi sighed.
‘I would like you to come, Georg.
You are my oldest and most special friend.
I would really like you to come.’
Georg turned his back to her, clamped down the lid of the sterilizer and switched it on.
‘I see enough of you and Gesner racing around in that appalling car of his without watching you prancing together on a stage.’
‘Actually, Georg, we don't perform together on the stage.
We are hardly on at all together.
I only have very short appearances.
He is the star.’
‘So I understand,’ said Georg bitterly.
‘We're only friends, Georg,’ she said gently.
‘You mean you and I are only friends?
Or you and he are only friends?’
He turned and glared at her and for a moment she thought the old Georg was going to start carping and nagging and telling her what she ought or ought not to do.
But his mouth suddenly tightened and he turned back to the sterilizer in dignified silence.
She suddenly realized she didn't know what she had meant.
She was hopelessly confused, not wanting to lose Georg, but at the same time obsessed with the pull of Gesner.
She couldn't stop  thinking about Gesner; every moment of her life when she wasn't working she was thinking of him, reliving what he had said, what he had done, how he had kissed her, what he would do next time.
What she would do if he tried to take her to bed.
She knew she ought to tell Georg it was all over between them, that it was finished for good.
But somehow she couldn't.
She wanted to eat her cake and have it, put Georg away in a little box for the future, when she'd finished having a good time.
‘We're still friends, aren't we, Georg?’ she asked.
‘Go to hell!’
She didn't know why that hurt, but it did and her eyes filled with tears.
She was tired and off balance.
She hadn't had an early night for ages and when she did get to bed she didn't sleep but just lay there thinking about Karl.
Georg looked at her and for a moment she thought he was going to grab her, thought he was going to cry himself, but he suddenly stormed out of the dairy and began to stride up towards the lower pasture.
‘I've had enough,’ he shouted in a choked voice.
She was upset, but later reflected it hadn't been as bad as it could have been.
At least he hadn't interrogated her in his awful ‘Georg’ way.
If he had really started asking questions she wouldn't have known how to answer them.
Three days before the opening night of the Season, Gesner — rather embarrassingly — stopped the rehearsal when he saw she was slipping out of the theatre to go home.
‘Carry on without me for a moment,’ he said, waving his hand in an imperious way, which Suzi found funny and Busacher found infuriating.
‘I just want to have a word with Suzi.’
Everyone watched him stride up the aisle towards the door at the back of the auditorium.
Everyone looked from him to Suzi.
They were all too kind to snigger but Suzi distinctly saw fat Luiza shrug her shoulders in a gesture of fatalistic despair.
Suzi dodged outside the door into the theatre foyer.
‘You shouldn't have done that,’ she said nervously.
‘Everyone will blame me for you stopping the rehearsal.’
‘They don't matter.
What they think doesn't matter.
Tonight is our last free night before we go into production.
It's non-stop rehearsals from now on.
I think we should go somewhere special tonight.
I want to be alone with you — it will be the last time for several days.’
He had her penned up against the wall, both arms stretched out, imprisoning her in a cage of his body and arms.
She shivered.
The oppressive power of him was overwhelming.
‘I can't come tonight.
It's Uncle Willi's party.
He always has his party on the last free night before production.’
‘You're not a little girl.
You don't have to go to Uncle Willi's party.’
‘Oh, but I do.
I've always gone.
And this year, with me being in the Company for the first time, I really must go.’
Gesner smiled down at her.
‘But I want you to come to my party, pumpkin.
I thought we would  have a special party, just the two of us.’
Suddenly she realized what he was saying, just what he meant.
She felt totally confused, totally lost.
If she could have gone to bed with him at that moment it would have been all right.
‘I can't,’ she faltered.
‘If I didn't go to Uncle Willi's party, everyone would know…’
‘Know what, pumpkin?’ he purred.
‘Know…where I was…with you.’
‘Would that matter?’
In spite of her shaking legs, of the heat swamping up from her stomach, of the overwhelming desire to throw caution to the winds and not think about anything else, she was also conscious of the fact that if she gave in, went out with Karl, Uncle Willi would be unbearably hurt, and that she couldn't cope with.
It was very strange that she didn't mind too much what her parents thought, or even Georg, but Uncle Willi so loved his pre-production party, and this year was really excited about it, that she just couldn't let him down.
‘I really couldn't disappoint Uncle Willi,’ she said faintly.
‘I must go.
Perhaps if I asked Uncle Willi, I could bring you.’
Even as she said it, she knew it was an outrageous suggestion.
Uncle Willi's preproduction parties were very, very special, small, and select.
Only his close friends were asked.
Karl Gesner had never been invited.
Suddenly Gesner took his arms away from the wall.
‘As you wish,’ he said coldly.
‘I had forgotten what a silly little girl you still are.’
He pushed  through the swing doors and was gone, leaving her close to tears and frantically worried that she had upset him for ever.
All the way home she agonized about what she should do.
Should she go back and tell him she'd changed her mind?
But how could she?
She would have to speak to him in front of the entire Company.
She could hang around up at the Karl Joseph and hope to catch him when he went back after rehearsal, but the same applied — everyone would see her.
And what about Uncle Willi?
How could she make excuses to Uncle Willi?
Uncle Willi, she was sure, would totally understand about being in love, even though he was Georg's father, but he wouldn't understand that you had to be in love on the one night of his party, not when you'd had all those other evenings with Gesner.
She drooped miserably into the farmhouse, dropping her bag of rehearsal clothes on to the floor.
Frau Hoflin took one look at her and refrained from asking her to pick them up and put them in the washing machine.
‘Upstairs and into the bath,’ she said.
‘Papa has already had his.
I've pressed your dress for you.
Uncle Willi wanted us to dress up specially this evening, because of Therese Aschmann coming.’
‘I'm sick of Uncle Willi's parties!’ she said irrationally and not a little spitefully.
It was all Uncle Willi's fault that Karl was so angry with her.
Her mother was suddenly still, said absolutely nothing.
‘I don't see why I have to go.
There's never  anyone else my age there.
And it's foolish of him to have it when we're all about to go into production and we're so tired.’
Her mother still didn't answer.
‘If he didn't make such a fuss about it, make you feel guilty if you didn't go, I would never go to one of Uncle Willi's parties ever again.’
‘Suzi, if you don't want to go, that's fine.
I will ask you to write a little note to Uncle Willi and I will take it with us when we go.
That will be sufficient.
But if you do go, I would ask you not to spoil Uncle Willi's evening with a long face.
It will be quite bad enough with Georg sitting there glowering at everyone.
If there are two bad-tempered miserable guests, poor Uncle Willi will be very upset.’
Suzi burst into tears and hurried up to the bathroom.
It was a measure of Willi's popularity that, even though his pre-production party was known about by nearly everyone who was anyone in Hochhauser, and even though the guest list was extremely small, no-one ever felt slighted because they hadn't been invited.
Willi rang the changes a little every year.
This year, as well as his old regulars, the Hoflins, Busacher, and old Anton, the répétiteur from Vienna, he had invited his friends on the theatre committee who had assisted so nobly in quelling the Gesner revolt, and Luiza, Freddi and Alfred, who came nearly every year but not so often they took it for granted.
Therese, of course, was the special guest, the one he was most looking  forward to having.
Aschmann in his house, all dressed up for a festive occasion, the most glamorous lady in the theatre, was going to make it a party like no other.
She had promised to sing for them later in the evening if she wasn't too tired.
Busacher arrived first, looking grand and archaic in full evening dress, white tie and tails.
Willi had, somehow, over the years, forced everyone into the custom of dressing as though it were a State ball instead of a private dinner party in a prosperous farmhouse.
‘I'm getting too old for this kind of caper, Willi,’ Busacher said testily.
‘Far too much to do this year, with the new production and Gesner worse than usual.
I'm amazed any of us have time to come.’
‘Oh, pouf!’ said Willi.
‘You say that every year.
My pre-production party is part of the tradition of the Hochhauser Season.
You would be very cross if I stopped giving it.’
He popped the first bottle of champagne and poured a glass.
‘Drink that, you grumpy old man, and get into the party spirit.’
Busacher snorted, drank, and wandered over to look at the long table which had been set up right down the centre of Willi's big living room.
Willi's dinners were always good and he liked to see how many courses his host was serving.
‘Sixteen place settings, Willi?
More than usual.
Who else is coming?’
‘Julius is bringing his wife.
And as we seemed to be rather overweighted with gentlemen I have also invited Ingrid — it is her first time in a major role and the enchanting Miss Grimsilk.’
‘She accepted?’
The Direktor was startled.
‘It seems that Miss Grimsilk and our own adorable Therese have become firm friends.
Therese said Miss Grimsilk was a very nice lady who is at present a trifle unhappy.
She said it would be a kindness to invite her.
So I did.
Also, I was conscious that my little friend Suzi Hoflin is usually the only young one at these evenings, so I thought a couple of extra women nearer her own age would make her feel less conspicuous.’
And, thought Busacher to himself, it would also help with the awkwardness of Suzi and Georg no longer speaking and everyone knowing that the little Hoflin was currently messing about with Gesner.
‘Your little idea didn't quite work out, did it, Willi?
Your plan that taking on Suzi as the dancer would avoid the Gesner problem.’
Willi looked glum, then quickly downed a glass of champagne.
‘I refuse to be depressed this evening,’ he said firmly.
‘Not by Suzi, and not by Georg.
I am going to enjoy myself.’
‘You always do, Willi.
You always do,’ murmured Busacher as Willi bounced away to welcome Gaston, Julius, and Julius's large wife who, overwhelmed by the invitation to one of Willi's famous parties, had gone to Vienna and bought herself a long brown satin dress with a purple sash swathed round the middle.
‘Looks like an Easter egg,’ murmured Busacher to himself and heard a snort behind him.
He turned.
Georg was standing there and although Busacher had no time for the  disagreeable young man, he had to concede that Georg, in dinner jacket and black tie, was extremely handsome.
Pity he can't sing, act, and has no charm, he reflected.
He would make a wonderful Alfredo if only he would smile.
All those looks are quite wasted on a farmer.
‘Good evening, Georg.
How nice to see you at this kind of gathering.
I know theatre people are hardly your choice of party companions.
Indeed, I know you do not care for parties at all.’
‘Obviously I would be present at a party in my own home,’ said Georg stiffly.
‘You are all very welcome.’
‘Thank you.’
Busacher inclined his head slightly, noting the ‘my own home’ and not ‘our’.
My friend Willi is going to have severe trouble with this one, he thought.
It is patently apparent that young Georg has forgotten just who owns the Zimmermann farm.
He cast about desperately for something to say.
Making small talk with Georg was not easy.
‘I hope you will be coming to our opening night next Tuesday, Georg.’
‘I'm afraid I do not care for the theatre.’
‘No.
Of course.
I had forgotten.’
What a boor the young man was.
One would have thought Willi would have drummed some kind of graciousness into him.
And who am I to criticize, he thought wryly to himself.
Willi has done a better job with Georg than I ever did with Peter.
These days he tried not to think of his son too much.
It was unproductive.
The crowd from the Gasthaus arrived and the party began to lift.
They were all old troupers and knew the importance of entering on a high note.
Freddi and Alfred and the ancient Anton all wore their ‘stage’ tails.
Luiza had decked her inevitable blue with a piece of tat borrowed from the wardrobe, and Ingrid wore black silk trousers and a gold waistcoat and very little else.
Therese was magnificent in a swirling confection of crimson that Busacher didn't recognize from the wardrobe department at all.
Had Therese spent a large part of her salary on a dress she would never wear again?
Willi bustled forward.
‘My dear, dear friends!
And…
Therese!’
He clasped his hands together.
‘Silence, everyone!’
Over by the door Busacher saw the Hoflins sidle in.
Suzi was pale and had obviously been crying: He did hope Gesner hadn't done anything to interfere with the opening production next Tuesday.
‘Dear friends — how honoured I am to have you at my party for another year, a very, very special year in many ways.
Our first new production in two weeks’ time, our very own original Luxembourg, designed by our very own designer from England, and choreographed' — that was really a somewhat over-splendid description of Suzi's little dance steps —‘by our very own special Hochhauser girl, our little Suzi.’
Everyone smiled at Suzi then looked hurriedly away as her mouth began to tremble.
‘We have Ingrid, making her debut in a leading role, and above all, my dear friends, this season is very special because, for the first time, we have a  soprano of outstanding quality, a soprano who was, and is, truly a great star.
Friends, before we do anything else, I would like you to raise your glasses and drink to our leading lady, and to the Hochhauser Season.’
‘Therese, and the Hochhauser Season!’
Thank God for my old professionals, thought Busacher.
Without them the toast, and the evening, would have fallen flat.
The Hoflins looked uncomfortable.
Suzi was close to tears, Georg was scowling, and Madge Grimsilk, in her grey suit, looked prim and forbidding.
Willi bounced about filling up everyone's glasses; more corks popped.
He managed to co-opt the gloomy Georg into circulating with more champagne and everyone averted their eyes as Georg drew near Suzi and refilled her glass.
Willi bustled over to the dresser that stretched along one side of the room and picked up a huge basket of flowers.
He had always done that at his pre-production party, given everyone a carnation to wear, but this time he had overreached himself.
‘Very special corsages for my delightful lady guests!’ he cried.
Oh dear, Willi could be such a fool.
‘I have had a wonderful time trying to select flowers that will complement each of you.
Madame!
’ Julius's wife in the Easter egg dress was presented with a gardenia.
Well, at least it was dignified.
Willi padded round the room with his basket, a balding, rubicund Eliza Doolittle.
Carnations for Luiza, irises for the sensible Frau Hoflin, red camellias for Ingrid (she would love the  tenuous connection with La Traviata), cream and yellow roses for little Suzi Hoflin, a spray of mixed violets and primroses — rather clever — for Madge Grimsilk, and finally, with a flourish…
‘For a prima donna there is only one flower.
I know the other ladies will understand — but for our leading lady there can only be orchids!’
Two spotty, purply-pink flowers that looked appalling against Therese's crimson dress.
She smiled radiantly and allowed her eyes to widen slightly.
‘My dear, dear Willi!
How luxurious.
I only hope the Season will prove that I have deserved your wonderful orchids.’
She pinned them bravely to the shoulder of her dress, touched the blooms lightly with her fingers and said to the room at large,
‘Aren't they absolutely wonderful?’
Therese had changed.
She had come to Hochhauser in hope and desperation and Gesner had nearly destroyed her.
But since the day when Willi had brought her up here, to his farm, she had won back something she hadn't had for years, a sense of balance, of proportion, a sense that there were a great many other things, other people in the world other than Therese Aschmann and her problems.
She had realized that she, who had always been so outgoing as a young singer, had been verging on the brink of obsession with her own failures, her own abilities or lack of them, with Gesner and his personal vendetta.
She had never been to lunch or any other meal alone with Willi since that day, but she was wholeheartedly indebted to him for his  kindness, his common sense, his consciousness of the world outside one's own personal situation.
Since that lunch everything had taken an upward swing.
She and Madge had begun a guarded friendship based on a similar sense of humour and a past that both of them skirted around.
Gesner, since that terrible day, had been, if not cooperative, at least not openly antagonistic.
She had looked around the company and seen that she was not out of place at all.
They were a ragtag crowd and she was as good — or as bad — as the rest of them.
She had, for the first time in eighteen years, recovered her equilibrium.
And she had also begun to observe what a miracle the whole Hochhauser Operetta Company was — a miracle that stemmed from two people.
Direktor Franz Busacher, and Burgermeister Willi Zimmermann.
She had seen what huge uphill problems they faced and she was determined to support their heroic effort to the best of her ability.
As the party noise began to dominate the room, the hum of voices, glasses clinking, laughter from the old guard, who were not going to allow any tension to spoil their evening, Busacher came over to Therese.
‘You look…quite splendid, Therese.
Apart from Willi's orchids, of course.’
‘Ssh.’
She smiled and touched the flowers again with her fingers.
‘Dear Willi.
And in some ways they are quite right with this gown.
You remember, Franz, how I always liked bright, even garish colours?
I often wore the wrong things together, just because I couldn't resist them.
I think Willi has put his finger on the essential me!’
She laughed.
‘The gown is certainly you, Therese.
Have I seen it before?
In my own wardrobe department?’
‘Madge brought the material back from Vienna the last time she went on a buying trip — it is not part of the Luxembourg budget, I hasten to add and, wonderful creature that she is, she threw it together on an evening when Wardrobe weren't using one of their machines.’
‘Madge?
Madge Grimsilk?’
He put his arm through Therese's and drew her into a corner of the room.
‘I am quite bewildered by all this, Therese.
Bewildered, and fascinated.
Do you realize that Madge Grimsilk has never, not once, shown any sign of…humanity in my presence?
I have done everything.
I have praised her effusively for her work — quite rightly — I have given her lunch at my villa — she refused the wine, though I observe she is guzzling Willi's champagne without a shudder.
I have exerted myself to be as charming as I can be perhaps you will reassure me, Therese, that I can still be charming when I try?’
‘You are the perfect Viennese, Herr Direktor.’
‘So why has Madge Grimsilk never offered to run me up a quick ball-dress on the wardrobe sewing machine?’
‘Madge is…’ she hesitated, ‘a very private person.
Not the kind of character to wear her heart on her sleeve.
That is a very English expression.
It means…’
‘I know what it means.’
‘She has been hurt, let down I think, by a man, some man in England.
I don't know the details but I recognize the symptoms.
She's very reserved.
I know he was in the theatre.
But that is all I know.’
‘How old do you think she is?’
‘Not sure.
Thirty, thirty-seven, difficult to tell.’
‘It did go through my head — a wild surmise that the man might have been Gesner.
He did that season in London last year.’
Therese began to laugh.
‘Gesner?
And Madge?
You should hear her talking about Gesner.
You should see her doing her impersonation of him; one of the funniest things I've ever seen.’
‘Madge Grimsilk?
Impersonations of Gesner?’
‘Quite wonderful!’
Busacher stared across the room to where Madge was standing talking to the two committee men and the Easter egg.
She wore her corsage of violets and primroses pinned to the lapel of her grey suit.
She wasn't smiling but she was obviously being polite, nodding and asking questions and pretending to be interested in the answers.
‘Why does she wear no make-up?’ he asked distastefully.
‘And why has she come to Willi's party in that dreadful suit?
Did you not tell her that everyone dresses up for Willi's party?
If she made a dress for you, she could have made one for herself.’
‘I'm not sure,’ Therese answered thoughtfully.
‘It is something to do with not wanting to be noticed.
It is very strange.
She understood at once about me — how I always loved bright colours, outrageous  clothes, unsuitable jewellery — but she seems to prefer to be invisible.
And you know, Franz, sometimes designers get tired of clothes.
They have to invent so many for other people they just can't be bothered when it comes to themselves.’
Busacher suddenly shrugged, dismissively.
‘Englishwomen,’ he said sadly.
‘Someone should teach them how to be gracious, how to accept compliments prettily, how never to wear a grey suit to a party however bored one is with designing clothes.’
‘I won't hear a word against her, Franz.
She has designed the most wonderful costumes for me and she's been a good friend.
And I think Willi is about to sit us down for one of his gargantuan dinners.’
Willi, slightly tipsy, but still wonderfully in control, was marshalling people to the table.
Georg next to Frau Hoflin — hard on his old friend, but at least Georg was comfortable with her and she would be motherly and kind to him.
Suzi with Alfred, who although ancient was still an entertaining man who took pleasure — and patience — in making a pretty girl enjoy her dinner.
Frau Trauffer and her daughter began to bring in the first of six bountiful courses.
There is something quite atavistic about a group of people sitting down together to a good dinner.
Even the awkward, the misfits, the discontented, feel a lessening of their misery when they realize they have a place, specially set for them, at a dinner which has been the subject of much thought, care, and several hours of preparation.
One becomes a  privileged member of the tribe.
If one did not sit down at the table there would be a gap, an empty space that would spoil the symmetry of the host's table.
Therefore one is important.
One has been chosen.
Willi's magic began to work as the meal progressed.
His old friends, the Hoflins, looked a little less worried.
Suzi smiled a couple of times at Alfred, Georg began to feel rather proud at hosting a dinner of such magnificence.
And Madge Grimsilk was seen to lean back in her chair instead of sitting upright and swallow a surprisingly large quantity of Willi's excellent wine.
Therese, sitting at Willi's right, felt a sudden surge of pure, undiluted happiness wash over her.
I never expected to feel like this again, she thought.
Never.
Even if nothing nice ever happens again, I must remember this.
Willi had carefully seated Georg and Suzi on the same side of the table, but at opposite ends, so that they could not see one another and could relax.
Willi made another speech, so did Busacher, so did both of the committee men.
The Easter egg, overcome by heat, too much food, and an excess of wine, had to go and stand outside the door for a little fresh air, but came back full of verve and ready to tackle some of Willi's bonbons that were scattered about the room in dishes in case anyone felt the need of more to eat.
Willi was already nibbling.
‘And now,’ said Willi, ‘I shall ask Therese to sing for us, and because this is my house and my  evening, I shall accompany her myself and ignore criticism from the professionals.
Therese?’
‘What would you like me to sing, Willi?’
' Traviata.
Act One.
The waltz.’
‘It's a duet, Willi.’
‘You can sing it all.’
The golden, fluting, essentially young voice filled the room.
Frau Trauffer and her daughters came out of the kitchen wiping their hands on their aprons.
The voice seemed to seep through the seams of the farmhouse, echo up the mountains and ripple back around the flowers and empty champagne bottles.
Her teacher had been right all those years ago, reflected Busacher.
He'd said it was a natural voice, one that didn't have to be nursed or conserved or constantly disciplined.
He remembered her in the old days, singing at parties for hours and then turning up for rehearsal next day without any sign of strain or tiredness in her voice.
There were enough singers in the room to finish the chorus lines with her, then Luiza rose from her chair.
‘Help me over to the piano, young Georg.
I intend to play some waltzes and you shall all dance.’
Gaston, the committee man, who had been eyeing Ingrid the entire evening, trying to discern if she was wearing anything at all under the gold waistcoat, hurried over and pulled her to her feet.
Julius danced soberly with his Easter egg.
Freddi grabbed Therese and, amazingly energetic, whirled  her round and round with surprising control.
Therese was a good half-head taller than Freddi and when Busacher caught her eye, she winked at him.
Willi made his way over to Madge Grimsilk, coughed, hesitated, then bowed in a very old-fashioned and courtly way.
To Busacher's astonishment Madge Grimsilk rose to her feet and placed a hand on Willi's shoulder.
The next moment, stiff as a beanpole but smiling, actually smiling! she was pivoting round with Willi, stumbling, tripping, but nevertheless dancing.
Busacher was so riveted by the bizarre sight that he failed to see what was happening with Georg and Suzi.
Suzi had been conscious of Georg the whole evening, even when she couldn't see him.
She often forgot how handsome Georg was, especially lately when he always seemed to have a scowl on his face.
But tonight he looked splendid in his dinner jacket, groomed, combed, and really being rather charming to his guests.
He wasn't as handsome as Gesner, of course, and at the thought of Gesner the misery of the evening threatened to engulf her again.
She felt reckless, off balance.
She didn't want Georg back but she wanted to hurt him the way Gesner had hurt her.
She didn't know what she wanted and she'd drunk too much.
She walked across to Georg and looked at him the way she looked at Gesner.
‘Dance with me, Georg.’
‘You know I don't dance.’
She looked pretty and provocative and very, very sexy.
He'd never seen her look like that before, and when he thought of  why she looked like that he wanted to throttle her.
‘Oh, come on, old sourface.
You can surely stand up and just put your arms round me.’
She laughed rather shrilly, grabbed his hands and tried to pull him up against her.
‘Stop it, Suzi!’
‘Come on!’
She pulled harder, dragging him out into the path of a waltzing couple, trying to wrap his arms round her waist.
‘Sour old Georg.
Aah!’
For suddenly Georg's control had snapped and he pushed her hard, violently and savagely away from him so that she spun across the room, hurtled into the table, and nearly fell.
Some glasses crashed to the floor.
There was an appalled silence in the room, broken by a choked sob from Georg, who suddenly ran out of the door.
And at that moment Madge Grimsilk gave a gentle hiccough and passed out cold upon the floor.
Nine
In the following three days they had to get through two complete run-throughs, two technical rehearsals, and one dress rehearsal.
The dress rehearsal for Countess Maritza was left until the Wednesday morning, after the opening night.
There was no time or energy for anyone to do anything but get through the long gruelling hours and fall into bed, usually after midnight and on the night before the opening, at three in the morning.
Gesner was in a foul mood again and Therese took the brunt of it.
He didn't totally sabotage the production but during the technical run-through when the cast spent a lot of time just standing about waiting for lighting and scenery and props to be adjusted — he made a point of whispering to Ingrid, putting his arm around her, making her giggle, while they both looked over at Therese.
As the opening production was Gypsy Baron, where Ingrid was taking the lead and Therese had to play the role of an eighteen-year-old village maiden, it wasn't hard to guess what most of the jokes were about.
When they came to plotting the lighting for Countess Maritza, Therese's first starring role, he became very aggressive.
He had absorbed enough  knowledge of lighting in his career to know who was being given the best spots, and he fought all the time to get Therese pushed out when he was on stage.
It was also observed that he was fairly cool with the little Hoflin girl, who seemed to be mooning miserably about the theatre with a pale face, even when she wasn't needed.
He wasn't rude to her, just cold and polite.
Idly, without a lot of interest, the company wondered if he was planning to take Ingrid to bed instead of Suzi although, as Luiza pointed out, Ingrid wasn't really his type.
Too old.
On the Monday night the orchestra arrived ready for the dress rehearsal of Gypsy Baron the next morning.
Busacher tried, as far as possible, to get the same musicians every year, those who knew, as he put it, ‘our funny little ways’.
This meant that on some occasions they would be conducted by Busacher, on others by Anton, the old répétiteur, and in emergencies by their own lead violinist.
They were also used to bursting into unexpected crescendos of sound when Ingrid's voice cracked or Freddie lost his pitch, and infilling with fiddly bits when some backstage hitch caused long pauses.
They were worth every penny of the large chunk of the Hochhauser budget they absorbed.
The dress rehearsal was fairly dull.
They were all tired and Ingrid was, by this time, thoroughly frightened and didn't want to use her voice too much.
Gesner, sniffing the advance of his adoring fans, suddenly became smug and rather patronizing.
He walked through his role, yawning and refusing to sing any of it.
‘La, la, la,’ he said dismissively, waving his hand in the air.
‘We all know what I sing here.
We have all heard it many, many times.
Same old tunes, same old singers, same old operetta.’
‘Perhaps I may remind you, Karl,’ said Busacher waspishly, ‘that the choice of this revival was yours.
You were very anxious that Ingrid should star in it.’
But he was really too tired, like everyone else, to get angry with Gesner.
He knew the man would be magnificent when he got on to the stage that night.
He always was.
The dress rehearsal finally ended at four in the afternoon and everyone went home to rest.
The young members of the company were more exhausted than the old.
Busacher had noticed that before.
They tended to wear themselves out with too much excitement.
On the way home he checked with Stefan on the evening's bookings.
‘Not sold out, but a couple of coach parties from Vienna — you know, the usual thing, group booking for early dinner at the Strauss Inn and straight back into the coach after the performance.
Same tomorrow, and the following night is the first charity block-booking of patients from the Elizabeta Hospital.
All sold out for first four performances of Luxembourg next week.’
‘Good.
Good.’
Stefan was in the front booking office; not really his job but the front of house manager had given up and gone home to bed.
Stefan looked particularly grey and was frantically scrunching indigestion tablets.
‘New pills not working, Stefan?’
‘Be all right once we get started — get Ingrid and Aschmann on the stage without hitches.’
Buscher knew exactly what he meant.
It was the same old production of Gypsy Baron they'd done last year, but there were two huge question marks over this year's production: two new debuts, Ingrid and Therese.
Therese, lying on her narrow bed at the Goldener Adler, was fighting overwhelming panic.
She was exhausted and she wasn't even taking the lead in tonight's performance.
If she was this tired, how did she think she'd be able to survive Maritza on the following night, and Luxembourg next week?
Eighteen years away from a stage, eighteen years and she'd forgotten until now that terrifying gut-wrenching dread of stepping out in front of several hundred people and making a total fool of yourself.
Supposing Gesner pulled a trick, or she fell over.
Supposing the audience laughed at her playing a soubrette role.
Supposing she forgot what she was supposed to do, missed her entrance, let them all down.
The Direktor had taken such a chance on her.
Supposing she let him down?
When she got to the theatre she found her dressing room was full of flowers — Willi again.
The Zimmermann farm was in danger of bankruptcy if Willi didn't control himself.
She donned her white dress, the wig of blonde ringlets, and began to put on her make-up.
She looked absolutely ridiculous and she knew it.
Busacher knocked on the door and came in.
‘To wish you good luck, my dear!’
He was  deliberately playing it down.
She didn't have the lead but it was still a big part and it was her first time on the stage since the scandal.
But he certainly wasn't going to encourage her to indulge in nerves or old memories.
‘I hope I'm not going to let you down, Herr Direktor,’ she said through tight lips.
‘I'm beginning to wonder if this was such a good idea.’
He was deliberately offhand.
‘It doesn't really matter what you do, my dear.
You are not the lead.
Ingrid is.
I am much, much more concerned about her voice lasting out for the evening.
You need to do nothing except stand there and sing your numbers.
No-one will notice you.
Everyone will be watching Ingrid.’
He saw the colour flow back into her face.
‘Of course,’ she said.
‘I must go and wish her luck.’
Ingrid was defiant but shaking.
She refused the offer of a glass of schnapps.
He didn't approve of singers drinking before they went on stage, but he could see that Ingrid was in a very bad way.
‘You are going to be quite splendid, Ingrid,’ he said briskly.
‘I know.
I'm quite confident.
No worries at all.’
‘Good.’
‘Karl has sent me a good luck card.
Wasn't that kind?’
Kind and unprecedented!
Karl Gesner had never done that before to any member of the company.
‘Karl will see you through, Ingrid.
You know you can rely on him.’
‘Yes.
But I'm quite confident, Herr Direktor.’
He closed the door, paused outside Gesner's dressing room, then decided not to go in.
The man had nerves of steel and didn't need anyone's good wishes.
There were many times in the past years when he had wondered why on earth he had involved himself with the Hochhauser Season, times when he was worried, exhausted, furious, and prepared to consign the whole company to hell.
But when he stepped up on to the conductor's rostrum for the opening production of a new season, he was — every time — filled with a sense of sheer elation.
It had always been a moment of pure magic to him in the theatre, the consciousness of the huge rustling animal behind him, and the hush as the house lights went down, the pause of utter stillness, silence, and then as he brought his baton down, the incredible surge of excitement as music smashed the silence, created instantly the illusion of that otherworld that didn't really exist.
Every time it happened he was conscious of the audience being captured, ensnared into his world of fairy tales.
They didn't always stay ensnared; often they were lost when a performance was bad and didn't sustain the magic.
But always, for that one first moment, there was a hope, a promise of a few hours of enchantment.
At that moment he loved the theatre.
The curtain rose to the usual restless flutter of the audience, the last coughs — audiences were as predictable as the performers in their reactions and the chorus began their opening song.
OK, just.
Gesner would be on in a few moments and then the thing would lift off.
It was when Gesner stepped on to the stage — on this occasion looking unbelievable in his Mandrika costume successfully altered by Wardrobe — that Busacher forgave him, nearly, for all the trouble he caused.
The man dominated the stage.
Superbly self-confident, exuding sexuality, he captured the audience in the space of two minutes.
Busacher relaxed.
They were away again for a new season.
Freddi did his Zsupan number with all the expertise of an old professional — miraculous!— what did it matter if his voice had gone — and then, Busacher swallowed hard, realizing his heart was pounding dangerously fast, Therese made her entrance and began to sing.
The audience, many of whom knew the operetta well, were puzzled.
She didn't look as bad as she had done in the dressing room but she was obviously not young, not slender, not a girl.
It was very odd casting and they couldn't quite work it out.
But as she sang, the voice seemed to lift itself out of the setting, out of the plot, and become a performance in itself.
Probably the audience, most of them, didn't realize what they were hearing except that it was…different, something one didn't expect on the stage of Hochhauser.
What Busacher was suddenly aware of was the orchestra.
They'd heard her a little at rehearsal, but not properly, not consistently, and not without interruption and background noise.
Professional musicians are mostly a cynical lot — they've heard it all  before and played it all before too.
They know the tricks used by most singers and are expert in helping out or not as the case may be.
Even Gesner was very careful not to be rude to the orchestra.
Now Busacher sensed a sharpening all around him, a tightness, an awareness that something was happening.
Without realizing it, their orchestral accompaniment fined itself to the quality of her voice.
I wasn't wrong, Busacher thought exultantly.
I wasn't wrong.
They've recognized it.
She got a round of applause when she'd finished, a modest round and Busacher suspected it had been started by Willi.
But even so, in Hochhauser not many of the second soloists got rounds.
Ingrid was still shaking when she came on.
He just hoped they couldn't see it from the stalls.
Her performance was about what he'd expected but they brushed through without anything too awful happening.
Her hair looked wonderful as she darted about the stage and she was at her best in the gypsy dance.
Backed by Suzi, who did most of the energetic stuff, Ingrid strutted and flounced and flung her hair about.
It was all very Hungarian and high-spirited.
Went down well, all things considered.
By the end of the evening all had come together very nicely and the Direktor knew the performance was ‘set’ for the rest of the Season.
Gesner had made it better than it was and had carried Ingrid through most of her numbers.
Luiza, who was always very happy singing Czipra as she spent most of the evening sitting on a gypsy log, had been in  superb voice and Therese — Busacher gloated — Therese had made one or two of the more discerning wonder what she was going to do in some of the other productions.
No-one really had time to celebrate that night.
The dress rehearsal of Countess Maritza was the following morning, but still they all found time to make a fuss of Ingrid, who was now smugly self-confident instead of defiantly self-confident.
Busacher gave Therese his own private accolade.
Willi was ebullient.
‘You heard it, Franz?
You heard what happened?
The audience recognized it and so did the orchestra.’
Busacher had at one time been surprised at Willi's musical perception, but was no longer.
‘The orchestra were very kind,’ Therese said.
‘One or two of them came and spoke to me afterwards.
They remembered me from the old days.’
‘You were wonderful, Therese!
Wonderful, wonderful!
Even Rudi sang better when he was with you!’
She couldn't stop smiling.
Even knowing she looked ridiculous, she'd enjoyed it after that first entrance, had loved being on a stage again, singing with the company.
She had to keep reminding herself to behave with dignity and not whoop round the dressing room like Willi.
‘And tomorrow, Maritza!’ gloated Willi.
‘Just wait until tomorrow!’
Gesner, turning up for the dress rehearsal the next morning, was rather bored.
His opening night had been his usual triumph.
It had been amusing to get Ingrid through it, just to spite Busacher and keep Aschmann in a supporting role, but now he had to sustain Ingrid through the rest of the Season.
No effort or trouble, but it would become irritating in time.
The conflict with Aschmann was over.
She was no threat, he'd seen that last night.
Oh yes, her voice was good, but voice alone wasn't enough in operetta.
She was never going to look right and she didn't have any stage style, no attack, no panache.
Even Ingrid had stage style, a certain energy that made her project something over the footlights.
Aschmann had none of that.
She was just going to be rather tedious from now on.
The Hoflin affair hadn't worked out quite the way he'd planned either, although he'd spent a lot of time and money on the little thing.
He debated whether Ingrid would do.
She was terribly grateful to him at the moment and it wouldn't require any effort on his part.
But, he reflected idly, the little Hoflin thing had been so much prettier, so much more uncritically adoring.
She was still mooning about the theatre, gazing at him.
Probably it wouldn't take much to reactivate things, but on the other hand, if she was one of those drearily perennial virgins it wasn't really worth the effort.
He wandered into his dressing room, climbed into his costume — really, buying Mandrika's old wardrobe had been the best investment he'd ever made.
The rest of the hired costumes looked  appalling by comparison — and strolled out towards the stage.
‘Good God!
That's not the hired costume.’
Therese was standing on the stage, Madge Grimsilk on her knees crouching and doing something to the bottom of Therese's costume, which was most certainly not the hired costume.
‘There were no twenties costumes in my size,’ said Therese sweetly.
‘I'm too fat to fit any of the stock Maritza costumes.’
He glared at her.
Was she being funny?
Sarcastic?
But another look at her face, just blankly polite, made him decide he had imagined the irony.
He certainly hadn't imagined the costume, however.
She stood there in a full, swirling coat of silver-grey silk.
Actually it wasn't silk.
It was the cheapest, thinnest, shiniest material that Madge could find and she had told Therese it would just about last out the Season before you could start shooting peas through it.
It didn't matter.
Under the clever lighting it fell in folds of shimmering silver round her knees.
It was caught up at the neck into a huge thick collar of silver fur.
On her head was a large Russian hat of the same fur, and on her right hand a muff.
‘It looks very silly against all the other costumes.
It isn't twenties at all.’
‘That's why I'm shortening it,’ said Madge Grimsilk from the floor.
He stared at the hemline which was being taken up to Therese's knees.
She had, whatever the rest of her figure, very good legs, long and slim.
He  didn't remember noticing her legs before.
She'd worn slacks all through rehearsals and the only other times he'd seen her she'd been wearing that dreary suit.
She also wore extremely high-heeled shoes that made her legs seem even longer.
From the auditorium he heard Franz Busacher's voice.
‘Excellent, Miss Grimsilk.
Very good indeed.
Therese, could you come down here for a moment?
And Miss Grimsilk.’
As Therese walked forward towards the stage steps the silk coat swung out around her, catching the light, drawing attention to her legs.
Framed by the silver fur her face took on a glow that emphasized her high cheekbones.
Madge held the folds of material away as Therese climbed down from the stage.
‘You're going to be hot in that fur, Therese,’ she murmured.
‘It's not fake.
I found an old coat in the flea market and cut the good bits out.
It's real and hot.
You'll be a greaseball by the end of Act One.
And it will probably give you some horrible skin disease too.’
‘I don't care,’ said Therese firmly.
‘I don't care if I dissolve into a puddle the minute the curtain comes down.
The whole thing is a miracle.’
It was a miracle.
She looked rich, stylish, elegant.
Busacher lowered his voice.
‘Brilliant.
Do we have some paste in the wardrobe, Miss Grimsilk?
A few diamonds perhaps.
I think a large diamond pin of some kind up near the collar, and those glittery sort of earrings, and perhaps several bracelets to flash when she moves the muff.’
‘I'll see what we have, Herr Direktor.’
‘And Therese…
I think perhaps, for the dress rehearsal, more of a walk through?
Not too wise to let…everyone see exactly what you can do.’
Therese grinned.
‘I quite understand, Herr Busacher.’
It was unbelievable what the costume had done for her.
She had nothing else quite so effective to wear for the other two acts, but this, for her first entrance, for establishing herself as Countess Maritza, did absolutely everything.
‘You…you and Gesner,’ said Busacher a little apologetically.
‘You look rather splendid together.
The rest of the costumes do look a trifle…stale.
You make a handsome couple.’
‘Thank you, Herr Direktor.’
Her mouth twitched.
‘Now.
On with the rehearsal.’
They got through quite quickly.
Chorus numbers were sung in full, and the Hoflin girl's little solo in Act Two was performed from beginning to end, but Ingrid, who was singing Lisa — not such a heavy role, but she still had a couple of solos — was resting her voice again, and the rest just walked and hummed their roles.
Gesner seemed rather wooden and he kept giving Therese a speculative scowl.
That evening she felt no nervousness at all, just excitement, controlled excitement.
She knew just what she had to do, knew the music perfectly, could sing it in her sleep, but now she felt, for the first time in years, she could bring something of herself, her personality, into her singing.
It was a wonderful entrance.
Busacher wanted to cheer.
Willi nearly did.
The music of Maritza's entrance was always a gift to any singer, good or bad: the rising crescendo from the orchestra that tells the audience a star is about to come on stage.
And tonight the orchestra, intrigued by the vibrations they had picked up of something unusual happening this season, gave the entrance a full-bodied flourish of emotional sound, a build-up of chord and melody that culminated with Therese, shimmering, a mass of silver and flashing diamonds, swinging her way down to front stage, smiling, radiant, totally in control, moving quickly, gracefully around her stage guests, a wave of her muff to this one, a kiss blown to that.
Busacher was suddenly blinded by tears.
It was the old Therese, the happy, extrovert Therese, the golden girl who had lit up the stage of the Volksoper.
Of course, she still wasn't as good as Gesner, she didn't steal the show from him by any means.
She was uncertain in some places, still finding her way, upstaged by him whenever they were on together, but the rippling golden voice never faltered, and in the Varasdin duet with Freddi she took flight again, gave the whole scene a sense of gaiety and even kept Freddi on key for once.
‘I'll be all right by the time we come to Luxembourg next week,’ she said confidently to Franz and Willi at supper that night.
They had found a small restaurant away from the theatre circuit where there was no chance of bumping into Gesner.
‘By the time I've done the rest of this week, two Gypsy  Barons, and two more Countess Maritzas, I'll be totally on top of everything.
You've no need to nurse me along any more, Franz.
I've been, oh, so aware that you've been more than generous, with your time, your coaching, your support against Gesner.
From now on you don't have to worry.
I can do it myself and you can go back to being the Direktor of the company instead of my protector.
I can manage Gesner myself.’
‘Be careful.
You've seen how spiteful he can be; possibly even dangerous.’
‘Nothing can hurt me now,’ she said blithely, reaching out her hands one on each side towards them.
‘With my two dear, good friends who have brought me this far, nothing can go wrong now.’
It was the uncles again.
That was how she felt — as though those dear supporting figures of her childhood were once again hovering over her.
She had always prided herself, as she got older, that she wasn't a bit like her mama, but perhaps she was.
The uncles had looked after her when she was young, then her professor and Hans Kramer and Busacher had begun her on her career, and then she had fallen in love and it had all gone wrong.
And the years when she had had no-one to look after her had been disastrous.
So perhaps she was, after all, like darling Mutti (now married to a Hungarian doctor and living an extremely respectable old age in Budapest).
Perhaps she was incapable of standing on her own and needed the encouragement of supportive males.
It was all very  pathetic and she didn't like the thought of it at all.
‘No,’ she repeated.
‘I can cope with him on my own now.
Nothing can go wrong.’
Busacher, under the spell of an unexpectedly successful evening, began to feel quietly confident that she was right.
Karl Gesner, not frantically worried, but conscious of a slight worm of discontent at the back of his mind, bought Ingrid an indifferent supper and decided to take her to bed.
He needed a little boost to his ego and she was better than nothing.
Ten
By the end of the week the company had played themselves in and the two opening productions were soundly established.
Countess Maritza had moments of brilliance, and even in Gypsy Baron Therese had improved.
The casting was still incongruous but, because she had gained enormous confidence, she began to look better, held herself tautly, lightly, and, by the Saturday matinee, gave a convincing performance of an eighteen-year-old girl.
Gesner was becoming increasingly angry.
He knew that, somehow, he had been fooled.
He watched her, listened to her getting better and better in Countess Maritza.
She was receiving curtain calls nearly as long as his and on the Saturday night performance a spontaneous (spontaneous — ha — Willi Zimmermann was in the house again) burst of cheering broke out when she took her call.
He began to think about Therese Aschmann — could she be dangerous?
A threat to his position of total supremacy over the whole of the Hochhauser Season?
He began to try to remember things he had heard about Aschmann.
He'd been conscious of her in the old days of course, although he kept quiet  about that.
He didn't want anyone to realize he was — well — as old as he was.
He had worn well, unlike her.
He still looked like a romantic lead.
She didn't.
And he'd also clocked up several more years on the operatic stage than she had.
And why was that?
He tried to remember the details of the old scandal something to do with a scene on the stage that had stopped the performance, and after that she'd never appeared again, until now.
That was very odd indeed.
He was not a fool and he recognized that what came out when Therese opened her mouth was a unique sound that could, if she had continued in her youthful career, have taken her right up to the top, to the international opera houses of the world.
Something had happened to make her vanish, all those years ago.
He woke late on the Sunday morning after their first week, sent Ingrid back to her Gasthaus, and wandered down to the coffee shop where several of them came and ate a late breakfast.
He looked around for someone who would fill him in on the gossip.
Luiza and Freddi were there but he knew they would be hopeless.
They clammed up like leeches when anything about Therese came up.
Then he saw Stefan, blue round the chin, sitting down with a plate of rolls and butter and a jug of milk.
‘So, Stefan.
May I?’
He pointed to the chair on the other side of the table.
‘Please yourself.’
‘Stomach any better, Stefan?’
‘Terrible.’
‘It's been a trying time, warming up to opening.
Our new leading lady hasn't helped either — needed more work than usual to get her going.’
Stefan grunted and gave him a sharp look.
‘Very promising now though, don't you think?’
Gesner said hastily.
‘I do believe we have a leading lady of some merit.’
‘Sounds good to me,’ said Stefan guardedly.
Gesner waved for some coffee and helped himself to one of Stefan's rolls.
‘Seems a shame she hasn't made a comeback before,’ he said genially.
‘Good voice — and she must have been very attractive when she was young.
What a waste!’
Stefan began to thaw a little.
He was a strange, rather lonely man with a lonely job that was highly pressured and didn't leave him any time to make friends or indulge in theatre gossip.
When he was given a chance he enjoyed it as much as anyone else.
‘I believe she tried a couple of times.
The managements were very wary of taking her on, of course.
Couldn't risk letting that kind of thing happen again.
She was in disgrace for a while, not her fault though.’
‘Ah yes — it was the husband, was it not?
Something to do with a scene on the stage that stopped the show?’
‘He was a drunk, a jealous drunk.
He rushed on to the stage with a knife, tried to kill her.
Rest of the cast fought him off but the tenor got cut about quite badly and had to go to hospital.
Curtain  brought down.
Couldn't go on with the performance even with the understudies because of the police coming in.
And the stage was in a terrible mess, all blood and vomit, and the scenery all smashed up.
Was in all the papers.’
‘But of course everyone's forgotten it by now?’
‘Well, naturally the old ones remember it.
And the managements.
But it was a long time ago and other things have happened since.’
‘But nothing quite as…sensational as that.’
‘No.
But she's a plucky lady.
She stood by him in court.
He wasn't given too long a sentence providing he agreed to go into a clinic — you know — to be dried out and cured.
And she stuck by him through all that.’
‘Presumably he's dead now?’
Stefan hesitated.
‘Not sure.
Never liked to mention him and I don't think anyone else does either.
He's certainly not around any more and she doesn't wear a wedding ring — not that that means anything these days.’
‘Who was he?
The husband?’
‘A singer.
No-one ever remembers his name.
He wasn't a very good one, I suppose.’
Idly Gesner finished eating Stefan's rolls.
He wasn't sure just how worried he ought to be by Therese Aschmann.
She was good as Maritza, but still no threat to him.
He wasn't even prepared to admit to himself that he'd had to work hard to keep her down.
Absolutely no threat.
She'd be dreadful when they came to Der Zarewitsch in three weeks' time; like playing Arsena again.
But he was very  much afraid she was going to be rather good in Luxembourg — it was a role not unlike that of Countess Maritza.
He wasn't too worried about the stagecraft.
He was an old hand at knowing how to steal his audiences; he'd managed to do it with Hanna Brunner last year and she was experienced.
This one, after a gap of eighteen years, didn't even remember how to hold her place in the lights when he started to manoeuvre her upstage.
But what really concerned him was the voice.
It was good, and it was getting better, and no matter what he did, all the old tricks that had always worked so well, the talking in the wings, blocking her when she was on stage, that voice never faltered.
Even when the audience couldn't see her because he'd managed to move across and mask her, holding centre stage for himself, they could still hear that effortless, golden sound spinning round every prism of the crystal chandelier in the middle of the theatre.
When he thought about that voice he felt he would like to murder her with a knife himself.
The entire cast were excited about the dress rehearsal of The Count of Luxembourg, even the blasé old orchestra catching some of the anticipatory delight that stemmed from the new production.
The sets were marvellous and Madge Grimsilk had devised a quick and efficient way of implementing her transformation of the whole theatre into a fairy ballroom.
Huge stiffened but graceful garlands were hung from twenty-four tiny hooks set round the gallery parapet, and were constructed so cleverly  that they gave the impression of winding around the gallery pillars.
The transformation of the ceiling was brought about with two simple pulleys, almost on a clothes-line principle, that took a tent of diamonds and icicles up around the chandelier.
The garlands that swathed the proscenium arch took the audience right on to the stage — in spirit.
But the most exciting thing of all was that, after eight years of hired costumes, old, stale, tired costumes from ancient productions, everyone in the cast was dressed in an outstanding design that really fitted.
Gesner was pleased with his own clothes, and had to confront the realization that Therese's would be no less effective.
He'd seen what Madge Grimsilk had done for Therese in Maritza, and had savagely braced himself to give no sign, no indication of anything when he saw her Luxembourg costumes.
Even so, it took all his self-control not to lose his temper with Madge Grimsilk, for Therese, in the dark sapphire Rosa Ponselle gown, studded all over with flashing blue stones and with the huge peacock train spreading out behind her, was outstanding, so outstanding that the rest of the cast, pleased with their own designs but quick to recognize a ‘star’ outfit, burst into a little patter of applause.
Gesner felt an actual furious pain in his gut.
She didn't look fat at all, not even a bit plump.
Her wig, a soft gold colour, was dressed to sit high on her head, emphasizing once more the high cheekbones and the slightly slanting eyes.
The pointed tiara flashed as she moved.
She looked mysterious and quite, quite beautiful.
‘You seem to have fallen from the top of a Christmas tree, Fräulein,’ he said spitefully.
‘Thank you, Karl.’
‘Will you be able to breathe, and sing, with all that corseting?’
‘No corsets, Karl,’ she said sweetly.
‘I've been losing quite a lot of weight since I came to Hochhauser.
The strains and stresses, you know.’
The rehearsal was a mess of stops and starts.
In spite of the technical run-through the day before, Madge Grimsilk's front and back cloths kept sticking and not coming down when they should.
The little Hoflin, who had her speciality showpiece in Act Two, did it very badly and finally tripped and fell.
Everyone tried to help, reassuring her that this was a good omen, she would be marvellous when it came to the actual performance, but it was fairly obvious she was in a bad way.
News had spread that some kind of scene had occurred at the Burgermeister's pre-production party.
No-one was surprised.
They'd seen it happen before to Gesner's dancers, but not usually so early in the Season.
But even though the rehearsal was, if not exactly bad, then most certainly inconclusive, nothing could dull the sense of wild excitement that gripped the entire company.
This was their new production, and an electric charge went through them, intensely fuelled amongst the younger members because they had heard that Hans Kramer, the Viennese operatic agent, was coming specially to Hochhauser to see Therese.
Nothing like that had happened before in the history of Hochhauser.
Each one of them  envisaged the scene where Hans Kramer, overwhelmed by their particular performance, begged to represent them in the international field.
The entrance foyer was packed when Georg sidled in that evening, hoping that no-one would see him and recognize him.
He knew his father would be backstage, interfering, and Suzi's parents had arrived much earlier in order to park their car and get to their seats in good time.
In any case they were sitting upstairs in Willi's little loggia (the gallery of the Spa Rooms had not lent itself to conversion into boxes, but parts of the curved balcony had been sectioned off with wrought-iron grills into small loggias for distinguished guests).
He didn't know why he had come, hated himself for coming, but had by now tormented himself into a state of mind where he was deliberately looking for fresh spasms of anguish.
He couldn't understand how his world had collapsed and although he said to himself, several times a day, that it was all the fault of the theatre, that sick, all-pervading fever that seemed to turn everyone foolish and mad, in his heart he knew it was more than that.
Something had gone wrong between him and Suzi that was nothing to do with the theatre.
Every time he saw her it hurt him, and he knew it would hurt him even more tonight, to see her cavorting with her lover on the stage.
He didn't know what was happening between Gesner and Suzi any more, hadn't seen either of them since the Season began, since that dreadful scene at Willi's party, but he knew he had to submit himself to yet another bout  of torture and watch them together on the stage.
He pushed his way through to the box office and thrust a handful of money through the window.
‘One seat.
In the back stalls.’
It was a sign of his distress that he didn't care what it cost, hadn't even looked to see the list of seat prices posted up by the side of the window.
He wanted back stalls because he'd be right under the gallery and no-one would see him.
‘No seats at all for this evening.
All sold out long ago.’
Georg stared.
‘But I must have a seat for this evening.
I've come specially.
I'll stand.’
‘Standing room all gone too.’
He felt himself begin to tremble.
‘What about tomorrow?’
‘Nothing at all this week.
First available is next week — Saturday.’
He'd forced himself to do this, sneak down here, humiliate himself because he had to see her now, this evening.
‘Well, do you want a ticket for Saturday week or not?’
‘Yes.’
‘It's more than that.
I'll need thirteen schilling more.’
Blindly he pushed more notes through the window and turned away.
‘Don't you want your ticket?’
He crammed it into his pocket and bludgeoned his way rudely through the first-night crowd.
One or two people spoke sharply to him as he elbowed and trod on feet.
When he got outside he turned to  the right, up to the mountain road leading to his home.
He had walked all the way down and he began to walk back.
The May evening was warm and filled with a golden light, and as he passed the Maria-Therese gardens the scent of the lilacs hit him with an almost physical pain.
He clenched his teeth, pulled back his shoulders and began to stride up the road.
When he reached the branch-off track to the farm he looked up at the farmhouse.
It had never seemed such a lonely, sad place since the day his mother had died.
Even the sight of the herds, grazing gently on the new young grass, failed to cheer him.
He wished his father was in the house.
He felt the way he had when he was eleven, coming back to the farm after school, knowing his mother wasn't there and trying hard not to cry.
Busacher, after careful thought, had decided he would conduct the orchestra himself this evening.
In some ways it would have been wiser to remain backstage, allowing his presence to be felt, the sight of him reassuring everyone.
But Stefan had everything under control and he could not resist the temptation to open his first new production on his own rostrum.
And in any case, he could control the things that mattered very well from there.
Any nonsense from Gesner and he'd have to fight the orchestra.
He went around the dressing rooms, wishing everyone good luck (even Gesner) and congratulating everyone on a magnificent effort.
This was not the moment to tell Ingrid to strain less in her upper  registers, or to remind Luiza to allow plenty of time when she had to walk on in the ball scene.
A special accolade for Stefan, that prodigy of a man who virtually single-handed got everything together on time, and then, just as he was about to go through the orchestra door he saw Madge Grimsilk, the headdress of a rat under her arm, hurrying up to the wings.
‘Err…
Miss Grimsilk?’
‘Herr Direktor?’
‘No problems?’
‘No, Herr Direktor.
Max had broken the strap on his mask.
It's mended now.’
‘Good.
I…we…
You have made a major contribution to this production, Miss Grimsilk.
You must be aware of the excitement we all feel about this evening.
Quite a large part of that excitement is due to you, to your designs, and, also, if I may be forgiven for mentioning something so personal, for the way you have helped and befriended Therese.
I like to think that you have truly become one of the Hochhauser Company.’
Miss Grimsilk's face didn't crack, although he did perceive — perhaps — the very faintest of flushes creeping up from her neck.
‘I hope you have enjoyed working with us,’ he persisted.
‘Good luck, Herr Direktor,’ she said impassively, and he gave up.
He had assisted in lifting her from the floor of Willi Zimmermann's living room when she was blindly unconscious.
He had helped drag her to a chair, and had watched Julius and Willi  carry her out to a car and take her home.
Never once had she referred to it at all.
He wondered if he had imagined it.
He watched her hurry away from him as though she was terrified he was going to say more, and then the sounds of his orchestra tuning up took him through into the pit.
A full house, wonderful, and an excited one.
All the committee were there and most of the Gemeinderat, a few interested specialists from Vienna, friends and relatives of the performers, the editor of the local newspaper and the top echelons of Hochhauser.
And then his own special moment of elation: the overture, the rustle, the curtain up, and suddenly his tacky, ragtag little chorus was out there, looking wonderful, moving well, even singing better!
Something had happened to them — they were charged for just a while into being better than they were.
This time he didn't have to wait with trepidation for the entrance of Gesner.
This time his chorus was good!
Gesner, as Luxembourg, carried the excitement up several notches, as though realizing that tonight everyone was better and in order to shine he would have to exert himself.
When Therese came on the entire evening lifted into top gear.
She shone, both physically — Madge's dress sent prisms of sapphire light flashing across the stage — and artistically.
Her voice began to dominate Gesner's, controlling him in the marriage scene.
He couldn't upstage her, for the piece was carefully staged so that bride and groom were hidden from each other, one each side  of the screen and Therese, radiant, controlled, confident, set the atmosphere of the whole scene.
Busacher could feel, hear, Gesner fighting.
He was superb but she was better and the voice coated the entire stage, the entire production with a quality never before heard in Hochhauser.
And then, just when the Direktor was congratulating himself that nothing could go wrong, Gesner refused to take it any more.
Instead of staying carefully on his side of the screen —‘She goes left, I go right’— he suddenly stepped forward, centre stage, out of his position, out of the whole plot of the operetta, threw out his arms in the great expansive sexual gesture that never failed to work with the audiences, and began to sing in front of Therese, ignoring the screen, ignoring the action, making a total mockery of the whole theme of a bride and groom who marry without knowing who they are.
‘Get back!’
Busacher hissed, but Gesner was in charge now.
He had centre front stage, his voice projected forward over Therese's, and he ceased to make any attempt to act out the plotted movements with her.
He was giving one of his best solo Gesner recitals, whilst totally blowing the sense of the scene.
Busacher was livid and Alfred and Freddi were obviously lost.
If those old pros didn't know how to get Gesner back into the plot, how to adjust and improvise the act, then nobody could.
Therese, on her side of the screen, totally masked by Gesner, suddenly peeked round his shoulder and gave a gay little smiling wave to the  audience, then she tapped Gesner on the arm.
Startled, he turned, but Therese had darted, scooping her peacock train up over one arm, back around behind the screen, to the side he should have been on.
Again she tilted her head at the audience, still singing.
Gesner moved to mask her again, and once more she darted round the screen, suddenly making great play with the peacock tail, holding it up to hide the lower part of her face, managing to pretend never to see the front of Luxembourg's face, and never to let him see her.
The duet continued, with Gesner planted solidly in the middle of the stage, and Therese whirling and gliding around him, managing never to confront him face to face, and with wit and grace stealing the scene totally back from him.
The audience, through the music, were beginning to laugh, and Busacher, sacrificing one of Lehar's most romantic and loveliest passages of music to the emergency of the moment, speeded up the orchestra, gave the melody a light-hearted rather than a passionate lilt, and swore to himself that he would murder Gesner in the interval.
The duet ended to a roar of applause and laughter.
Gesner looked angry.
He was conscious that Therese had been engaging in ‘business’ but hadn't appreciated how it had looked from the front until it was too late to do anything about it.
He fumbled back to his position to the right of the screen and somehow Busacher got them all through the rest of the act.
Backstage they were all screaming at Gesner; Stefan —‘You do that again and I'll bring the  curtain down’— Alfred, Freddi, Ingrid, Rudi, everyone was shaken, aware that he had nearly wrecked the entire production, and afraid that he still might.
‘Karl,’ Busacher said.
‘Into your dressing room, at once.’
He was shaking with rage and this time it wasn't a deliberately contrived rage.
It was a dangerous one he knew he mustn't release.
His wretched heart began to pump ominously again and he closed his eyes for one second, tried to breathe slowly, tried to control himself.
‘Karl, you do that once more and you will never work on my stage again, you understand?’
‘Without me you have no company.
Don't make foolish threats to me, old man.
They don't care whether I stand on the side of a screen or front stage so long as they can see me, hear me, Karl Gesner.
Without me you have no company.’
‘Don't be too sure, Karl.
Who do you think was making the audience laugh while you were giving them the full force of your personality?
Who turned the scene round, made it work so that the rest of the operetta is not totally ridiculous?
Who kept singing, and what a voice!
I shouldn't be too sure that you are indispensable, Karl!’
‘She's ruined this company!
Everything's gone wrong since she came here.
No-one likes her.
I told you at the beginning how it would be.
We were all good friends until she came!’
‘Chaa!’
Busacher's voice cracked on a derisive laugh.
‘I refuse to sing with her again.
You will have to choose between her and me!
It is impossible for me to work the way I want to work when she is on the stage.’
Busacher was so enraged that diplomacy, tact, talking Gesner down into finishing the performance, all vanished into the maw of his rage.
He opened the dressing-room door.
‘Stefan!’
He'd been hovering anxiously outside and stepped in at once.
‘An announcement to the audience — there will be a slightly longer interval and Herr Gesner, due to an indisposition, will not be able to continue his performance.
Tell Rudi to get out of his Brissard things, and get Edouard out of the chorus and into Rudi's clothes.
Rudi will take over from Karl.’
‘I refuse!
You cannot do this!’
‘I can and will.
You either go on and sing with Therese, the way it has been rehearsed, or you do not go on my stage, at all, not tonight, not any night.’
‘I shall sue!’ screamed Gesner.
‘Go ahead.
I, the committee, and Hochhauser will probably sue you for refusing to go on, thereby breaking your contract!’
Stefan, white-faced, looked from one to the other.
‘Hurry, Stefan.
I've told you what to do.’
‘Wait.
All right.
I'll finish the performance.
I'll finish this one performance.
But tomorrow she must go, other plans must be made, someone else found.’
‘There will be no alterations in the plans for the rest of the Season.
Aschmann remains.
If you wish to break your contract I will inform your agent of your decision tomorrow morning.’
The dressing room was charged with venom, jealousy, spite, and also total and undisciplined panic, which stemmed mainly from Stefan, who had been through most things with Gesner in the course of the various Seasons, but never anything like this; never before an open confrontation between Gesner and the Direktor in the middle of a performance.
‘Act Two — Beginners please,’ said a tremulous voice from outside the door.
Everyone in the company knew something was going on, and when no sound came from the dressing room the tremulous voice said again, ‘Beginners please.’
‘Get out of my dressing room!’
Gesner said angrily.
‘I haven't even begun to change yet.’
It was a capitulation of sorts.
‘Remember what I said, Karl!
There are to be no further scenes on the stage, no deviations from the rehearsals.
If there are, I shall instruct Stefan to bring down the curtain.’
‘Ha!
In the middle of your new production?
The production you've waited eight years for?
You'd be committing suicide and you know it.’
‘No, Karl, I don't know it.
And in any case I am so angry — I have never been so angry!— I am prepared to commit suicide if it would mean the end of your career!
And I would take good care to see that it was the end of your career.’
‘You cannot survive without me!’ screamed  Gesner.
‘You cannot survive without a star!’
‘No.
We cannot.
But I believe a new one is beginning to emerge.
Think on that, Herr Gesner!’
He turned and walked from the dressing room with as much control as he could muster.
Outside, he turned to Stefan.
‘Stefan, do you think you could find me a brandy from somewhere?’
He felt so ill and exhausted he didn't know how he was going to get through the rest of the evening.
But get through it he must, and from the conductor's rostrum.
That was the best way of controlling Gesner for the two remaining acts — through the orchestra.
If the worst came to the worst he would cut his numbers, take the orchestra straight over Karl's sections and leave him standing.
Please God it wouldn't come to that.
‘Are you ill, Herr Direktor?’
‘A brandy and a short rest will put me right.
Extend the interval.
No-one will notice.
Give me another ten minutes.’
He wanted to go and see Therese, thank her, warn her, but now had no energy for anything but getting to his office, sipping his brandy, and sitting back with his eyes closed, trying to steady his breathing.
The pain in his chest began to lessen, his legs stopped shaking.
Idly, in a detached way, he wondered what would happen if he collapsed in the orchestra pit, dropped dead in the middle of his new production.
But he couldn't do that.
He couldn't let them down like that, his brave little company who had battled their way, despite enormous odds, into a precarious success.
Therese, conscious, as was everyone else, of a row of gargantuan proportions going on in Gesner's dressing room, was blithely uncaring.
She felt totally in charge, totally confident, able to cope not only with herself but with any emergencies that might crop up.
The Act Two ball dress, the emerald gown with the huge stiffened collar embroidered with pearls, looked even better than the Act One dress and she realized that, without knowing quite how, she had quelled Gesner — not for reasons of rivalry but because she had had to get the production back on course.
If she could do it once, she could do it again.
She saw him in the wings just before she went on stage and she chose to ignore whatever had happened in the interval.
‘It seems to be going very well, Karl.
Good audience.’
He turned his back, as she had expected.
It wasn't going to make it any easier playing the love scene, but she could cope.
If necessary she could do it without even standing close to him.
She could make it quite convincing just by throwing yearning smiles across the stage and focusing her gaze at a point just over his left ear, so that the hard brown eyes didn't impinge on her concentration.
‘Thank God for Madge,’ Busacher reflected grimly as the curtain went up and the enchanted ballroom brought a round of applause from the audience.
He felt slightly cheered.
Nothing could detract from the atmosphere that Madge's set created, an otherworld of romantic fairyland, all silver and white and iridescent greens.
It went better than Busacher had hoped.
As lovers they were not exactly vibrant, but their voices and Lehar's music more than made up for that.
They were both singing well, not exactly together, but not destroying each other either and, as he listened, he realized that once again it was Therese who was making it work, adapting slightly, but still dominating the sounds as they came over the footlights.
The little Hoflin didn't fall over and looked extremely pretty, and when the curtain came down he leaned for a moment on the rostrum and took a deep breath.
Act Three was short and musically not too demanding, just tied everything up without putting Gesner and Therese into a strained situation.
They made it to the winning post fairly creditably.
Backstage, in Therese's dressing room, all was excitement and congratulations — Willi, old Anton, Alfred, the entire Hochhauser Theatre committee complete with the Easter egg — the expensive dress had found an occasion worthy of a second showing — and Hans, a smugly self-satisfied Hans who sat in the only chair sipping a glass of champagne provided by Willi.
Busacher desperately wanted to go home and rest, but he daren't let any rumours of his frailty get around.
As soon as the congratulations were over he could go.
Hans, under the cover of general triumphant noise, raised both his glass and an eyebrow at Franz.
‘Congratulations, my friend.
I came prepared to be mildly pleased — one or two rumours have  trickled back to Vienna, you know — and find myself overwhelmed.
The entire production was…very good.’
‘Thank you, Hans.’
‘A rather novel production, of course.
That Act One marriage scene — I don't think I've ever seen it played that way before, as a comedy number.’
‘You know very well, Hans, that was not intended,’ Busacher remarked dryly.
Hans sniffed.
‘Well, I did wonder — rather suspected that Gesner was behaving very naughtily.
Also I knew it was most unlike you to sacrifice one of the loveliest passages in the whole operetta to a comic routine.
But it was…different.’
‘And what do you think of our diva?
Did you recognize her — that poor crushed creature we saw in Vienna, did you recognize her?’
Hans looked even smugger.
‘The voice I recognized — oh yes — that will never change, please God, and you have nothing to do with that, Franz.
But for everything else I give credit where it is due.
To you.
You have created a star, in a small pond at the moment, but by the end of the Season Aschmann will be a highly commercial plum.
Mozart next, I think.
I shall begin to put out a few delicate hints.
Salzburg perhaps.
Glyndebourne, that level.
A winter working on Mozart, perhaps a few concerts, and then we'll see.’
‘I think you owe me one more Season, Hans.’
‘Perhaps.
Well, yes, perhaps you are right.
We'll see.’
Busacher pushed his way over to Therese, kissed  her on the cheek, then excused himself.
Willi followed him out of the dressing room.
‘I'm going to drive you home, Franz.
You're ill.’
‘But Therese…the party?’
Willi looked slightly wistful.
‘She has all her old friends from Vienna to take her out to dinner.
It will not matter if I am not there.’
He felt Willi was wanting to be reassured but he was just too tired and ill to bother.
With relief he gave up trying and allowed Willi to see him out, into the car, and home.
Eleven
He felt considerably better the next morning and, upon reflection, decided to cope with Gesner by doing exactly nothing.
Karl was not unintelligent when it came to his own interests, his own career.
He had got the message quite clearly last night.
He could stay and sing with Aschmann, or he could break his contract.
There was no need to reiterate it all this morning, and it might be unwise to force Gesner into losing any further face.
Karl was a master at ignoring unpleasantness, situations he had brought about by his own actions.
Busacher rather thought they would rub through the next few days without an open revolt from Gesner.
They were performing Luxembourg for the remainder of the week.
He had found, over the years, it was always better to play a new piece in several times before ringing the nightly changes.
By the end of the week Luxembourg would be nicely set, and next week they would return to the Baron and Countess Maritza, finishing up that week with Luxembourg again.
And the week after that, the last of the Season's productions, Der Zarewitsch from last year, could be reintroduced into the programme.
Willi came up to see how he was during the morning.
‘I know there was some trouble backstage last night,’ he said.
‘But I don't want to know too many details.
Just assure me it won't affect the rest of the Season.’
‘I hope not, Willi.
Gesner threatened to walk out unless Therese was fired.
I made it quite plain he would go before she did, and I rather think he has accepted the status quo.
What we will do next Season I dread to think.
In fact I refuse to think about it at all.’
‘Will we…
I mean is there any chance we shall have Therese next season?’
Willi asked tentatively.
‘Perhaps.
I think, from the way Hans, her agent you know, Hans Kramer, was speaking last night, we may effect some kind of compromise.
Therese for part of the Season.’
‘She will go back to Vienna then?’ asked Willi.
‘Her agent was speaking of Salzburg — Mozart.
A good idea I think.
Then perhaps some work in Munich before returning to Vienna and the Staatsoper.’
‘I'm not terribly fond of Mozart,’ said Willi glumly.
‘Willi, we cannot keep her here.
She's too good for us.
We have done exactly what I wanted us to do — brought a great singer back into the difficult world of the performer.
And we shall have a wonderful season, and possibly a wonderful season next year.
But we cannot hope to keep her here for ever.
It would not be fair.’
‘No,’ said Willi.
‘But it has been a great triumph for Hochhauser, Willi.
Therese, the new production, Madge Grimsilk, all have helped to make the Hochhauser Season an outstanding one.
Our grant will surely be increased next year.
Better singers will be attracted to us.
We are beginning to be well known, Willi!’
‘Yes,’ said Willi grudgingly.
‘And we still have the rest of this Season, Willi.
It has only just begun.’
Really, it was like consoling a small child.
And Willi was usually such a tower of strength.
‘That's true,’ said Willi, cheering up.
‘A magnificent season — and Zarewitsch still to come.
Der Zarewitsch has always been one of my favourites.’
How absurd it seemed — that they had been worried about Therese in Zarewitsch.
It was, of course, still an unsuitable role for her, a seventeen-year-old dancer disguised as a Circassian boy.
But now, with the triumph of Countess Maritza and Luxembourg behind her, it seemed unimportant.
It wouldn't be the pick of the Season, but Therese's marvellous and emotive voice would be a joy to listen to, no matter how uncomfortable the casting.
And it had always been one of Gesner's greatest roles.
It was — almost — Lehar's most operatic piece and Gesner had always found he couldn't fuff his way through it.
He had to sing properly in Zarewitsch and one was reminded yet again that he could have been a great singer if only he had tried.
‘When is Miss Grimsilk leaving us, Willi?
Is she staying on for another couple of Luxembourg  performances?
Just to see us safely in?’
Willi had revealed that, since the night of Madge's fall from grace, she actually socialized with him, accepted the occasional invitation for coffee and, whilst not exactly chatting effusively about herself or her private life, indulged in fairly normal conversation with him.
‘She has said she will be staying on, at her own expense of course, until the opening of Zarewitsch.
Apparently she likes it in Hochhauser and intends to take a little holiday here — as we have already paid her fare from London.’
‘How fascinating, Willi!
And what do you think she will do on her little holiday?
Get drunk and pass out every night?’
‘Apparently she walks.
She, Rudi, Elisa, and some of the young ones go out every Sunday, up on the Hochhauser.
They rather like her.’
Willi paused, then said apologetically, ‘Actually, so do I.
‘Why, Willi?’
‘I don't know why.
She's very quiet, of course, reserved.
But she's very kind and she can be very funny, when she's had a drink or two.’
‘I am rapidly coming to the conclusion,’ said Busacher thoughtfully, ‘that it is something personal with Madge Grimsilk and me.
She does not like me.
Still…’ he shrugged.
‘What matters is that she has given us the most glorious production we have ever had at Hochhauser.
She is a genius, and we shall use her again.
And now, my dear Willi, I would ask you to make just a little overture  of…friendship, to Gesner this evening.
Oh, nothing much,’ he hastened to say as Willi made protesting noises.
‘Just a little to keep him sweet before the curtain goes up.
Karl Gesner has had to swallow quite a few blows to his ego over the last few days.
Just a kind word, a flattering word, Willi, to help us all out.’
‘Oh, all right,’ said Willi.
‘But if you saw how miserable my poor Georg is, and how he has upset Suzi, to say nothing of my friends the Hoflins…well, I shall find it very difficult to be nice to him.’
‘Just try, Willi,’ said Busacher closing his eyes.
‘Just think of the Season and try.’
As the week's performances of The Count of Luxembourg continued, it became increasingly obvious who was the star of the company.
Every night Therese sang better, dominated the stage, laughed, bubbled, and sailed through the part with a charm that delighted the audience.
They reinstated the waltz with Gesner and it was observed that it was Therese who was the light, lithe dancer, whirling around the stage, pulling Gesner with her, making him dance in spite of himself.
Gesner fought a bit but it didn't work.
When he tried to upstage her she sauntered down to the front of the stage and such was her control over the audience now, he had to back off, otherwise it would have been he who looked ridiculous.
Offstage she was scrupulously polite to him, an exercise that was totally wasted as he continued to ignore her.
It made for a somewhat strained atmosphere, but as a  company they were used to that.
It was worse than last year, with Hanna Brunner, but the high spirits of the company, knowing they were creating quite a stir, knowing they were good, all of them, made it bearable.
Ingrid was the one who found it most awkward.
She was Gesner's girlfriend.
That was how she described it to herself, although what it really meant was that he took her to bed whenever he felt like it and occasionally gave her an absent-minded smile backstage.
She'd hoped, thought, it would be nice if he had taken her to lunch sometimes, or let her stay to breakfast in his room at the Franz Joseph instead of pushing her out early and sending her back to the Gasthaus.
But the most she got was a hasty and inexpensive meal after the evening performance on the nights he wanted her to go to bed with him.
Still, she was his girlfriend and he was wonderful to her in Gypsy Baron and also in Maritza.
She had a duet with him in the latter that she couldn't have managed if he hadn't carried her through.
But she also liked Therese, who had made a point of introducing her to Hans Kramer, the big Viennese agent.
She sometimes felt she was walking a tightrope, wanting to be friendly with Therese, and yet terrified of upsetting Karl.
The week of that first production of Luxembourg, Karl had been absolutely beastly to her — really hurtful about her performance as Juliette which, as she was desperately saving her voice for the other productions, she tended to talk her way through.
Herr Busacher had said that was fine, perfectly all right, so she didn't know why Karl was so scathing about it.
One evening he had almost made her cry.
‘You'll never be a singer, however hard you try.
What will you do if you have to manage in the company without me, eh?
How would you manage without me to carry you through?’
She'd been upset by that.
She told herself that he didn't really mean it, that he was just angry about the way everyone was praising Therese, and about the applause and cheers that she got.
That was what it was, but it hurt just the same, his open contempt of her.
Then suddenly, after the Thursday night show, he was wonderful again.
They went back to the Franz Joseph together — she liked everyone to see them walking off together when the performance was over.
It made her feel that he didn't mind everyone knowing she was his girlfriend, and he was really sweet to her in bed, told her she had lovely hair and said she must never, ever cut it, it was so beautiful, and then he began to talk about Therese, saying how cruel it was that he had carried the company all these years and now, just because she was the Direktor's favourite — he snorted at this point and said he really did believe Therese must have been old Franz's mistress years ago in Vienna — he was being treated like a pariah, no consideration, everyone being rude and unkind to him, Therese allowed to do just what she liked on the stage even though she'd been no-one before she came to Hochhauser.
‘She was a singer, years ago, in Vienna.
Luiza told me.’
Karl stroked her hair and murmured, ‘So pretty.’
‘Actually, it's terribly tragic, Karl.
Her husband became an alcoholic and they had to put him away in a clinic.’
‘Are you and Luiza good friends?’ he asked.
‘Well…yes…we were.
Until, you know, until you and I…’
‘Of course— but if you were to go to Luiza and pretend to be friends again…you could tell her you didn't like me any more.’
‘Oh Karl!
That's not true!’
‘I know it, sweetheart.
But if you told Luiza you were finished with me, then perhaps you could find out about Therese Aschmann for me.’
‘But what more do you want to know, Karl, and why?
What does it matter if you know about Therese and her husband?’
‘Because…because she has hurt me, Ingrid.
She has been very rude and unkind to me.
She has made my position here in Hochhauser untenable.
You must see how appallingly she behaves on the stage.
Makes no effort at all to work with me, just thinks of herself all the time.
She's not thinking of the company, Ingrid.
You must see that?
She's just concentrating on making everyone say how good she is.
That's not going to help us as a company, is it?
We want everyone to work together.’
‘Yes…
I suppose you're right.’
‘The way you and I work together — some of the Baron's a bit difficult for you, isn't it?
Oh, no fault  of your own, it's a very tricky role.
But do I take delight in pushing you down, making you worse?
I help you, don't I?’
‘You're marvellous, Karl!
I couldn't have done it without you.’
‘You wouldn't like me to have to leave the company, would you?’
‘Oh, Karl.
There wouldn't be a company without you!’
‘Well, Ingrid.
I'm going to tell you something I don't want repeated, not to anyone.’
She felt really wonderful when he said that.
Usually he never bothered to talk to her in bed, but this was what real lovers did, told each other their fears and worries, confided in each other, helped each other .
‘That first night of Luxembourg, when she turned that marvellous duet into a slapstick comedy routine and I complained to the Direktor about it — you knew I complained about what she had done to the duet, didn't you, Ingrid?’
‘Well, I wasn't sure exactly what had happened,’ she breathed.
‘I said it was terrible, to ruin one of Lehar's most wonderful love songs like that, and Ingrid, he made it quite plain that if I didn't fall in with Therese's wishes — exactly — I would be thrown out of the company.’
‘Karl!
I don't believe it.’
She was really upset.
She couldn't imagine the company without Karl.
How would she cope?
‘I never wanted there to be a war between us, Ingrid.
But that's what it has come to.
And I know that's what she's planning to do — get me thrown out of the company that I've helped to build, taken a reduced salary.
I could have worked all over Europe, Ingrid.
I could have gone to New York, but I chose to stay in Hochhauser because I believed in the company and wanted to help them.
And now Aschmann is planning to get rid of me!’
‘Oh, Karl, how dreadful.
I had no idea she was like that.
She always seemed so nice…’
‘So you see I've got to protect myself.
I've got to find out everything I can about her.
That's the only way I can hope to fight back and keep my job.’
‘But I don't think there's anything else to know about her,’ Ingrid faltered.
She was thoroughly upset now, angry with Therese for being so two-faced and injuring the man who had, more or less, founded the company single-handed.
‘Luiza told me, when Therese first came up here, that she was divorced and the husband was in a clinic over near Mayerling — the Schubert Clinic — I remembered that because I thought it was a funny name for a clinic.’
‘You knew that and you didn't tell me?’
Gesner suddenly shouted at her.
‘I didn't think it was very interes—’
‘You sly little trollop!’ he cried, grabbing her hair and pulling it so hard she nearly fell out of bed.
‘Karl!’
‘God preserve me from foolish and deceitful women,’ he said, letting her hair go and falling back  on the pillow, his arms raised angrily above his head.
‘Karl!
I wasn't being sly or deceitful.
I wasn't.
I didn't know about all this, about Therese trying to get you out of the company and…and everything.’
‘Oh, get dressed and get out,’ he snarled.
She began to snatch up her clothes, brushing her hand across her eyes.
This time he really had made her cry.
‘Do you still want me to make friends with Luiza?’ she choked.
‘I didn't understand…
I see now it's important to you.
I'll do anything I can to help.’
He eyed her speculatively across the room, stupid bitch, then decided he ought to be careful.
‘Sorry, Ingrid.
You see how all this has upset me.
Aschmann has really ruined my life.
No, don't do anything about Luiza.
I'll tell you if T want you to do anything.’
‘Would you like me to stay?’ she asked tremulously.
‘God, no!
I mean, you can see what I'm like this evening.
We don't want to have a quarrel, do we?
You go back and have a good night's rest.’
‘Good night, then, Karl.’
‘'Night, pumpkin.’
When she had gone he took his bottle of schnapps from the bedside cupboard and poured himself a glass, then lay back against the pillows, thinking about what to do next.
Ingrid was pathetic, disgusting.
He should have continued with the little Hoflin girl.
Maybe if things worked out he'd start  that up again.
He drank, and then began to think how he could use the information he'd just been given.
Stefan didn't room with the other members of the company in the Goldener Adler, nor in any other Gasthaus close to the theatre.
He had a room in a private house some way out of the town.
It took him longer to get there after the performance but he was away from all the problems of the rest of the company.
He'd tried, the first year, rooming with the others, and had found they still came up to him all the time with their queries —‘They've sent me the wrong costume for Gypsy Baron.
Will you sort it out with Wardrobe?’—‘My parents are coming all the way from Linz and the box office say they've sold out.
Can you do something, Stefan?’—‘I've got the chance of an audition in Vienna early on Wednesday morning but it will mean I'll miss the Tuesday night show.
Can you make it all right with the Direktor?’
He didn't have much time in his lodgings on the outskirts of the town, but when he was there he was able to lie down in his quiet, quiet room and totally relax.
His landlady was very kind to him too.
She had put a small fridge in his room and she kept it well stocked with milk.
He had a nice room.
The house was quite high on the slopes and he could see the main road down into the town, and behind that the mountains on the other side of the valley sweeping up into the changing skies.
It was very restful and he'd moved his furniture around so that he could lie on his bed and look at the view.
He was appalled, late on the Friday morning, to glance out of his window and see Karl Gesner striding up the road towards his house.
It had to be his house.
There wasn't another beyond this, and Karl Gesner wasn't one to take mountain strolls in the morning.
He debated whether to dart out and tell his landlady to say he wasn't in, but he had underestimated the speed of Gesner's long, athletic legs.
He came straight up to the open window and smiled.
‘Hullo there, Stefan.
Hoped I'd find you in.’
‘I'll be at the theatre after lunch.
Couldn't it wait until then?’
‘That's why I came.
I'd like to buy you lunch.’
‘No thanks.
Too busy.
And I don't feel like eating out today.
Frau Gess has promised to make me some creamed chicken and steamed potato.
I'm looking forward to it.’
‘I thought these wonderful new tablets were supposed to solve all your troubles?’
He smiled kindly and Stefan felt a twinge of alarm shoot through him.
‘They've solved the ulcer problem for nearly everyone, but for one in a hundred it doesn't work.
I'm the one in a hundred.’
‘Tough.
Can I come in?’
He vaulted cleanly through the open window, brushed his hair back and sauntered around Stefan's room, picking up his record book, his razor, his hat.
‘What do you want?’ asked Stefan nervously.
‘Just a chat.
I was thinking about those poor  people we had in last week — the charity group.
You know, the wheelchairs and white sticks.’
‘It's a block booking.
There's another one tonight.
There's nothing wrong with them.
Their own organizers look after them.
Nobody else has complained.’
‘Stefan!
Why should you think I'm complaining?
I felt sorry for them, thought it was quite a decent thing to do.
I wondered why we didn't do a bit more for them.
Meet them after the show or something.
Give them a really good night out.’
‘They have to get back after the show.
There is a sort of refreshment thing organized beforehand, in the small studio at the side of the theatre.
They give them about an hour there before the curtain goes up.
I checked with the Direktor and he said it was quite OK.
The Franz Joseph have the catering franchise.
It's just cakes and coffee.
There's no harm in it.’
‘Of course there's no harm in it!
I just wondered if we couldn't do more.
Who runs the whole thing?’
‘Fräulein Hubert.’
‘And she'll be there tonight?
Before the show?’
‘I suppose so.’
Alarm bells were ringing frantically in Stefan's head.
‘I think I would like to meet her.
To discuss what more we could do.
It would be nice, for instance, if some of the cast went in in costume before the curtain went up — to wish them well, hope they enjoy it, that sort of thing.
Make it more glamorous for the poor wretches.’
‘I don't know.
The Direktor would have to decide.
You know he doesn't like that kind of thing before a performance.’
‘Still, even so, perhaps I'll wander in early this evening.
Have a little chat with this…
Fräulein Hubert.’
‘I don't think that would be a good idea.’
‘Stefan!
For God's sake — what do you think I'm going to do?
Steal their white sticks?
Sabotage the wheelchairs?’
He laughed rather ruefully.
‘Everyone in this company seems to think I'm incapable of doing anything even halfway decent for anyone.
I do get a bit tired of being the permanent Big Bad Wolf.
I have occasionally been known to be kind to an old lady and I don't kick every stray dog that comes across my path.’
‘No, I know,’ said Stefan stiffly.
‘You needn't bother to introduce me to Fräulein Hubert.
I can sort her out for myself.
Presumably she'll be the one without a white stick.’
He chuckled.
‘Nice room you have here, Stefan.
Nice and quiet.
Can't blame you for getting away from everyone.
They're a motley crew, aren't they?’
He climbed back out of the window.
‘Enjoy your lunch now, Stefan.
See you later.’
Stefan waited until he had gone some way down the road, then rushed out to the telephone.
He didn't know what Gesner was up to but he thought he'd better tell the Direktor.
That night Gesner got into his Luxembourg costume early, slid out of the stage door and into the outside entrance of the small studio.
He didn't  want anyone to see him walking through the theatre.
He looked as amazing as he always did in his stage costume, twice the size he was on stage, twice as powerful.
He stood in the doorway and smiled around him.
More wheelchairs but no white sticks tonight.
Several crutches, though, and quite a few people who didn't apparently have anything wrong with them, helpers or nurses, he supposed.
He stared at the women.
There was one in a loden green suit with a felt hat — in May!— and terrible legs.
She was in that indeterminate middle age that lasts for ever with unattractive women.
It must be Fräulein Hubert.
He smiled even more widely and went across to introduce himself.
Young Suzi, in the depths of her misery, knowing it was making her worse, still couldn't keep away from the theatre, even during the day, even on Sunday when no-one was there.
Like Georg, she felt the need to submit herself to the possibility of seeing the one she loved who had rejected her.
She was deeply ashamed of the way she had behaved with Georg, drink, misery, badly upset hormones, whatever it was she knew that from now on she must keep right away from him, let him get over her, meet someone else, someone interested in farming and cows, and be happy again.
At the thought two miserable tears wandered down her face.
She imagined Georg happy and married to some nice girl, while she went on in this gulf of misery for the rest of her life, hanging around waiting for glimpses of Gesner, spending every  night reliving every moment they had been together, all the wonderful things he had said to her, the magic of his hands when he touched her — she shivered.
She could see no way out of her present despair.
The excitement of taking part in the Hochhauser Season had totally gone, swallowed up in the misery of losing Karl.
She hadn't even been nervous on the first night, not in the way other people were nervous.
She wanted to do well because of Gesner.
Perhaps if he saw her looking wonderful, dancing beautifully, he would realize that he needed her as much as she needed him.
On Sunday she rose late.
She didn't ever get to sleep until the early hours now and she woke up heavy and lethargic.
She wandered into the kitchen, poured some coffee and slumped down at the table.
Her hair was limp and needed washing, her face was pallid and there were dark stains under her eyes.
‘Try to eat some breakfast, Suzi.
You told me once that it was important for a dancer to eat plenty of protein.’
‘I'm not hungry.’
Frau Hoflin fought an overwhelming desire to slap her daughter.
But it would achieve nothing.
Gesner was the one who ought to be slapped, but he had at least done the decent thing in abandoning Suzi.
She was miserable now but inevitably she'd recover from her first heavy affair.
Frau Hoflin hoped it hadn't been an affair, but even if it had, well, things were different these days and it didn't matter too much as long as it was over.
‘Are you going out today?
Would you like to come to church with Papa and me?’
‘No.’
‘So what are you going to do?’
‘I'll wash my hair — and then I'll go out for a walk.’
‘Why don't you go and see your old friends?
You haven't seen Eva and Manni for ages.
You've rather neglected them since you became involved with the Season.’
‘I don't seem to have anything in common with them any more.’
‘That's because you've dropped them.
It doesn't do to drop old friends, Suzi.’
Suzi made patterns in the sugar with her spoon.
‘Oh well, I might.’
But when she had washed her hair and dressed in a new pair of designer jeans and a silk shirt that had been a Christmas present and which she'd never worn before — it wasn't to Eva's house that she went but back down into the town, towards the theatre and the Franz Joseph.
It was a glorious morning.
All the snow had gone from the tops and the sun was really warm.
The parks and main avenue were awash with trees in full blossom, and when she looked back up towards the farm she could see patches of cloudy pink where the apple trees were in bloom.
Usually in Maytime she liked to walk up into the high mountain meadows to see the wild flowers, but this year she had no heart.
And anyway, the big meadow was the one on the ridge, the one that separated her farm from  Georg's.
It would be awful if she met Georg up there.
She hung around for a while, looking aimlessly into the shop windows, wondering if she should go and have a coffee in the Franz Joseph, just in case he was there.
She bumped into Rudi, Madge Grimsilk, and some of the young ones.
They all wore mountain shoes and had packs slung over their shoulders.
‘Hi, Suzi.
We're off to see how high we can get up the Hochhauser.
Come with us.
We've enough lunch for you.’
‘Oh…thank you.
But…well, I haven't got the right shoes on or anything.’
‘We can go up the long way, past your farm, and you can nip in and change.
We don't mind waiting a bit.’
Should she go?
For one moment she thought what fun it would be with them all.
No-one very serious about anyone else, just a crowd of friends all having a good time, walking up the mountain on a lovely day, drinking the spring water and having a picnic.
She hesitated, just about to say yes, and at that moment saw Karl coming slowly down the steps of the Franz Joseph pulling on his driving gloves.
‘Thanks,’ she said quickly.
‘But I've promised to look up some old friends I haven't seen for ages.
Have a good time.’
She waved them on and quickly walked away, terrified they might hang about and try to make her change her mind.
Karl certainly wouldn't stop and speak to her if she was with a crowd from the theatre.
Should she walk towards the car park?
No, that would look too obvious.
Better to stroll back the way she had come, then perhaps she would cross over the road and look in the souvenir shop.
She didn't even have to cross over.
The miracle happened: she heard the car slow down and stop beside her.
She turned and tried to look surprised.
Karl was smiling at her, the first time for over two weeks.
‘Hullo, little one.
Where are you off to?’
‘Oh, nowhere special.’
‘Where have you been hiding yourself?
I haven't seen much of you lately.’
‘I've been on stage every night,’ she said sharply, surprising herself with her own effrontery at speaking that way to Karl.
‘Oh, the performances!’
He shrugged carelessly.
‘Everyone's so paranoid in the theatre these days it's impossible to actually see anyone there.
I meant, why haven't I seen you outside the theatre?
Why haven't you come to lunch with me?
Where have you been?’
‘I…er…well, you haven't asked me.’
‘I could hardly ask you if I didn't see you, could I?’
She was faintly conscious of being manoeuvred into a defensive situation she didn't deserve, but Karl had one arm hung over the side of the car, his sleeve rolled up to reveal a hard masculine arm and his brown eyes were smiling, one eyebrow slightly raised in an amused sort of way.
‘I thought you…didn't like me very much.’
‘I like you too much, pumpkin.
That's been the trouble all along.’
She felt a throb somewhere in the region of her midriff, a throb compounded of relief and a dawning hope.
Perhaps it really had all been a terrible misunderstanding.
‘I wanted to come with you that night,’ she said earnestly.
‘The night of Uncle Willi's party.
I just didn't know what to do.
I've been so miserable.’
‘Me too,’ he said softly, reaching out his hand to touch her face.
‘Are we friends again, little one?’
She could hardly speak she was so relieved.
She couldn't believe that it had all stopped, the misery, the anguish, the self-recrimination.
It was all right again, it was wonderful again.
She waited for him to invite her into the car and out for the day.
It was such a marvellous brilliant day!
A day to go out with Karl, sweep over the mountains in his fantastic car, the top down and the sun shining on them.
She waited, but nothing happened.
He patted her cheek again, then put his hand back on the wheel and started the engine.
‘I'd like to ask you out, pumpkin, but I've got rather a lot to do today.
I have to drive over to Mayerling and see someone.’
‘I could come, just for the drive,’ she said breathlessly.
‘I.
don't mind waiting in the car, however long it takes.’
He hesitated.
‘I don't think so, sweetheart.
It's business, may take a long time.
And I've lots of other things to do.
I'll see you in the week, eh?
We'll have lunch one day.’
‘That would be nice,’ she said bleakly.
‘Bye now, pumpkin.
Don't forget me, will you?’
He put his foot down and roared away.
He could see her in his rear mirror, standing on the pavement looking wistfully after him.
He was very tempted to hurry developments along in that area, but with things as they were he decided he ought to play it very carefully.
Ingrid was a bore but he wasn't sure he might not need her again.
It had worked very well last night with Fräulein Hubert, better than he'd hoped, but he ought to be careful until his plans were all consolidated, then he could dump Ingrid and carry on where he'd left off with that lovely little thing.
She really did have the most fantastic figure.
On Monday Busacher made Stefan go over again every word of his conversation with Gesner.
Like Stefan he was highly suspicious, but he couldn't see quite how Gesner could use the charity bookings in his quest for glory.
‘Did you get a chance to look in at the side studio, when they were there last Friday?
Did he go in?’
‘Yes.
I couldn't stop for long, not just before the show.
But he didn't seem to be doing anything awful.
That Fräulein Hubert was taking him around, introducing him to the group, and he was being — oh, well — you know, like Gesner, laughing, shaking hands, holding the women's hands too long, you know the kind of thing.’
‘I know.’
‘Fräulein Hubert said, when they were getting them back on to the coach after the show, what a wonderful man he was.
How he'd made their evening for them.’
‘He likes to be adored of course, and maybe he's just lobbying for an extension of his fan club, but I wouldn't have thought he was that desperate.
What the charity groups think of him is hardly going to make or break him in the operatic world.’
‘Unless he's going all out to make people think he's a really nice fellow.’
‘Hmm.
When's the next group in, Stefan?’
‘End of the week.
Saturday evening performance.
Luxembourg again.’
‘We'll watch him.
I think I'll ask Willi to go into the side studio and see exactly what he's up to.
And we'll keep a very careful eye on him this week.
He'll be all right at the beginning, Gypsy Baron and Maritza again.
We can cope.
But we'll watch very carefully for the three Luxembourgs at the end of the week, just in case he's planning a fresh revolt on the stage.’
But Gesner behaved beautifully all that week.
He gave a magnificent performance in Gypsy Baron, and a nearly magnificent performance in Maritza, in which he was overshadowed only by Therese.
Offstage he was fairly quiet, preoccupied.
Twice he was called to the telephone just before the curtain went up and he had long intense conversations with his hand over the mouthpiece.
He also, Busacher observed, seemed to be playing a curious double game with both Ingrid and the little Hoflin — being charming to both of them and he was seen lunching with them on alternate days.
But in the evening, after the show, he vanished, alone, back to the Franz Joseph and, presumably, a celibate bed.
He still ignored Therese offstage, but was — surprisingly — quite civil to the rest of the company.
‘I really think I felt happier when he was being his normal, rude, arrogant, bullying self,’ said Busacher gloomily to Willi one evening.
‘I feel very uneasy about this well-behaved Gesner.’
‘No need,’ said Willi with confidence.
‘He's been badly frightened.
That first row, when we got the committee up to face him, that frightened him, and then it was made quite plain that Therese was here to stay.
And now she's become the star he realizes that he may be out of a job if he doesn't behave.
Before this season he always knew that we couldn't survive without him, but now we can, now we have another star.
I think he's trying to be sensible and doing it all wrong.’
‘Perhaps you're right, Willi.
Perhaps you're right.’
‘And if we all watch him, Stefan, you, I, he can't do anything fatal.
Three against one should be enough of a match for Gesner.’
‘Of course,’ said Busacher, relaxing slightly.
‘I'm probably being neurotic.
But still, my friend, I think we ought to watch him, the three of us.’
But by Friday the three had been reduced to two.
Frau Gess telephoned very early in the morning to say that she had just called the doctor.
Stefan had begun haemorrhaging in the night.
His ulcer had  finally blown up and the doctor was rushing him to hospital.
The theatre would have to manage without him, and Busacher suddenly had more than enough to do without watching Karl Gesner as well.