

From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 93 10:24 GMT
Subject: Rocky…and Strach/Mgt
Well, I think we can all appreciate the problem Wilko has.
He has actually come out this season and said that theres no place in the side for Strachan and Rocastle.
Strachan is playing very well again, not only individually but hes inspirational.
Thank god hes having more shots now too — thats been my only criticism of him over the last year, now hes looking to shoot more, and scoring!
I would not replace Strachan at this moment.
Although Batty is my favourite player probably I would say his form is the least ‘inspirational’, and yet I think his role is to be solid and dependable…so I reckon he is still doing his job and I also dont see anyone doing it better.
Wilko bought Rocky as a replacement for Strach, when he had his back operation.
Luckily (for all but rocky) this operation was a success.
The more unfortunate thing is that we have a much better midfielder for the subs bench in Hodge, who can come on and is lively, aswell as likely to score a goal.
I dont think theres a place for 2 midfielders on the bench.
However, he is still young, and will get his chance.
As for Strach and management, they had the ‘Footballers football show’ on Sky live from Elland Rd last night.
On the panel was Ray Clemence, Norm Hunter, Bill Fotherby and Strach (also in the audience was Garry Schofield for those interested!…and it wast a celeb audience).
At one point the player manager question came up (in general) and strach was asked about it.
He said he wants to stay in football.
He said he considered the move into player/mgt in the summer, but after thinking about it decided it was too much hard work.
He then said playing wise he does not want to play anywhere else but at Leeds for the rest of his career, said that Elland Rd was the best arena for a footballer bacuase the atmosphere is so special.
Norm then told him to carry on just playing for as long as he could.
The wee man is a shining example to all pros, played at the very top for all his career, and has a very sound tactical brain.
*IF* Wilko was ever to go I would want Strach as manager at Leeds.
He mentioned he often gets the coaching bug, I say Leeds should give him the opportunity to get more involved in that side now.
Wilko has said that everything he and the club has done was always with Strachan beside him, or just behind.
How about a management team (in a few years) in the Taylor/Clough role?
What do you reckon of Strach as a future Leeds manager?
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 1993 10:51:28 +0100
Subject: Oldham game comments
A few impressions of the Oldham game on Monday night.
I was in the middle of the kop for this game, and in the first half it was very much the place to be.
Leeds attacked the kop-end goal, and looked like scoring on several occasions.
This was a welcome contrast to Anfield where we had tons of possesion, but uninspired performances in front of both goals.
Against Oldham it was more like the form of the Man City game again.
Strachan got the goal, another well-crafted and well-taken strike running into the penalty area from Speed's pass.
Strachan is the most inspired thing Leeds have in action right now.
Another goal I thought was certain was Wallace's solo run on the keeper (I was the one hoisting myself up on the terrace barrier screaming as it happened) coming in on his right.
I don't know how he failed to score (okay the keeper stopped it) but maybe he should have wellyed it a bit more.
It was the best chance of the evening in my book.
Others were queueing up for cracks at goal as well, notably Jon Newsome on at least two occasions, as well as Speed and Bats.
Speed is into strenuous challenges these days — he went head over the top of one of their defenders at one point and ended up in a crumpled heap in front of the ref, who was pointing for a free kick in the opposite direction.
The second goal, the one that never was, looked good to me.
Those of you who had the benefit of tv replays and pundits blathering will actually know a lot more about it than I can recall.
I gather there was a defender on the goal line so Strachan couldn't have been offside at all.
Is this true?
The other pleasure of the first half was seeing Beeny perform competently in goal, and the defence doing likewise.
Wetherall was in for Fairclough.
There were a lot more long balls down the middle of the field than usual, simply because Beeny was putting them there whereas Lukic had got into the habit of putting them in the stand.
I've read some stuff in the papers about Leeds' long ball tactics, and I think the point has been overstressed.
There was a good amount of passing and creative play going on as well, which dismissive comments about long balls tend to cover over.
My worry about the half is that we should have had a few goals in, rather than just the one.
The game could really have been over by about 60 mins, if not half time.
Second half began in similar vein, but gradually Leeds lost it.
Play became scrappy and disjointed once again.
The defence reverted to its Meldrew mind set.
Beeny was put under increasing pressure, and made one excellent save.
It was a relief to see their goal flagged offside.
Up front Leeds looked clueless again.
Wallace battled well till the end, but Deane looked unsettled and uninvolved, apart from a few deft touches back in defence.
The Radio 5 commentators were right about him not jumping for the ball — he didn't seem interested.
Speed also faded from view in the second half, as did Macallister.
However, we held on.
It ended up a deserved win, thankfully, but it could so easily have been a draw.
Other points coming up.
Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 1993 11:16:17 +0100
Subject: incidental stuff on Oldham game
Other points of possible interest from the Oldham game…
Before the match started, a little white blow-up airship was being tossed around the kop for a while, inscribed with the words ‘Bring Back Cantona’.
I think someone deflated it.
The crowd was just under 28,000, but parts of the ground were deserted.
The south stand in particular looked like a midwinter Halifax v Northampton reserves match, and it must have seemed strange on tv.
The Lowfields was packed, though, and is a magnificent sight.
Are we supposed to call it the Lowfields as before or carry on using ‘The New East Stand’?
There's a new song brewing in the kop about Brian Deane, to the Robin Hood tune — you know, Brian Deane, Brian Deane, Riding Through The Glen.
It only came out a couple of times, and I couldn't get the words apart the end where it sounded something like ‘scores off the bar, F*CK CANTONA, Brian Deane, Brian Deane, Brian Deane’.
The Cantona bit was by far the clearest.
Maybe this song will catch on, but I think Deano needs to buck up a bit for it to get sung some more.
There were more than a few ‘One Sergeant Wilko’ and similar chants during the evening, perhaps making up for the heat-of-the-moment bollocking he got at Anfield for taking off a very industrious Rod Wallace.
In this game, Wallace again shone while Deane faded.
The new handbook is out.
It's got team photos/bios, reviews of last season and other historical stuff.
It costs 3.50, but should come free to members (I collected mine from the ticket office on the night).
Why do some service stations on the M1 close at 10.30pm?
Hordes of grumbly Leeds fans left one place which had just shut up shop.
Other places had half shut up, which meant trecking back and forth across bridges to get cups of luke warm coffee.
At Watford Gap, though, everything was fine, and a nice tea lady saw my shirt and asked how we'd got on.
‘We won 1 — nil, against Oldham’.
‘Ah you should have beaten them, shouldn't you?’
Just so.
Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 1993 11:37:15 +0100
Subject: MoRe: Oldham remarks…
mee too.
well — as seen on sky norwich' disallowed goal was even more doubtful — strach —was—offside (but not interfering with play)— kind of like the goal that lorimer ‘scored’ against Bayern Munich way back then when bremner was judged to be offside.
for those of you that did not see the match the situation looked kind of like this:
goal-line with oldham player standing on the line
strach about 5 m from the goal-line and a good 20–25 m from the play.
oldham keeper wallace kicking the ball in
so wallace was clearly not offside — but strach was —technically—offside (the tv replays clearly showed that).
english linesmen/refs for some reason tend to blow offside on players not interfering with play — you see this most often when there is the long ball from defence/keeper towards the other penalty area with attackers running against the midfield clearly with no possibility of reaching the ball or trying to do so.
in england the whistle is blown but in other leagues play is allowed to continue.
oldham dominated the last 20 min. they had a (good? i think so) goal disallowed and a good header straigth at beeney.
well — he was solid — but no real —saves—. just the stuff that you would expect from —any—keeper playing in the premiership.
lets hope this gives him some confidence.
lets see what they do against some real top attackers…
deane was not —that—good.
in fact im not impressed with the guy at all: 1 simple tap-in in five games (and some good passes).
strach was clearly man of the match.
anyway — the first half was impressive — good floating football with both the long ball (which led to the goal), a little‘Tottenham type’ football (lots of possesion from here to there in midfield) and some sharp short attacks from the sides…
if we can keep up with that kind of play —and—get those goals we will do OK. im still worried both with the back-five and the attackers — against better oppositon or away things —might—not look as good as on monday.
halvard /scandinavian whites (i saw the match in oslo i a footbal-pub:hoorible place — but cheap beer)
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 93 12:30 GMT
Subject: Oldham
Except for THAT match (Lorimer);-)
Well, if you looked at the lines on the grass the blokes' leg was definately ahead of the defence, the angle made it difficult to judge if his body was.
At best his body was level (no way behind).
If that was Leeds Id be a little pissed off, but only because Ive seen worse allowed.
If anything he WAS offside.
I cannot say that Oldham ‘dominated’ the last 20 mins.
They were not really in control, apart from about a 5 minute spell where their passes did all seem be to controlled.
Leeds just couldnt keep possession for any time, so werent building attacks, even the clearances started going out of play.
The play was in the Leeds half most of the time, but this play was scrappy to say the least.
I always feel the press, and to some extent the supporters, cant put the last 20 mins out of their heads in any match, the first 70 can be classical, but if the last 20 is bad — they report the match as being bad on the whole.
The match was reported as being scrappy…exactly what the last 20 minutes was.
Leeds were annoying me at their sudden inability to keep the ball on the pitch, either kicking it off, or playing stupid passes up front(down the middle) straight to their keeper/defenders.
Had they played the ball down th channels or to the corner flags, this would have turned their defence and let us regroup and play in their half.
Oldham had 1 shot on target…that header that was easy for the keeper.
If they had dominated I expect they would have had at least a few more (in 20 mins).
So, by my definition nobody ‘dominated’ the last 20 mins.
Then again, I probably would say that;-))
When was the last time Lukic had to save?? in fact hes one of the better ‘savers’.
Hes no good with the back pass and/or crosses.
beeney was solid in this respect…one of the best kicks from a back pass youll see…this gives the defence confidence and that option.
It also discourages the opposition from closing him down.
True, but they seemed pretty cohesive, and confident.
O'Leary might be back for Soton anyhow…
Come on…when Chappy wasnt scoring just what did he do for the team?
You could virtually tell within 5 minutes if Chappy *could* score (not would).
With Deane I get the feeling he *could* score at any time.
He is not getting the best of scoring service at the moment…hes being used as the target.
Weve had precious few decent crosses/corners/free kicks into the box.
His flick helped create the goal.
He is bound to be nervous too, playing in front of big crowds — a big price tag — expectation — playing for the club he supported.
When he scores his first coulpe of goals I reckon hell take off.
Well, given the opposition in the last few matches theyve not done too bad.
Shouldn't Deane have had 3 pens vs Liverpool??
He must have been causing some problems.
The defence played against Rush, Clough, Wright, merson and Campbell in the last 2 matches.
Its taken a rush ‘nose job’, a dubious penalty, an unlucky bounce on Newsomes knee and a short back header cuased by Campbell pulling kelly back for 10 yards for those people to score goals.
not too bad Id say.
The trouble is, can we afford to find out the hard way??
I think all of the players are capable, just need a little experience (at the back).
O'Leary can provide that, and the defence didnt look troubled at all when he was playing.
mark
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 93 10:21:49 EDT
Subject: Deane song
gavin wrote:
I'd like the words when they're crytalised…since thefirst thing my daughter (now 19months) learned to do was the arm movements to ‘ooh aah Cantona’, I suppose I should teach her something new…perhaps I'll modify the last phrase though;-)
glynn
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Sep 93 10:27:55 EDT
Subject: Strachan as manager
Well, I don't know just yet…
former players from great teams have not had that much success at Leeds!!
Clarke/Gray/Bremner…(ok so Bremner got semi-finals FA & play-off final in same year…but them almost relegation to D3!!)
Perhaps Rocky could be manager…he's never played for a great Leeds team;-)
But seriously, Strachan *appears* to have all the credentials for becoming a great manager…been there, done it, GREAT motivator, lead by example stuff.
I also like the Clough/Taylor model…infact this may be even more successfull as Wilko' would be able to let Strachan have more of a say in a way that Cloghie never could (IMHO) with Taylor…this would be a great grooming school for Strachan…
It'll never happen though!!
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 93 10:46 GMT
Subject: A nice kiddies Leeds routine…
Ah, but what had movements could she do…horse riding perhaps…
No, as Im thoroughly sick (and tired of SCUM hype), how about a nice simple aeroplane action whilst humming the theme from Dambusters (for all you fact fans, the principle was actually tested and refined here at NPL.
In fact I believe you actually see NPL in the film.
Strange but true:-) We also have a tree grown from a cutting off THE apple tree which Newton sat under).
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 1993 11:55:11 +0100
Subject: RE: A nice kiddies Leeds routine…
I'm all for loud singing and opposition-baiting at matches and other times, but I don't normally Do The Dambusters, or worse still the ‘who's that dying on the runway’ stuff.
Bill Shankly was only joking when he said football was more important than life and death.
What gets me though, is the number of man U fans who'll whine about it and yet sing Hillsbrough disaster stuff at Scouse fans, or even put jokes in Red Issue about Don Revie's motor neurone disease.
Did anyone else have to put up with Man U banter in pubs and clubs last May?
In an Oxford pub on the last day of the season we got the song ‘Who's the champions now, scum, who's the champions now?’ chanted at us (tune Tie me kangeroo down).
Our version went ‘Who's the champions now??— SCUM!’.
In the subsequent furore, I nearly lost my Leeds shirt to a rabid band of Man U supporting women.
I'd like to think it was my body they were after, but I suspect they just wanted to destroy the shirt.
(Can't blame them really, it was the vommy Admiral away one).
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 93 12:49 GMT
Subject: ‘Sick’ songs
Ah well, erm, yes.
I have got a seriously black sense of humour.
I personally think that ANYTHING is game for a joke.
I think most people have too, just that society tells them not to have about certain issues.
I think the munich songs are just one in a long line of ‘sick’ songs.
This is not exclusive to football types, remember the wave of ferry jokes (forgive the honestly unintentional pun).
The fact that I was not alive when the munich thing happened — and that it happened so long ago — gives me far less problems with it than say heysel songs, hillsboro songs, and even racist (black) songs.
What makes it so ‘attractive’ as a song is the fake affrontery most SCUM supporters put on.
Jesus, half of SCUM supporters couldnt name the side 5 years ago, let alone 40 years ago.
Its just a pity theres not a better song to really get at the SCUM supporters, that doesnt perhaps offend the older generation who WERE alive at the time.
Still, we make fun of the titanic, we look back at the romans-christians thing with a sense of romance…why not the munich ‘disaster’.
What about spurs/jews thing?
Come 3 o'clock on a saturday I say taking the piss out of history goes.
Without exception.
Racist chanting is a no-no (although I reserve the right to call anyone a black b*st*rd…etc, just I would call someone a fat b*st*rd or a long haired gippo b*st*rd).
I get far more offended going to Goodison and hearing those animals doing gorilla impressions than anything else Ive ever heard.
Id like to wager these same ‘people’ werent so visible the May before!?
I was actively looking for any hint of SCUM support for about 6 weeks after the campaign…not ONE solitary supporter could be found.
And I like to take quite a chunk of consolation from the fact they didnt beat us to the title…yet we beat them.
In a 1 on 1 contest, they lost.
:-)
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 1993 13:48:25 +0100
Subject: RE: ‘Sick’ songs
Fair enough, I plead guilty to telling & laughing at sick jokes too.
What's funny is them being ‘outrageous’, ie it's so sick you've just GOT to be joking when you say it.
But where's the boundary between the humour and violence that's in some people?
There are those who, whether they realise or not, aren't joking when they say these things.
One pub we went in in Cov on that last day of the season had a group of about 20–30 Leeds ‘fans’ singing stuff against Munich, the Irish, the Scots, and just about every other ethnic group present in the place too.
It could have turned into an ugly ruck pretty quickly.
We left, as did a few others.
That's it I think.
It never, never fails to wind them up something rotten.
Well, in this case the women were actually girlfriends/ wives of Scum fans who can be respected.
We've known them for a while, they've been travelling to games solidly for years and are better fans on that score than I've ever been.
The banter between us is a laugh.
I was in the US over the summer (yes, I just happened to see a couple of the England games) and it was the same there — ordinary match-going footie fans who like a drink and a bit of crack (fun, that is), and who all supported loads of different teams mixing together happily enough.
But no, The Day Leeds Won The Title they weren't there, apart from one fat bloke called Jimmy who'd gone out hoping for a quiet drink…
Gavin
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 93 13:52 GMT
Subject: Southampton game
We are trying to get a group together to travel to the Southampton match (maybe…nothing definate just yet).
Who would be interested?
At the moment its Gav and maybe a couple, and me and ‘er indoors’.
Again, its looking like we might meet in London somewheres (fortunate I live just 5–10mins from the M3 hehe), so London/southern dwellers might be OK, but eve if youre travelling from farther afield, we might all be able to meet somewhere and go in CONVOY, scarves a-fluttering out of windows and all that.
It would be most useful to get numbers in multiples of 4's — for full car loads therefore cheaper petrol costs for everyone.
I have a nice feeling this is THE away game where we break the duck.
Ok, post and/or email me direct if you are or might be interested.
Apart from the obvious meeting times/places, the more pressing requirement is to get tickets sorted.
From the Oldham prog it says seats only 13 quid.
However, that doesnt rule out the other previously mentioned methods of getting tickets, with the added bonus if you cant get a ticket for the Leeds end, at least therell be more than one in a home area.
Well…whaddareyawaitinfor??
Mark (email )
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Sep 93 14:17 GMT
Subject: Egos
Got 10 grand burning a hole in yer wallet?
Got an ego the size of the new east stand??
Got a nice flash car???(optional)
Why not buy yourself a ‘custom’ number plate as advertised in the Oldham prog…
L66DS U or,
L6EDS
Ok, so these dont look too impressive in this font, but the advert had them italicised and the ‘6’ squarer, so they were basically ‘E’s with the bottom bits joined up.
Alternatively ‘L8VER’(lover) was ‘only’ 5 grand.
Maybe some scum fans would appreciate a ‘F1YER’,’ C8ASH’,’SNO W1’Their wonderful manager could have ‘SPI T100’or ‘M0 NEY’.
Sorry…losing it a bit towards the end.
The first 3 are geniune though.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 93 12:25:12 BST
Subject: recent talk
I've been away for the past week and had loads of messages to come back to.
Most of the talk has been on the Rocastle situation.
My view is that
a)
Strach has been playing well, but definitely fading after 1hr.
I would not have made him motm against Oldham, I thought the Oldham defenders Jobson and Redmond were the best players on the park.
I would pick Rocastle to start and bring Strach on after an hour (or earlier in emergency) asa tactical substitution or as a fresh pair of legs:-).
Speed and Wallace are versatile enough to move around mid-field/upfront/wings to accomodate this whoever goes off.
This would also give Strach coaching and bench experience.
b)
Newsome, Wetherall and Beeny passed the Oldham exam, but that was only an O — Level, compared to the 1st degree which will come in some games.
c)
From what I have seen of Kelly, he has promise, but only 20% of his passes, clearances, crosses go to a Leeds player.
He gets caught out of position too far forward too often.
This is more noticeable later in the game when he gets tired and looses some of his recovery pace.
It is compounded by the fact that later in the game Strach also tires and cannot pressurise his full-back, or cover Kelly so well.
d)
I too have a feeling that Leeds may finally win away, at Southampton on Saturday.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 93 12:50 GMT
Subject: Strach
I spose he has been fading towards the end of matches, but then again — who hasnt?
I thought Speed and mcAllister faded far more than strach.
Im also ‘concerned’ that he always seems to be the catalyst for the periods when Leeds start ‘buzzing’.
I havent seen it for a while and it was one of the more pleasing aspects to the Oldham game.
They attack from all sides, nice neat passing — direct — create chances etc etc. they dont give the other side a chance to breathe.
Strach is normally the epitomy of that and swarms all over the right back area in and around the box.
more importantly the whole side starts doing it.
I dont know if we would/could do it if he wasnt there to start it.
inspirational is the word.
How would him sitting on the bench give him ‘coaching experience’??
What is ‘Bench experience’???:-)
Ok, if he fades, take him off for someone else, if we are in control, then yes Rocky.
but when the side is picked Wilko doesnt know what the situation is going to be, and not only is Hodge another ‘buzzer’(;-), but he can score all important goals.
Fair enough, but some were saying they couldnt pass the 11+ exams:-) O'Leary should be back to provide the lacking experience.
interesting to note Norman Hunter saying he thinks they both can make it…especially newsome…
Yes, maybe.
But hes doing remarkably well considering he is a natural right winger.
And what would you prefer — losing recovery pace after 80 mins, or having none to start with;-))).
Im happy to see him there.
Given more experience especially.
Getting back to Rocky, did he play all his career at Arse at right midfield?
Didnt he play at all centre midfield…i seem to remember a goal against scum (40 yard lob), where he was more left/centre midfield??
mark
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 93 12:57:39 BST
Subject: Jobson/ Sunderland
Hi everybody, I'm back from holiday to find only 3/9 points.
Seems we have been playing o.k though! and have been unlucky (same old story)
The papers are saying we are after Jobson from Oldham (Centre half).
They said we offered Hodge plus some cash but that was rejected and Oldham want just cash.
Sunderland are shite at the moment but thats because all four of their new signings were injured in a car crash.
They are staying in a hotel in Durham and I saw them yesterday in the bar.
They didn't seem to injured and could be back for the Leeds match.
Cheers,
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 93 14:44 GMT
Subject: Re:Strach
Ok, I see your point now;-) Im sure he wouldnt need to learn much from Wilko at all tactically etc, maybe in the practical aspects of mgt — so I cant see MUCH benefit from sitting next to him in the dug out.
It would be nice to think of them working together on the training ground.
He seems pretty strong minded, so Im pretty sure hes got definate ideas of how hed like a team to play etc.
I have a feeling its not too different from how Leeds play now, thats why I see him as an excellent (joint?)
Leeds manager.
Yes, thats why I said it was a bit worrying before.
We can play perfectly well…but when Strach is playing, and gets the side ‘buzzing’ we look truly invincible.
Its what we used to do in the 2nd div championship year, and even in the first division the first year up.
We would completely pin back a side for the first 20 mins, and invariably crack them.
We havent got another player like that to set that kind of tempo.
Rocastle is a class player — no doubt— but that tempo is not there.
Batty used to do it a bit, but is more of a solid player and these days tends to calm things down.
A sense of urgency I suppose is another way of saying ‘buzzing’.
Who else has that?
Again, I agree.
But I tend to think he is probably fitter than a lot of the other players.
As I said, he certainly hasnt been alone in fading the last few games — and he does do the work to begin with, so maybe has more right to fade.
I do think it is a possibility to use him as a substitute to come on when theres more space around on the pitch.
Given his form, and the contribution he makes, I would have to pick him in front of Rocastle at the moment.
his only dip in form since hes been at Leeds was when he had back trouble.
Thats past him hopefully, and hes also playing with more confidence…
‘…theres only one Gordon Strachan…’
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 1993 23:36:42 +0800 (WST)
Subject: Hodge
If I were them I wouldnt sell Hodge.
He's saved their arses on more than one occasion with a late goal.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 1993 15:49:21 GMT+1
Subject: leeds to sign a scum midfielder!
Hi
The Papers today are saying that Leeds are going to sign Darren Ferguson from the scum for 500,000!!!!
Do we need another midfielder?
They say that Leeds also want to sign Richard Jobson from Oldham for Hodge plus cash.
Oldham want 1.5 Mill.
This is a panic move Jobson is 30 and plays for the worst defence in Premier divison.
Jim
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Sep 93 17:29 GMT
Subject: Hodge…
Jobson…fergurson
What papers had all this gossip on Leeds?!?
I normally check out all the sports pages for gossip during lunchtime, but didnt today…typical huh!?:-)
Ok, well Im also shocked at the jobson approach…especially if he is that old (is he?).
He cant be that bad cos he was called up for England last season if Im correct?
At least on standby.
I certainly wouldnt exchange Hodge for him…but hodge PLUS cash?
Then again…
Wilko is crap at selling players.
I saw West Brom vs Wolves on TV yesterday, and I was quite impressed with Cook for Wolves.
I think he was playing centre back — he looked more like a midfield player and certainly LOOKED like a McAllister type…elegant-ish.
It was pretty good for him to be noticed by me as I was far more impressed with WBA than Wolves — no wonder they signed Geoff Thomas, they play more long balls than C Palace!
I digress…
There must be some better talent in the lower divisions, I dont hold much hope of getting Cook because Wolves seem to have found a few quid recently and would certainly put a silly price on him.
Wilko is likely to be impressed with Jobson as he has always played reasonably well vs Leeds — even in his Barnsley days.
What has happened to leeds' scouts?
We never seem to be going in for young players from lower divisions anymore.
I would have thought Centre half one of the more easier positions for talent spotting.
Jobson is good in the air — but so are newsome and Wetherall.
I doubt if he is quicker on the ground, especially than Newsome.
He might have better awareness etc, but I should bloody hope so at 30…unless O'Leary has had a set back with his injury????
Ferguson hey?
It might be a potential signing for the groundsman — if he can spit half as well as his dad then we just get him to run around on the pitch for 20 mins…no need for sprinklers etc.
Probably binds the pitch better than water too.
Seriously tho, it would make sense to go for a replacement midfielder, if Wilko IS looking for a centre half and hawking Hodge in a swap deal.
We need a scoring midfield substitute though.
How about Kanchelskis?
mark
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Sep 93 09:24:31 BST
Subject: Re: Hodge…
Jobson…fergurson
Jobson: He's a pretty decent all-round defender, surprisingly listed at 5'11 so not that big.
IMO we could still do with a Ruddock type figure at the back.
30 is not that old for a defender.
They can still be playing to their full ability at 34 ish.
Hodge: At 31 and not playing in the first team.
He must be looking to get away.
We need a good defender (not necessarily Jobson) more than midfield cover.
There's stll Rocky and Tinkler in the wings, Wallace can play wide on either side and Speed can play in the middle, so we would still have enough cover.
Ferguson: The Leeds fans would never give him a chance, plus he is crap.
He would need his head testing if he came to Leeds.
If we want scumite which is not a good idea.
Mike Phelan who can play Full-Back, Central Defence, Right or Centre midfield would be better.
He is getting on and is a mile away from their first team.
Really though unless we signed Giggs or Hughes the Leeds fans would roast them.
It would take an extra-special ex scumite.
Strachan, Giles etc to win me over.
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Sep 1993 09:49 GMT
Subject: RE: Hodge…
Jobson…fergurson
if he is only 5'11 and assuming that O'Leary is our other choice in the middle, neither would be that good in the air.
DOL has never really been noted for his heading ability.
When they meet someone like Niall Quinn they could be in trouble.
As I've said before I still reckon that Alan Kernaghan from ‘Boro is the palyer we should buy.
Personally I'd hate to see Hodge go, he gives his all and as has been mentioned on a number of occasions scores very important goals but I suppose their is really no place for sentiment with the way we've started this season.
Ferguson: Can you imagine it New Years day next year, 0 –0 v the scum at Old Trafford, 2 minutes to go and on comes Fergy junior.
Strach passes from the right in comes Fergy, takes control, Bruce falls on his arse trying to stop him and Junior puts the ball between Shmichael's legs.
Junior runs towards the Scum dug out and kisses his da’, HEAVEN.
God I'm having drunken fits already and there's still 4 months to go.
Anyway, having said that Wilko would be nuts to buy another Midfielder of any sort.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Sep 93 10:33:34 BST
Subject: RE: Hodge…
Jobson…fergurson
Where is this place?
The only 2 grounds I know in Scumland are ‘Maine Road’ and ‘Swine Park’.
It is very offensive not to call it by its proper name;-).
Kev.
Scum fans claim they've now got the best pitch in the Premiership.
— Because of the shit that's put on it every week.
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Sep 93 11:54 GMT
Subject: Wilko…
THE BOSS
I was really pissed off because I was watching the U21 England match, and when it finished turned over during the ‘adverts’.
I usually flick back to see whats on next — but forgot.
I then turned back onto Sky Sports only to catch the last 5 minutes or so.
In that bit it was more of a personal insight, rather than Leeds.
He mentioned stuff about his family…and how football wasnt more important than life or death (Shankly).
Something that was of interest was him mentioning a discussion with his wife, where he said he tells her he intends to retire at 55.
That he has books, videos etc to do — lots of things that would take 30 years to do.
His wife reckons hed get bored within 3 weeks.
He did seem quite certain that 55 is the age.
He is 50 now (I think).
Maybe a couple of year as joint mgr with Strach, then a nice smooth transition to Strach as full mgr when Wilko hits 55????
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Sep 93 12:15 GMT
Subject: Southampton Game
Just to inform you that Gavin and I are meeting en route to the Soton game this weekend.
If anyone else fancies joining us (and possibly sharing cars for the rest of the trip) we are meeting probably just outside Winchester, then driving in to Soton.
Winchester is ‘on’ the M3, so anyone going to the game from anywhere but the south coast shouldn't have to divert much, if at all.
Apart from the convoy, we can all get lost on the way to the ground together:-)
Gav is setting off from Oxford, I am setting off from West London.
Anyone is welcome to jump aboard and share petrol costs, or just meet up and continue to the ground together…
Let either of us know and we can send you details of where and when we are meeting etc.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Sep 1993 13:04:47 +0000
Subject: First Away Win
I see the Mirror has Saturday's visit to the Dell as an away win for us.
Certainly they are hit by injuries and have not bought anybody.
Flowers was injured out of the England Game which will be a help too.
Since I have been away at Scarborough on holiday I got the YEP every day and the special Leeds edition that they do every season.
Don Warters was hedging his bets this time, though noting high spirits in the team.
Rocastle got a page long interview expressing some puzzlement at Wilko keeping him out of the first team.
There was a really good profile of all the youngsters which I could reproduce if people want.
The worst thing was McAllister's ‘Captain's Log’ column after the Norwich debacle.
He warbled on about watching Match Of The Day from behind the sofa that night — now is that the sort of talk we want coming from the captain of Leeds United AFC?
What we want is fighting talk, and fighting spirit, I want Macca to prove me wrong that he is not a big girl's blouse.
Anyway at least all our lads had a good rest this last two weeks, so it'll be up and at 'em on Saturday.
Remember — 7–0 (March 4th 1972)
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Sep 93 15:07 GMT
Subject: Macca
A point relating to both these points…
Macca was the only real involvement for any of the lads this week on the international scene.
Batts and Dorigo werent even on the bench for England, Speed was a sub for Wales (cos they wanted to play sweeper…
I bet they played someone like Aizlewood instead <sigh>).
Macca on the other hand was captain for Scotland.
From what I saw of the match he played well.
Some nice touches/skill.
Some good reviews.
Hes got quite a dry sense of humour and was probably ‘joking’ about the Norwich match…and lets face it it was a bit of a horror show defensively!
I also think shame is as good a motivator as anger.
Although it would be nice to see someone apart from Strach get annoyed on the pitch every now and then.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Sep 1993 16:39 GMT
Subject: First away win
People, Let's relax for just a sec and not get carried away with talk of 7–0 victories over twenty years ago, a lucky, boring 1–0 will do wonderfully well.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Sep 93 16:50 GMT
Subject: Away win…
Ok Ok, lets talk about the 4–0 home win in about 78, when Currie scored THAT goal:-))))
Or the 4–0 AWAY win 2 years ago when Speed scored THOSE goals, and Ruddock got sent off:-))))
Or the 3–3 draw 2 years ago when we…ooops.
Sorry!!
Seriously…
I wont be truly happy until we get completely pissed on in a match yet come away with a win.
THATS when Ill be convinced some gypsy scum fan hasnt been doctoring Wilkos cornflakes (or something).
Mark
‘…jingle all the way…’
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 1993 15:35 GMT
Subject: RE: Rocky on his way to Liverpool
You have got to be joking me.
Why would Wilko be even remotely interested in a complete waste of space like St-wart.
OK so Wilko won the league for us 2 years ago but has he got still got hold of his faculties?
How long will he go on buying midfield players when what we still need is a centre half?
If he won't give Rocky a chance why should he even consider giving St-wart a chance?
What will he do next start selling the likes of Whelan and Tinkler before they have a chance to mature?
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 93 16:02 GMT
Subject: Rocky…
Stewart…
Scousers
First…remember a couple of papers had Rocky signed and playing for Derby.
Did he sign??
No.
Second…if this has happened why only the Mirror having the story?
The better sports papers (ie Today, Sun, Star) had nothing.
I dont even bother reading the Mirror cos its sports pages are so crap.
Third…indeed, why would wilko be looking for another midfielder.
Except maybe if Hodge is about to go (in a swap deal for a defender), maybe Wilko feels he should have a more versatile midfielder.
This might be a reason to get one, NOT for getting stewart.
Four…
Souness often spouts on about deals when nothing is happening.
maybe Wilko called to check up on another player, or he was returning Souness' enquiry about Rocky (saying no).
Five…
Rocky is in the squad for tomorrows match.
Six…
The papers have been desperate to unsettle Rocky for ages, so they see that Wilko has made some enquiries about a player, they see the two clubs, they see an out-of-favour player on each side and immediately jump to conclusions.
Anyways, its quite funny — Souness has been after all our midfielders at some stage (except Strach AFAIK), now hes moving onto our reserves.
Hehehe.
Just for the sake of argument of course— *IF* Rocky was to go to Scousers, who would we be willing to see come our way??
Although this is just for fun, lets keep it realistic, I cant see them swapping Wright or Ruddock for example.
What about Thomas??
Central midfielder.
I would have liked to see rosenthal, but now we have deane (and the rest) I cant see the point.
What about one of their numerous foreign defenders?
One last piece of unrelated news…on teletext (no hint of Rocky/stewart swaps BTW), the team news suggests that we will be starting with the same side as vs Oldham, ie beeney and Wetherall still in.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 93 16:20 GMT
Subject: Rocky & team news
Well, after Marks advert for Clubcall I decided I just had to hijack the fax machines telephone line and call it up.
Nothing at all about Rocky…except hes in the 17 man squad (which we already knew).
Apart from the 11 who started vs Oldham, the squad is;
Lukic, Hodge, Rocastle, Strandli, Shutt and I think Forrester.
They also said that maybe Strandli will push Wallace for the first team place after scoring in the last 2 reserve matches.
Its a pity it isnt 15-a-side isnt it?
I would like to see the current midfield plus Rocky and hodge, and also like to see Strandli get a chance with Deane and wallace.
Shutt also deserves better.
Oh well.
Incidentally, an interesting fact emerged from Clubcall.
Leeds worst away run was 26 matches in the 40's.
They ended that run at Soton!!
Leeds current run is 24 matches.
This fact, coupled with everyones ‘feeling’ that this is the one, and Sotons sh*t start AND our encouraging away performances AND Sotons injury problems…its GOTTA be a home win;-)))))
BTW Gav…well be coming in a blue mini, not the escort…
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 1993 16:31 GMT
Subject: Rocky & team news
Is Forrester a defender and has Wilko completly lost faith with Fairclough?
If that's the squad it look a very attack orientated setup with maybe Lukic being the reserve centre half:-))
My quess would be Lukic, Rocky and Shutt as the 3 on the bench.
Any other guesses?
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 93 11:39:35 EDT
Subject: Rocky — Stewart
if Wilko is thinking of this deal he must be going totally off his trolley.
The only thing Stewart has in a nice hair-style…so nice he won't head the ball.
glynn
PS I wouldn't be so sure about the away win this week-end…
I think we may have to wait until Swindon…and we know when that is don't we;-(
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Sep 93 16:51:56 BST
Subject: Re: Team news wanted
Anybody know the situation regarding Sterland and Kerslake.
All reports I'd heard were that Sterland would be fit by now.
As for Kerslake's injury, what is it?, when did it happen?
When will he be in contention?
The media and everywhere else have been very quiet about him.
I would not take any notice of CEEFAX speculation.
Firstly the team will not be announced until tomorrow.
Secondly, Wilko is not going to drop anyone who played in the Oldham game out of the squad altogether.
Lastly, In the absence of any injuries, suspensions, players returning from injury it is a fair guess on the part of the Ceefax people that the team will be unchanged.
The old adage about not changing a winning team is not true, but is a starting point.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 1993 08:17:54 +0000
Subject: Youth Team Profiles
Here are the profiles of the Youth Team who won the cup last season, from the YEP special Leeds edition of August.
I added bits where a player has done anything since.
By the way I just wanted to say I went out and got totally plastered on Saturday night, came home and watched those goals from Match Of The Day about six times.
YYEEEEEEESSSSSS!!!!!
Paul Pettinger
Born Barnsley.
Substitute goalkeeper for last season's visit to Man City.
This is his second year at Leeds, and he has made several appearances in the Reserves.
Represented England at U15 and U16 levels.
Andy Couzens
Born Shipley.
One of several youth team players awarded a professional contract.
Played mostly right back last season but can also play in central defence or midfield.
Kevin Sharp
Born Canada.
Made first team at Crystal Palace last April and has played four times for the senior side.
Along with Jamie Forrester went from the FA School of Excellence to Auxerre and signed for Leeds last September.
England U15, U16 and Youth international.
Member of England U18 Championship winning squad in July.
Currently left back but equally at home in midfield.
Rob Bowman
Born Durham.
This is his second year at Leeds.
Made reserve debut three days aftr his 17th birthday and after a substitute appearance at Wimbledon started the Premier League game against the scum in February.
Fullback or central defender.
Has four Premier League appearances behind him.
Memeber of England U18 Championship winning squad in July.
Mark Tinkler
Born Bishop Auckland.
England youth international at home in defence or midfield.
A regular in the reserves last season made his first team debut vs Sheffield United in April and made six subsequent League appearances.
Member of England U18 Championship winning squad in July.
Matthew Smithard
Born Leeds.
Midfielder who impressed in his first year at Elland Road making several reserve outings and being rewarded with a professional contract.
Mark Ford
Born Pontefract.
YTS boy who plays midfield and is captain of the youth side.
Product of York and North Yorkshire Schools representative teams, he has signed on profesional terms and has played in the reserves.
Noel Whelan
Born Leeds.
Hit all six goals in Leeds' Northern Intermediate League game vs Scarborough in February (6–2).
Member of England U18 Championship winning squad in July.
Played in most of the Premier League games so far this season.
Striker.
Steve Tobin
Born Manchester.
Hard working forward who can play midfield.
Just completed second year on YTS.
Next highest scorer to Forrester and Whelan at youth level.
Jamie Forrester
Born Bradford.
Egland U15, U16, Youth International.
Signed from Auxerre last September.
Two Youth Cup Hat tricks and three in Northern Intermediate.
Played six times for first team last season.
Striker who played in several senior games last season.
Scored with spectacular overhead kick in second leg of Youth Cup Final.
Alex Byrne
Born Leeds.
Plays defence or midfield.
Just completed two years as trainee.
Played for Leeds, West Yorks and Yorkshire schools teams.
Simon Oliver
Born Bradford.
Played left back for much of last season but also midfielder.
David Connor
Born Leeds.
In first YTS year.
Right back or defender.
Paul Wharton
Son of former Newcastle player Kenny.
Still at school but has already played a few times in midfield for youth team.
England U16 international.
Thats All Folks
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 93 09:57:36 BST
Subject: jingle bells…at last Hello, Well the chaps have finally got an away win.
I was holding off buying an away shirt, as I didn't want to wear a shirt that had never won a game.
I suppose that's as good a reason as any for changing them after last year:-) Especially that blue Chelsea-like thing.
They'll probably change again next year, but at least this shirt will not be forever linked with failure.
For the record this shirt looks uncomfortably like those worn around my area when Oxford were doing particularly well.
(Beating Leeds 5–2 & 4–1 around 1983–4).
Stuart, Gavin Have you been mistaken for Oxford fans yet?
I'm not sure if I could live with that.
Also it looks a bit like the West Brom shirts of the late 70's.
Although of course they were Blue/White and Yellow/Green.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 93 15:12 GMT
Subject: Southampton report…
Well, Gav and I met up as planned and had an ‘interesting’ drive to the match.
It should have taken approx 20 mins…but took 1 and a half hours!!
We got to our seats exactly on kick off, and made our way from Winchester to the ground via Marwell zoo (amongst other local attractions).
Anyhow…the feeling in the water continued to indicate the away win, and the clincher (for me) was seeing 2 magpies sitting on a street light on the way.
The crowd (as ever) did Leeds proud, were all around the ground and Im sure helped make it another ‘home game’ for the players.
Leeds really controlled the action throughout.
In the first half, whenever Leeds had mounted a little pressure, a southampton player went down injured.
Its no exaggeration to say that at least 7 minutes were lost in 3 particular stoppages in the first half.
Needless to say the ref blew the whistle exactly on time.
In the first half Beeney didnt have anythingto do really, apart from one excellent save after Soton had suprisingly been onside.
He saved well from very close range, and also palmed Le Tissier's followup shot round the post to huge cheers, even though he was called offside.
At the other end I cant remember any really clear chances (Gav?), aside from a good volley from Newsome which swerved viciously and had flowers diving to hold onto (this from about 25 yards out).
In the second half it was pretty much a similar story, Leeds pressing from the start, then a Soton injury, then a lovely classy move which led to the first goal.
I was disappointed to see this move cut when they showed the goals on MOTD.
Anyway, it comprised of 4 or 5 short/quick one touch passes between Soton players — down the side to Batty, first time left foot cross — Deane rose and a superb little glancing header floated in at the far post…off the post.
Unbelievably, Leeds remained relaxed, and continued to play well.
Beeney continued to show Lukic how easy the back pass can be, and also just how to command your area — coming off his line to catch crosses/corners with ease.
Kelly had another good solid game, making a couple of very good runs forward, and using his pace when defending.
He (and the others except Wallace who took a knock) seemed to last the pace aswell.
Wetherall did very well against Dowie who was literally a handful the whole match.
A better referee would have given fouls against Dowie most of the game…
Wetherall just got on with it and won all the important headers.
The midfield operated well, Strach the inspiration yet again.
Batts had his best game this season (IMO) and is now back to his best.
McAllister also played well…
Speed was a little disappointing — hes not quite shaken off pre season yet.
Up front Deane was ready willing and able.
Looking for balls down the channels, holding the ball, taking defenders on etc etc very good.
Wallace was his usual lively self, and they both looked to be working well together.
Wallace took a knock and looked like he was ready to come off after about 75 mins.
Wilko eventually took him off and brought Strandli on — this didnt give Frank enough time to get into the game (other subs were Lukic and Fairclough).
Although everyone was a bit wary of an undeserved Soton equaliser, Beeney mopped up any semblance of an attack, and after good work by Strachan in not letting Benali shepherd the ball out for a goal kick, he dispossessed him, took it past another defender and played it across the goal for Speed to slot it into the bottom left corner.
Cue celebrations.
17 months of relief poured out.
About 50 fans poured onto the pitch to join in with the players.
They cleared of their own accord some 50 seconds later.
This was later referred to as ‘Ugly’ by BBC teletext…implying there was something bad happening.
Tim flowers felt quite safe Im sure.
As a side issue if anyone knows what we (the public) can do in the way of complaint against Ceefax can they let me know…it almost spoilt a wonderful day.
A day made all the more wonderful by the confirmation that SCUM had been beaten by Chelsea.
If we have 2 or 3 good results now I can see this as being a watershed for Leeds, and we can build on the renewed confidence and self belief to challenge again.
remember, the performances have been there…and now we need to get into the habitof not losing games again.
Thats about it.
Im sure Gav will fill in any bits I missed out…
For a more ‘independant’ summary of the symbolism and importance of that match…try and read todays report in the Telegraph Sport supplement.
Dont think we can win the title this year? look at the main challengers:
Scum…aside from the (hopefully short) european distraction — their confidence is at the highest.
Another quick defeat will bring them crashing down.
Also they have had very nice games up til now…you look at their xmas schedule.
Arsenal…didnt we outplay them a week ago?
Liverpool…ditto, and bad results A Villa…
Look at their results so far
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 1993 15:03:03 +0000
Subject: Goalkeeper
Nobody's commented yet but the goalie on Super Saturday was Beeney.
He was said to have dealt efficiently with the job and made some good saves.
Isn't this our first clean away sheet since Arsenal away last season??
I say give the boy another chance.
Let Lukic sweat a bit.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 93 16:30 GMT
Subject: Beeney
I say the boy should now be 1st choice.
It was/is quite refreshing to have crosses/corners snuffedout by someone who comes and catches the bloody ball.
End of attack.
Immediately.
Lukic, whenever he decided to do something with a cross, punched it.
Continued attack.
Immediately.
Ive spoken about the back pass situation…thats another HUGE plus factor.
The defence look confident when passing back.
The only question was what he was like at saving shots.
He did enough to show me he can do that as well as Lukic.
Whats more hes becoming a bit of a crowd favourite.
Incidentally there was some goss in a sunday paper that Leeds were looking at another keeper (from the lower divisions…cant remember who).
Maybe Wilko will look to sell or part ex.
Lukic for a defender?
Having said that Newsome and Wetherall looked solid again against Dowie who is awkward, and a couple of lively little forwards (Maddison??).
So, to continue the analogy started before…theyve now passed year one of their Degree course…
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 93 12:30:32 EDT
Subject: Re: Saturday
There may have been a lot of talk on this news group…but does Wilko subscribe?
I hear he's fond of his computer.
Maybe we should tell him to get a modem & subscribe so that he can get some real electronic info?
Or maybe he could just ask us what team to pick;-)
He'd soon find out that selling Rocky (especially in a deal with Stewart) is not a popular move…and why wasn't he even on the bench?
ROCKY…
ROCKY…
ROCKY etc etc
We even play his theme song at every home match…what more of an omen does Wilko need????;-)
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 10:38 GMT
Subject: Position & quotes
Wilko spoke a lot about the ‘monkey being off our backs now — people will have to start thinking about something else to say…’.
He also sympathised with Ian Branfoot (Soton mgr).
Strach said the relief/celebrations/satisfaction was possibly better than winning the league — Scotland qualifying for the World Cup…(and some other top sporting moments Ive forgotten about!).
He also said this kind of feeling is why he wants to stay in football as long as possible.
Any other quotes I missed??
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 10:41:37 BST
Subject: Alan Kernaghan
Lennie Lawrence, Middlesbro's manager was summarising on Radio 5 last night.
It seems that Alan Kernaghan was out of contract, thus a free agent for 4 months.
He signed a new contract 3 weeks ago.
Lawrence was saying that Man City have bid 1.5 million, but he has recommended that the offer is rejected.
He is expecting City to come back with a bigger offer.
No Mention of any any offer from Leeds:-(.
Hurry up Wilko, You could Fairclough or Hodge + Cash.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 10:48 GMT
Subject: Scum in Europe
Ah, well y'see youre lucky you dont have to put up with all the constant SCUM hype.
Here in the UK we are pretty much fed up of it already.
Even when they werent winning anything except the occasional FA Cup there was hype.
Now its nauseous.
If they did anything in Europe it would be even worse.
People also always say that it will ‘distract’ a team from the league.
It MIGHT make them tired at the end of the season — but the confidence they would gain would more than compensate.
Football is all about confidence.
Thats why when a team gets knocked out of europe — invariably they do nothing in the league.
It shatters their self belief and confidence.
You can see the SCUM players believing the hype they have been fed.
It makes it all the sweeter when they fall.
Because they have been seeded they will avoid any decent sides, so I dont think that Honved will beat them.
If they did it would be soooooo cooool.
Almost as sweet as when Giggs missed that penalty a year or so ago vs Soton in the FA Cup which meant they got knocked out…:-)
Nope…the earlier they go out the better.
The more humiliating the better.
Its a pity Leeds' games vs Stuttgart last year overshadowed scum losing to a bunch of russian part timers.
Funny how the press shut up about that one rather quickly isnt it?
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 11:43:13 +0100
Subject: LEEDS HAVE WON AWAY
Yep, it was a great day out on Saturday.
As Strach says, it was like winning the cup or something.
I was anxious right up until the end, but Speed's killer goal sealed it; the crowd went wild.
On MOTD, did they show the banner unfurled at that point which said ‘LEEDS HAVE WON AWAY’?
Afterwards, in the traffic jam leaving Southampton, party hats were being handed out among the Leeds cars.
Although Mark's expert navigation round the lesser-known hedegrows of Hampshire got us out of the bumper-to-bumper mess, I almost regretted leaving cos I expect there was a huge party somewhere on the middle of the M3 (‘let's all have a disco’, etc.)
I've nothing much to add to Mark's exemplary report of the game.
Beeney was great and I don't see how he can fail to be selected for the next few games short of leg amputation (and even then…)
The defence looked happier, but wasn't without its wobbles on this nervy occasion; Newsome got another shot in.
Deane looked 100% better than the Oldham game.
Wallace was great even when he took a knock early in the 2nd half (Strandli should have been on sooner).
Speed had an off day but still managed to score.
Gordon Strachan OBE is simply unbelievable, and if HRH has been shown highlights of the game yet, I expect she'll have popped the hereditary peerage in the post for him.
How about Lord Strachan of Leeds, or Elland?
Or maybe Gordon, Lord of the Wings?
I met a scum fan on the bus home from town late on Saturday night who was trying to tell me in a very loud voice that Strachan was now ‘past it’ and ‘knackered’.
Well, Gordon might have passed on Man U, but he's anything but knackered!
Anyone know who supplies his bananas?
I want some!
Hope y'all enjoyed the day as much as I did.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 11:36:08 +0000
Subject: Scum In Europe
I agree that it is better for the pigs to get beat in Europe, but it would be good if they progressed a little, no further than we did but enough to get tired out.
Even if they got to the superleague then were repeatedly humiliated 6 nil I would be happy despite it making them yet more money.
Fergie muffed it by buying an Irishman — Keane — instead of an English player.
Six of his 1st team are foreigners.
This will cause problems in Europe, especially if they get a few injuries.
Hur hur hur.
Incidentally the Mirror mentioned that Lee Chapman has a new book out in which he ‘reveals’ that Frogslegs left in a huff because he thought he had carried the can for the defeat by Rangers.
Peut-etre Wilko was aussi pissed off with him because he couldn't be arsed away from home…
Has anyone seen this book?
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 14:39 GMT
Subject: LEEDS HAVE WON AWAY
Nah.
They hardly showed the goals…bastards.
After all the sniggering and playing up of our away record, you might have though SOME mention might have been in order??
Nope.
BTW, did you see this banner Gav?
I saw it in one of the papers, but didnt see it on the day.
Too busy jumping up and down like a lunatic (along with the rest of most of the crowd).
I was a little confused at one point — after one of Leeds smooth silky passing movements in the first half, which ended in a shot that went just over the bar I think, most of the ground broke into applause.
I couldnt tell if it was Soton fans joining in the appreciation, or just Leeds fans everywhere.
I also forgot to check out the rest of the ground when we scored — to see just exactly Leeds fans were.
Oh well…
Yes…and Im soon to be starting a commercial tour on a regular basis.
Fancy taking in the quaint country lanes of Hampshire?
Mail for a price list;-) A book to follow —’ A to B via the rest of the alphabet’.
Catchy dontchathink?:-)
I have nothing to add to this bit — just left it in in case‘Her Maj’ is on the list.
‘Here here’(and all that tosh).
Yes, he must feel very lucky to have such fit and frisky players as Robson, Mike Phelan and Brian McClair in his midfield (pfffftt!!).
I would have thought that hed also steer clear of mentioning old codgers, seeing as Hoddle and MAL DONAGHY (double pfffttt!!), amongst others, turned his team over that day.
Ok…thats enough laughing (for now).
Anyone know any good Honved songs??
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 15:22:40 +0100
Subject: Boring Boring Admin
More list admin problems, I'm afraid.
It concerns UK address-holders only.
There are two forms of most UK mail addresses, a long one and a short one.
Which one appears as the From: address in your messages depends largely on the local arrangements of the site which receives them.
Unfortunately, the people in charge of Oxford Uni's mail server have been playing around of late, and have changed from using the long form to the short form, and now, it seems, back again.
This has consequences for the LEEDS-UNITED list, because only list members can post to it (helps deter bovver from non-list members).
A side-effect of this is that if your mail starts showing your long address as opposed to the short address given for your name on the list, the dopey list software rejects it.
Likewise it will reject any requests you send to  (NOMAIL, UNSUB & c ).
To solve the problem, any UK subscribers who have bouncing mail difficulties of this kind should re-subscribe themselves as follows: Write to  saying
SUBSCRIBE LEEDS-UNITED Your Name SET LEEDS-UNITED NOMAIL
This means you'll be on the list under both forms of your address, so no matter which form your From: address happens to take on a given day, you'll be able to write to the list.
The NOMAIL option ensures you only receive one copy of each message sent to the list, even though you're on it twice.
Several of you are already subscribed twice in this way — as a result of the confusion which occured the last time the Oxford mailer was messed about with.
If you're affected by this, or confused by these instructions, get in touch with me when you need to.
Apologies to , the most recent victim, and to the rest of you who probably will be affected shortly…
Apologies too for being more boring about this than an Arsenal v Wimbledon game.
Which reminds me, has anyone else seen that Radio 5 billboard advert which says ‘We also cover Arsenal, Wimbledon and Crystal Palace.
After all, you'd get bored just hearing about football’.
Gavin
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 15:50:39 +0100
Subject: Fings are looking up?
According to the book Leeds United: The Return to Glory, the season we won the championship we had 20 points off of ten games.
If we win the next 3 then we'll have 19 off of 10.
Only one point behind and we won the championship by 4 points -:)
Well, I for one am cracking open the Pomagne tonight!
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 16:06 GMT
Subject: LOOKING UP?
Howard is famous for his points targets.
One is something like ‘50 points avoids relegation’, so as soon as Leeds get over 50 points (whenever that is)— there is a celebration.
Another figure for success is 2 points per game average.
If you get that you will be Champions or runners up.
So, we are ‘allowed’ one draw — one win — one draw…etc etc.
We need to catch up 4 points.
4 wins on the trot will put us on course.
This formula also allows for defeats…2 wins for every defeat is also OK.
You be careful!:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 16:14:41 +0100
Subject: Re: LEEDS HAVE WON AWAY
Yep, someone behind the goal had it, about 30 yards down to the left of where we were sat.
I wonder how long its owner has been trailing it up and down the length of England…
Who was it kicked one clearance right out of the ground?
A Leeds defender wasn't it?
That got a rapturous round of applause too.
Yeah, great!
You could do a birdspotting book too!— you know, ‘Two magpies perched on telegraph wire = Leeds away win’.
I think the Pools Panel work this way too:-)
Well, if she's on, it's under a pseudonym.
Either  or Julie Donnelly, I guess.
And I can confirm (for the benefit of Glenn, I think it was) that Howard Wilkinson is not a member either, as far as I can tell from the list.
If he's interested, I'm sure we could fix him up!
How about Half Man Half Biscuit's ‘I Was A Teenage Armchair Honved Fan’?
Gavin
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 16:34:09 BST
Subject: carried away
Come, come…let's not get carried away.
All this talk of 2 points per game and championships is a bit premature, we'll end up sounding like scumites who always think they'll win everything.
I'm sure the win will do wonders for the team's confidence, but let's see what happens for the next 5 games at least before we make rash predictions.
My target for the first 6 games was 10 points.
we got 7.
I was hoping for 13 from games 7–12 and will be happy to achieve that.
Of course, eating into the deficit from the first 6 games with another away win would be ok.
This 3 points for a win is a bit weird really.
Deep down I would regard a draw at both Coventry and Ipswich as being better than a win and a defeat.
It seems odd that we could get hammered in one game, just win the other and still be better rewarded than with 2 draws.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 1993 16:54:50 +0100
Subject: Carried away…not
Kev,
don't worry.
The Pomagne is as safe as a Trevor Brooking driving offence.
Anyway, we only have to get 8 more points to beat Stoke City's record 17 points in a season (and that was when you got 3 points for a win).
Surely we can manage that????
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Sep 93 17:12 GMT
Subject: Carried away??? moi!?????
??
Erm, who is this addressed to??
All *I** did was quote a famous (at least I thought it was) Wilkoism.
Ive no reason to get carried away myself…just like I wasnt all doom and gloom before the Oldham match.
:-)
A season is all about consistency, and no matter what the bad start — if we end up with an average of 2 pts per game (ie 84 points), we will right up there — if not champions.
Theres no reason whatsoever we shouldn't be thinking in terms of the championship anyway.
We were this time last year, and weve got a better squad this time around (and indeed than that which won the league).
Only 5 games;-) Another ‘famous’ thing in football is to wait until at least xmas.
Then you can get some good ideas about who will be challenging.
On performances I personally think we are worth more than the 2 pts per game average.
Im not going to argue this one.
Its my opinion…
MINEMINEMINE so nyah:-)
But, if we got ‘fair’ results (ie a win at City, draws at Liverpool and Arse (at least))— then wed be stonking by your expectations no?
Yeah, I suppose 4 wins on the trot would be ‘ok’;-) Ans coincedentally bring us slap bang onto the 2 points per game average…
Thats one reason we suffered last year.
We drew quite a few games away.
Never mind…whos for arranging the end of season championship piss up then:-)))
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 15 Sep 1993 15:00:56 +0000
Subject: I Was A Teenage Armchair Honved Fan
The following is a couple of suggested songs for tonight's football TV viewing, to urge on those brave Budapestians against the scum:
We love you Honved — we do We love you Honved — we do We love you Honved — we do Oh Honved we love you.
or
Hungary Hungary Youre the famous Honved And you come from Hungareeee.
I also hope Vitesse Arnhem slice up Norwich like an Edam cheese.
Serve the slags right for beating us at home.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 16 Sep 93 09:22:15 BST
Subject: Europe
I am quite pleased to see Norwich, Villa, even the Arse do well in Europe, because, I like to see the English do well against foreign sides.
Especially the diving, whingeing latin types.
Obviously the scum are an exception and we all want them to loose, it was a shame they were up against a more charitable defence than ours.
I thought Honved might cause them a few problems once they had equalised.
Nice to see Bruce get injured although he did seem to recover.
He should have been at least booked in the first half, for a nasty and ‘professional’ foul.
Ince was lucky in that he made lots of fouls, but the ref played advantage on some and then forgot about them.
Also the incident when he hacked their left winger in the box, he never touched the ball.
It was either a penalty, or a goal kick (if the ref thought that the forward had intentionally got tangled up).
Denis Law who despite being a scum bastard sometimes amuses me, thought the ref had got it right.
Still they will hopefully be knackered when they play the Arse on Sunday.
Giggs looked shagged after 75 mins.
I think that's enough about the Scum now.
Let's start preparing for a convincing win against Sheffield Utd.
I reckon they'll come with 9 or 10 behind the ball at all times and hope to catch Leeds out with a long punt or from a set piece.
If we can get an early goal, they'll have to change their plan, but i reckon 2–0 will be about par.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 16 Sep 1993 08:35:56 +0000
Subject: Europeanut brain
The much vaunted scum defence leaks two goals against a plucky though rather ordinary side; ho ho ho.
They should have slaughtered Honved but ended up with only 1 goal in it.
Cantona's miss in the second half in particular raised a chuckle, a perfect opportunity which he totally muffed, but they missed a sackload of chances.
Rangers had the excuse of injuries for their cockups but the scum were at full strength.
Wait till they play the Italians or the Spaniards, they will die.
From:
Date: Thu, 16 Sep 1993 11:42:55 +0000
Subject: No Squad Problems For SC*M
There is no doubt that SCUM have the strongest squad yet assembled for their season's campaign.
What with Giggs, Cantona, Hughes, McClair, Keane, Pallister et al, they also have Des Lyneham of MOTD, Alan Green, John Inverdale and the entire cast of Radio 5's commentary team on the bench.
How can they lose the league?
Its a pity Inverdale can't play footy cos he would die for that red shit, sorry I mean shirt.
At any rate, I predict a decisive win on Saturday for us, loadsagoals with Deano amongst the honours.
And another clean sheet for Beeney.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 16 Sep 93 14:43:26 BST
Subject: Re: ‘English’ Champions?
I'll be interested to see what SCUM do if they get a couple of injuries to English players.
When you consider that Hughes, McClair, Gobber Junior, Kanchelskis, Blackmore were all surplus last night.
They've got to keep Danny Wallace, Dion Dublin happy even though in reality they are miles from a first team place.
The constant team-changing may well fuck up their rhythm completely.
Their squad could just prove to be too big, ie Ferguson may not know who to pick.
I just hope he'll carry on leaving out good players in order to give Robson a game.
He did just that during Feb, March 1992 to hand us the title.
He appeared to have learned his lesson last season, but the fact that he needs Robson's ‘Englishness’ for Europe means he will pick him for some league games such as Chelsea last week, and wasn't he crap; >}
Please note the gormless smilie above.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 17 Sep 93 12:01:08 BST
Subject: bits
Ceefax say that Leeds will be unchanged tomorrow.
Anybody know the news on DOL and Kerslake?
Interesting to see that Liverpool have signed Julians Dick (swap for Marsh and Burrows) and West Ham have signed Chappo!
Man City have signed Kernaghan for 1.5m
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 17 Sep 93 14:18:19 BST
Subject: Gif files
I posted about this when our group was small and young.
Now there are more of us:—
I have 2. gif files of leeds (one of the club badge, the other of a radio leeds ‘marching into Europe’ car sticker).
They make excellent backdrops to windows environments.
Mail me if you want them
Mark.
From:
Date: Fri, 17 Sep 1993 14:07:08 +0000
Subject: Chapman in the Claret & Blue
So Leee is going to the Irons and Leslie is probably going to be in Eastenders (I hope).
I can't see it working out.
He needs a steady supply of crosses from the flanks and West Ham don't play that game at all.
They have a static defence and no decent wingers.
Also they are crap at corners so I don't see him getting anything there.
Anyway he's pretty much in the twilight of the gods now.
I wish him well but realistically he isn't likely to get more than a couple here and there.
Premier League central defenders have got him sussed.
I'd love to hear the cavalier wit of the Whites at work at that Upton Park fixture now though…
Souness really does want a team of raging psychopaths — Dicks is a right evil bastard, Ruddock and Burrows have just gained a soul mate.
Vinny wouldn't be mean enough for Liverpool now.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 17 Sep 93 15:19:37 BST
Subject: Re: bits
I suppose this means West Ham will be playing without Dicks on Staurday. — That one always makes me laugh.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 93 09:53:37 BST
Subject: Radio Stations.
Does anybody know the FM frequencies for Radio Leeds and Radio Aire, so I can tune my car into them permanently.
I always seem to forget where they are.
Thanks.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 1993 11:17:27 +0100
Subject: Cov tickets
Just rang up the LUFC ticket office (got through first time, is this a record?) and all the tickets for Cov have sold out.
I'm trying the Cov office now which means we'll have to sit with sad people singing Jolly Boating Weather with lyrics by Jimmy Hill.
According to Directory Enq. the Cov ticket Office is 0203–225545.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 93 12:14:41 BST
Subject: Sunderland
Is anybody off to the Sunderland Match (away)?
I've got ticket no. 33, I hope more that thats going!!!!
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 93 12:21 GMT
Subject: Leeds 2 Sheff Utd 1
Anyone go to the match?
Ill give a brief summary, gleaned from the London papers — so therefore little or no real match information!
The team was unchanged from Soton, except for Fairclough coming in for Newsome (to counter Flo's aerial threat?)
Leeds scored after 5 mins…
A driven pass by Strach mid way in the Leeds half in the right back area — to Wallace who played a nice cushioned header into McAllisters run.
Mac picked the ball up centre field, just inside the Sheff half, and ran with the ball diagonally towards Sheff right back position.
About 25 yards out he cut inside kamara and struck a superb right foot shot into the top(ish) right of the goal.
Goal of the day without a doubt.
Strach scored after 29 mins.
A ball was flicked on by Deane and Strach ran onto it close to Sheffs left midfield/ left back area.
He flicked it past a defender as he cut in to his left, and shot left foot on the volley into the bottom left corner of the sheff goal.
The keeper might have done better, but a good goal none the less.
Sheffields goal was an own goal by Kelly.
A long throw on the Leeds left went into the box, someone got a head to it and it looped towards the far post.
Kelly jumped, whilst Beeney cam to punch, unfortunately Kelly just got there first and the ball fell into the goal.
Not a bad OG.
Just unfortunate.
Apparently the match deteriorated after the break with 6 bookings, 4 from Sheff Utd, and Wallace and Deane booked for Leeds.
In the sunday papers I saw Batts was M.O.Match.
In the papers Ive seen today McAllister was MOM in one, Speed in the other.
In the first half Leeds played the better and deserved to be leading by at least 2 goals.
I dont know much about the second half, except that Hodges tried to maim dorigo with an elbow, and should have been sent off.
Strandli again came on for Wallace with about 5 mins left.
Anyone got any other info on the match?
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 93 12:44:06 BST
Subject: Saturday
I went to the match and disagree with the papers that the match deterioated in the 2rd half — it was certainly more exciting.
The first bit of ‘fighting’ was after Wallace was brought down in the area for what I thought was a definate penalty.
The best bit of leeds pressure and the noisiest participation from the crowd came in the next 10 mins or so.
Wallace had a excellent spell and thier keeper made two brilliant saves.
(one form Rod and the other form Kelly).
Deanes booking was a joke, he tangled with that git Hodges who had body-checked him.
Kamara got a great reception.
‘'there's only one Kamara’ etc from the crowd and a lot of applause when he was subbed.
Beeny didn't have any saves to make, although they has a couple of good chances which they mishit.
He was good catching crosses though.
Fairclough and Wetherall played pretty well.
Batty was brill, as usual.
Cheers,
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 1993 14:39:00 +0000
Subject:(?)— football soothsayer
Your words were strangely prophetic in the light of his goal for West Ham which sunk Blackburn on Saturday — and with no prior training session either…
Tim The Enchanter
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 93 11:18:00 EDT
Subject: More predictions
I also predict Rocky to get a first team start BEFORE Christmas…
If that comes true I'll change my name to Russell Grant (!);-)
On a more serious note…
I believe we have just entered the top 10…
Is this a *true* reflection of the quality of football we've played over the first couple of months…and are we likely to break Cov's unbeaten run?
Answers from the guys who've actually seen some football this year (you lucky, lucky people!)— actually I saw a Yale match last week — complete farce but that's another story!!
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 20 Sep 1993 16:24:25 +0100
Subject: trivia: norwegian national team leeds fans
hi — as we over here in norway are preparing for our big game at home against Poland on wednesday i thought i would post some trivia about a couple of the players
Jostein Flo (Jo-Flo) of Sheffield United is rumoured to be a Leeds fan.
a couple of you might have seen him last saturday — he is — hmm — quite big…
Kjetil Rekdal is a —BIG—Leeds fan.
you might remember him from Wembley as the man who levelled for Norway against England with that wonderful shot.
Kjetil plays his football in Belgium (SK Lierse, premier belgian division) and this guy is really a fan.
Rekdal usually come to the wardrobe an hour before the other players at Lierse.
He brings with him his radio and prepares for —his—match with Lierse listening to BBC hoping for Leeds goals…and after the Wembley match he went straigth to Batty for changing shirts — i think he said that for the couple of last minutes that was the main thing — not that he had made a great goal or Norway getting a draw.
amazing stuff — considering that Rekdal is one of the best players in our national team and at least as good as Batts…
Goran Sorloth is also rumoured to be a Leeds fan.
Goran stayed two weeks at Elland Road a couple of years ago but did not make it — even though he scored a number of goals in his test matches.
Goran now plays his futba in Turkey (where money is rumoured to be good)
Frank Strandli is of course a Leeds fan and a co-member of the Scandinavian Whites.
Frank is a regular at the norwegian U21 team and has also played some first team matches — i remember him giving the pass to Sorloth which gave us 2–1 against Holland at home.
Frank is —not—in the first national team at the moment; Norway's coach Egil ‘Drillo’ Olsen has no place for people who are not in the first-11 for their teams in his 16-man squad.
If Norway qualify he will have problems getting in the 22-man squad for USA-94 if he is not a regular starter for Leeds — Frank knows this and i expect him to deliver when /if he gets the chance to play a little more than the last 5 minutes.
that's it for fans: Norway national team still includes a few guys playing their futba at home.
a couple of these men will probably go pro soon and one or two will surely go to England — as defence have been a problem for Leeds the last year or so Wilko should take a look at
Erik Pedersen, Brann. regular starter in our first team — previously played in IFK Gothenburg and was swapped with Joachim Bjorcklund this season (Bjorcklund and team-mate Karlson was linked with Leeds last season, Bjorcklund stayed and Karslon went to Blackburn).
Erik is a terrific central defender.
Roger Nilsen, Viking.
played one season for FC Koln (Cologne) in the Bundesliga. also excellent central defender but not a regular starter; Pedersen and captain (and one of the top-three defenders in the world) Rune Bratseth keeps him out.
both these play as ‘amateurs’ and could probably be bought for a relative small amount of pounds…other ‘amateurs’include Bohinen (who made 2–0 against England at home and is linked with Nottingham and an Italian Serie A club) and technical wonderboy Erik Mykland who might go to France or Italy (he is really to small and skinny to play in England).
so that's it: the match Norway-Poland will be televized by Sky Sport at wednesday for those who want some midweek-futba.
I guess England will have to hope that Norway gets another win — at least i do;-)
halvard/scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Tue, 21 Sep 1993 13:30:57 +0000
Subject: Batty out — Rocky In?
Batty has a fractured wrist and will not be playing in the game at Sunderland tonight.
Rocastle has got to do the business, score a hat trick or something.
If you think about it, Rocastle is as good as Batty and he scores goals too, so Batts should be concerned for his place in an ideal world given his 3 goal career tally.
The Radio 5 commentators were building the game up this morning typically talking about the 1973 FA Cup debacle but that is crap.
Their ‘73 team were a decent side with a couple of great players — especially the goalie.
The modern team are on a losing streak and are propping up Division One.
The press expect manager Butcher to lose his job shortly.
Nothing short of a pathetic performance by Leeds could bring about victory for the makems.
The press reports of Leeds games lately sound ominous for opposition everywhere.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 21 Sep 93 17:34:53 BST
Subject: Batts
Yep, two hours before I'm off to watch Leeds silence the Roker roar and butcher Butcher.
Hopefully Rocky will be playing but I've a feeling it will be Hodge.
The problem will be that we have no great tacklers in the midfield without Batts.
Rocky may have more vision but if the team hasn't got the ball it is not worth much.
Batty's other great strength is controling the ball, no matter how fast or high it is he brings it down with his chest or foot so he can lay it off for someone else to make a defence splitting pass.
I
Hopefully Batts will be back soon.
At least its his wrist not ankle.
Cheers, Mark
BTW Tinkler, who is another good tackler, is badly injured
From:
Date: Tue, 21 Sep 93 13:21:36 EDT
Subject: Just how well are we playing?
On this side of the Atlantic it's good to see Leeds collecting points again, breaking the away spell, and up to 8th.
But I don't have much of a picture as to how the team are playing.
Are we back to the levels two years ago, with THE premier midfield, and a back four that held firm despite lots of snide comments about the apparent quality?
Or are things still fragile at the back (from over here it seems that that was the main thing that caused us trouble last year, and in some early matches this season.)?
How's Beeny in terms of organizing the back four?
(Did he start against Sheff U?)
Looking forward to seeing the Sunderland result.
John
From:
Date: Wed, 22 Sep 93 09:33:08 BST
Subject: Last Night
Sunderland 2 Leeds 1
Well we lost but things aren't too bad.
Effectively it makes the tie a one match game at Elland Road — if we win 1–0 or better we are through.
I'm not sure if the away goals rule applies to the coca-cola.
What was encouraging was the way we played — the best I've seen them this term (although I've only seen 4 matches).
Our midfield was excellent (except Hodge — who worked hard but never really got into it) with (perhaps too much) lovely passing footy.
Macca kept playing brilliant balls to the wings, especially to Wallace and Kelly (who improves every game, is bionic and will be a star).
The most worrying thing was Deane, he didn't click at all.
He wasn't even getting headers.
I hope he just needs a couple of goals to help his confidence — or maybe we shouldn't use him just as an ariel target man 'cos when he gets the ball on the deck he looks okay (if a bit Chapmanesque).
Any way Sunderland came out pumped up and we hardly got a touch before Goodmans strength made an opening from which he scored in the 6th minute.
It was good skill and strength that got him around the center-half (Wetherall I think) and his near post shoy crept in via Beeny.
Beeny and Wetherall would have to share the blame, but there was no glaring mistakes.
After the goal, Leeds came back and Wallace hit the inside of the post after a lovely through ball from Hodge (the only thing I remember him doing).
Then Wallace hit a good cross which Speed side footed the volley at very slow pace into the net.
I don't know if he meant to hit it so slow but who cares?.
The half continued with good end yo end play by both teams.
In the second half Leeds got stronger and once they got the ball were passing it around well.
We ahd a couple of chances — Wallace made a good run but his finishing (always a bit suspect) let him down.
And in a goal mouth scramble Deane hit the post.
(All this action was at the furthest end from where Leeds fans were stood, so I couldn't see much.
By the time the highlights were on t.v I'd had a few beers and wasn't paying much attention!
Then with about 7 minutes to go, Goodmans speed got through the defence again and Beeny could only parry his low shot for Gray (there was about 5 of them on the pitch) to tap in.
This causes a mini-pitch invasion, and a few ‘supporters’ were wearing Man.
Utd Shirts and were spotted by the lads ‘Scum’, Scum'!
So, Leeds played better than average and Sunderland (looking at there league form) played out of there skins.
All in all, apart from the score, a good cup-tie.
I think we should beat them at H.Q, especially if Batts can get the ball in Midfield, and Deane perks up.
A draw would have been a fairer result.
Up here in Durham, the Sunderland fans think its 1973 again (BTW 1973 was mentioned hundreds of times in the programme).
I hope we can wipe off the smiles in a fortnight — then I can get my own back!
Rocky (and Sharp) were on the bench but didn't get a run.
Cheers, Mark
BTW — The Roker Roar:-‘Miaow’— except when they scored!!
From:
Date: Wed, 22 Sep 1993 11:26:58 +0000
Subject: Don Goodman
I remember reading in Shoot a couple of seasons back that Goodman was born in Leeds.
He was at West Brom then.
Like Matt Jackson of Everton (two seasons back) no doubt he felt more inclined to score against his hometown side.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 1993 08:57:56 +0000
Subject: A Scum IX lose
Man U lost 2–1 to First Division Stoke City in their 1st leg of the League Cup, but it was apparently a team of fringe players like Phelan, Martin and Dublin.
Oh bugger.
I can't believe Celtic lost 1–0 to Rangers down to 10 men in the midst of their worst run for ten years.
They're hopeless.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 11:07:56 MET DST
Subject: Just after joining the greatest mailing list in the world…
Hello fellow Travellers,
Thanks to I have become the first DECcie to join the greatest mailing list in the world;-).
How long has the mailing list been in existence?
Internal to Digital there is a roaring football conference conducted over VAXnotes with people from all over the world noting every day.
Our throughput is usually greater that the USENET posting total with possibly over 200 messages going in every day.
So much so that many people internal to Digital never bother venturing out into the big bad world of USENET for their kicks.
This is one reason why its taken me so long to find out about this mailing list.
I live in Galway and have been supporting Leeds since 1977–1978 when I think we finished 5th in the first, endured the bad 80's and have mostly enjoyed the 90's though a couple more trophies wouldn't go astray.
I recognise a few names on the list from previous lives especially Tim Kennedy (Howya Tim).
Unfortunately living in Ireland I don't see much of the team but I was lucky enough to be in Southampton a few weeks ago to see them beat Southampton about the head a little.
After the game I met most of the players including Tony Dorigo's mother who works in Digital (Birmingham office).
Keep spreading the gospel, it needs to be heard.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 10:39:15 BST
Subject: Re Mrs. Dorigo
Dear James,
When did we sign Tony's mother and what position does she play?
Perhaps she could team up with DO'L in central defence.
:-):-) Seriously, this could be our chance to put the mailing list on the map.
If we could get Tony's ma on the list, we are only a step away from having inside info and influence.
It would mean that it may be diffcult to do any Tony bashing, but I'm sure all the praise will by far exceed criticism as far as he is concerned for years to come.
Kev.
PS good to see Scum loose last night, Gobber junior looked crap we certainly don't want him.
Shame it's only half-time really.
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 1993 12:22:53 +0100
Subject: Greatest mailing list in the world & c 
Very glad to see you made it on the list, James.
(Actually I think I've still got an old match report of yours somewhere — the game v Chelsea in April ‘92 where C*ntona scored That Goal, what a day that was!)
Please feel free to tell the VAXnotes people how to get on the list as well: the numbers are still going up steadily — I make it just under 60 now — and there's room for loads more.
Only 2 people have ever left the list, and one of those was an Arsenal fan.
Incidentally, for anyone interested, you can see the current list of names by writing to  and saying REVIEW LEEDS-UNITED.
She'll probably also tell us about Tony the Toddler putting domestos in the jelly, or whatever embarrassing things he did as a kid.
Might be good for a laugh.
What was the crack with the players like after the Soton match, James?
In the ground it was, as Strach said, as if we'd won the cup or something.
Some of you will remember  's suggestion a while back of writing to TSB and the Programme desk with info about the list.
Well, he's going to do something for the programme and I'm doing something for TSB.
Before we send anything off, though, we'll post it to the list first for your comments, corrections, better jokes, & c & c .
Keep watching this space.
How about us trying to get on Standing Room Only as well?
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 14:30:28 MET DST
Subject: Southampton vs Leeds match report
Here's a little report I put together about the game down in Southampton.
I hope someone finds it useful!
The atmosphere was amazing.
I thought I was a serious fan, that was until I met the fans at this game.
Tony's mother sounds English to me and promised me tickets for next years FA Cup final.
James.
Report on the Premiership game — Leeds United V Southampton 11/9/1993
Leeds, before the game, had gone a full season, plus three games without registering an away win — a total of 24 games.
They had become the first team ever to escape relegation from the top division not having won an away game.
Couple this with the fact that Leeds had been champions the season before, the decline in away fortunes was even more mysterious and worrying.
It isn't as if the chances hadn't been there for Leeds to win away last term: Oldham 2–0 up with 5 minutes to go, Sheff.
Wed 1–0 up with seconds remaining.
This season hadn't started any better with reversals already suffered at Arsenal and Liverpool.
Their only away point bring secured at Manchester City with a last gasp equaliser from the new $2.75 million signing Brian Deane.
Beating Oldham 1–0 on 30 August had taken a bit of heat off Wilkinson, but another away defeat could well have led to calls for his resignation.
Success has become expected and four defeats in your first seven games is hard to accept if you're Leeds fan.
Southampton came into the game with their own problems.
Ian Branfoot, the manager, is under pressure from some local supporters to resign after an abysmal start to their season — five losses in the first six games.
Their only bright spot, thus far, being a 5–1 defeat of Swindon.
Another loss would be another nail in Branfoots managerial coffin.
The game was all ticket but I found little problems obtaining a ticket, going down Friday lunchtime and obtaining a spare ticket from a Southampton supporter.
The Dell is a relatively small ground about a mile from the city centre and I had no problems walking from there out to the ground.
Come Saturday morning I made my way to the ground.
There wasn't much of an atmosphere, well what could I expect with the home team doing so badly at the moment.
There weren't too many Leeds fans around either.
Most of the away fans would make it down in time for the game and little else.
Those that drive down usually congregate around two pubs near the ground.
This is where I had arranged to meet Paul Cadd (fellow DECcie).
He was only a few minutes late having been caught in traffic on a motorway.
He had a spare ticket for the Leeds end which I said I would take if I could get past the ‘security’ outside the Leeds end.
I hadn't bothered getting a Premiership card for this seasons away games.
The card is too expensive on the off-chance I could get in an away game during the season.
Last season, I had one which I never got a chance to use:-(.
The mode of attack was to approach the ground around 2:55 when it would be most busy and not look out of the ordinary.
It worked, I got through without being asked any questions, not even to produce a membership card!
The first thing I noticed on getting into the ground was that the Leeds fans were making most, no, all of the noise in the ground.
Paul commented that in previous years Leeds seats would have been occupied long before kick-off, unlike this year where there were still gaps at the Leeds end before kick-off.
There were, however, quickly filled come 3:00.
Leeds started out:
To the game itself: the first half was poor with little in the way of chances to either side.
Much more of the danger being generated by the Leeds side desperate for a win.
Southampton were poor.
Both linesmen and the referee had poor games with bad off-sides decisions being given against both sides.
Strachan had a few shots over the bar, with McAllister swaggering around, doing little.
Both McAllister and Speed played some very poor cross field balls during the game.
The back line made a few errors but there wasn't anyone on the Southampton side able to take advantage.
Deane was playing well out of position acting as a left wing, to such an extent that he got a few crosses in during the first half.
Wallace was chasing around without being very effective.
Leeds brought a good save from the Southampton keeper with an indirect free kick before half-time.
By the time I got to the bathroom at half time and over to get something to eat there was nothing hot left.
The shop was poorly stocked in either case.
It wouldn't have taken much brains to realise that Leeds would have a large number of travelling fans and that they would like to eat.
Seems that Southampton didn't cop that one.
The stand we were in was wooden and when a few of the fans tried to light up their cigs. they were immediately pounced upon by the attendants to cordially desist.
So a couple of jokers in the Leeds crowd started shouting ‘FAG, FAG, FAG’ in a jovial manner whenever anyone tried to smoke.
It was a bit perplexing the first time I heard the chant though, because of the other associations that could be drawn from it!
The whole Southampton setup was a bit too primitive for my liking.
Leeds had about 3 to 4 thousand at the game out of a total of 11,500.
All the noise came from the end we were in throughout the game.
It was amazing the noise generated.
I was hoarse by half-time as a result.
On the first half performance neither side looks like scoring though.
The second half started out the same as the first half with good pressure from Leeds.
Strachan has a good game and was man of the match, in my opinion.
A Leeds frailty of late has been the inability of the side to convert the pressure they exert on the opposition.
A concrete example of this was the number of corners won and goals scored from corner opportunities by Leeds.
Leeds beat Southampton 4/5 to 1 in corner count but didn't look like scoring from any of them.
Remember all the goals scored from set pieces and corners the first season we came back up?
Wallace had an appeal for a penalty turned down about 15 minutes into the game.
Tim Flowers in the Southampton goal hadn't much to do before the first Leeds goal was scored.
The ball went down the Leeds left wing and was turned onto Deanes outstretching head.
He glanced the ball over Flowers head into the right corner of the net.
The Leeds fans went mad.
Brilliant.
This put the fans in a good mood and the nervousness wore away a little.
Southampton didn't have much in the tank to reply and Leeds were comfortable in the lead.
On the one occasion Southampton did threaten after Leeds scored Kelly made a very timely interception as one of the Southampton forwards beared down on goals.
So clean was the tackle that he was able to dispossess the player and race clear with the ball.
The boy has some pace and will be a big asset to the side in the future.
I knew the last 10 minutes would be nervous both for the fans and the supporters, as had happened against Oldham the previous week.
This time around no great pressure was exerted by the home team.
Strachan had plugged away all day and was rewarded in the closing moments when he dispossessed a Southampton player on the byline, came across the penalty area and laid on a beautiful ball from Speed to slot in the net.
Ecstasy!!
Speed had done nothing else right the whole game with his overall game looking jaded.
A few games in the reserves could do him some good.
The fans were delighted which resulted in a pitch invasion from the new stand behind the Southampton goal.
All good fun and mannerly, no problems.
I suppose I could have joined in except I was on the second tier of the other stand.
This is where Paul got injured.
He was jumping up and down so much he gashed his shin a bit on the seat in front of him.
It could mean him missing the next match as a result.
This will be a huge blow to the team;-).
Magic.
The 17 months of agony washed away at long last.
The run of 24 away games without a win didn't quite eclipse the Leeds record of 26 incurred during the seasons 1938–39, 1946–47, 1947–48.
This record was broken, too, at Southampton.
History repeats itself in some less than mysterious ways.
On this performance Leeds should record a few more away victories e.g. Swindon.
As for Southampton, they looked on Saturdays performance a poor side with little hope of staying up *if* they continue to play the way they did against Leeds.
This was my fourth live Leeds game, each of them being won by Leeds.
Not a bad record to have?
After the game I went around to the dressingroom to try and meet the players.
The last time I'd been (Chelsea, April 1992) over I missed two of the main players from the championship winning team John Lukic and Tony Dorigo.
Who did I bump into first except John!
I waited around a few minutes and had a chance to talk with Tony Dorigo and met his mother who works in the Digital office in Birmingham.
Most of the other players were around too: Hodge, Rocastle, Deane, Speed, Batty, Kelly, Newsome, Wetherall, Beeney, Wallace, Fairclough, McAllister.
While I was around the bus at least 8 bottle of the fizzy stuff was transported onto the team bus for consumption on the way back.
I don't think there were many sober players by the time they got back to Leeds.
This time they deserved it.
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 1993 14:33:52 +0100
Subject: Articles in Prog and/or TSB
I don't know how true this would be.
Such ‘abuse’ on the list so far hasn't overstepped the bounds of general footie fan decency etc (with the possible exception of that memorable bout of Humphries v Donnelly a month or so back:-)
The list has been well-advertised on rss, and anyone can subscribe.
So far any opposing and neutral fans haven't caused a rumpus or complained.
I'd say publishing in The Square Ball doesn't bring us ‘overground’, as you put it Tim, but publishing in the programme might to some extent — it could imply some sort of ‘official’ status.
Either one should bring in new subscribers, though.
This is worth clearing up on the list now, before anything is sent, so what d'y'all think?
What are the pros and cons of writing for TSB and/or the Prog?
Where do we want info about the list to be published?
And Mark S, as the one who first came up with the idea, what would you like to say about it?
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 1993 13:37:45 +0000
Subject: Celebrity Whites
Roy Castle is a Leeds supporter actually.
I've liked him since he was rude to Thatcher at a big ceremony.
Amongst fictitious Whites is the wonderful Rigsby in Rising Damp.
In one episode he rants for about ten minutes about the Bayern Munchen team goostepping round the pitch after cheating their way to winning the European Cup Final in ‘75.
Also in London's Burning, in one episode the lads are watching one of the legs of the semi of the Rumbelows in 1992 vs scum and Bayleaf gives a shout of disapproval when a Leeds player is dispossessed…
Incidentally re: all this talk of getting into the programme and that — if we go ‘overground’ you can kiss goodbye to references to Man U as pigs, scum etc or any abuse of opposition anywhere.
Is this what we want?
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 15:01:18 BST
Subject: Re: Articles in Prog and/or TSB
I can see fans of 1 or 2 other clubs getting upset if they read some of the stuff we write, and if the press got hold of it, it may cause embarrassment to Leeds United FC.
I don't think advertising in TSB or the Prog is going to do that.
Most non-computer people will just view us as ‘Boffins’ with no street cred anyway.
My own view is that anybody joining the group and not liking what they read can just fuck off.
We can obviously take care with any articles for extra-group distribution not to say anything which may embarass us.
Are there any equivalent mailservers for other clubs?
Is the stuff they write censored/moderated at all?
I say ‘Published and be damned’.
Hmmn…
I think it may have been said before.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 17:06:05 BST
Subject: Re: Articles in Prog and/or TSB
If details of our list are published in a program, it does not mean that Leeds are endorsing the list as official.
There are often features asking for pen-pals etc, I'm sure Leeds don't and will not take any responsibility for any correspondance resulting from these.
Really our list is a sophisticated type of pen-pal system.
And surely any forum ‘spreading the word’ cannot be decremental to the club.
Different supporters clubs around the world, have got official status, and yet I'm sure at meetings and socials of these clubs, worse ideas and maybe even actions are carried out than what has been discussed between us.
Anyway if Leeds think its a problem announcing the list in the programme I'm sure they will decline the oppertunity!
When I first mentioned this, it was only as an idea.
And not necessarily a good one.
I don't know how much ‘buisness’ it would attract — maybe too much causing endless streams of mail which could not all be read and would be repetitious.
I'm not sure how much the powers at oxford where the server is set up would like this either
One of my biggest motives for thinking about being ‘official’ is for the perks which we might benifit from.
I'm not, and don't know any people who are members of supporters clubs and don't know if in fact, there are any perks (e.g priority ofr tickets, discounts etc).
Whatever, we have a unique oportunity for discussing Leeds, in real time throughout the World.
We can organise meetings before matches, pass on information about ticket news and generally give people with no other contact of the club valuble and interesting info.
For God's sake, sometimes I even look forward to coming into work to read what has been said!
Anyway I obviously won't act without the endorsement of everybody else — comments are welcome.
On a different tact, I think the membership cards are quite good value.
As well as allowing us to buy priority tickets and get away tickets, you get a quite nice yearbook (3.5 quids worth), 10% of goods from the shop and discounts from home games.
(Eg I got 2 pounds of a cop ticket for wimbledon — meaning I can see a match for 5.50) It only takes me going to 5 matches like this and I've got good value for my initial investment.
It is also nice to be an official member of the club.
I agree that a card is a waste of time for season ticket holders though.
Sorry for the waffle and spelling/typo mistakes.
(I've still got a wicked hangover and its nearly time to go drinking again!!)
Cheers
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 23 Sep 93 14:08:23 EDT
Subject: Re: Articles in Prog and/or TSB
It appears to me that any articles published in a program probably wouldn't be the ones with, well shall we say ‘less than polite’, references to other clubs/players…and even if they were they could be censored so as to be acceptable to the general public.
Consequently no offense should be caused.
The potential problem would appear to be that any people attracted to the list as a result of these publications may take offence at what/how things are said.
I really can't believe this would be a problem as the only people who are likely to subscribe would be Leeds supporters, and they won't mind a ‘bit of banter’ at the expense of other clubs.
The benefits that may be accrued from publication/official status (whatever that means) should be such that there would be a net increase in the quality of the group.
This may include: ticket info; reductions on prices; electronic distribution of fan-cluib news letters etc etc.
One possible solution may be the publication of selected articles/threads (possibly anonymous) with a caption at the end explaining the group/how to subscribe & post/etc and, importantly, a discalimer that any opinions expressed on the group are solely those of the poster and that Leeds United and the group's organizers take no reponsibility for these opinions.
I say, ‘go for it’.
At least then I'll be able to tell everyone that Rocky should be playing;-)
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 10:42:36 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Program & TSB
I also think it would be a good idea to advertise in the match day prog's and TSB.
I don't think we need to worry ourselves about people being offended.
After all, I don't remember seeing anything posted to the list that would not be accepted by TSB.
Some of the their articles can be pretty outrageous which is exactly why most of us buy it.
Go For It!
Simon.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 12:05:14 BST
Subject: Kerslake
David Kerslake has signed for Spurs for 1/2 Million.
This seems a bit of a strange decision.
Unless Mel is almost back to fitness (if he ever was ‘fit’) it means Kelly is our only right back!
Kelly is bionic but still very young.
After spending all last seaon looking for a right back we now sell one!
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 12:20:53 +0100
Subject: TSB article
Well, you alomost all seem to want us to publish in the programme and in TSB, so as agreed with , I've drafted an article for The Square Ball which I'm sending to the list for your comments.
I haven't come up with a snappy title yet, so suggest away on that and other points.
If y'all like it, off it will go to TSB.
Mark's doing something for the Prog.
Gav
LEEDS UNITED ON-LINE 
LEEDS FANS GO ELECTRONIC
For most people nowadays, any mention of computers conjours up vague images of more or less two things: either Sonic the Hedgehog, or a shapeless, grey, John-Majorish boredom.
For most of those who link computing and boredom, the explanation is that they have to spend many working hours a day behind luminous screens endlessly tapping a plastic typewriter keyboard, after which they are usually fit only to go and goggle at the luminous screen in their living rooms every night.
What saves computing from being as big a social embarrassment as accountancy, tax inspecting and supporting Manchester United is the fact that it's possible to make contact with other Leeds fans at home and abroad by means of the vast electronic networks which interconnect thousands of computers right round the world.
It literally takes seconds for a message typed in by someone in Britain to arrive at an address in the US, or Australia, or wherever.
Forget all the tv ads about TNT overnight delivery to Japan — computer networks deliver messages over lunch.
So for any Leeds fans with access to this technological miracle, the ideal solution to terminal boredom is the new electronic mailing list devoted to the discussion of all things Leeds.
Subscription to the list is free, and members can easily post all kinds of stuff about Leeds to a world-wide audience, and frequently do.
The result is a kind of speeded-up, unedited version of TSB — anyone can have their say, and get a response in minutes.
Or maybe it's more like the rambling, chest-prodding football discussions most of us have in pubs every Saturday night.
Or a chat line, except you don't get done for the phone bills.
However you describe it, it's a great opportunity to talk about LUFC action whether you're at home or whether you're exiled in those strange faraway places that don't get Look North on the telly.
The origins of the list are far from clear.
Some say  in the States got things moving first, others credit  in Durham.
No matter how it started over the summer, there has been no shortage of things to bang on about.
In addition to match reports from our regular fans on the spot, topics have included
1)
The New Improving Defence (but shouldn't we have held on to Kerslake?)
2)
Wilko selling players for less than they're worth (or did he actually sell Cantona for 1.8m?)
3)
Emotional tributes to the departure of Leee
4)
Emotional tributes to John Lukic and his form of late
5)
Tactics for outwitting the ticket office phone system and managing to get hold of tickets (the consensus was use the Fax Method — if it helped us get a replay against Stuttgart, just think what it can do when you want a ticket for West Ham away on a Tuesday night in December)
6)
Famous Leeds fans past and present.
So far we've only got Roy Castle, David Hamilton, and Russell Grant (why didn't he give us advance warning about last season?)
7)
Leeds songs improvised in the style of Victor Meldrew (following the Norwich, Arse, and Scouse games.
This confused the hell out of most of the overseas subscribers)
8)
Proposals for Gordon Strachan OBE to become a Lord of the Realm, or failing that, Wilko's right hand man and next in line for LUFC manager
9)
The many different Rocastle transfer rumours (‘ROCKY XVIII: The Move to Derby’), and appeals for him to take the first-team field.
10)
Ways of getting Tony Dorigo's mum to join the list — we are informed that she works in Brum for the computing industry's equivalent of Leeds United, the multi-national giants Digital.
1?)
??
Anything else?
What have been your favourite bits so far?
In some cases, membership of the list has stirred dormant support into life again.
Phil Gelderd praised the list in glowing terms before going to his first Leeds game for years — sadly for him he picked the recent one against Norwich.
He hasn't been able to contact the list since, so we're not sure what became of him.
Phil, are you there??
In other cases, strong feelings have been aroused, and there has been one electronic punch-up.  stated quite reasonably that Sheffield United are crap, and Julie Donnelly, a list member with Blade tendencies, told him what she thought of that in many words of few syllables.
Electronic mailing lists like this can easily be infiltrated by other supporters, but thankfully segregation isn't necessary, and so far policemen on horses have yet to be called in to arrest computer terminals (or even Sonic the Hedgehog) for causing an affray.
However please don't anyone tell Graham Kelly about all this — he'll probably try and stop us sending messages to list members in Europe, or make an announcement that the authorities are doing all in their power to break up some hooligan ring he'll call the Sony Hedgehog Club.
List membership is currently about 60 people, worldwide.
That's about a busful, but the chances of ever getting everyone in one bus to a Leeds game are virtually nil — unless the Travel Club starts all-in deals via New Zealand, Australia, Canada, the USA, Israel, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany, Dublin, Liverpool, Congleton, York and Bradford.
Come to think of it, if the bus had started out from NZ at the start of last season, it could just about have delivered everyone to Southampton in time for the famous Away Win.
For most of you, any talk of electronic mail is probably more mystifying than Jon Newsome's og against the Arse.
However, if it does mean anything to you, and if you do have electronic mail facilities at your work place or college or whatever, we hope you'll join in.
All you have to do is send an email message to 
which says
SUBSCRIBE LEEDS-UNITED Your Name
You're added to the list automatically, and sent full instructions on how to use it.
After that, you can expect Leeds mail to come surging down the wires to your computer every day of the week, and aim to join in the talk whenever you can.
See you on the list,
Email Whites 
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 12:42:57 +0100
Subject: RE: Scum Pig Filth Hate
Yep, I think it'll be fine.
As long as we don't start calling Germans ‘sausage eaters’, eh Tim?:-)
Now there's a thought!
We could take it turns to get in the press boxes in the West Stand!
And the post-match press conference!
He's been to uni, and, I hear from the list, is into computers, so yeah, who knows?
For what it's worth, I *think* we're the first automatic listserv list for a British football club.
Well WOW.
Time for lunch.
Gav.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 13:49:33 MET DST
Subject: Whats the deal with Sterland?
Whats the deal with Sterland.
I had almost completely forgotten about we still having him?
How much did we buy Kerslake for in the first place?
I thought it was for more than we are after selling him for.
Wilko doesn't seem to be the smartest when it comes to totting up transfer prices!
James.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 13:16:38 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Kerslake
I think we bought him for something like 650,000.
I remember at the time Wilko saying how he though Kerslake was an excellent buy, and how he'd been after him for a long time.
Few months down the line, and he sells him at a loss.
I for one don't understand it.
I can't believe Mel is the player he was two years ago and he must be getting on a bit now, but we have still got Ray Wallace just incase I s'pose.
Sunil
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 12:21:33 +0000
Subject: Scum Pig Filth Hate
I am not too bothered re: TSB — as you say they don't mince words themselves.
Maybe our Wilko is a bit old-fashioned and he may view things transmitted electronically in a different light.
I think (actor's voice) people who are not in this great business of ours think the idea of electronic messages flying around is really odd and they may get freaked if some of what is said is a bit inflammatory- maybe more so than if they saw it printed.
Mind you it'll probably be fine and anyway as someone said it'll be good to widen the group a bit more and launch some journalistic careers into the bargain (->).
I would be interested as to what Wilko thought.
Maybe he'd love it, obviously he is trying to take the club forward.
The Mystic Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 13:32:34 BST
Subject: Programme letter
That article for TSB looks great!
One small point, if you say its like a free TSB they might not want to print it!
In comparison, my attempt at a letter to the programme desk is very boring.
But as the programme is boring with respect to TSB it will probably do!
Please feel free to comment, I didn't spend much time on it and I've still got that bloody hangover!!
Dear Sir, etc,
We were hoping that there would be room in a future match-day programme to advertise the following information.
I must stress we have nothing to do with any commercial company and no costs are involved.
We have recently set up a electronic news server devoted to Leeds United which allows fans to make contact with other Leeds fans both home and abroad, via the vast electronic networks which connect computers worldwide.
We already have about 60 supporters who use this facility not only from all over the country but from places such as New Zealand, Australia, Canada, the USA, Israel, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany and Ireland.
People write letters, ‘post’ them to a central computer in Oxford which then distributes the article to all the subscribed users.
This whole process takes a few minutes.
Subscription to the list is absolutely free and there is no commercial exploitation or hidden costs.
Anyone familiar with electronic mail who have access to facilities at work or college can join us.
All you have to do is send an e-mail message to 
which says
SUBSCRIBE LEEDS-UNITED Your Name
You're added to the list automatically, and sent full instructions on how to use it.
If you need any other details or information I will be more than happy to supply them.
If it is possible to mention something in the programme it will allow other fans who perhaps have little contact with the club, to use this excellent free facility.
Yours etc
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 09:07:53–0400
Subject: Re: Programme letter
Its not quite true to say its absolutely free IMHO as folks with dialup internet connections or compuserve dialup have to pay telecoms charges.
A small point perhaps but being yorkshire folk partin wi' brass is a serious matter.
On a related point how's about an email list server for Yorkshire County Cricket club supporters???
There are no list servers for cricketing folks.
Anyway here's hoping for another 3 points tomorrow 2–1 will do nicely (Shame about Manchester not getting the Olympics:-))
Rupert
On Sep 24, 8:32am, wrote: But as the programme is boring with respect to TSB it will probably do! programme only 
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 15:19 GMT
Subject: Decency?
Im back after a week in the wilderness.
Moving offices and such at work, in fact weve just had a drink to ‘celebrate’ so please excuse any slurred words and the like…
Nice to see someone name-drop on the list;-) hehehe.
Maybe Mrs Dorigo can persuade Wilko to 1) get on the list or 2) get a computer network and get on the list????
Ah, fame at :-)) Nah, I have to agree…nothing whats been said here is too radical.mostly encouraging (like the performances to date).
I cant see why we would have to be more careful even if we were ‘official’.
Are the fanzines ‘careful’??
I believe some (if not all) the players read fanzines.
And even my contact with Miss Donnelly was fairly tame as flame wars go!
More the merrier.
The more active the merrier too…always nice to have different points of view.
Itll also be useful when arranging travel groups etc.
Again, the more the merrier…we are leaving ourselves open to a few ‘active’ neutrals who will try and stir things up…but its always easy for gav to exclude any twats…if it gets a bit too fruity of course…nothing wrong with a bit of friendly banter and discussion.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 15:45 GMT
Subject: Non Leeds Fans on the list
No more than fanzines do now though.
We are far less controversial than most of them…and lets face it, anyone who receives mail from the list has to go out of their way to get that mail…unlike fanzines.
:-) Diplomatic as ever:-) I agree.
This is a Leeds fan list, if we cause offence to any other club…tough.
If someone causes offence to us (ie Leeds supporters) then they can be kicked off.
Maybe something to this effect can be mailed as a ‘joining ‘message?
Were not here to be politically correct, fair, justified etc…we re here as Leeds supporters chatting with like minded individuals.
that doesnt say we wouldnt mind non Leeds fans on the list — or even to participate — but remember what its here for.
Everyone is a guest, non-Leeds fans are far less likely to be tolerated coming out with anti-Leeds stuff.
I think we can all handle criticism — but wont stand for abuse.
Yet we CAN abuse other teams as and when we see fit:-)).
If someone doesnt like it they can piss off to a list for their club.
Simple.
Sounds familier to me:-) At the end of the day, as long as we keep Gav happy with content and we dont compromise his position etc, then thats ok.
I think so far weve been as good as gold, and can only maybe have offended Scum supporters…which can only be good:-))))
Mark Stein.
He's good.
;-)))
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 15:53 GMT
Subject: TSB Article
Exactly, and let us not forget this either.
First and foremost it is a tool for us fans fortunate enough to have email.
More members can only be good insofar as more chance of intersesting info, more chance to arrange travel groups, and more chance of being recognised by Leeds.
The latter is a (huge) bonus.
It is quite a small world, and sooner or later we might be lucky enough to get someone really close to Leeds on the list.
Even if its one of the juniors pissing around on their computer and modem.
Im 100% behind putting a msg in TSB and the prog.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 16:11 GMT
Subject: Kerslake
Is this a ‘real’ event?
Not just speculation?
Anyhow, my alcohol affected state prevents me from recalling the fee we paid Swindon?
As long as we have recovered the outlay Im not fussed.
Kelly is perfectly good at right back, and with him, newsome and Speed playing or on the bench, we have a team for all eventualities.
Id have thought this is a massive boost for the lad, and thoroughly deserved too.
Its nice to have a few bob in the bank in case too.
Re: Kernaghan (sp?)
I hadnt seen him play much, but saw him last Monday playing for Man City.
This brought home to me the fact that paying lots of money for an established defender (central) is a massive risk.
Unless they are truly inspirational Id rather have a decent full back/midfielder/striker.
Even Scales wasnt outstanding or noticable.
Id rather have Scales than Kernaghan.
Im happy for us to stick with the present team (when DOL fit), unless we start to make obvious cock ups in one postition. the team looks balanced and functional as it is…just need the forwards to start knocking in a few more goals…
Leeds always start slowly in that regard — its nearly always midfield goals at the start of a season…strange but true:-)
Re: Official list
Hey — if the worst comes to the worst we could always have a ‘safe’ official list, and an ‘alternative’list.
Maybe even a ‘Scum haters singing munich songs list’?;-))
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 16:25 GMT
Subject: TSB thing
Gav,
a coupla things re: your article
Maybe you could include a previous post/thread as an example of the ‘humour’?
So they know its not just a boring/unhumourous thing?
I dunno if you have any older posts.
Anyone have suggestions?
The Meldrew thread was quite funny I thought.
Also, would it be wise to say Im not THE  (or should that be the other way round;-))?
Might save the lads career if Wilko gets a look:-)
I know they tend to like match reports sent in (‘white watching’).
maybe we could send in our trip to Soton via Hampshire hedgerows report?
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 16:43:05 +0100
Subject: Re: Non Leeds Fans on the list
It's not necessary to keep *me* happy — everyone is free to say what they like — my only concern is that if a complaint about serious abuse (or whatever) went in, those with their finger on the button might look dimly on a footie fan list.
I had a bit of persuading to do before the was set up, and it's the only one at Oxford open to the outside world.
In general, though, the best reason for avoiding serious abusive stuff is that most people just don't like seeing it.
And so far things have been jus' fine.
VERY good.
Just hope the potters don't sell him before the next leg
Gav.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 17:04:44 +0100
Subject: RE: TSB etc etc
yeah, good point.
I'll say something about you getting ‘21’(?) and ‘Humphries’ ironed on your shirt!
Another good point.
I think they'd get some good material from us, so I'll add some match reports and humourous stuff for them to do with as they will.
Also thanks for the stuff you sent me, Joo, about the origins of the list and the initial gang of seven that's turned into the mob of 60.
I'll alter that bit suitably too.
And Tim I thought the sausage eaters stuff was hilarious.
Given some of the appalling crud that gets sent to rss (cf Denise), I couldn't believe you were getting serious grief for it.
Have a good weekend y'all.
If you're off to the Cov game, look out for us in  's Porsche.
Gav
You think I'm joking about the Porsche, don't you?
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 17:11:52 +0100
Subject: Leeds fan steals a Porsche
I would like to point out that it aint mine, I'm waiting for a C Reg Escort to come through.
the vehicle in question, a 924 Porsche, is owned by an assassin with the rank of major (in an army he won't tell us about), who is on first name terms with Bill Gates of Microsoft.
Or so he told me.
Anyway, he's alright by me cos he lent me his Porsche.
Stuart
P.S. I don't know why.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 17:17 GMT
Subject: Porsche as official list travel method?
Sausage eaters??
And they thought THAT was bad??
Never did like that group…
I mean, Im into football — but playing it and Leeds — thats about it.
Oh yes Id *really* like to know the 1700 African PWBotha reformed terrorist League division 7 section 3 results…
NOT.
It was kinda nice to see the Norweigan results when frank was on loan to Start, but now we got Halverd (sp?…sorry mate) for that.
Not Red I hope?
I went to the Cov/Leeds game 2 years ago (1–1), and managed to wangle an executive box from a freight company we used then.
Apart from having Mel Charles (brother of John) in the box, it (the box) was right next to the Leeds bench.
For those of you who dont know, the Coventry benches are actually back in the stand, and in 2 rows.
the effect was to be sitting on the bench…when leee scored everyone (Wilko and co) were looking into our box at the TV for a replay.
Cool.
I also duped a few stupid coventry fans into thinking I was a new signing as i walked out of the officials entrance after the match…did about 8 or 9 autographs:-)))
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 1993 16:32:28 +0000
Subject: Stuttgart Sausage Eaters Crew
I am glad someone remembers my r.s.s. anti-Stuttgart abuse of yore.
Those were't days.
I even got stick from a manager at work about that believe it or not, albeit friendly stick.
I've always been of the opinion that opposition are there to be hated and abused.
The lot of them.
Bastards.
I don't have r.s.s. access anymore but I don't care cos they're all horrible and blether on endlessly about red scouse, arse or scum or else the goddamn Paraguayan League.
Mind you I want Norway to win the World Cup, they're all Leeds aren't they?
And face it, England aren't going to win squot.
By the way both the TSB and programme articles are luvly.
Publish by all means.
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 14:15:34 EDT
Subject: Re: Porsche as official list travel method?
Conning Cov fans (a noble pusuit in my opinion) is all very well…but picture this:
the other  does well as a player…signs for Coventry…blossoms into an outstanding talent…captains the England WC winning team of 2006…get elected MP for Coventry…becomes PM…solves global warming issues.
You may think this is unlikely (!) but there'll be some old Coventry fans who have your autograph & think they've got something really valuable…only to find…
Just a thought…not much going on here!
:-)
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 14:26:55 EDT
Subject: Team News vs Coventry
Does anyone have any team news for tomorrow's match.
Will Hodge keep his place (I assume he was in the line-up for the Sunderland match)?
Will Rocky make the bench?
Is Batty back?
Will Whelan be given another chance?
Will Wallace finally score a goal?
(Doesn't seem to be a strength of his since moving to Leeds)?
Will anyone other than Strachan play a blinder?
OK: some exaggeration and sarcasm there, but seriously, any pre-match gossip would be appreciated.
Also, any comments on the r.s.s discussion as to who C*ntona was ‘pegging’ that caused hime to be sold off?
I missed all this gossip — is there any truth in it?
Yours, starving for news
John
From:
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 93 16:07:13 EDT
Subject: Re: Eric Cantona
In article   (Jonathan Burnard, SD Integration, 3765,3380919) writes:
WHAT!!!!!!!!!!?????????????
From:
Date: Sat, 25 Sep 1993 15:55 GMT
Subject: Half Time V Cov
Just heard on Radio 5, we're 1–0 up at half time with Rod Wallace scoring from a header.
Looks like the drive away in the Porsche might be worth it guys.
Declan
From:
Date: Sat, 25 Sep 1993 17:00 GMT
Subject: Rod Wallace 2 Coventry 0
The subject says it all.
Wallace got another in the second half to make the final score 2–0, bring the car in future boys.
Declan
From:
Date: Sat, 25 Sep 93 12:19:17 EDT
Subject: Declan plays as well as Leeds!!!
I just want to say that Declan is an absolute star for posting this result (& half time score) so quickly.
I look at r.s.s. every Saturday from about noon local time (5.00 pm Leeds time) in the hope of getting the results asap and I normally have to wait for ages until info arrives.
Today, Declan does the biz…pretty much as Rod & the guys did by the sounds of it…
Well played Leeds…and well played Declan!!
Red Porsche review coming up???:-))))))
Glynn
From:
Date: Sat, 25 Sep 1993 16:47:24–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Bravo Declan again!
I can only second Glynn's remarks.
Partial and final scores, posted so quickly, make all the difference in the world to those of us half a world away.
KEEP IT GOING, DECLAN!!!
From:
Date: Sun, 26 Sep 1993 13:29 GMT
Subject: RE: Rod Wallace 2 Coventry 0
Yesterday's lineup was 
I don't think any subs were used.
The Good news is that we're now 4 in the table
With The Scum 1st Arsenal 2nd Villa 3rd
Declan
From:
Date: Sun, 26 Sep 93 10:46:06 EDT
Subject: Wether — who????
Hi,
Declan posted this:
and he is (of course) correct.
Where was Rocky?
I'm sure someone will tell us that Wetherall had a great game (he must have — look at the result!) but surely Roecastle would have been a better bet (or even Hodge?).
Anybody any ideas as to why Wetherall was played?
Some cunningly shrewd tactic?
Or maybe Roecastle was just to warn out after all those punnishing reserve games??!!??
I'm just waiting for an official to say something along the lines of ‘we can't play Roecastle in important Premier league games as he's not match fit’…aaaaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!!!!!!!!!
Can anybody shed even a glimmer of light on the selection strategy?
Mrs. Dorigo?
Anyway, we won HAHA.
I predict a REALLY HAPPY NEW YEARS DAY IN 1994…beating scum to go top of Premier league…oh dear, I'm starting to feel dizzy already (must be the lack of air this high up the league table:-)
Glynn
PS Perhaps Rocky's next game will be in our next European match next year?
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 09:00:04 MET
Subject: How close to the wind is that?
Ah, rumours, rumours, rumours, or just sour grapes.
Take your pick!
What I think is true, is that Cantona was named as co-defendent in Chapmans divorce, or whatever it is called.
Can anyone tell me how true this is?
Has Chapman been fully divorced from his lovely wife yet?
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 1993 10:08:21 +0100
Subject: Saturday
I haven't got time for a full match report but Wetheral, and indeed the whole back four, played exceptionally well.
From what I could see Fairclough played as a form of sweeper with a man-to-man job in Wegerle.
Basically we pissed all over them, and out-classed them in every department.
However, this isn't saying too much as Coventry were pretty appalling.
They seemed to give up in the second half, failed to mark anyone, gave Wallace (who was running riot) as much space as he wanted, and left Quinn up, waddling around (usually into an offside position) like a half-deflated barrage baloon (with a tache).
Did anyone see the review yesterday that said strachan was showing signs of being past it?
I couldn't see any indications of it.
It seems, however, Rocky will have his work getting into the team now (barring injuries).
that's 4 wins on the trot.
Perhaps Wilko should consider alternating Rocky with strachan or Fairclough (assuming he keeps with the sweeper system) for Cup matches.
That way if one of the midfield does do themselves a mischief Rocky will have had some games at least(I'd rest Strachan personally to keep him going for the League campaign — which IMO is our best chnace of a European place [we're too unlucky in the cups]).
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 11:23:16 BST
Subject: Comments
I couldn't believe we went to fourth poistion on Saturday.
To be honest, I think this is a bit flattering because Leeds don't seem to have clicked yet.
However 4th spot is an execllent position from which to build on and start ‘clicking’(especially Deano).
If you look at the teams above us:—
Scum are good but not that good when you wade through the amazing pile of hype.
Letting Swindon, Stoke and Honved score goals past them quite easily seems to point at a suspect defence.
What happens if Bruce or Pallistar gets injured, have they any (decent) cover.
Then as soon as they loose a few games Cantona will bugger off, Sharpe will go back to old habits and Giggs will go to Italy (:-)).
Arsenal have had a pretty poor start and yet are 2rd.
They lost 3–0 to Coventry on the first day of the season.
Vila are another team that don't seem to have clicked.
They seem to have problems finding the net.
The you look at teams close behind such as Wimbledon who could go 3rd tonight.
I don't have to say much more.
In effect I reckon it will only take a slight upward change of gear and performances to become something special.
Just imagine if Deano started scoring a couple of goals and the defence tightened up just a fraction more.
It was nice to hear the radio 5 commentator say that Leeds play one of the most attractive styles of football around.
That will shut up the winging Wednesday, West Ham, Swindon, etc etc fans —’ You're above us…but we play really good footbal to watch…’.
The commentator did however get Rod (God?) confused with his scummy bro.
Danny.
He also complained about our use of the off-side trap.
I never understood this kind of complaint — off side is n the rules so why not play by it.
Are we meant to hang back and let the opposition run at us?
As soon as one of their attacks is stopped and we can build on an attack of our own!(good for the nerves with our defence!)
Anybody know which membership token to send to get discount for the Sunderland match??
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 12:06:26 BST
Subject: Re: TSB article
Gav, Article for TSB looks spot-on.
How about ‘Side of the Net’ or something to do with net for the title.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 12:53 GMT
Subject: clicking hell
A few things while we wait for a report of some description (hint hint;-)
I do not think 4th is a false postition at all.
Not if you look at how we have played.
Ok, weve not been scoring too many goals, but the performances for EVERY MATCH (barring MAYBE Norwich) have been better than that of the opposition.
I agree we have several gears to change up.
I dont think we should get too complacent as we may have a genuine bad run and things are pretty tight in the top 10 at the moment, but then again I did say after the Oldham match that 4 more wins on the trot would see us averaging 2 points a game, which is statistically Championship form.
One more win and our league postion will show that Im sure…we just need to get working on the goal difference.
Did anyone see the Norwich match on Sky?
Once again MOTD had absolute crap coverage compared to sky.
They edit games and the result is highlights which bear NO resemblance to the actual match.
This was highlighted with the Norwich match.
They had 5 shots (6 if you count Suttons effort), and scored 5 goals.
Everton had more of the play, more shots, more corners…sound familiar??
Would you have known this from MOTD?
You would from ‘Goals on Sunday’.
Its a pity I missed the Leeds Norwich match on it.
Thats it anyway…
I hope we completely piss on Wimbledon, Joe Kinnear REALLY f*cks me off.
He is such a twat.
Other than him, I quite like Wimbledon…
I want us to thrash them just to see him shut his fat mouth — and then whinge about unfair treatment blah blah blah.
Thats off my chest now:-))
Seeya
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 1993 13:31:16 +0100
Subject: Match report
Just realised that Gavin is at a conference today so it's up to me to type up a report.
Well, expectations were high as we wended our way up to Coventry in teh Porsche (I just had to slip it in!!!).
Even though we hadn't won at Cov since 1976, it felt like today we would begin to shut the critics up and show them that we truly are contenders.
Someone has typed in the team news already (I actually got into teh ground a bit late so I missed the starting line-up).
i also missed buying a programme — question: why don't they sell programmes after the match as well so that people who arrived late can still buy one without having to find the club shop?
Cov's ground is undergoing building so the traditional away end is closed which left the away fans only about a 3rd of one stand.
hence the reason why all the Leeds tickets had sold out so soon.
The first half was pretty exciting.
Both teams were playing good attacking football with Kelly and Dorigo looking particularly good down the wings.
Beaney continues to impress, his handling in the area is sound, although he wasn't really tested by any shots.
he also looked good in clearing back-passes which Newsome and Wetheral sent at him.
He would always kick it back into play whereas Lukic, more often than not, would kick it into touch.
The midfield looked strong and tackled hard despite the absence of Batty.
deane still looks out of sorts though, but Wallace is back to his old ways and was continually running at the defenders.
As the half progressed Leeds became more dominant.
Cov's attacks were generally snuffed out with a solid offiside trap, and in the event of that not working, Fairclough being on hand to snuff out any breakthroughs.
the more successful attacks by Leeds came from either Kelly or Dorigo breaking down the flanks and crossing in.
Any ball direct to deane was usually flicked on to no effect.
Speed and mcalllister would hang around outside the Cov penalty area and snatch onto anything the Cov tried to clear.
With Strachan still the keenest and fittest on the pitch, Leeds, on the break, usually had 7 players attacking Cov before they knew what hit them.
the goal when it came, was a sweet cross with Rod heading in.
I thought at first it was too high but not for our hero.
Perhaps Deane might learn a thing or two.
In the second half Leeds continued to dominate.
Cov seemed to defend more leaving Quinn up front by himself.
he was, without doubt, totally useless.
his ball control was pathetic and he was continually caught off-side.
Argh, more to come!!!!
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 13:00:48 IST
Subject: European Places? /4th place
Stuart said:
Does anyone know how many places England have in next year's UEFA Cup.
Is it 2 like this year, or up to 3? said that 4th place looks a bit flattering.
I'd agree — While it's great to see 2 away wins up, we haven't beaten any of the ‘classy’ teams yet…our wins have mostly been over the lower teams…which brings us to Wimbledon this week.
Couldn't call them classy, but they are up there also…
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 14:10:03 BST
Subject: Re: TSB article
I may have already sent this, but if not.
Like the article for TSB Gav, How about calling it ‘Side of the Net’, ‘Side Netting’ or something like that.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 93 14:16:18 BST
Subject: Re: TSB article
I've just thought…
As it is a publicity thing.
‘Finding the net’ may be a good title.
This could go on forever so I'll shut up now.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 1993 13:35:25 +0000
Subject: Underground Overground Wombling Free
A totally boring John Motson-style fact about Wimbledon and Leeds: They have never beaten us except once (at Selhurst Park in the depths of the 1992–3 nightmare, by one cheesy goal).
Always a drag to watch, I remember one game at their old Plough Lane tip, back in 1991 when we won 1–0.
The game consisted entirely of cavalry charges end to end.
As dire a Leeds win as I have seen.
Wimbledon must have lost about 30 balls cannoned over the stand roof.
As always Vinny will get a huge ovation.
Incidentally I am planning to go to the Blackburn home game on the 23rd October.
Anyone interested?
Email me personally.
(Incidentally I live in the Murkeyside area if anyone fancies a lift t' Homeland.)
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 1993 14:43:39 +0100
Subject: match Report II
…
Sorry about that.
had a message saying the mailer was about to shut down and I didn't want to lose what I'd typed in.
OK. 2nd half.
Cov giving up, Leeds running riot.
I think this was at its most obvious after Leeds scored their second goal.
A beautiful cross in from the left, a dummy by Speed, leaving Wallace to volley home.
After that you'd think that Cov would man-mark Wallace out of the game and throw forward a few players.
They did neither.
I lost count of the number of corners Leeds had or the amount of times Wallace was given as much space as he wanted.
the Cov defenders backed off all the time.
there was an appeal for a penalty late on in the 2nd half but it was turned doen.
My view was obscured by a stupidly placed pillar but a Cov fan next to me muttered that they were lucky to get away with it.
man of the match was either Wallace or Kelly.
The latter was a total star, showing good awareness in defence and the willingness (and ability) to pass the midfield and become an out-and-out winger.
Other highlights: when Leeds scored the fact that all around the ground Leeds fan stood up and cheered (really narking off the so-called Cov boot-boys); Rocky warming up and actually kicking the ball when it came near him; Leeds fans singing ‘Sydney!
Sydney!’.
A good day out.
A good result.
And great to hear on radio 5 on the way back that we are level with Villa on 3rd place.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 27 Sep 1993 18:23:13 +0100
Subject: stuff on Cov
Leeds fans in a Porsch-e, Leeds fans in a Porsch-e, na na na na OOH na na na na OOH
It's the first time I've been to a game of footie in a Porsche, and it will probably be the last, but it was fun, and added to the enjoyment of another thoroughly enjoyable day out Leeds watching.
Most of the Leeds fans we passed going down the M40 looked a bit unsure of the sight — it's not every match day you see three guys in Leeds clobber driving a green porsche with their Leeds scarf in the back window.
A few even pointed at the offending vehicle as if to say ‘what the **** are you lot doing in THAT??’
I'll do just a few observations on the match.
It was great weather, plenty of blue sky, but it wasn't the Sky Blues' day — it was very emphatically Leeds's.
I think it was the most relaxed and confident I've seen Leeds play so far this season.
One big difference from the normal formation was that there were five defenders playing, not the usual four.
Dorigo, Newsome, Fairclough, Wetherall, and Kelly.
Fairclough seemed to be playing in front of defence and behind midfield to some extent.
All the defenders seemed to get up front from time to time.
Whatever the fine points of the strategy, it worked, because Beeny was called on to make only a few big saves throughout the game.
However it meant Rocky was on the bench again.
Strachan, Macallister, and Speed were in midfield, and by the end of the game were running round it seemingly at will — they had so much space to play in.
Loads of their flicks and tricks came off beautifully.
Wallace and Deane were up front, and Wallace took his goals well.
He should have had another hat trick, but the ref chickened out from giving a penalty at the end of the game when? was comprehensively brought down.
Deano did fine, but I suspect we still aren't seeing the best of him.
I'm a lot less concerned about the sale of Kerslake seeing how Kelly gave another impressive performance at right back.
(Incidentally, the papers give Kerslake's transfer fee as 450,000 — that's 50,000 less than we bought him for.)
The official Leeds part of the ground was about a quarter of one stand, but as ever this was where most of the noise came from.
As well as that there were Leeds fans everyf*ckinwhere, all round the place it seemed.
When the disappointed Cov fans started sneaking out before the end, the stand we were in seemed to have just as many Leeds as Cov fans in it.
We were even singing by that stage; there weren't enough Cov fans left to object really.
And among the usual ‘Man U haters’ songs was a brief but heartfelt tribute to Sydney.
The Coventry scoreboard doesn't work.
We suspected that this might have been because Coventry didn't score.
Stu: sod the Escort, buy the Porsche!
Like the Net idea for the TSB title, Kev, thanks.
Gav (just off to the conference banquet)
From:
Date: Tue, 28 Sep 1993 09:38:54 +0000
Subject: Dear Batty Again
Batty's Agony Column returns…
I were going to talk about the problems of an ex Premier League football manager today.
I won't tell yer his name…
‘Dear Batty, I needed money for booze so all I did was rip off a few thousand cup final tickets supposed to be for our lot and flog 'em to some scum supporters.
In the middle of the final these scum who had bought the tickets start scrapping with our boys and fighting and making a nuisance.
Now I can't get pissed in peace without TV cameras poking their noses into my affairs.
Could you sort them out for me Batty lad, you're hard.
I wouldn't normally ask but me own lad is a greet big jessy and cannot stand up for himself let alone kick f*** out of Roger Cook.
Cheers mate, B**** C*****.’
What a cheeky twat.
Me dad told us all about you, and what you said about Big Norm, Sniffer, Uncle Billy, an' that back in t' seventies.
Serves you right you red nosed, gobshite, pissed-up old dosser. 44 days, 44 days…
From:
Date: Tue, 28 Sep 93 13:53 GMT
Subject: Uk trip…’ you dont wanna go there…you wanna go…’
Halvard…
Yep, its possible to get to Newcastle and back from London — quite easily.
I think its only about 30mins longer than London-Leeds.
Where bouts in London you staying anyway?
The Leeds-Chelsea, Newcastle-Liverpool sounded best to me…bound to get good atmospheres at both.
An alternative is to come and watch one of my Saturday/Sunday games;-) You ALWAYS see goals, cos we are good up front but crap in defence hehe
Plane to Newcastle???
Porsche to Coventry????
I think Im in the wrong job…
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 29 Sep 1993 13:37:50 +0000
Subject: Dear Batty 2…
David Batty used once upon a time to write an agony column in rec.sport.soccer.
Only the other day he was saying to me ‘Tim it's abart time I answered sum a them letters I ‘ave pilin' up from poor folk as ‘ave ‘ad personal problems.’
I had to agree so here is Batts' agony column back again for the benefit of the LUFC mailing list.
‘Ere's a letter from Coventry manager Bobby Gould.
‘I've got a dozy scouse striker who can't keep off the pies.
I'm forever putting him on diets but he just runs straight round to the local kebab shop and puts away three large doners and a rum baba.
As a result he is bloated up like a space hopper and just rolls round the pitch with a dopey grin on his face.
What do you suggest Dave?’
Bobby, there's nowt you can do mate.
Mel Sterland were like this and there were no stoppin' ‘im.
Personally I'd invite him to t’ gaffer's office, talk to ‘im, try to see it from ‘is point o’view, listen to ‘is side, then if I still couldn't bring ‘im round, give ‘im smack in t’mouth.’
cheers Batts.
From:
Date: Thu, 30 Sep 93 13:21 GMT
Subject: Pitch
Yeah, I forgot that noone has mentioned it here.
The ground is being pulled up and relayed in stages.
It was cutting up, mainly due to the new East stand sheltering the pitch from drying winds.
they are laying some new fandangled pourous underlayer or summink?
Any grass experts out there?
Well, stop smoking and comment:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 30 Sep 93 13:49:40 MET
Subject: Sure you're not on grass?
What had you to smoke last night:-)?
There is still an awful long way to go before we can start talking Premierships.
Look at the teams we've beaten — nothing special, any of them.
Now if we went out tomorrow and put (a long overdue) one over the scum then I will be more than happy to start talking Premierships.
All Leeds can do at the moment is keep winning the games we should win and clock the away victories, so that when the Uniteds of this world come along we won't be psyched out of beating them.
Look at the bare facts we've not beaten the scum in the three season we've been back up and god knows we've had enough chances in that time.
I do agree that considering the start that Leeds have had to this season we are doing extremely well.
Long may it continue.
Another thing that sticks in my gut big time is that whenever I mention I'm a Leeds United fan, peoples first reaction is that ‘Oh you were so lucky to win the league two years ago’.
Fuck that, we were the only team not to choke when it came to the crunch, the same cannot be said of the scum.
They can never take that championship away for us, and at the same time made the scum pay the ultimate price (he-he-he).
Sweet memories all.
The longer the the arse and the scum stay in Europe the more likely they will be distracted from the real task in hand — winning the premiership IMHO.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 30 Sep 1993 13:53:48 +0000
Subject: Dear Batts: Not For Faint Hearts
Another excerpt from the Agony Column of Leeds United and England's celebrated midfield maestro:
T'other day I got ter thinkin': warrappened to Eric?
You remember, that French blork ‘oo scored against Chelsea scum the season we won t’ title.
Well you'd never believe: ‘e just sent a heart-rendin' letter to me Agony Column…
‘Cher Davide,
Ah sink you weeel remaaamber me, your old chum Erique from 1991–2 when ah played for ze Leeds.
Any'ow, since zat taaaime ah ave joined ze cochons rouges, ow you zay ‘scum’.
Well zose batardes cochons, whenever ah am in ze dressing rhoeume zat Pallisteur ‘e jump on me and try to make leurve.
Ees embarrasing no?
You remembre zat leetle fleeng ah ad wiz Madame Chapman?
Well c'est impossible dans Old Trafford beceuse none of zem ave waaaives except for Ince and she is disgeusting.
No decent woman would go wiz any of zem.
Most are on disco biscuits or else on Sheurpe et Geeggs.
Geeggs is certainement un wonderboy when ‘e take his teeths out.
Can you give me ze advice, no?’
‘Appen Eric.
I warned yer about them mancs when you stormed out.
Pallister were always jumpin on Lee's back if you remember, at least Lesley were better lookin'.
Frankly I don't reckon we're in the market for itinerant frog nutters.
Perhaps Halifax Town is yer next ‘true spiritual home’…