

CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
In last year's statement, I commented upon several adverse trends for industry including the base interest rate of 15% and inflation at 7.6%.
The comparative figures one year later of 14% and 10.9% are still worrying.
During the last 12 months or so there have been several major developments which will influence the international economic climate in which we all operate.
I mention below our recent entry into the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, the transition to market economies of the Eastern European countries and the impact on production costs of the situation in the Gulf.
These and other developments have led to much speculation and conjecture regarding the future competitiveness of UK businesses.
I recognise that companies are under considerable pressures and that we face a period of uncertainty.
The current economic conditions are particularly challenging and it is clear that we must increasingly earn our living by ingenuity and innovation.
After many years of debate the United Kingdom became a full participant in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System in October 1990.
The corresponding reduction in base interest rate to 14% was interpreted as a signal that the Treasury expects this will be an anti-inflation discipline.
Although sterling is now in the ERM there is still scope for reasonable movement and possible realignment.
Not surprisingly, many exporters have expressed their concern at what they consider is the high value of sterling, at its mid-point entry of 2.95 DM, on international competitiveness.
Nevertheless, the move has been generally welcomed by companies in Scotland involved in the European market.
In recent months the deepening troubles of Eastern Europe have been pushed to the edge of the world's stage by the Gulf crisis.
The transition to democracy and market economies will call for much patience and persistence.
If the price of crude oil remains high and volatile then this will impose severe strains on economies which are already under pressure.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that businessmen are hesitant to commit resources to forge new relationships in Eastern Europe.
Of course, Western Europe is providing financial and technical help and opportunities exist for experienced exporters, but a realistic, long-term view is essential.
The Council's business development services continue to prove popular and participation numbers remain high.
The growing importance of the Western European markets is reflected in the Council's Euro-drive and this programme has attracted valuable private sector sponsorship.
I am delighted that The Clydesdale Bank PLC has agreed to support six Scottish Council trade missions in the period 1991–93 and I am hopeful that several other arrangements can be finalised during the year ahead.
A summary of export mission achievements is shown on page 10 of this Report and I take this opportunity to thank all those who have led Scottish Council missions during 1989/90 for their excellent support.
As expected, the issues of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the reform of non-domestic rates, Scotland's lowland airport policy, the future of steel-making in Scotland and environmental policies received considerable attention from the Council's various committees in 1989/90.
During the year the Council made a wide variety of submissions on these and other matters to Government and these are listed on page 7 of this Report.
I anticipate that in 1991 we will re-visit most of these subjects and I expect that we will address several others such as skills shortages, innovation policy and education policy proposals.
The Scottish Council has been active for some years in bringing employers and school pupils much closer together and this important aspect of our work has expanded considerably in recent times.
During the year, the residential courses which we have organised since 1985 and which are aimed at young people aged between 16 and 19 years, produced our 1,000th graduate.
The network of Young Engineers Clubs started some four years ago now includes 30 clubs and involves around 900 boys and girls.
The ultimate beneficiaries of the YEC programme are the organisations which employ engineers, in whatever discipline or capacity, in the manufacturing and service sectors.
Employers of young engineers face a double dilemma: a declining proportion of a reducing population opting for subjects which could lead to qualifications in science, technology and engineering.
The Young Engineers Clubs aim to encourage a greater number of Scotland's more able youngsters to continue with subjects which give them the option of tertiary education in science or engineering.
In addition, we are now into the extension of the Enterprise and Education Initiative which is aimed at strengthening links between schools and employers and is co-funded by the Industry Department for Scotland.
Originally, this was proposed as a two-year project but we have been asked to manage the Initiative until March 1991.
The Scotland-wide network of business secondees we have been able to attract to this project is most impressive and I am pleased to list the supporting companies and organisations on page 13 of this Report.
They readily accepted the challenge of the Initiative by seconding senior staff to the Scottish Council or gave generous and substantial in-kind assistance to the project.
This is an excellent example of public-private sector co-operation.
Industry has clearly endorsed the concept that every young person should have the opportunity of work experience prior to leaving school.
By the end of September 1990 the network of Advisers had identified almost 60,000 work experience opportunities for pupils and over 2,000 teacher placements in businesses.
The year 1989/90 was a busy and satisfying one for the Scottish Council's Committees.
I am most grateful to the Area Chairmen in the North East, Tayside, the Highlands and in London for their counsel and support.
I would especially wish to record my thanks to  who retired in September 1990 from the chair of the Highland Area Committee after eleven successful years.
He was succeeded by , Commercial Director, British Alcan (Highland Smelters) Ltd.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Chairmen of the Council's other Committees and in particular to  who took over the chair of the Policy Review Committee in May 1990.
By virtue of its wide membership base, the Scottish Council is uniquely placed in Scottish public affairs to investigate, debate and recommend economic development measures.
Because the Council is seen to be independent of government and political parties, it is a trusted source of objective comment on how policy can affect business conditions in Scotland.
The Council's objectives are wholly concerned with economic growth, rather than with the distribution of the benefits of that growth and as a result, the full participation of all members is possible without sectional positions being adopted.
The year 1991 will be an important one in the Scottish Council's history.
Although the Scottish Council Development and Industry was formed in 1946 by the merger of the Scottish Council on Industry and the Scottish Development Council, the Scottish National Development Council — the word National was later deleted — came into being on 8th May 1931 and we look forward to marking our Diamond Jubilee Year with several special events throughout Scotland.
In this era of short-termism, which was the subject of  's address to the Scottish Council's Annual Dinner in London in April 1989, the merits of longevity and stability are often overlooked.
The Council is proud of the contribution it has made to business life since 1931 and aims to continue serving its members for many years to come.
I am most grateful to fellow office-bearers and to all members of the Council's various committees for their support and advice during the year.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all members for supporting the Scottish Council in 1989/90 and I look forward to your continuing, active involvement in our policies and programmes in the future.
Finally, I am sure that you will want me to thank the staff of the Council for their valuable work in what has been another very busy and challenging year.
Review of Operations
MEMBERSHIP RELATIONS
The Executive
The four meetings of the Council's Executive in 1989/90 were held in Irvine, Aberdeen, New Lanark and Inverness.
The Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the co-operation and hospitality of the Irvine Development Corporation, the City of Aberdeen District Council, Clydesdale District Council and Highland Regional Council.
Speakers, Guests and Visiting Delegations
An important feature of the Scottish Council's work is the opportunity for members to exchange views with visitors and specialists.
During the year, SCDI hosted many such meetings and a few of our guests were  The number of visitors to the Scottish Council from overseas continued at a high level.
A total of 31 specialists from all over the world spent time with the Council's Business Development staff.
Involvement varied from the informal exchange of information through to the detailed organisation of local visiting programmes.
In addition, the Council hosted several important inward delegations during 1989/90 and these included visitors from France, China and Japan.
Annual London Dinner
Around 140 members attended the Annual Dinner for Chairmen and Chief Executives hosted by the Council's London Committee and held in March 1990 in the Caledonian Club.
The principal address, Europe's Regions in the 1990's — Policies and Prospects was delivered by the Rt Hon , Member of the Commission of the European Communities.
, Chairman and Chief Executive of the Argyll Group plc replied.
The Chairman of the London Committee of the Scottish Council, welcomed guests and the Council's President, CBE, proposed the vote of thanks.
Media Communications
Press releases, press conferences, radio and television interviews, speeches and articles all contribute to the Council's profile.
The work of the Council achieved a significant increase in media coverage from the press, radio and television at both national and local levels.
During the year under review a total of 220 press releases, 15 press conferences and 70 radio and television interviews helped communicate the Council's news and views in Scotland.
In addition, 42 speeches and presentations were made.
Importantly, the Scottish Council continued to project Scotland's products and services to the international media in a positive manner during overseas business visits and trade missions.
Membership Communications
Comprehensive information regarding the Council's programmes and policies was mailed regularly to all members to stimulate involvement in a wide variety of policy consultations, services and projects.
There were 5 major mailings to the membership during the year and these contained over 40 notices, brochures, consultative papers and invitations.
The Quarterly Report to The Executive is circulated to all members following adoption by The Executive and is a complete record of all SCDI activities.
During the year, 163 new members were recruited to the Scottish Council.
Exports and Enterprise Awards
A capacity audience of 610 attended the Awards Ceremony at a Gala Dinner held in Glasgow on 29th March.
MP, Minister of State for Industry at the Scottish Office presented the Awards which recognised outstanding achievement in exports and the encouragement of liaison between schools and industry.
The Awards were sponsored by British Airways.
Gold Awards were won by Tullis Russell & Co Ltd., Royalite Plastics Ltd., Teknek Electronics Ltd., Daks-Simpson Ltd., Stephen Clark Fabrications Ltd., and Bell College of Technology.
In addition, the President's Award for 1990 was presented by  CBE to  in recognition of his outstanding achievement in the encouragement of the Arts in Scotland.
MP, Minister of State for Industry at the Scottish Office presented a Gold Award in recognition of outstanding achievement in exports to , Export Sales Manager, Tullis Russell & Co Ltd., at the Council's Exports and Enterprise Awards Ceremony in March.
The winning team of 4 Young Engineers representing Bell College, Hamilton, is seen here with  and , Personnel Manager of Daks-Simpson Ltd.
The Great Egg Flight Competition was sponsored by British Airways and attracted 34 teams from SCDI's Young Engineers Clubs.
,, and  later took part in the Council's trade mission to Madrid and Barcelona.
EVIDENCE, SUBMISSIONS AND LOBBYING
The Council comments on issues of public policy at its own instigation and in response to requests for its views.
During the year under review information and opinions were given to:
The Secretary of State for Scotland on several aspects of the reform programme for non-domestic rates;
The Scottish Office on public expenditure plans and the impact of various subjects on enterprise development;
The Scottish Development Department on infrastructure improvement in those parts of North Lanarkshire affected by steel closures;
The House of Commons' Trade and Industry Committee on mergers policy and the need for regional interest in the MMC reference criteria;
Scottish Members of Parliament on provisions of the Environmental Protection Bill;
The Scottish Development Department on the consultative papers Scotland's Natural Heritage — The Way Ahead and Scotland's Natural Heritage;
The Scottish Development Department on environmental policy objectives, being a submission in the course of government's preparation of the White Paper This Common Inheritance;
The Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment at the Scottish Office on provisions of the Environmental Protection Bill;
The Scottish Development Department on proposals for public access to information in the context of pollution control;
The Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for Scotland on Scottish Lowland Airport Policy;
The Department of Trade and Industry on the treatment of Regional Selective Assistance in the Department's Deregulation Review;
Scottish Members of Parliament who were serving on the Committee for the Enterprise and New Towns (Scotland) Bill regarding the central provision of core functions in Scottish Enterprise;
The Office of Fair Trading on the implications of the Ravenscraig strip mill closure announcement for competitive supply of hot rolled coil in the United Kingdom market;
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on the definition of undertakings given by British Steel to offer assets for sale as an alternative to plant closure;
The Secretary of State for the Environment on the location of the headquarters of the new European Environment Agency.
During the period under review, meetings were held with:
The Minister of State at the Scottish Office on arrangements for international trade promotion following the establishment of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise;
The Minister of State at the Scottish Office on British Steel's intended programme of capacity cuts in Scotland:
The Minister of State at the Scottish Office on arrangements for schools-industry liaison;
MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland on education and training policies;
MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry;
, then Chief Executive of the Scottish Development Agency on Scottish Enterprise;
, Chairman of the Scottish Development Agency on Scottish Enterprise.
PUBLIC POLICY
Environmental Policies
Following the International Forum in September 1989 when the theme was Enterprise and the Environment: The Vital Partnership, the Scottish Council has maintained its close involvement in this important subject.
Several submissions were lodged in 1989/90 with Government regarding environmental protection and management.
The Environmental Protection Bill contained several provisions of direct interest for Scotland including the creation of the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland and new waste regulation responsibilities for District and Islands Councils.
Briefs on these two aspects were provided to all Scottish MP's serving on the Committee stage of the Bill.
In April, the Council organised a conference in Livingston attended by 91 delegates which examined the options for environmentally-friendly municipal waste treatment and disposal, and their business implications.
The Scottish Steel Industry
The Council's longstanding interest in the Scottish Steel Industry was given a higher priority by the decision of British Steel to close the hot strip mill at Ravenscraig in early 1991 and the indications were that the rest of Ravenscraig would cease operations in 1994.
The refusal of British Steel to contemplate a sale of the redundant assets has resulted in submissions from the Council to the Office of Fair Trading and the Department of Trade and Industry.
The context of these submissions is the undertaking given by British Steel at the time of privatisation that it would consider commercial offers for the steel mill facilities if it no longer had a use for them.
In the Council's experience the most effective way to mitigate the social and economic consequences of major plant closures is to secure a new operator for all or part of the redundant assets.
Non Domestic Rates
Non-domestic rates are a substantial part of business taxation in the United Kingdom.
They are even more important in Scotland where a process of reform is underway, but far from completed.
The Council and the Government are of one mind on the long term objective.
That is the creation of a common rate poundage throughout the United Kingdom and a uniform system of property valuation.
That was an objective set in the Toothill Report published by the Scottish Council nearly 30 years ago.
The ‘level playing field’ on rates is intimately linked to regional policy aims.
Poundages are now subject to intervention by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
His authority is total and in effect the tax rate, the poundage, is a national tax, locally varied.
So far, an across-the-board reduction of poundages by 6.25 per cent has been applied.
Rateable values north and south of the border were substantially different, mainly because of a lack of revaluation in England and Wales between 1973 and 1990.
The revaluation at a common date has helped, as has agreement in practice to arrive at comparable results.
However, substantial differences of method remain, many of which are based in law.
Therefore, legislation will be required to achieve harmonisation.
There is some doubt as to whether the processes of investigation and legislation will be completed in time for the 1995 revaluation.
The Scottish Council's most recent interest in the subject arose in the context of changes in enterprise development policy.
Council staff provided an estimate of the gap between rates payable in Scotland in 1990/91 and the rates that would be payable were the same system in place as is in England (The Uniform Business Rate).
The overtaxation of non-domestic subjects in Scotland was estimated at £458m.
By comparison, total expenditure on all forms of regional incentive (Regional Selective Assistance, Regional Enterprise Grants, Enterprise Initiative Grants and Regional Development Grants) was only £106m in 1989/90.
Economic Seminars
The second winter programme of economic seminars was held during the period October 1989 to March 1990 and consisted of seven meetings supported by 313 members.
All meetings were sponsored.
The third winter series of meetings spans the period September 1990 to April 1991 and consists of eight seminars.
This programme is being held in association with The Scotsman which is providing advertising assistance and appropriate coverage.
International Forum
The 20th International Forum took place in Aviemore in September 1989 on the theme Enterprise and the Environment: The Vital Partnership.
As usual, the conference proved popular with around 200 delegates participating.
The Position Paper and Briefing Notes for the Discussion Groups were prepared by , Executive Director, Centre for Environmental Management and Planning, Aberdeen University.
The International Forum came of age in October 1990 when the 21st conference was held.
The theme was Innovation and around 200 invited delegates took part.
Principal speakers at the event included , Managing Director, Communications Systems Division, British Telecom;, Executive Director, Hong Kong Trade Development Council;, Vice-President and General Manager-International Operations, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd; CBE, Chairman, Dawson International PLC;, Chief Executive Officer, BP Exploration Co Ltd; and The Rt Hon  QC MP, Secretary of State for Scotland.
Some of the principal speakers who took part in the Council's 21st International Forum are pictured above.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
Export Missions
An expanded programme of 14 trade missions to 20 countries was undertaken during the year.
This involved 197 companies and estimates of future business given by participants is shown below at £66.2m.
Other important achievements as a result of the mission programme included the confirmed appointment of 41 overseas agents and distributors with a further 60 under consideration and 4 confirmed joint ventures with a further 27 under consideration.
Since SCDI first became involved in international trade promotion in 1960, it has organised a total of 223 trade missions to well over 50 different destinations.
An encouraging feature in 1990 was the welcome involvement of 3 of Scotland's banks in the Council's Euro-drive.
The Bank of Scotland sponsored the Council's mission to Milan in January which achieved business estimated at £4.9m.
In March the Clydesdale Bank led a mission of 11 companies to Dusseldorf and in June the Royal Bank of Scotland again sponsored the Council's mission to Madrid and Barcelona.
A summary of export mission achievements is shown below.
Members' Business Development Club
The Business Club has continued to prove very popular with members.
During the period under review 11 meetings were held in Glasgow, attracting a total attendance of 528.
In Aberdeen, attendances were also encouraging with 215 members taking part in 6 meetings.
All MBDC meetings are sponsored and the Council is grateful  for the ready support it has received from sponsors of individual meetings.
In particular, the Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the assistance of Macdonald Lindsay Pindar plc for the supply of brochures and the Glasgow Evening Times for advertising assistance.
Business Information
Staff in the Business Information Unit service a very wide range of enquiries from members and colleagues.
The International Research and Information Service (IRIS), which provides comprehensive market information tailored to clients' requirements, dealt with 404 enquiries during the year.
Since inception, some 3 years ago, IRIS has dealt with 1,635 enquiries.
IRIS's Key Account Subscriber Service (KASS) was introduced to encourage regular use of the service and by September 1990, there were 63 Key Account subscribers.
The Business Information Unit continued to distribute regular publications such as Pointer and Europointer and during 1989/90, 610 enquiries were processed, many of which related to the Council's Scottish Production Industries Register (SPIR).
Secondments
The Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the support of the Clydesdale Bank PLC in arranging the two-year secondment of  to the Business Development Unit.
This is the fourth consecutive secondment of this type from the Clydesdale Bank PLC.
As part of Japan's Import Expansion Programme, was seconded to SCDI in September, initially for one year.
Fluent in English and Spanish, he has been seconded by the Japan External Trade Organisation (JETRO) and recruited from the Sumitomo Corporation where his career spans over 30 years.
Mission Leader  is seen here (left) with some members of the Council's trade mission to the USA West Coast during a visit to the Port of Tacoma in Washington State.
MANPOWER AND EDUCATION
Education Projects
In recent years there has been a growth in the number of schools introducing ‘schools-industry’ work into the curriculum.
More recently there has been an increase in the number of schools introducing enterprise education.
Several of the Scottish Council's programmes are aimed at bringing schools and industry closer together and some are described below.
Other education and training projects in which the Council was involved during 1989/90 included the Student Placement Scheme in the HIDB area, residential Enterprise Education Courses for young adults and a successful pilot course entitled Innovation, Design and Technology which took place in Plockton and involved 44 senior school pupils.
Schools Enterprise Co-ordination Programme
Since the Scottish Council's involvement in April 1989 in the Mini Enterprises in Schools Project (MESP), the number of schools which participated in the project has more than doubled to 168 in the academic year ended 1989/90.
This increased takeup is a result of the in-service training programme aimed directly at teachers.
The Scottish Clearing Bankers involvement in the MESP is much appreciated and they offer financial and practical support to secondary schools in Scotland by way of a grant towards each enterprise project and a low interest overdraft facility.
The curricular review for the age group 5–14 years presents exciting challenges and during the forthcoming academic year the MESP will be extended to 100 primary schools in Scotland on a pilot basis.
The Scottish Council is also pleased to acknowledge the financial support of the Department of Trade and Industry and of the Colonial Mutual Group with this project.
Schools Engineering Co-ordination Programme
10 new Young Engineers Clubs joined the network during the academic session 1989/90 and this extended the geographical coverage considerably.
Around 30 Young Engineers Clubs are now established between Thurso and Dumfries and these involve some 900 boys and girls.
During the year under review, British Airways sponsored the national competition The Great Egg Flight.
Regional heats were held in Aberdeen and Glenrothes to produce 4 teams for the final which was held at the Museum of Flight in East Lothian.
The team from Bell College, Hamilton won the competition and as prizewinners joined SCDI's trade mission to Spain in June.
During the year, a new brochure was distributed to increase awareness in the project and to encourage companies to support Clubs with materials, trainers, visits and funding.
The Educational Challenge for Scotland
During the year The Executive broadly endorsed a research paper proposing new educational targets for Scotland.
Staff were asked to distribute the consultative paper to members for views and comments.
The Paper finds that Scots are well educated in British terms, but are poorly educated in international terms.
It also suggests that Government policy on education lacks clear targets for student numbers and participation rates in higher education.
The paper argues that further education reforms are likely to meet with limited success and that the way to raise educational standards is to promote greater expectations of, and aspirations for, educational success.
On completion of the consultation process with members the paper will be redrafted then submitted to Government.
Enterprise and Education Initiative
In autumn 1988, the Industry Department for Scotland accepted SCDI's proposal to recruit, train and deploy a Scotland-wide network of secondees from industry and commerce to work towards achieving the aims of the Initiative.
The project was originally scheduled to end in August 1990 but the Department of Trade and Industry asked SCDI to extend this by 7 months to March 1991.
By the end of September 1990, the network of IDS Advisers on Enterprise and Education had undertaken a cumulative total of 5,534 visits to employers to persuade them to offer work experience to school pupils and appropriate short-term placements for teachers.
To date, the group of Advisers has secured offers totalling 58,497 work experience places for pupils from employers and 2,054 possible placements for teachers.
The positive response from the business sector to this Initiative indicates the willingness of employers to strengthen and extend links between schools and employers.
The Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the funding support of the Industry Department for Scotland with this major project.
In addition, the Council would like to acknowledge the support of the companies and organisations shown below which readily accepted the challenge of the Initiative by seconding senior staff to SCDI or by giving generous in-kind assistance.
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE
To the Members of the Scottish Council (Development and Industry) Limited
The Executive submit their report together with financial statements for the year to 30th September 1990.
Operations
The Operations of the Scottish Council are reviewed on pages 5 to 13.
Financial Commentary and Policies
The financial performance for the year has resulted in a consolidation of the position achieved in recent years.
The surplus after taxation adds £67,444 to the retained reserves which now amount to £379,033.
This is in accordance with the Council's long standing policy to maintain reserves broadly equivalent to three months' core activity expenditure.
Operational income has increased from £1.701 m to £1.792 m and expenditure has risen from £1.643 m to £1.754 m.
Subscription income has risen from £.743 m to £.779 m, an increase of 4.8%.
Within the increase referred to above Business Development income rose to £293,656 from £261,472 last year.
This includes additional income generated by the Business Information and IRIS departments.
Income related to Manpower and Education projects increased slightly from £470,371 to £481,405.
Income from the main revenue earning project, the Enterprise and Education Initiative, also rose slightly and the project has been extended by the Industry Department for Scotland for seven months to 31st March 1991.
The Enterprise Co-ordination Programme has now been in operation for eighteen months and a revised, enhanced budget has been negotiated with the Department of Trade and Industry for the year ahead.
During the year joint venture contributions were received from the Scottish Development Agency towards the International Research and Information Service (IRIS); the Scottish Education Department towards the Engineering Co-ordination Programme; the Industry Department for Scotland towards the Enterprise and Education Initiative and the Enterprise Co-ordination Programme (MESP); the Highlands and Islands Development Board toward the Student Placement Scheme and the Enterprise and Education Initiative.
In addition, the Scottish Council Foundation granted funds amounting to £29,478 to the Scottish Council, the major part of which was in support of Enterprise Education Courses for young people.
The various categories of operating expenditure are broadly in line with budget for the year.
Although joint venture programmes have expanded rapidly in recent years, care has been taken to contain the growth of core staff.
As appropriate, the Council occasionally employs specialists on fixed-term contracts to undertake externally funded projects.
Staff costs at £631,681 amount to 36% of total operating expenditure.
Property and equipment costs increased considerably to £366,321.
This reflects the second five year rent review for Head Office which took place in 1989 and became effective from August 1989.
The first five year rent review for the Council's Glasgow Office is due in August 1991.
A significant increase has been achieved in the income from investments rising from £40,929 to £65,356.
Higher interest rates and continued vigilance in cash management contributed to this improvement.
The Surplus on Ordinary Activities before taxation is £93,224 and is regarded as satisfactory.
Membership of The Executive
The direction of the Council is in the hands of The Executive.
The membership of The Executive during the year and retirals from it, due at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting, is given on pages 28 to 32.
Auditors
In accordance with Section 384 (1) of the Companies Act 1985, Grant Thornton offer themselves for re-appointment as Auditors of the Company.
Financial Report
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT
BALANCE SHEET
STATEMENT OF SOURCE AND APPLICATION OF FUNDS
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS TO THE MEMBERS OF THE SCOTTISH COUNCIL (DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRY) LIMITED
We have audited the financial statements on pages 16 to 23 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of The Scottish Council (Development and Industry) Limited as at 30 September 1990 and of the Income and Expenditure and Source and Application of Funds for the year ended on that date and are properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Grant Thornton Chartered Accountants
1 November 1990