

CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
In last year's statement I commented upon the challenging economic conditions which resulted from a base interest rate of 14.0% and inflation at 10.9%.
Although the comparative figures one year later of 10.5% and 4.1% are much more encouraging, the positive results of recovery are still rather distant which perhaps, reflects the depth of this particular recession.
Throughout the year there has been a growing realisation that Scotland's future economic prospects will be influenced to a substantial degree by the economic and political realignment which is taking place in Continental Europe.
The liberalisation of the former Soviet satellites and the effective disintegration of the Soviet Union are important factors in the new European order.
However, it has been the closer integration of the European Community which has dominated the economic development agenda.
Preparations for the completion of the single market and discussions about economic and political union have been particularly prominent themes during the year.
One of the few certainties in the European debate is physical geography which decrees a peripheral position for Scotland in the new Europe.
It is vital therefore that Scotland's distinctive interests should have an effective voice within the institutions of the European Community.
During the year there have been two helpful developments to that end.
The Commission itself has been examining the feasibility of creating an official forum within the Community's institutions through which the European regional economies can express opinions and make recommendations.
Proposals arising from this initiative are expected from the Commission towards the end of the year.
At home, various organisations and institutions including the Scottish Council, came together to form Scotland Europa as a broadly based  non-government lobbying organisation.
The initiative was subsequently modified and taken forward by Scottish Enterprise.
It is expected to be operational with an office in Brussels early next year and although some doubts remain about the scope of the redefined Scotland Europa, the Council has agreed, in principle, to support the initiative.
In the Annual Report two years ago, I called for the careful co-ordination of export support services from both private and public sector organisations.
Since then, the Government has created the local enterprise companies, many of which have become involved in internationalisation programmes.
In addition, Scottish Trade International will come into existence in December 1991 and this will bring together Scottish Office Industry Department staff involved in the delivery of the BOTB's services with those of Scottish Enterprise.
A specific objective is that this new body will work directly with the local enterprise companies.
The so-called ‘one-door approach’ has many attractions in what is fast becoming an over-crowded arena and a strategic, national approach to export promotion is to be welcomed.
However, to achieve effective co-ordination between the new publicly funded bodies and the long-established private sector organisations, such as the Scottish Council and others, it must be recognised that the latter group is not able to subsidise projects nor to encourage company participation with a formula of matching expenditure.
In my view it would be regrettable if, in the passage of time, only organisations reliant upon government funds were left to provide export promotion services.
The Scottish Council has been active for some years in bringing employers and school pupils closer together.
The network of Young Engineers Clubs started some five years ago now includes 27 clubs and this is expected to expand in the year ahead.
The curricular review for the age groups 5–14 years presents many exciting opportunities and during the year, the Mini Enterprise in Schools Project (MESP) was introduced to 100 primary schools in a very successful pilot scheme.
Since SCDI's involvement in 1989, the participation of Scottish secondary schools in this scheme has doubled to 212 last year.
The ultimate beneficiaries of these programmes are employers, in all disciplines and in both the manufacturing and service sectors.
The year 1991 was an important one in the Scottish Council's history.
The Council came into being on the 8th May 1931 and we have marked our Diamond Jubilee Year with several special events throughout Scotland, and these are described on pages 6 and 7 of this report.
The year was also a busy and satisfying one for the Scottish Council's Committees.
I am most grateful to the Area Chairmen in Tayside, the Highlands and in London for their continuing counsel and support.
I would especially wish to record my thanks to  of Shell UK Exploration and Production who retired in December 1990 from the Chair of the North-East Area Committee.
He was succeeded by , General Manager of C Davidson & Sons.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Chairmen of the Council's other Committees including Business Development, Policy Review and the Scottish Council Foundation.
The Scottish Council is uniquely placed in Scottish public affairs to investigate, debate and recommend economic development measures.
For 60 years the Council has been seen to be independent of government and political parties.
The Council's objectives are entirely concerned with economic growth, rather than with the distribution of the benefits of that growth and as a result, the full participation of all members is possible without sectional positions being adopted.
Your Scottish Council is a broadly based organisation and I feel strongly that this consensus is our strength.
I am most grateful to fellow office-bearers and to all members of the Council's various committees for their support and advice during the year.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all members for their loyal commitment to the Scottish Council in 1991 and I look forward to their continuing, active involvement in our policies and programmes in the future.
It was particularly gratifying that in the Council's Diamond Jubilee Year, was honoured in The Queen's Birthday Honours List.
I am sure that you will want to join with me in thanking him and all the staff of the Council for their valuable work in what has been a particularly busy and challenging year.
Review of Operations
MEMBERSHIP RELATIONS
The Executive
The four meetings of the Council's Executive in 1990/91 were held in Glenrothes, Dundee, Musselburgh and Falkirk.
The Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the co-operation and hospitality of Glenrothes Development Corporation, Tayside Regional Council, East Lothian District Council and Falkirk District Council.
Speakers, Guests and Visiting Delegations
An important feature of the Scottish Council's work is the opportunity for members to exchange views with visitors and specialists.
During the year, SCDI hosted many such meetings and a few of our guests were  The number of visitors to the Scottish Council from overseas continued at a high level.
A total of 38 specialists from all over the world spent time with the Council's Business Development staff.
Involvement varied from the informal exchange of information through to the detailed organisation of local visiting programmes.
In addition, the Council hosted several important inward delegations during 1990/91 and these included visitors from Switzerland, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia and China.
Annual London Dinner
Around 120 members attended the Annual Dinner for Chairmen and Chief Executives hosted by the Council's London Committee and held in April 1991 in the Caledonian Club.
The principal address was delivered by , Chairman of British Telecommunications plc.
, Managing Director, Finance and Administration, Guinness PLC, replied.
The Chairman of the London Committee of the Scottish Council,, welcomed guests and the Council's Chairman,, proposed the vote of thanks.
Media Communications
Press releases, press conferences, radio and television interviews, speeches and articles all contribute to the Council's profile.
The work of the Council achieved a significant increase in media coverage from the press, radio and television at both national and local levels.
During the year under review a total of 132 press releases, 12 press conferences and 67 radio and television interviews helped communicate the Council's news and views in Scotland.
In addition, 37 speeches and presentations were made.
Importantly, the Scottish Council continued to project Scotland's products and services to the international media in a positive manner during overseas business visits and trade missions.
Export and Enterprise Awards — 1991
A capacity audience of 500 attended the Council's annual Awards Ceremony at a Gala Dinner held in October 1991.
The Rt Hon  MP, Secretary of State for Scotland, presented a total of 13 awards which recognised outstanding achievement in exporting, innovation and enterprise.
The event was organised in association with British Airways.
Gold Awards were won by Weir Pumps Ltd; Fortronic Ltd; Cruachem Ltd; Beckman Industrial Ltd; Lamberton Robotics Ltd; Seametrix Ltd; and Coatbridge College.
In addition, the President's Award for 1991 was presented to , Director and General Manager of British Aerospace (Commercial Aircraft) Ltd, for innovation.
In the President's citation it stated that the Jetstream 41 was the first aircraft to be designed and manufactured in Scotland for several decades and is testimony to the enterprise and teamwork of the company's workforce.
On behalf of the Scottish Council's President,(left) presented the President's Award for 1991 to , Director and General Manager of British Aerospace (Commercial Aircraft) Ltd.
Diamond Jubilee Events
The year 1991 was an important one in the Scottish Council's history.
Although the Scottish Council Development and Industry was formed in 1946 by the merger of the Scottish Council on Industry and the Scottish Development Council, the Scottish National Development Council — the word national was later deleted — came into being on 8th May 1931.
During the year a series of commemorative events was held to recognise the Council's 60th anniversary.
A Diamond Jubilee Dinner was held in Edinburgh in May when 420 members, office bearers and staff attended.
The guest speakers were , Chief Executive of IBM United Kingdom Holdings Ltd; CBE, General Secretary of the Amalgamated Engineering Union;, Chief Executive of Clydesdale Bank PLC; and , Authoress.
Scottish Television produced two special programmes to mark the Council's 60th anniversary which were broadcast in May.
Around 100 members and guests participated in the programmes, the first of which looked at the future economic development of Scotland while the second examined the social and political circumstances relating to the ambitions outlined in the first.
In May, Dundee Port Authority generously hosted a reception for around 50 Council members based in the Tayside area.
, Chief Executive of the Port Authority, and  OBE, Chief Executive of SCDI, welcomed guests.
Also in May, around 120 members and guests attended the Diamond Jubilee Balmoral Lecture in Aberdeen's Art Gallery.
The subject was Facing the Future: Education and Industry.
The Council's Chairman, CBE, DL, and  OBE, Vice President and Managing Director of NCR (Manufacturing) Ltd, provided stimulating addresses which provoked much discussion.
The occasion was marked by a Civic Reception courtesy of the Lord Provost and Council of the City of Aberdeen and the evening was generously sponsored by the Balmoral Group.
SCDI's North-East Area Chairman,, gave the vote of thanks.
As part of the Diamond Jubilee programme, a dinner was held in Aberdeen in September on the theme of Industry and the Environment.
The Guest Speaker was  KBE, Chairman of the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland and Chairman Designate of Scottish Natural Heritage.
Over 100 leading industrialists and environmentalists were joined by the Scottish Advisory Board of BP Exploration which generously sponsored the event.
Finally, in October some 150 members and guests participated in an anniversary dinner in Inverness when guest speakers were , Scottish Office Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries; MEP;, Convener, Highland Regional Council; and .
During the evening, special awards were made to recognise outstanding contributions in the fields of export achievement, environmental care and in the encouragement of young engineers.
The recipients were Osprey Seafoods of Scotland Ltd, the Tomatin Distillery Co Ltd and Thurso College.
The event was chaired by , SCDI's Highland Area Chairman.
, SCDI's Tayside Area Chairman (left), welcomed  MP, Scottish Office Minister for Industry and Local Government, to a Members' Dinner in September.
KBE (right) was guest of honour at a Dinner in Aberdeen when his theme was Industry and the Environment.
, the Scottish Council's North-East Area Chairman, chaired the event.
, the Scottish Council's Highland Area Chairman, seen here (left) with the guest speakers at the Diamond Jubilee commemorative dinner held in Inverness.
PUBLIC POLICY
Evidence, Submissions and Lobbying
The Council comments on issues of public policy at its own instigation and in response to requests for its views.
During the year under review information and opinions were given to:
The Secretary of State for Defence on the threatened closure of the Rosyth Naval Base;
The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland on regulations affecting distribution of smoked salmon by post;
The Scottish Environment Department on the choice of enforcing authority for Integrated Pollution Control;
The Secretary of State for Scotland on the general implication for Scotland of the White Paper Higher Education: A New Framework;
The Secretary of State for Scotland on the particular implications for The Dundee Institute of Technology and Robert Gordon Institute of Technology, arising from the White Paper Higher Education: A New Framework;
The Scottish Office Education Department on the implications for further education provision arising from the White Paper Access and Opportunity;
The Scottish Office Environment Department on creation and management of National Heritage Areas;
The Scottish Office Education Department on the future of The Careers Service;
The Scottish Office Local Government Finance Unit on rates reform and the position of industrial derating;
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and OFTEL on the implications for rural services provision arising from the consultation paper Competition and Choice: Telecommunications Policy for the 1990s;
The Secretary of State for Transport on the interpretation of powers contained in the Ports Bill, as they might affect ports in Scotland;
The Department of Transport on airports policy; being a response to the consultative document Runway Capacity to Serve the South East;
The Scottish Office Education Department (Committee chaired by ) on 5th and 6th year curriculum and examinations;
The Scottish Office Environment Department on proposals to create the new agency, Scottish Natural Heritage, and the associated need to reconcile development ambitions and conservation duties at a local level;
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on the implications of amendment to political risk provision in the Export and Guarantees Bill.
During the period under review, meetings were held with:
MP, Scottish Office Minister, on the progress of non-domestic rates reform;
The House of Commons Select Committee on Trade and Industry, regarding their review of mergers policy;
MP, Deputy Leader, The Parliamentary Labour Party and  MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland, on constitutional reform and regional policy.
The Environment
The impact of increased environmental awareness has considerable implications for Scotland.
Basically, two groups of policy measures are involved — those involving conservation and enhancement of the natural environment and those affecting operating conditions for companies and public services.
Both have important economic implications.
More than most areas, Scotland trades on its environmental image.
Most obviously this includes earnings from tourism but it also involves the image of products, not least whisky.
The Council has supported moves towards more responsible management of the countryside but with the important caveat that the management systems should work in harmony with local interest, including the interest in sustaining output and employment in rural areas.
Following earlier attention to the economic implications of increased environmental awareness at the 1989 International Forum, the Council continued to take an interest in changes in regulatory conditions for industry and commerce.
Non Domestic Rates
The Council continues to give a high priority to achieving equity in Scottish rate burdens.
Implementation of the Uniform Business Rate in England and Wales has confirmed the substantial disincentive to business development represented by overtaxation of non-domestic ratepayers.
At a national level the Council estimated the disadvantage arising from the poundage alone to be £401 million in the fiscal year 1991/92.
It has also highlighted the differential at local level.
A further aspect of overtaxation arises from differences in valuation for industrial use of process plant.
This affects petrochemicals and metal manufacturing but can also extend to processes like whisky bottling.
During the year, the Government acceded to requests to establish a Review Committee which will examine differences in the legal bases of valuation practice north and south of the border.
The Government's intentions for reform of tax rates and valuation systems are supported by the Council.
However, there remains concern at the pace of change.
The Government has been asked to give a high priority to the subject by making substantial cuts in rate poundages in the tax year 1992/93.
The International Forum
The International Forum came of age in October 1990 when the 21st conference was held in Aviemore on the theme Innovation.
As usual, the conference proved popular and around 200 delegates participated.
In October 1991 the 22nd Forum addressed the subject of The New Europe Co-operation and Competition.
Principal speakers at the event included —
Economic Seminars
The third series of seminars was held during the period September 1990 to April 1991 and consisted of 8 presentations, covering subjects of policy interest and practical business application.
All seminars were sponsored.
A total of 471 members, guests and staff took part in these meetings which were advertised by The Scotsman newspaper.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
Export Missions
A programme of 10 trade missions to 15 countries was undertaken during the year.
This involved 153 companies and an estimate of future business given by participants is shown below at £24.2m.
Other important achievements as a result of the mission programme included the confirmed appointment of 31 overseas agents and distributors with a further 39 under consideration and 2 confirmed joint ventures with a further 14 under consideration.
Since SCDI first became involved in international trade promotion in 1960, it has organised a total of 233 trade missions to well over 50 different destinations.
An encouraging feature in 1991 was the welcome involvement of the Clydesdale Bank PLC and the Royal Bank of Scotland PLC in the Council's Euro-drive.
A summary of export mission achievements is shown below.
Focus on Japan
In September 1990, joined the Council on secondment from the Japan External Trade Organisation (JETRO) as part of Japan's Import Expansion Programme.
As the only such secondee in the UK, 's services have been in great demand.
In the year under review he has been involved in 20 seminars, 18 counselling workshops and has undertaken 92 company visits.
He has processed some 72 detailed enquiries with assistance from his colleagues in Tokyo and has arranged articles and publicity for 35 Scottish products in JETRO's Import Business News Magazine.
Several sample orders have been received particularly in the food and drink sector for products such as whisky, smoked salmon, chocolate, honey and shortbread.
In addition, the Japan-Scottish Business Club has met 4 times in SCDI's office in Glasgow and 5 Scots have participated as guests of JETRO in Japan Study Programmes.
Business Information
Staff in the Business Information Unit service a very wide range of enquiries from members and colleagues.
The International Research and Information Service (IRIS), which provides comprehensive market information tailored to clients' requirements, dealt with 295 enquiries during the year.
Since inception, some 4 years ago, IRIS has dealt with 1,930 enquiries.
IRIS's Key Account Subscriber Service (KASS) was introduced to encourage regular use of the service and by September 1991, there were 68 key account subscribers.
The Business Information Unit continued to distribute regular publications such as Pointer and during 1990/91, 605 enquiries were processed, many of which related to the Council's Scottish Production Industries Register (SPIR).
Members' Business Development Club
The Business Club has continued to prove very popular with members.
During the period under review 5 meetings were held in Glasgow, attracting a total attendance of 332.
In Aberdeen, attendances were also encouraging with 150 members taking part in 3 meetings.
In Inverness, staff organised 4 meetings and these were supported by 192 members.
All MBDC meetings were sponsored and the Council is grateful for the ready support it has received from sponsors of individual meetings.
In particular, the Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the assistance of Macdonald Lindsay Pindar plc for the supply of brochures and the Glasgow Evening Times for advertising assistance.
Gold Awards to recognise outstanding achievement in exporting were presented to , Sales & Marketing Director, Weir Pumps Ltd (left);, Sales & Marketing Director, Fortronic Ltd; and , Sales Director, Cruachem Ltd at the Council's annual Gala Dinner and Award Ceremony.
EDUCATION-INDUSTRY LINKS
Education Policies
The Council has recognised for many years the intimate connection between economic performance and educational attainment.
Studies conducted by the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, with which the Council has been associated, have shown that international productivity comparisons of like facilities show disturbing disparities.
These disparities are largely attributed to poor educational attainment — too many people leaving at the statutory school leaving age with few or no qualifications, too few continuing their education and too few entering higher education.
In the autumn of 1990, the Council distributed its consultative paper on this subject, The Educational Challenge for Scotland.
That process was given effect in the year under review by formal submissions to Government and these involved:
commenting on 5th and 6th year curriculum and examinations to The Scottish Office's review of policy (the Howie Committee).
The thrust of the Council's case was higher participation and widened access to higher education.
To achieve that, the Council defended the historical role of the higher certificate, of the English ‘A’ level system.
responding to White Papers on the tertiary education system, the Council supported the volume and variety of courses provided on a full-time and part-time basis and drew attention to the need to give proper status to colleges' degrees.
advocating a review of the Careers Service, the Council proposed that reform within the existing structure of local authority control of the Careers Service should be examined before committing this function to radical restructuring under other management.
The relationships between educational attainment and economic performance is expected to be a recurring policy theme.
The Enterprise and Education Initiative
In autumn 1988, the then Industry Department for Scotland accepted SCDI's proposal to recruit, train and deploy a Scotland-wide network of secondees from industry and commerce to work towards achieving the aims of the Initiative.
The project was originally scheduled to end in August 1990 but SCDI was asked to extend this by 7 months to March 1991.
At one stage, almost 20 companies had seconded senior staff to the Scottish Council in support of this project and well over 60,000 work experience opportunities for school pupils were identified in commerce and industry.
When SCDI accepted the challenge of putting together this project in 1988, the scene in education-industry links was patchy.
Some schools and education authorities had established strong links with the business sector but others were very much at the starting post.
Inevitably, the picture is still somewhat blurred.
Some would say that this is not surprising given the vast array of new, competing programmes launched in recent years.
The current blackcloth of financial constraint in local government and the fact that most companies are under economic pressures, combine to make the short-term future less than ideal.
The EAEI has been a genuine partnership.
The private and public sectors have combined under the umbrella of the Scottish Council and by doing so, financial budgets have been increased and the project has been professionally delivered.
The simple objective was to enhance existing linkages and to create new partnerships and there can be no doubt that this was achieved.
The positive response from the business sector to this Initiative indicates the willingness of employers to strengthen and extend links between schools and employers.
The Scottish Council is pleased to acknowledge the government's funding support with this major project.
In addition, the Council would like to acknowledge the support of the companies and organisations which readily accepted the challenge of the Initiative by seconding senior staff to SCDI or by giving generous in-kind assistance.
Schools Enterprise Co-ordination Programme
Since the Scottish Council's involvement in April 1989 in the Mini Enterprise in Schools Project Scotland (MESP), the number of secondary schools participating in the scheme has increased to 212 in the academic year ended 1990/91.
This increased take-up is a result of the in-service training programme aimed directly at teachers.
The Scottish Clearing Bankers involvement in the MESP is much appreciated and they offer financial and practical support to secondary schools in Scotland by way of a grant towards each enterprise project and a low interest overdraft facility.
The curricular review for the age group 5–14 years presents exciting challenges and during the year a very successful primary pilot was undertaken which involved 100 schools throughout Scotland.
Schools Engineering Co-ordination Programme
The network of Young Engineers Clubs was enhanced during the year by the opening of new clubs at Ayr College, Telford College in Edinburgh and at Scotwest Training Services in Irvine.
Some 27 clubs operated during 1991 and these involved around 800 boys and girls.
British Airways again sponsored the national competition, The Supply Drop.
Some 40 teams took part in the regional heats in Dundee, Glasgow and Inverness and the final was held in March 1991, hosted by Strathclyde University.
The eventual winners were 4 boys from St Patrick's School, members of the Coatbridge College YEC and as reward they accompanied SCDI's trade mission to Spain in June.
, Head Teacher of Sorbie Primary School, Newton Stewart, received a bronze plaque from The Rt Hon  MP, Secretary of State for Scotland, in recognition of her school's outstanding achievement in primary enterprise.
The winning team of 4 Young Engineers representing Coatbridge College are seen here with The Rt.
Hon.
MP, Secretary of State for Scotland.
The Supply Drop Competition was sponsored by British Airways and attracted 40 teams from SCDI's Young Engineers Clubs.
As reward,, and  took part in the Council's trade mission to Spain in June.
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE
To the Members of the Scottish Council (Development and Industry) Limited
The Executive submits its report together with financial statements for the year to 30th September 1991.
Operations
The Operations of the Scottish Council are reviewed on pages 4 to 13.
Financial Commentary and Policies
The financial performance for the year has resulted in a consolidation of the position achieved in recent years.
The surplus after taxation adds £30,109 to the retained reserves which now amount to £434,941.
This is in accordance with the Council's long standing policy to maintain reserves broadly equivalent to three months' core activity expenditure.
Operational income has decreased from £1.792 m to £1.700 m as has expenditure from £1.754 m to £1.709 m.
Subscription income has risen from £778,683 to £811,942, an increase of 4.3%.
During the year staff attracted 201 new members.
The reduction in income relating to Business Development activities from £293,656 to £219,947 reflects the completion last year of the Scottish Development Agency's financial assistance towards the International Research and Information Service.
Also, the programme of trade missions undertaken in 1990/91 decreased in comparison to the previous year.
As anticipated, income related to Manpower and Education projects reduced from £481,405 to £315,616.
This is almost entirely due to the completion of the Enterprise and Education Initiative in March 1991.
Income under the category of Public Policy has increased to £173,141 but a sizeable element of this relates to a number of projects associated with the Council's Diamond Jubilee Year and will not necessarily be repeated in the year ahead.
Although the change, introduced last year, to gross accounting has succeeded in highlighting the volume of activity which was previously reported in modest, net contribution figures, it should be appreciated that significant fluctuations will occur on the completion of major projects.
It should also be borne in mind that some high turnover projects contain a considerable element of government grants which are paid to the Council ‘en bloc’ for further distribution to participants.
During the year, joint venture contributions were received from the Scottish Office Industry Department towards the Enterprise and Education Initiative and the Enterprise Co-ordination Programme (MESP); and from Highlands and Islands Enterprise towards the Student Placement Scheme.
In addition, the Trustees of the Scottish Council Foundation granted funds amounting to £33,050 to the Scottish Council for several projects.
The various categories of operating expenditure are broadly in line with expectations.
Staff costs at £671,194 are anticipated to reduce significantly next financial year as the result of recent retirals and the Council's current policy of non-replacement when staff resign.
Property and equipment costs increased to £391,946 and this aspect of expenditure is the subject of a consultant's report which is investigating the Council's present property requirements, commitments and costs with a view to providing future options.
Income generated from investments was slightly lower than last year at £61,891.
This reduction reflects lower rates of interest earned on short term investment.
The Surplus on Ordinary Activities before taxation is £46,186 and is regarded as satisfactory.
Membership of The Executive
The direction of the Council is in the hands of The Executive.
The membership of The Executive during the year and retirals from it, due at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting, is given on pages 28 to 32.
Auditors
In accordance with Section 385 of the Companies Act 1985, Grant Thornton offer themselves for re-appointment as Auditors of the Company.
Financial Report
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT
BALANCE SHEET
STATEMENT OF SOURCE AND APPLICATION OF FUNDS
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS TO THE MEMBERS OF THE SCOTTISH COUNCIL (DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRY) LIMITED
We have audited the financial statements on pages 16 to 23 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of The Scottish Council (Development and Industry) Limited as at 30 September 1991 and of the Income and Expenditure and Source and Application of Funds for the year ended on that date and are properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Grant Thornton Chartered Accountants
1 November 1991