

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report highlights the importance of Scotch Whisky to the UK economy, in terms of employment
the trade balance, and
tax revenue
71,000 people are dependent for their employment on the Scotch Whisky industry.
If these people were to lose their jobs, they would fill Murrayfield to overflowing!
£1.8 billion was contributed to the trade balance by Scotch exports in 1991.
Without Scotch, the UK food and drinks trade deficit would have increased by almost 40% to reach £6.8 billion.
£729 million was raised in excise duties on Scotch Whisky in 1991 and VAT at 17.5% was added to the duty paid price.
These benefits have been realised despite heavy excise duty discrimination against spirits in favour of beers and wines, both at home and abroad.
In the UK, the Chancellor continues to discriminate against spirits despite the fact that spirits — of which Scotch Whisky is by far the largest category — are losing market share to lower taxed, imported wines.
This discriminatory tax treatment is echoed in the other Member States of the EC which constitute the most important markets for Scotch Whisky.
Our native spirit is overtaxed.
The time for reform is overdue.
1.
UISGE BEATHA 
1.1
The Gaelic term for Scotch, ‘uisge beatha’ means, literally, ‘the water of life’.
Scotch Whisky is the water of life for many remote islands and glens in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, where whole communities can depend on the distillery.
But the world's most famous drink is also a source of sustenance to the troubled UK balance of trade, and — through excise duty — to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
1.2
The difficulty is that successive Chancellors have levied much heavier excise duties on spirits, and therefore on Scotch, than on wines and beers.
In consequence, Scotch is losing UK market share at an alarming rate.
Worse still, discrimination against spirits is in danger of becoming institutionalised particularly within the European Community, now the most important market for Scotch.
1.3
The purpose of this report is to put these trends into focus in order that the Chancellor should be persuaded to remove the present severe discrimination against the spirit of his native heath.
1.4
The report highlights the importance of Scotch Whisky to the UK economy overall.
It measures the significance of Scotch in terms of its contribution to
employment,
the trade balance, and
tax revenue.
1.5
At the heart of the Scotch Whisky industry stand those companies engaged in the distillation, maturation, blending, bottling, advertising and marketing of the product — both malts and blends.
1.6
The cover of this report illustrates the chain of economic linkages which begins with distilleries in the Highlands and Islands, and ends many thousands of miles away in export markets around the globe.
Between the distillery and the whisky tumbler, tens of thousands of people are at work — in distilleries and warehouses, blending and bottling plants, and in distribution, marketing and management.
1.7
The study quantifies the direct, indirect and induced employment arising from the Scotch Whisky industry.
Direct employment is only the tip of the iceberg.
Indirect employment is much greater and stretches from cereal producers to bottle manufacturers, marketing agencies, and transportation and shipping companies.
1.8
In turn, those employed directly and indirectly by the industry, spend the majority of their income in the UK, and this creates many additional jobs across the country.
1.9
It is important to set the boundaries of this study.
It concerns itself with domestic UK employment and output arising from Scotch Whisky.
It does not attempt to quantify the overseas impact of Scotch Whisky, except in terms of its contribution to the UK trade balance.
That is, the study excludes income and employment generated overseas eg. from marketing and distribution.
1.10
The direct, indirect and induced employment estimates are generated on the basis of the normal methodology applied to this type of study.
The details are explained in the Appendix.
At this point it is sufficient to state that the estimates are based on high quality data supplied by The Scotch Whisky Association's nine largest companies and they provide the first published attempt to quantify the wider economic significance of this important industry.
2.
THE SCOTCH WHISKY INDUSTRY 
2.1
It is always difficult to set the bounds to an industry — to determine where one industry's activities end and another industry's activities begin.
This is particularly so in the case of Scotch Whisky.
It starts simply enough with a water supply and a distillery but even that is not necessarily the ‘start’, in that one could equally well have begun with the barley which forms one of the main inputs to the process of distillation.
2.2
Further down the chain of linked processes, are all the activities which eventually result in the provision of the product to the final consumer.
However, the heart of the industry is clearly the Scotch Whisky companies, some of which are single distilleries, some multi-national drinks conglomerates and, between these, a mix of large and small firms, single product and diversified product firms.
Here, we describe the range of activities commonly carried through by the Scotch Whisky companies before considering, in Section 3, how we might measure the employment they support.
2.3
If one starts with the producer rather than the consumer, then the chain of activities involved in producing Scotch Whisky can be described as follows:
2.4
Some companies are engaged in only one of these activities (e.g. a single distillery or a warehousing company) and some are engaged in all of these activities (e.g. a multi-national drinks conglomerate).
Some activities, distribution, haulage, advertising and marketing, may be carried through by specialist firms who also provide these services for other industries.
Where such activities are undertaken in-house, they appear in this report in Scotch Whisky industry direct employment figures.
Where such services are bought in, they appear as indirect supplier employment estimates.
2.5
We have taken the industry as being the member firms of The Scotch Whisky Association (SWA), all of whom are engaged in distilling, maturation and warehousing or blending.
All the major firms in the industry are members of the SWA, who consider they account for some 98% of the industry's employment.
Moreover, for these firms we have confined our analysis to their Scotch Whisky business.
That is, for the drinks conglomerates we have excluded all employment and activity associated with other drinks products.
2.6
The detailed data for our study have been obtained from the nine largest Scotch Whisky companies, namely 
2.7
Each of these companies provided us with detailed information of their purchases, which provided the basis for our estimate of ‘indirect’ employment described in Section 3.
2.8
These companies account for 82% of Scotch Whisky output.
The company information provided was aggregated and a ‘correction factor’ applied to account for the missing output, relative to the total output of the Scotch Whisky industry.
Because of the good quality of data supplied and the high coverage obtained, we are satisfied that the resultant estimates of the employment generated by the industry provide a very accurate and detailed analysis of the economic significance of the Scotch Whisky industry.
3.
EMPLOYMENT IMPACT 
3.1
In this section we consider the total UK employment impact arising from the production and distribution of Scotch Whisky.
For the first time, estimates are made of the indirect and induced employment gains associated with Scotch Whisky production and distribution.
3.2
Figure 3.1 illustrates the three distinct employment elements which must be measured, these being:
direct employment
indirect employment
induced employment.
3.3
Direct employment covers all those activities undertaken by Scotch Whisky companies, who, to a greater or lesser extent, are engaged in:
distillation
maturation and warehousing
blending
bottling and packaging.
3.4
All of these activities are included in ‘direct’ employment.
Some companies, especially the larger companies, will have employees engaged in distribution and haulage and in advertising and marketing but many companies will ‘buy in’ some or all of these services.
Where such activities are undertaken ‘in-house’, they appear in ‘direct’ employment.
Where the services are ‘bought in’ they appear as indirect employment.
Hence, in Figure 3.1, employment in transport, distribution and marketing is allocated to ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’employment as appropriate.
It should be noted that the procedure does not involve double-counting.
3.5
Indirect employment results from the expenditures of Scotch Whisky companies with their suppliers.
The main categories are:
cereals producers/suppliers
bottling and packaging companies
energy producers
distribution and haulage companies
business services (including advertising)
capital goods manufacturers
3.6
Induced employment arises from the personal expenditures of those employed directly by Scotch Whisky companies, and indirectly in the network of supplier companies.
3.7
The Scotch Whisky Association (SWA) Employment Census, which is based on individual company returns, shows that 15,310 people were directly employed by the industry at end 1991.
3.8
The SWA Employment Census is estimated to include 98% of the industry's direct employment.
Only 5% of that employment is based outside Scotland — primarily in London.
3.9
The distribution of this employment by region and activity is shown in Figures 3.2 and 33.
3.10
Strathclyde, Grampian and Lothian Regions together account for 70% of the industry's UK workforce.
Scotch is also important to employment generation in the Highlands and Islands, Tayside, Central and Fife regions.
3.11
The greatest concentration of employment can be found in Glasgow City District, reflecting the large number of grain distilleries, warehouses, blending plants and offices located there.
Moray District, in Grampian, is the single most important District in terms of the number of malt distilleries, warehouses and visitor centres.
3.12
The remaining distilleries are widely scattered in many rural communities.
Blending and bottling operations are concentrated in Dumbarton, Renfrew and Kirkcaldy Districts.
Glasgow, Edinburgh and Perth are the main administrative centres.
3.13
Scotch Whisky companies support employment in various sectors of the economy as a result of their sourcing of raw materials, manufactured and service inputs to their production process.
In turn, these ‘immediate’ suppliers have their own input requirements, creating a chain of backward linkages and employment generation.
3.14
Pieda visited the leading nine SWA company members listed in paragraph 2.6.
Detailed financial information was provided by these companies, and aggregated for the calendar year 1991.
This related to all current and capital expenditures arising from their Scotch Whisky businesses.
3.15
The nine leading companies account for 82% of SWA output (by volume) and just under 93% of employment.
A correction factor consequently needed to be applied to account for the ‘missing’ output — relative to the total output of the Scotch Whisky industry.
3.16
An upward adjustment factor 5% was applied.
This provides a conservative basis for the calculation of indirect employment.
3.17
On the basis of the methodology described above, Table 3.1 shows that in 1991 the Scotch Whisky industry spent £905 million with their immediate suppliers based in the United Kingdom.
The inputs exclude imports and hence relate only to domestic demand.
3.18
In order to measure the indirect employment generated as a result of Scotch Whisky industry purchases it is necessary to have a more detailed compositional breakdown of the supplier inputs shown in Table 3.1 and to trace back through the economy the whole chain of –backward’ linkages.
Table 3.2 provides the former, breaking down, into sector groups, the key immediate suppliers.
3.19
Using the ‘first round’ input data in Table 3.2, together with ‘CSO UK Input-Output Tables’, it is possible to calculate the value of the Scotch Whisky industry's backward linkages to the UK economy.
3.20
The chain of backward suppliers is measured via what is known as an ‘input-output’ analysis.
Thus, Scotch Whisky company purchases of inputs constitute outputs for their immediate suppliers.
To achieve those outputs the immediate suppliers, in their turn, purchase inputs from other firms, this constituting another set of outputs; and so on back up the supply chain.
3.21
A simple example of this input-output analysis may help illustrate this process.
£33 million of the output of the energy sector was used as an input to Scotch Whisky companies (see Table 3.2).
In turn, input-output analysis permits us to quantify the inputs necessary to produce the £33 million of energy output.
3.22
In short, the initial round of purchases by Scotch Whisky companies from their immediate suppliers merely represents the beginning of a ripple effect, spreading ‘backwards’ through the UK economy and impacting on a wide range of sectors.
3.23
To estimate the additional employment generated, a two stage calculation is made.
First, the UK input-output tables are applied to calculate the value added (or income) accruing in the UK from all the input purchases, both current and capital, of the Scotch Whisky companies.
In effect, this measures the additional UK national income deriving from the purchases of inputs.
This yields estimated value added of £836 million.
3.24
The employment creation associated with such expenditure can then be calculated using an estimate of output per head data for the whole economy.
In 1991 the value of UK output per person in the employed workforce was £19,141.
It seems reasonable to take this as a good approximation of output per head for the chain of suppliers to the industry because the chain is very diversified and includes a wide range of UK economic activities.
3.25
Applying average UK output/employee to the additional output of £836 million, yields an estimated 43,659 jobs which are dependent on the supply chain of Scotch Whisky companies.
Table 3.3 shows this indirect employment creation classified by the product category of the initial input.
Inputs of cereals and bottling and packaging turn out to be particularly important in employment terms.
3.26
The importance of Scotch to the agricultural sector (as indicated by indirect employment generated by cereals purchases) is apparent when one considers the lack of alternative employment.
The Rural Development Commission expects 100,000 job losses in agriculture over the next decade and 50,000 associated redundancies because of CAP reform.
(The Rural Development Commission, Rural Focus, 1992).
A reduction in Scotch production would seriously compound these difficulties.
3.27
The employment and income created directly and indirectly by Scotch Whisky companies and their associated supplier chains has a further impact on the UK economy.
The direct and indirect employment incomes generated will be used to purchase goods and services.
This will in turn, create additional income and employment, in a wide range of activities.
3.28
Obviously the size of this multiplier effect will depend on the ‘leakages’ which occur which divert expenditure away from domestic consumption.
Allowing for the three major leakages of imports, savings and taxation, it has been calculated that for every £l paid to an employee in the UK, a further 80 pence of expenditure is generated throughout the economy.
(MJ Surrey, ‘The Domestic Economy’ in Morris (ed), The Economic System in the UIC).
3.29
Table 3.4 shows the induced multiplier employment effect for the Scotch Whisky industry and associated suppliers.
The calculated employment gains are based on take home pay for the Scotch Whisky industry and its suppliers.
3.30
Take home pay for the Scotch Whisky companies was provided by the nine SWA members.
A correction factor was then applied, as before, to gross up for the entire Scotch Whisky industry.
For supplier companies, an estimate was made on the basis of the ratio of wages and salaries to gross output in manufacturing (taken from Business Monitor PA1002, The Census of Production).
3.31
Applying the multiplier of 1.8 (see para 3.28), the induced income arising from personal expenditures can be calculated.
This is divided by the UK output/person value of £19141 to yield the induced employment estimate of 12,336 described previously.
3.32
Again, this is a conservative estimate, since it is based on wage and salary income only and excludes profits.
For the purposes of this study, the conservative assumption is made that profits are repatriated within companies, and captured in investment expenditure.
3.33
The total employment impact on the Scotch Whisky industry to the UK economy as a result of direct, indirect and induced employment is then calculated at 71,305.
The breakdown between direct, indirect and induced employment is shown in Table 3.5.
4.
THE TRADE BALANCE
4.1
Scotch Whisky is a major contributor to the UK trade balance, with a trade surplus three times the current trade surplus for oil!
In 1991 Scotch exports exceeded £l, 800 million.
4.2
The trading performance of the Scotch Whisky Industry stands in marked contrast to that of UK plc.
In 1991 the UK current account deficit was a little over £6 billion and is expected to double in size to £12 billion or more by the end of 1992.
4.3
Over the last decade, during a time in which the UK balance of payments has slipped heavily into deficit, Scotch whisky export earnings have increased from around £750 million to £l, 800 million last year.
Scotch is Scotland's second largest export and the fifth largest manufactured export emanating from the UK — being exported currently to over 185 countries worldwide.
4.4
Export earnings for Scotch translate entirely into an equivalent trade surplus, whereas the other spirits, wines and beers sectors have minimal exports and, often, substantial imports.
Wines alone recorded a trade account deficit of £900 million in 1991 (see Figure 4.1).
4.5
The most striking illustration of the export performance of Scotch is shown in Figure 4.2.
Exports per employee are six times the average for all UK manufacturing industries.
4.6
Scotch Whisky accounts for over a third of UK food and drinks exports, and its contribution limited the total food and drink (F&D) trade deficit to £4 bn in 1991.
Without the contribution of Scotch, the UK trade deficit on food and drink products would have increased by 40%.
4.7
The trade deficit on food and drink has been the focus of a report by the House of Commons Select Committee on Agriculture.
Their report ‘The Trade Gap in Food and Drink’,(1992) states that over half the deficit is accounted for by trade with northern EC countries (Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark and Ireland).
Extrapolating current trends, the Select Committee suggests that by the year 2000, the UK will run a £4 billion food and drink trade deficit with northern Europe alone.
4.8
Northern Europe's competitive advantage in food and drink does not stem from any climatic advantage.
Instead, as the Select Committee point out, the organisation of the UK retail sector makes it vulnerable to bulk import penetration.
4.9
The strong implication is that the UK will be increasingly dependent on Scotch Whisky for its positive contribution to the trade balance.
5.
EXCISE DUTY 
5.1
In 1991/92, spirits accounted for 35% of all excise duties on alcoholic drinks, which totalled £5bn, but for only 24% of consumer expenditure on alcoholic drinks.
Excise duties raised on Scotch alone were £729 million, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Hence, Scotch is an important earner for the government but the trends in the domestic market, and particularly in the demand for Scotch, reflect the need for a fundamental review of taxation policy.
5.2
Over time, excise duty revenue from alcoholic drinks has fallen as a share of total indirect taxes excise duties plus VAT — from 13.4% of the total in 1980/81 to only 8.6% in 1991/92.
The reason for this is that UK per capita consumption of alcohol has been static from the late 1970s, as shown in Figure 5.2.
This means that excise duty revenue from alcoholic drinks is not buoyant.
The Chancellor will find it difficult to maintain the real value of excise duties on alcoholic drinks.
5.3
This conclusion applies, a fortiori, to Scotch Whisky.
The real value of excise duty revenue from Scotch peaked in 1983/84 and with minor and temporary exceptions, has fallen steadily since that date (see Figure 5.3).
A major contributory factor to this has been excise duty discrimination against spirits, particularly that in favour of imported wine.
5.4
The ratio of the excise duty on spirits to that on wines (expressed on a per degree of alcohol basis) has worsened from 1.65 in 1979 to 1.87 today (see Figure 5.4).
The extent to which this is reflected in domestic retail prices is illustrated in Figure 5.4.
Excise duties account for 54% of the retail price of a typically priced bottle of Scotch and for 42% and 18% of the retail price of typical wine and beer products respectively.
VAT is then levied at 175% on the duty paid price, further widening the tax disadvantage placed on spirits.
5.5
The present system, might be defensible if it were the only means by which the Chancellor could sustain tax revenue from alcoholic drinks in real terms.
However, independent research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies (The Structure of Alcoholic Taxes: A Hangover from the past, 1990) and by the Henley Centre for Forecasting (Competition between Alcoholic Drinks: An Analysis, 1991) indicates that it would be perfectly possible to sustain tax revenue by levelling down the duty on spirits, and levelling up the duty on wines and beers, so that all alcoholic drinks are taxed at the same rate of duty per degree of alcohol content.
5.6
The accompanying Figure 5.5 (adapted from data contained in the Institute for Fiscal Studies paper) demonstrates how the system might work.
For wines, excise duty per litre of alcohol is £10.50 (very similar to that for beers); for spirits it is £19.80.
If the duty rate per degree of alcohol were raised for wines (and beers) and lowered for spirits, the standard rate for all alcoholic drinks, which would maintain the total tax take, would be much closer to the wine rate than the spirits rate.
This is because wines and beers account for a greater proportion (76%) of all consumer expenditure on alcoholic drinks.
Pieda calculate that this would involve an increase in the real level of duty of less than 10% on wines and beers.
5.7
The present structure of excise duties is inimical to the Treasury's own interests.
It results in a low rate of excise duty on wines (the fastest growing component of consumer expenditure on alcoholic drinks) and a high rate of duty on spirits (whose share of expenditure on alcoholic drinks is falling).
All the econometric evidence — the Treasury's own demand models, the research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the Henley Centre for Forecasting, published academic studies and our own in-house work — shows that the demand for spirits is sensitive to price.
Hence, tax-induced price increases have a substantial effect in distorting consumer demand but are unable to maintain the real value of excise duty revenue from alcoholic drinks.
5.8
The basic elements of a sensible taxation policy would recognise the following principles:
Total excise duty revenue is much less buoyant than VAT revenue (see Figure 5.6).
This reflects a need to place greater weight on broadly based sales taxes, rather than on excise duties which bear on a comparatively narrow range of goods.
Excise duty revenue from alcoholic drinks is much less buoyant than total excise duty.
This reflects static per capita alcohol consumption in the 1980s, and suggests that within the structure of excise duty taxation, less duty can be raised from alcoholic drinks.
Within alcoholic drinks, excise duty revenue from spirits is declining, as its market share falls.
This suggests duty on spirits should be lowered relative to that on other drinks.
5.9
In sum, excise duties discriminate against spirits, including Scotch Whisky, and in favour of imported wines.
This is not a sensible tax structure viewed from the viewpoint of HM Treasury, far less from the wider viewpoint of the national interest.
6.
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
6.1
Between 1973 (when the UK joined the Community) and 1991, the Community's share of Scotch Whisky exports grew from 20% to 39% (see Figure 6.1).
At the latter date, total Scotch exports to the Community were valued at £718 million.
6.2
Intra-EC trade is much more important for spirits than for other alcoholic drinks and such trade is dominated by UK exports of Scotch.
Figures 6.2 and 63 contain the necessary details.
Intra-EC trade accounts for 29.3% of EC spirits production and for only 18.3% and 4.7% of EC wine and beer production respectively.
Intra-EC trade in spirits is dominated by the UK, whose sales to the rest of the EC consist, overwhelmingly, of Scotch.
6.3
This export performance has been achieved in the teeth of discriminatory taxation whose basis is, frankly, protectionist.
The wine producing countries of the Community have sales taxes which favour wines.
The beer producing countries have sales taxes which favour beers.
Only the UK is unique — it is the leading producer of and exporter of spirits but discriminates against spirits and in favour of imported wine.
6.4
The structure of excise duties can be measured in many different ways but the most transparent is to express excise duties on a per degree of alcohol basis.
Table 6.1 shows excise duties in ECU per hectolitre of pure alcohol (HLPA) prior to the July 1992 ECOFIN agreement.
For all Member States the excise duty for spirits is above that for both wines and beers.
The average difference is considerable, as witness the much higher mean and median values for spirits as compared to wines and beers.
6.5
The recent agreement regarding the ‘harmonisation’ of excise duties on alcoholic drinks within the Community must be seen against this background.
‘Harmonisation’ does not mean, as it clearly should, that all competing alcoholic drinks should be treated on the same basis.
It has been interpreted to mean that the wine and beer producing countries should be allowed to institutionalise discrimination against spirits by having quite different tax regimes for competing alcoholic products.
6.6
Hence, the July 1992 ECOFIN agreement on minimum duty rates:
introduced de jure discrimination against spirits and in favour of wines and beers;
adopted a two tier system of higher minimum thresholds for spirits against a single tier system of a low minimum threshold for beers and a zero rate for wines;
provided widespread concessions for small distilleries and special deals for certain spirits producers, none of these being to the advantage of Scotch.
6.7
Scotch Whisky is the most export-oriented industry in the UK The EC is its largest and most rapidly growing market.
It is in the UK's national interest and in the interest of EC consumers, that there should be a ‘level playing field’ on which all alcoholic drinks compete on an equal basis.
This will not occur unless the Chancellor accepts the prior need to reform UK excise duties.
Failing this, Scotch will continue to face unfair tax barriers within the ‘internal market’ and will fail to realise its true export potential.
Introduction
Report Structure
The Industry
Introduction
The Scotch Whisky Companies
SCOTCH WHISKY INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT IMPACT
SCOTCH WHISKY EMPLOYMENT: BY REGION (% Share, 1991)
SCOTCH WHISKY EMPLOYMENT: BY ACTIVITY (% Share, 1991)
Assessing Employment Impacts
Direct Employment
Indirect Employment
Induced Employment
Summary
BALANCE OF TRADE, 1991 (£ million)
EXPORT EARNINGS PER EMPLOYEE
EXCISE DUTY BY CATEGORY, ALCOHOLIC DRINKS (£million, 1991/92)
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL (1979 = 100)
REAL VALUE OF EXCISE DUTIES 1979 = 100)
Excise Duty Revenue
Taxation Policy
EXCISE DUTY RATIO SPIRITS: WINE
REVENUE EFFECTS OF EXCISE DUTY CHANGES (1992)
REAL VALUE OF EXCISE DUTIES and VAT (1979 = 100)
SCOTCH EXPORTS BY REGION
INTRA-EC TRADE
SHARE OF INTRA-EC SPIRITS TRADE
APPENDIX
Data and Methodological Issues
1.
Key expenditure and wages/salaries data were obtained from leading SWA members on a financial year basis.
The data were then aggregated for the calendar year 1991.
2.
The individual companies accounted for 92.5% of SWA employment.
In order to make the data representative of the industry as a whole, an adjustment factor of 5% was applied.
The adjustment provides a conservative basis for the calculation of direct employment since it is less than the 7.5% ‘gap’ noted above and makes no allowance for the 2% employed in Scotch Whisky companies who are not members of the SWA.
3.
All company data obtained were screened to make sure they were Scotch Whisky specific, and did not relate to other spirits related sales and production costs.
4.
Expenditure was broken down into current and capital components.
The split, however, was not always consistent across companies, eg treatment of auto related expenditure but no serious problems are introduced in calculating the overall indirect employment generated by current and capital expenditure.
5.
Throughout the calculation of indirect employment, allowance has been made for leakages attributable to import penetration — particularly in the case of overseas advertising expenditure.
6.
Adjustment has been made throughout for intra-industry bulk Scotch Whisky sales.
7.
Care has been taken to ensure that wherever costs were classified as inputs, they were external, particularly where some of the same functions were also carried out internally.
8.
The coefficients of the input-output analysis are taken from the ‘1984 CSO Input-Output Tables for the UK’.
Despite the tables being somewhat dated, it is fairly safe to assume that in the case of Scotch Whisky production, the coefficients will not have changed significantly in the interim period.
9.
The coefficients applied to the various expenditure categories have been aggregated and weighted from across a number of industry sectors listed in the input-output tables eg the bottling and packaging coefficient has been weighted from glass production (input-output industry number 17), pulp, paper board (input-output number 82) and paper and board (input-output number 83).
The derived coefficients are comparable to those in other studies based on the ‘1979 Scottish Input-Output Tables’.
10.
The induced employment gain is judged to be a conservative estimate as a result of using gross output/head figures for the whole economy.
In many isolated rural communities output/head and value added will be lower, with the result that employment generation is higher than shown using the UK aggregate data.