

The front cover of this brochure says that Guinness Brewing Worldwide is committed to being the world's foremost brewer.
I make no apologies for such a bold statement.
Guinness operates in a changing, dynamic and competitive environment.
To succeed in such an environment requires an innovative approach to business.
We must set some guiding principles for the way in which we run our business, worldwide.
At Guinness, these principles constitute our Strategic Intent.
you have already seen the first part of that intent.
In full, it is:
GUINNESS BREWING WORLDWIDE IS COMMITTED TO BEING THE WORLD'S FOREMOST BREWER.
THIS WILL BE ACHIEVED THROUGH A COMPANY CULTURE BASED ON:
AN INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO BUSINESS AND INTELLIGENT RISK TAKING
A DISTINCTIVE COMPETITIVE EDGE ON QUALITY AND IN CUSTOMER SERVICE IN ALL AREAS OF THE BUSINESS
EMPOWERING EMPLOYEES TO CONTRIBUTE FULLY TO, AND BENEFIT FROM, THE CONTINUED SUCCESS OF THE COMPANY
A DETERMINATION TO SET THE STANDARDS FOR OUR INDUSTRY.
You may ask how we intend to define the objective ‘foremost’.
That forms the final part of our Strategic Intent.
THIS WILL BE REFLECTED IN A CONSISTENTLY OUTSTANDING FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AND GUINNESS BREWING WORLDWIDE WILL BE RECOGNISED AS A TRULY EXCEPTIONAL COMPANY IN WHICH ALL WHO WORK FOR THE COMPANY CAN TAKE PRIDE.
I believe that Guinness Brewing Worldwide has been a company consistently noted for the excellence of both its people and its brands.
With the Strategic Intent as our guiding principle, the company intends to demonstrate leadership, not only in its ability to respond quickly to new circumstances and challenges, but also to set new standards of customer service, product innovation and employee commitment.
I hope that in reading this brochure you will identify some of the essence of Guinness Brewing Worldwide that sets us apart from the crowd.
This essence embraces the enthusiasm, commitment and inherent ability of our people, pride in our company — and excitement at continuing to meet the challenges of the future with innovation and flair.
Foreword by Brian Baldock Chairman and Managing Director
Introduction
In 1759, Arthur Guinness travelled from County Kildare in Ireland to Dublin, with £100 he had been left in his godfather's will.
He took over a disused, ill-equipped brewery at St. James Gate, on a 9,000 year lease at an annual rent of just £45.
When Arthur started his brewery, beer was almost unknown in rural Ireland.
Whisky, gin and the illegally distilled poteen were the popular drinks.
But he quickly built a reputation for producing fine ales of the highest quality.
In the 1770s a new drink began to enter the Irish market from London.
Called ‘porter’ after the Covent Garden market porters who drank it, it was characterised by its distinct, dark colour, which came from the roasted barley it contained.
Arthur Guinness had the foresight to make a business decision which determined the future of the company.
He decided to brew a long-lasting, high quality version of this porter and within ten years he was exporting his ‘Guinness Extra Strong Porter’ to London.
It was the start of a brewing business that, some 200 years later, would be one of the largest and most profitable in the world, a business which would be based on the dark, bitter stout that bore his name — Guinness.
Even in those early days, emphasis was placed on quality and innovation, using the finest ingredients and taking advantage of the latest developments in mechanisation and transport to improve the product and its distribution.
By the Arthur died in 1803 and his three younger sons took over the prosperous business, there were already records of Guinness sales to the West Indies.
Overseas exports had begun.
By the end of the 19th century, Guinness was being enjoyed in territories as far apart as America, Africa and Australia.
By 1920, production of Guinness was three million barrels a week.
In 1936, the Park Royal Brewery in north-east London was opened to cope with the extra demand.
The vision of Arthur Guinness had been realised and the foundations laid for the building of the international organisation that is now Guinness Brewing Worldwide.
Today, Guinness is the world's widely distributed beer — brewed in over 40 countries and sold in around 130.
The company is the only brewer whose core product is a black beer.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide is now the world's fourth largest brewer in terms of operating profit and the 11th largest in terms of volume.
ST.
JAMES'S GATE, DUBLIN
An INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO BUSINESS AND INTELLIGENT RISK TAKING
Becoming the world's foremost brewer takes more than just good business sense.
It means taking an innovative approach to business.
It also means taking intelligent risks — being prepared to move into uncharted areas, based on experience, market knowledge and business flair.
Nowhere is this more evident than with the acquisition of companies.
Expansion through acquisition is a recognised business risk but one which, taken with intelligence and care, will result in the purchase of a business that will add growth, not problems.
One of Guinness Brewing Worldwide's key strengths is the careful selection of such companies, those with excellent potential, which will take us into new markets or geographical areas, or consolidate our presence, and which can be integrated smoothly and add value to existing operations.
La Cruz del Campo is an excellent example of such a company.
The brewer — Spain's largest — already produced and distributed some of the key lager brands in Spain.
Its purchase in early 1991 was followed later in the year by the acquisition of 70 per cent of Union Cervecera, Spain's sixth largest brewer.
The two companies have now merged into one — Grupo Cruzcampo — with three divisions, covering sales, marketing and operations.
The benefits of cost savings, greater efficiency and synergy are being realised.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide has gained access to an important blond beer market, and a powerful portfolio of brands that meets the varying needs of the consumer.
A TYPICAL BAR IN ANDALUCIA WHERE CRUZCAMPO LAGER IS SERVED
The importance of a strong, balanced brand portfolio cannot be underestimated and forms the basis of our success.
The import companies, Guinness Import Company in the USA and  Guinness Import Company (Canada), have benefited from intelligent acquisitions and subsequently strengthened brand portfolios.
The integration of All Brand Importers in the USA and Rymax in Canada has given us a range of premium beer brands for import and distribution that includes Moosehead, Dos Equis, Pilsner Urquell, Grolsch, Sol and Bass Ale, in addition to Guinness Brewing Worldwide's own products.
Partnerships are another route to strengthening brand representation.
Guinness uniquely among brewers, has demonstrated the ability and flexibility to form a variety of mutually rewarding partnerships with organisation both inside and outside the brewing industry.
This has come about partly because our main brand, Guinness stout, is able to complement the lager type beers of our brewers partners.
It is also the result of long-standing commercial relationships and the mutual respect which has developed from these.
Our skills at managing these unique and complex relationships have helped to fuel expansion and profit growth.
Whatever, or wherever, the opportunities, we have to be flexible in our business approach in order to increase our worldwide presence and market share.
If there is an efficient and profitable way of doing business, we will find it.
This may mean wholly-owning subsidiaries, where we operate the brewery and all its associated marketing, sales and distribution functions, as in Ireland, the UK and Cameroon.
It may mean entering into partnerships, like the joint venture we have in Malaysia and Singapore with Asia-Pacific Breweries, of which Heineken is a key partner, or the one we have with Jos Breweries in Nigeria, where Guinness, Harp and Malta Guinness will be brewed in the north of the country and sold to Guinness Nigeria.
It may mean operating with associate companies, where the bulk of the brewing operations are carried out through licensed brewing agreements.
Such operations are running successfully in Ghana, Sierra Leone, St Vincent and Grenada.
Guinness is also brewed under contract across the globe, from Trinidad to Kenya, from the Ivory Coast to Australia.
Our brewing operations are supported by a variety of business links, from joint ventures in Japan and Malaysia, through licensing agreements with Carlsberg and Budweiser, to marketing companies in the USA, Hong Kong and the Caribbean.
Our operating divisions are run as separate, autonomous profit centres to maximise opportunities in local markets, yet at all times we pay careful attention to areas of synergy.
An innovative approach and intelligence risk taking are not simply about managing complex business arrangements, or making strategically sound acquisitions, important though these are.
Expansion by organic growth is also important, developing existing business areas, evaluating market knowledge and demonstrating confidence in the products.
Kaliber is one such product.
A technically innovative, no-alcohol lager, it was launched in the UK in 1986, into a burgeoning no-alcohol/low-alcohol beer (NAB/LAB) market.
With its clear identity and superior taste, it very quickly became the market leader.
Naturally it was not long before other brewers saw the potential and began producing their own NAB/LAB beers, most of which were low-alcohol products.
A SELECTION OF OUR OWN BRANDS (TOP) AND SOME OF THOSE BREWED UNDER LICENCE (ABOVE).
Despite pressure to reformulate Kaliber as a low-alcohol brand, we had always been convinced that the consumer wanted a quality product with a clear no-alcohol identity — and our market research supported that view.
We have invested considerable resources and expertise to ensure a superior brewing process for Kaliber.
We backed our intelligent risk taking by marketing and advertising support, using the ‘no alcohol, no limits’ campaign.
As a result, Kaliber retains brand leadership and is improving market share in a fluctuating market that has seen many casualties.
While we believe that it is important to continue researching and improving existing products, we also devote more than 50 per cent of our Research and Development resource to developing new products, pushing back the frontiers of technology.
Success is achieved by analysing our market carefully, then researching and testing our products thoroughly.
Canned Draught Guinness is a product of which we are particularly and justly proud.
It has been the most successful new beer product launched in the UK off-trade over the last decade.
KALIBER IS SUCCESSFULLY EXPORTED TO THE USA
The idea of reproducing the unique taste, character and creamy head of Draught Guinness for the take-home market had been around for many years.
But the problems of making the product available in a can seemed insurmountable.
When Guinness is dispensed from a draught tap, the consumer is able to see the ‘surge’ rise up and form the characteristic creamy head.
Simply pouring the beer out from a can did not generate the force needed to initiate the gas break-out that creates the head.
A system was  needed that would trigger this breakout and yet allow the consumer to open the can, pour the beer and see the familiar surge in the glass.
The small device which enables Canned Draught Guinness to pour as if from a pub fount looks simple, but well over 100 techniques were designed and tested before the final development of the patented in-can system.
This revolutionary technology required the development of a new canning process at Runcorn in the UK.
We designed a new machine that could pick up the in-can system and position it within the can, without damage.
A new filter was also designed.
The new product was tested in 1988 and launched in the UK in 1989 and has since been launched in Ireland, Australia and in Canada and the USA, where it is known as Pub Draught Guinness.
The in-can system, for which we hold the patent, won The Queen's Award for Technological Achievement in 1991 — the first time that this award has been given to a brewer.
Guinness was also quick to realise the broader applications of such technology.
We have used the same device to produce Guinness Draught Bitter in a can — our first non-stout product in the UK to bear the Guinness name.
The product was launched nationally in the UK in March 1992.
MANY IN-CAN DEVICES WERE TESTED BEFORE THE FINAL SYSTEM WAS DEVELOPED
Since the development of our in-can system, other brewers have acknowledged our innovation and success and followed our lead in the market.
Once again, our innovative thinking and intelligent risk-taking have been well justified and proved successful.
A DISTINCTIVE COMPETITIVE EDGE
on QUALITY and CUSTOMER SERVICE IN ALL AREAS OF OUR BUSINESS
Quality has always been a key differentiating factor between short-term gain and long-term success.
Commitment to quality has enabled Guinness to enjoy success for over 230 years.
Our reputation as a company is based upon the quality of our products, operations and people.
It has been earned over many years through dedicated teamwork and attention to detail.
We are committed to ensuring that this reputation remains as sound tomorrow as it is today.
We take rigorous steps to ensure that our brands are not only produced to the highest specifications possible, but that the quality of our products remains consistently excellent — whatever the product and wherever it is brewed or sold.
Effective purchasing is important to ensure that quality materials and equipment are sourced at the best prices and made available when required.
There is a department dedicated to sourcing and supplying all the requirements of our overseas breweries, from plant, machinery and spares to brewing raw materials and consumables.
This expertise, which can be matched by few other companies, is also available to associated brewing companies and other clients.
Not only can we use the considerable buying power of Guinness to get the best prices, but we can use our knowledge of suppliers all over the world to ensure the highest quality product.
A SACCHAROMETER IS USED TO MEASURE SPECIFIC GRAVITY AS PART OF THE RIGOROUS QUALITY CONTROL PROCESS
REGULAR CHECKING BY THE SALES AND TECHNICAL TEAMS ENSURES A CONSISTENT, HIGH-QUALITY PRODUCT
Guinness Brewing Worldwide's technical teams work closely with the production teams who constantly monitor the products to ensure consistent quality.
Our continuing investment in state of the art technology ensures that our production facilities are second to none.
At every stage in the production process, quality is paramount.
The stout, ales and lagers are brewed to exacting specifications, under stringently controlled conditions.
It is our aim to ensure that customers get what they have a right to expect — the very best product.
Our development of complex beer flavour concentrates ensures that wherever Guinness stout is brewed in the world, consumers will enjoy the consistent taste they expect from Guinness.
In the best organisations, quality should touch every aspect of the business.
We already operate to BS 5750 at our packaging plant in Runcorn and are seeking ISO 9000 accreditation for all our worldwide production operations.
These are, of course, the official recognitions of quality — we aim to be ahead of these standards in everything we do.
Our commitment to quality does not stop at the brewery gate, it follows through to the customer.
Keeping close to our customers and to our markets is essential to our success.
We have always taken care to listen to our customers and to respond to their needs.
Sales service teams in the UK and Ireland ensure that our on-trade draught equipment is operating efficiently and at the correct temperature so that the products can be served in the very best condition.
In the USA, we acquired Draughtworks, a technical delivery and installation company, giving us control over our service operation and direct access to our customers.
We are constantly upgrading our distribution network to ensure that the right product is delivered to the right customer at the right time.
We have introduced lap top computers into Ireland and the USA for our sales team, enabling them to keep in touch with their customers and their own offices.
Customers can there be assured that their requests are being dealt with quickly and efficiently — often on the spot.
By keeping close to customers, we are better able to service their needs and we can keep ahead of industry trends.
In the UK off-trade, we have consistently been voted number one for customer service in industry surveys.
In many parts of the world, we have developed innovative policies on quality and customer service.
We are bringing these policies together, taking a global view of our business to ensure that best practices are implemented in all our operations.
In this way we can build on what we believe we do well — providing excellent customer service and quality beer brands.
EMPOWERING EMPLOYEES
TO CONTRIBUTE FULLY TO, AND BENEFIT FROM, THE CONTINUED SUCCESS OF the company
Innovative thinking, intelligent risk taking, commitment to quality and customer service — in short, all the things that make a business successful — cannot happen without a talented and dedicated workforce.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide is fortunate to have such a workforce around the world, led by an effective and focused management team.
This team is structured to respond swiftly to changing market circumstances, to promote employee creativity and to monitor the effectiveness of our product and marketing strategies.
As competition in the international brewery industry, intensifies, growth opportunities become fewer and so ingenuity and creative flair become more important.
Businesses have to adapt to change or stagnate.
Overcoming a natural resistance to change is a challenge faced by many companies that want to progress.
However, this is essential to continuing success, as is the development and harnessing of the full potential of all employees.
EMPLOYEES FROM DIFFERENT DISCIPLINES WITHIN THE COMPANY MEET TO DISCUSS A WIDE RANGE OF ISSUES
Guinness Brewing Worldwide has set ambitious business targets and knows that every employee can make a major contribution.
Accordingly, the company is being transformed, through the implementation of a major worldwide programme adopting an open management style and encouraging the involvement of all employees.
This programme promotes creativity and the cross-fertilisation of ideas and initiatives throughout the company, building teams able to create and  accept challenges which hitherto had seemed impossible.
Breaking down barriers and creating an environment of openness and candour, changing the corporate culture from one of obligation to one of commitment — all these things are happening throughout Guinness Brewing Worldwide today.
There are already results, with a wider spectrum of consultation and involvement, and a more practical approach to strategy formulation and implementation.
The major focus will be on creating opportunities and possibilities.
The process is not always easy, indeed it can be painful.
The results, however, are personally rewarding, and the benefits to our business are worth reaping.
The company which can embrace these new ethics will be ahead of others who do not.
This process of transformation is already underway in the Guinness Import Company in the USA and in Malaysia, where Guinness Malaysia and Malayan Breweries merged in 1989 to form Guinness Anchor Berhad.
In all the group companies, the process is well advanced.
Different companies and cultures have been integrated within a short timescale, with fewer problems and better results than had been expected.
There are other more traditional, tried and tested routes to develop skills and confidence and create opportunities within the company.
At Guinness Brewing Worldwide, a high priority is attached to training and development, and to providing opportunities for individuals to realise their own self-development.
We continue to place great importance on graduate recruitment and training.
It is our policy to promote and employ from within the organisation, wherever the worldwide opportunities may lie, retaining our talent, not losing it.
Investment in our employees is fundamental.
Also important is  continuing investment in the many communities in which we operate.
It is, after all, these communities which shape the operating environment faced by companies and which provide our employees, customers and partners.
These communities benefit from both the individual actions of employees and corporate activities.
In several countries, we operate the Guinness Stout Effort Awards.
Recipients range from those displaying acts of courage and bravery to those who have made an outstanding contribution to society.
Where appropriate, we like to take an active role.
We have been involved with Operation Raleigh for many years, seconding executives with special skills to lend their expertise to the organisation and sponsoring employees to participate.
We have also provided practical support, including vehicles used by the game wardens operating against ivory poachers in Kenya's safari parks — the first such major sponsorship by a company.
In Nigeria, where eye disease is a particular problem, we have provided funding for the building of a number of eye hospitals.
We believe in the preservation and welfare of the environment.
We audit our production processes to ensure that we fulfil our environmental responsibilities.
We were, for example, the first company to comply with the ‘Green Dot’ requirement in Germany for environmentally friendly packaging.
And we aim to use recycled and recyclable materials and environmentally sound processes wherever feasible, minimising both the destruction of our natural world and an escalation in waste products and pollution.
Commitment to the community continued through our support of the performing arts, most recently through involvement with the Royal National Theatre in the UK, where we have sponsored a European Tour and a number of other initiatives.
Such sponsorships provide support for events which might not otherwise take place, providing pleasure and entertainment for the public.
They also reinforce the natural link between our products and high quality, original cultural and leisure events.
A determination
TO SET THE STANDARDS FOR OUR INDUSTRY
The brewing industry is fast-moving, complex and highly-competitive.
Today's consumers are sophisticated, discerning and demand quality products with real taste and flavour.
However, it is not enough simple to produce a high quality, premium product — that product also has to be marketed in the right way, with the right packaging, presentation and image to create maximum demand.
As consumer demands become less varied around the world, the truly successful company is one which adopts global marketing strategies that can be tailored and implemented with a local focus.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide has established a reputation for its advertising and marketing skills.
With some of the most innovative marketing, research and new product development programmes of any major brewer, we examine changes at a local level, identify new opportunities and develop and market the products accordingly.
An example of how this works in practice is the marketing and advertising of the core brand — Guinness stout.
Draught Guinness is well positioned to meet the current consumer trend for sophisticated premium products, while retaining its enviable heritage and tradition in the black beer market.
Given the right level and mix of marketing support, a significant market opportunity can be created.
THINK GLOBAL — THE MAN WITH THE GUINNESS CAMPAIGN HAS BEEN ADAPTED TO ACCOMMODATE LOCAL CULTURES
Guinness has been targeted at a wider audience, in particular the more individualistic drinker, a position which is supported by innovative advertising around the world.
‘The Man with the Guinness’ campaign was launched in the UK in 1987 and has since been successfully exported to Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia where different actors are used to reflect local culture and customs.
But the basic theme remains the same; enigmatic, individual, strong, intelligent and stylish — a reflection of the brand itself.
The campaign has won numerous awards.
Our continued investment in production facilities not only ensures a top quality product but sets the standard for state of the art operations.
We have now invested £150m in an ambitious upgrading programme of our brewery at St James's Gate in Dublin.
The brewery, which serves export markets as well as the domestic Irish market and Northern Ireland, is now one of the most efficient and flexible in the world, with the facilities to produce virtually any kind of beer from the same plant.
At Grupo Cruzcampo in Spain, the lager beer brewery in Jaen is state of the art, as are the new brewhouses recently completed in Seville and Madrid.
in the UK, a major investment programme in the Park Royal Brewery is already under way.
When completed, the new brewery facilities will be the most technologically advanced in the UK.
This investment programme has begun with the installation of a new wort production facility.
We continue to upgrade and rationalise our packaging facilities to improve production flexibility and increase efficiency, particularly to meet increasing demand for our canned draught products.
We have established a pilot plant at our Park Royal Brewery which looks at improving the productivity and yield of our brewhouses, through special filtration processes.
We continually look for ways to break brewing barriers and set new industry standards.
The in-can system was one of those ways — arguably the  most exciting development in the brewing industry for many years.
Our development centre is currently testing new products and processes and we continue to improve our productivity record.
We are committed to our Strategic Intent of becoming the world's foremost brewer, working with partners all over the world to continue providing quality products and an excellent service to an increasing number of customers.
But there is one more role we have to play if we are to been seen as a socially responsible company, setting standards for the industry within the society in which we operate.
We have to act as a responsible company, raising awareness of the need for responsible drinking and implementing initiatives to prevent the misuse of alcohol.
We do this through our involvement with various industry-sponsored organisations throughout the world.
These groups aim to reach a better understanding of the complex reasons behind alcohol misuse and to implement practical and effective initiatives to encourage more sensible and responsible attitudes to drinking.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide has a cohesive and integrated approach to the business, which is firmly rooted in over 230 years of brewing expertise.
This is coupled with a team of people with extensive international marketing and commercial acumen and the drive and motivation to continue our commitment to international success.
This success is something to share with the company's business partners, host economies, shareholders, employees and, of course, drinkers of quality beers all over the world.
AN INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION
Guinness Brewing Worldwide had developed a strong portfolio of exceptional, premium brands.
Some, like the eponymous stout, have a long and distinguished heritage.
Others are market leaders in new and dynamic market sectors.
These are some of the products we brew around the world: Guinness Original.
Draught Guinness.
Canned Draught Guinness.
Guinness Draught Bitter.
Guinness Foreign Extra Stout.
Guinness Gold.
Cruzcampo.
Harp Lager.
Satzenbrau.
Keler.
Smithwick's Ale.
Smithwick's Barleywine.
Smithwick's Export.
Gold Harp.
Kaliber.
Hoffmans.
Malta Guinness.
Macardles Ale.
Phoenix Guinness Shandy.
Buckleys.
Steiger.
Kilkenny Export.
Elephant.
Victoria.
Merit.
Anglia Shandy.
Estrella del Sur.
Oro.
El Alcazar.
El Leon.
Calatrava.
We operate in partnership with some of the major brewers around the world.
On their behalf we brew: Fürstenberg.
Budweiser.
Carlsberg.
Heineken.
Kronenbourg 1664.
Skol.
Anchor.
Green Sands Shandy.
Henninger.
Lion Stout.
Tiger.
In addition, in some parts of the world we also distribute: Moosehead.
Dos Equis.
Pilsner Urquell.
Bass Ale.
Sol.
Grolsch.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide is one of two core operating businesses of the parent company, Guinness PLC, the most profitable alcoholic drinks company in the world.
The other core business is United Distillers, the world's most profitable spirits company.
United Distillers has an unrivalled range of brands, which includes such famous names as Johnnie Walker, White Horse, Bell's and Dewar's Scotch whiskies and Gordon's and Tanqueray gins.
Guinness also has a 24 per cent reciprocal shareholding in LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the French luxury goods group.
LVMH has a premium brand range of champagnes (including Dom Pérignon, Möet & Chandon, Veuve Clicquot), wines, cognacs (Hennessy and Hine), spirits, perfumes (including Christian Dior and Givenchy), luggage and accessories and beauty products.
GUINNESS BREWING WORLDWIDE IS ONE OF THE WORLD'S FEW TRULY INTERNATIONAL BREWERS.
WE MARKET OUR PRODUCTS IN:
ABU DHABI ANDORRA ANGOLA ANGUILLA ANTIGUA ARUBA AUSTRALIA AUSTRIA BAHAMAS BAHRAIN BARBADOS BELGIUM BELIZE BENIN BERMUDA BOTSWANA BURKINA FASO BURUNDI CAMBODIA CAMEROON CANADA CANARY ISLANDS CAPE VERDE C.A.R.
CAYMAN ISLANDS CHAD CHINA CONGO COSTA RICA CUBA CURACAO CYPRUS DENMARK DOMINICA DOMINICAN REPUBLIC DUBAI EQUATORIAL GUINEA  ETHIOPIA FALKLAND ISLANDS FINLAND FRANCE FRENCH GUIANA GABON GAMBIA GERMANY GHANA GIBRALTAR GREECE GRENADA GUADELOUPE GUERNSEY GUINEA GUINEA BISSAU GUYANA HAITI HONG KONG ICELAND INDIA INDONESIA IRISH REPUBLIC ISLE OF MAN ISRAEL ITALY IVORY COAST JAMAICA JAPAN JERSEY KOREA (SOUTH) KENYA LEBANON LIBERIA LUXEMBOURG MACAU MADAGASCAR MADEIRA MALAYSIA MALTA MARTINIQUE MAURITIUS MONACO MONTSERRAT MOROCCO MOZAMBIQUE NAMIBIA NETHERLANDS NEW ZEALAND NIGERIA NORWAY OMAN PANAMA PHILIPPINES POLAND PORTUGAL PUERTO RICO RÉUNION RWANDA ST HELENA ST KITTS-NEVIS ST LUCIA ST MAARTEN ST VINCENT SAN MARINO SENEGAL SEYCHELLES SHARJAH SIERRA LEONE SINGAPORE SPAIN SRI LANKA SWAZILAND SWEDEN SWITZERLAND TAIWAN TANZANIA THAILAND TOGO TRINIDAD & TOBAGO TUNISIA TURKS & CAICOS ISLANDS TURKEY UK URUGUAY USA FORMER USSR TERRITORIES VENEZUELA VIETNAM VIRGIN ISLANDS (UK) VIRGIN ISLANDS (US) ZAIRE ZAMBIA