

Governing Body Report 1990
The year 1990 brought progress on our new buildings in the Hodgkin Quadrangle, and signal distinctions to some of the Fellows, though the results in the Final Honour Schools were disappointing.
To start with the Fellows: Barbara Harvey (Medieval History) and Louise Johnson (Molecular Biophysics) were promoted to university readerships during Hilary Term.
Hard on the heels of that distinction we learnt in March that two Fellows, Carole Jordan, astrophysicist and physics tutor, and Louise Johnson, had been elected Fellows of the Royal Society, the only two women on the 1990 list.
Dr. Johnson then completed a hat-trick of honours by being elected the first holder of Oxford's David Phillips chair in Molecular Biophysics.
As the chair is attached to Corpus Christi College, she had to resign her Fellowship at Somerville, where she had taught our biochemists for over twenty years.
In October Professor Johnson, as she now is, was elected an Honorary Fellow of the college.
Jennifer Loach was awarded a British Academy/Leverhulme Research Fellowship for the academic year 1990–1 to pursue her research on Edward VI.
Olive Sayce, Fellow and Tutor in German since 1965, and college lecturer from 1946–65, retired at the end of the academic year.
A noted authority on Medieval German, Olive was a most dedicated college tutor to generations of modern linguists, fostering and encouraging her pupils, and a fierce defender of modern languages in college and in the university.
She has been elected to an emeritus fellowship, and has our good wishes for her retirement.
She plans to pursue her research actively and has acquired a word-processor to this end.
Some forty former pupils attended a farewell lunch for her over the gaudy weekend.
Almut Suerbaum, of the university of Munster, has joined us as the new Fellow in German; as a specialist in Medieval German literature she continues the tradition of her predecessor.
Also in October 1990, Grainne de Burca became our long-wished-for second Fellow in Law.
Another notable event was the admission of Joanna Innes as Senior Proctor, the first time a Fellow of Somerville has been Proctor.
We soon became accustomed to seeing her in Proctorial sub-fusc, worn not just for all the ceremonial occasions but for the daily transaction of University business which is now a major part of the Proctors' tasks.
Joanna's experience will be invaluable to the college when she relinquishes office at the end of the Proctorial year.
Events of the year included a dinner in May to celebrate Daphne Park's elevation to the Peerage.
A packed Hall of graduates and undergraduates gave Baroness Park an affectionate standing ovation at the end of her after dinner speech.
Barbara Craig as well as Daphne Park returned for the Gaudy for the years 1960–5.
In November Professor Roger Penrose's Bryce Lecture entitled ‘Cosmology and the Origin of the Universe’ attracted a huge audience.
The literary luncheon at which Penelope Fitzgerald was guest speaker happily coincided with the shortlisting of her latest novel for the Booker Prize.
Gifts to the college included a generous sum towards graduate scholarships from Rank Xerox, and a substantial contribution to the Margaret Thatcher Centre from Walter Annenberg.
The appeal committee report relates other gifts, including the unusual one of a free management consultancy report from the firm of Monitor.
ICL completed their donation of computer equipment by giving another two p.c.s and a further printer, so that the ICL room is now a well-established and valuable resource for undergraduates in particular.
Susan Purver, the assistant librarian, has been appointed computer officer to oversee the room.
Though the end of the year did not bring the hoped-for completion of the new buildings, all five shops and some twenty undergraduate rooms were in use, with a further twenty rooms ready for use in the next academic year.
The conference centre is receiving its finishing touches and will be bringing income to the college in 1991, and the adjoining area has been planted and landscaped with the help of the Superintendent of the Botanic Garden.
The new undergraduate rooms in the Hodgkin Quadrangle have proved a most welcome addition now that it is both difficult and expensive for undergraduates to find accommodation on the open market.
The changes in undergraduate financing have greatly worsened their financial position, and college is doing its best to relieve hardship with grants from its funds.
In October the college welcomed the new JCR overseas scholar Mona Wahba, a Palestinian medical student from the West Bank.
JCR members contribute towards a fund for an overseas scholar and are delighted to have Miss Wahba among their number.
The undergraduate body also contains two students from the university of Catania in Sicily on an Erasmus exchange, while there are two graduate Soros scholars, a neuroanatomist from Hungary and an astrophysicist from Poland.
BP Somerville travel awards enabled undergraduates to undertake projects in Dominica, and in the Malaysian Archipelago, and the Merrill-Lynch graduate scholarship to Harvard was won by Lucy Aitchison to study Political Science with special reference to China.
There were six firsts in Schools, but overall undergraduate academic results were disappointing, However, the college first eight regained the headship of the river in Summer Eights.
Governing Body was delighted by the conferring of the Order of Merit upon Margaret Thatcher on her resignation as Prime Minister.
Other honours to Honorary Fellows include the award of the CBE to Professor Tillotson, and the presentation to Lady MacDougall (Margaret Hall) of a collection of essays by former pupils and associates, entitled Competitions and Markets.
Two Honorary Fellows died in 1990, Mrs. Pandit and Lady Ogilvie, former Principal of St. Anne's.
Julie Jack, emeritus fellow in philosophy, was appointed to a teaching post at King's College, Cambridge.
Fellows and Junior research fellows have continued to be active in their publications (listed elsewhere in the report) and in giving learned papers in all corners of the globe.
Nancy Waugh and Karin Erdmann addressed conferences in Japan, Frances Stewart in Kenya, Washington and Oslo, while Carole Jordan lectured on her research in Heidelberg and Helsinki, and Miriam Griffin gave seminars at the University of Victoria, British Columbia.
Among many other activities of other fellows we may record that Professor Anna Davies gave the Carl Newell Jackson Classical Lectures at Harvard University, that Barbara Harvey has become a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, and Hilary Ockendon a deputy director on OCIAM, the Oxford Centre for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Helena Hamerow, the Mary Somerville Research Fellow, resigned in the summer to take up a post as lecturer in Medieval Archaeology at the University of Durham.
We are glad that she will be revisiting college when she comes to direct archaeological investigations at nearby Eynsham.
Dr. Steve Barnett resigned his GEC research fellowship in Engineering to take up a lectureship at King's College, London.
Of our remaining research fellows, Nermeen Varawalla (Rhodes Fellow) is continuing her work on beta-thalassemia at the John Radcliffe, and has lectured in Bombay and New York.
Andrea McDowell, an Egyptologist, gave a paper entitled ‘The tomb-builders’ contact with the outside world' at Brown University.
The college's resources are as much if not more in its members as in its bricks and mortar.
But the Hodgkin Quadrangle has added a handsome and valuable array of buildings to the college stock, and this report ends by expressing gratitude to those who have helped raise money for it, and by looking forward to the celebrations to mark its completion in the late spring of 1991.
Library Report for 1990
Gifts account for just over half the books received into the Library this year: 1455 out of a total of 2814.
They include two large bequests of books.
Kathleen Bigland Walker's generosity to the College at large was extended to the Library in the form of a most welcome collection of books on prehistorical and classical archaeology.
An important working library on South-East Asia and much modern French literature has come to us by bequest of M. Jacques Dauphin, father of our former Lady Carlisle Research Fellow, Dr. Claudine Dauphin; we owe special thanks to Dr. Dauphin and the army of Somervillian and non-Somervillian friends who helped transport this large collection of books across the Channel, and to Ann Raynes who stepped in at short notice to deliver the last consignment from London to Oxford.
M. Dauphin's books include many on Japan, providing a valuable complement to the more recent publications which we have been able to acquire through the generosity of our anonymous Japanese benefactor.
A further gift of £1000 has been received this year for this purpose.
Mrs Sayce marked her retirement this summer by a gift of money for books in Linguistics, Comparative Literature and Modern Languages.
Douglas Roaf has given money for the Physical Sciences, and an anonymous donor for the Biological Sciences.
We are grateful to Helen Grant (Newsome, 1927) for a gift of art books and exhibition catalogues, to Dr Ken Lewis for books on genetics, and to Mr Paul Foote for books on Russian Literature.
The Somerville Drama Committee has donated the profits from its performances in 1988–90 for books on drama.
This year's gift for American Studies from the Columbus, Ohio, branch of the English Speaking Union includes a donation from Ann Hansen in memory of her mother.
A number of gifts commemorate former members of the College: Classical books presented by Joyce Reynolds in memory of Elizabeth Rawson, Modern Languages books presented by Olive Sayce in memory of Sylvia Lenton (Russell, 1946), and by Mary Cheney (nee Hall) and Barbara Harvey (nee Woods) in memory of their undergraduate contemporary Dorothy Wilson (Harrison, 1935).
A gift from Mr J. M. Beecham in memory of Audrey Beecham has been used for Criminology.
Friends of Elizabeth Patterson have contributed handsomely to the Fund in her memory, one object of which is to provide books for the Library on the History of Science.
The Library has benefited enormously over the year from special funds of this kind: the Rose Graham Fund, the Gerrans Fund, the Centenary Funds for Science and Law, the Funds established in memory of Isobel Henderson, Diana and Michael Zvegintzov, Gisela Richter, Vera Farnell and Rosemary Woolf.
This year the Library has used its first grant from the Barbara and James Craig Fund to provide additional books for graduate students, and to support two subjects in particular need: Law and Politics.
We wish to renew our gratitude to all those who have contributed to these various Funds, and to those who, over the years, have supported individual sections of the Library with regular donations — in particular, Christina Roaf in Italian, Agatha Ramm in Modern History, Norma Dalrymple Champneys in Bibliography, and Ann Messenger in English.
The appeal for Law in last year's Library Report prompted a most generous response from Old Somervillian Lawyers.
We are grateful to Hazel Fox, Harriet Dawes, Judith Manches, Judith Bridge, Vicky Andrew, Ann Upton, Elizabeth Potter, Nadja Tollemache and Tracy Minns for gifts of money, to Katrina Crossley for a valuable contact with the publisher Butterworths, and to the newly-formed Somerville Lawyers' Group for the promise of continuing support.
Our efforts at self-help have been much encouraged by the generosity of Mr Peter Leaver, Q.C., Mr Samuel Stamler, Q.C., and other members of Mr Stamler's Chambers, who have undertaken to meet the cost ofthe Law Reports and some of our journals for the next five years.
In addition to the names mentioned above, we owe thanks to the following donors of books, periodicals or money:
The asterisks indicate donors who have presented copies of their own publications to the Library, of which full details will be found elsewhere in the Report.
We are particularly grateful to members of the undergraduate years 1965, who responded to the Librarian's appeal for items to display at the Gaudy in June, and to Nina Bawden (Mabey, 1943) who has supplied us with a complete set of her novels.
Other Somervillian novelists, please note.
In September Mr Michael Turner took over from Mr Mark Philpott as Library Assistant.
Miss Susan Purver has added to her role of Assistant Librarian that of College Computer Of ficer.
The year has brought its usual crop of visiting scholars to work on the College Archives and the Library's Special Collections.
It ends with the commissioning of the splendid new Archives Rooms in Darbishire — the gift of Dr Damon Wells — which will enable us to make better provision for both collections and scholars in future.
The transfer to 
Darbishire of archive material hitherto housed in the Library has provided a brief respite in the search for additional shelf-space, which is now the Library Committee's chief pre-occupation.
Offer of Awards for Post-Graduate Research and Travel
Katharine and Leonard Woolley Fellowship
The Governing Body invites applications from past or present students of the College for the Woolley Fellowship or Scholarship, tenable for one year from 1 October 1991.
The value of the Fellowship will not be less than £3,750.
It may also be possible to award grants of lesser value to applicants not elected as the Fellow.
This award was established by a bequest under the will of Lady Woolley (K. E. Menke, 1910–12) for archaeological work in the Near or Middle East, in the Mediterranean generally or in the Far East.
Applications, accompanied by two references, should be sent to the Principal by 9 May 1991.
Alice Horsman Travelling Fellowship
The Governing Body invites applications from graduates of the College, who are by birth British subjects, for the Alice Horsman Travelling Fellowship tenable from 1 October 1991.
The value of the Fellowship will not be less than £1,500.
It may also be possible to award grants of lesser value to applicants not elected as the Fellow.
These awards were established by gifts from Alice Horsman (Lit.
Hum., 1908–13) for the purpose of giving graduates of the College opportunity to travel at such time in their careers as might be of most value to them either by enabling them to broaden their experience of other countries and their peoples or to carry out research.
The Fellow and those awarded grants will be required to submit a written report to the Governing Body on the use of their Fellowship or grant.
Candidates for either the Woolley or the Horsman Fellowship should write to the Principal enclosing a s.a.e.for an application form.
They should ask two academic referees to recommend them to the Principal without waiting for any request from her.
Completed application forms and both recommendations should reach the Principal by 9 May 1991.
Edith Haynes Scholarship Fund
The Governing Body has decided that the income from this fund, which is used according to the By-Law to provide Edith Haynes Scholarships for either undergraduates or graduates of the College at the discretion of the Governing Body, will for the present be available to make grants in the first instance to mature graduates of the College  who wish to continue or resume academic work, and are ineligible for State Studentships, or similar public support, by reason of age or inability to meet the requirement of residence in the U. K. Should no such applicant come forward, graduates of another university who are or have been members of the College reading for a further degree will be considered eligible.
The value of the grant in any one year is not likely to be more than £1,300.
Applications, stating the reasons why a grant is requested and giving a curriculum vitae and the names of two academic referees, must reach the Principal by 31 January 1992.
Appeal Committee Report 1990
Over one thousand of the three and half thousand Old Somervillians have given or are giving to the Appeal.
Few other Oxford colleges are able to claim such a high proportion of donors among their alumni.
£60,000 from Old Somervillians
Somerville's appeal last year for every graduate at some stage of her life to give £400 brought a surge of contributions totalling £60,000 — some giving deposited covenants for the whole amount and some spreading their contribution in annual covenants over 20 years.
In 1990, many took advantage of the Government's new Gift Aid scheme (a scheme apparently designed for higher rate taxpayers who hate the nearly incomprehensible Deposited Covenant form).
£600 given in this way enables the College to claim an extra £200, while the higher rate taxpayer obtains tax relief worth £120.
A gift worth £800 to Somerville thus only costs the donor £480.
Once again our American supporters, Somervillians and non-Somervillians, have made a tremendous contribution.
The College received over $1.3 million in March 1990 from the American Trust for Oxford University, including a magnificent gift from the Annenberg Foundation.
Somerville's two Appeals
The Building Appeal — aimed primarily at corporate and non-Somervillian donors — is financing the new Dorothy Hodgkin Quad and Margaret Thatcher Conference Centre.
It has raised £2,772,643 towards the building costs of £4.2 million.
The Endowment Appeal is to fund the College's teaching Fellowships — many of which still have little or no endowment — and is aimed primarily at Somervillians and at Trusts.
Grants from Trusts last year totalled £46,000.
These twin appeals aim to reduce the College's dependence on tuition fees, which in 1983 (the year in which the Appeal was launched) made up 73% of Somerville's income.
The target is to match fee income with income from endowments and from Conference lettings.
Endowment income has risen from 11.5% of the total in 1983 to 19.66% in 1990.
Conference income has remained static at around 9% but is expected to increase when the new buildings are complete.
The Monitor management consultancy
One of the most important contributions to the Appeal last year was in kind not in money.
Monitor (Europe) Ltd., the rapidly expanding management consultancy established by Professor Michael Porter of the Harvard Business School, gave its services to Somerville.
Its brief was to examine the College's administrative structure and to advise on developing conference income.
Its recommendations will help Somerville to make maximum use of its extra resources.
Somerville Lawyers
The College Librarian's desperate plea in last year's Annual Report for help with the College's Law Library led to a number of generous donations from individual Somervillians.
It also engaged the interest of Mr Peter Cresswell QC, Chairman of the Bar Council.
As a result of his intervention, the Chambers of Mr S. C. Stamler QC have covenanted a thousand pounds a year to the Law Library ‘for the foreseeable future’.
They have also indicated a willingness to increase their contribution as the cost of Law Reports rises.
In a further development, a new group of Somerville Lawyers has been established under the Chairmanship of Harriet Dawes (a partner in Lovell White Durrant).
It has taken over from the Appeal committee the task of raising money to support the teaching of Law in Somerville.
Its members will also assist Somervillians interested in a legal career with advice and offers of work experience and mini-pupillages.
The new group provides a valuable new resource for those turning to law later in their careers as well as to the College's undergraduates and post-graduates.
Events
The Appeal Committee, Regional Groups and specialist committees have continued their diverse and productive activities.
Margot Newlands and her helpers organised a Fair of Small Antiques which brought in over £5000.
The committee headed by Dame Gillian Brown held a Literary Lunch in honour of Penelope Fitzgerald a fascinating occasion that also raised £2000 for the Appeal.
The Mary Somerville Art Trust gave £900, a product of its annual Art Fair in  London, to cover the cost in fees and materials of one of Somerville's two Fine Art undergraduates at the Ruskin School of Art.
Pamela Vandyke Price's Tutored Wine Tasting, arranged by Miranda Villiers and her colleagues in teh London Regional Group, brought in £300 for the Endowment Appeal and changed many people's views on sparkling wines.
Liz Lloyd Jones's Somerville Hundred Club clocked up its first hundred members and raised £800 for Somerville.
She is now intent on doubling the membership to give Somerville an annual income of £1500 and four prizes of £300 (and some lesser amounts) to fortunate Somervillian members — with a subscription of only £15 p.a. you can, like them and Tom Lehrer, be ‘doing well by doing good’.
Regional Groups, notably the Shropshire & west Midlands Group, led by Ursula Everest held a variety of events which all helped to swell the College's endowment.
Members of hte Soemrville Souvenirs Group have continued their sterling work throughout the year and make a valuable contribution to College income.
Souvenirs are once more available by post (form enclosed).
Legacies
Somerville has been enormously enriched over the past century by Somervillians remembering the College in their wills.
Jane Hands, the College Treasurer, is always delighted to discuss a particular application of a legacy — to provide support for undergraduates, or equipment, or support for teaching.
Last year college very valuable legacies from the late Miss Kathleen Bigland Walker and Miss Marjorie Ball.
Sir Geoffrey Leigh
Geoffrey Leigh, Somerville's chief benefactor and mastermind of its Building Appeal, received a much-deserved Knighthood in Mrs Thatcher's Resignation Honours.
His concerns have consistently been with education and with youth.
Not only has he exerted himself tirelessly on teh College's behalf but he has flung himself with similar enthusiasm into fundraising for the Prince's Trust and for the Leigh City Technology School in Kent.
We are espeically pleased that his Knighthood comes as a result of Mrs Thatcher's personal recognition.
List of Donors to the Appeal (31 December 1989–31 December 1990)
Our grateful thanks to everyone listed below as this year's donors to the Appeal.
We would also like to record our thanks to the many people who have covenanted in previous years and whose names have appeared in earlier Reports.
Their continuing contributions are greatly appreciated.
Every effort has been made to produce an accurate list.
If there are any errors or admissions, however, we are very sorry and would be pleased to hear of them so that they can be rectified in next year's list.
News from the Regions
Somerville London Group 1990
This was another year of varied activity in which the target of £2000 was reached.
On the principle common to all good traditions of ‘evolve or die’, the fourth Mary Somerville Art Fair held on 5–9th April 1990, underwent a change both of form and of venue, emerging in the Tabernacle Gallery, Notting Hill, as an integral part ofthe Portobello Art Festival.
In this form the Art Fair reached a more numerous and a far wider public; and it is hoped that the Tabernacle will provide a permanent home for this venture, which does so much to help young artists of promise in the difficult years after leaving art college until they make their name.
On Monday 18th June sixty people met in Painters' Hall in the City to take part in a ‘tutored wine tasting’ of sparkling wines, under the most knowledgeable guidance of Pamela Vandyke Price, author and wine journalist of fabulous expertise, whose distinctions include having been the first woman admitted on equal terms into the male-dominated world of wine.
Pamela had chosen six reasonably priced sparkling wines — a cosmopolitan collection, ranging from France via Portugal to Australia.
While we slipped and spat with deep concentration, Pamela gave a running commentary on the wine in question, combining information about its history and manufacture with many practical and amusing tips about wine management.
This was an event where senior Somervillians mingled with many younger A. S. M. members working in the City — it was good to see them.
Many thanks to Pamela Vandyke Price for giving us such a memorable glimpse into the highly specialised world of the wine trade — and thanks also to those husbands and sons who allowed themselves to be pressganged into the responsible task of pouring the samples!
Shropshire and West Midlands Region
Once again two meetings ofthe Shropshire and West Midlands Group of A. S. M. were held this year — in May and October.
The May meeting took place in Leominster on May 5th.
This was a new venue for the group, and proved very pleasant and suitable, The  Forbury being an interesting conversion of a thirteenth century church to a suite of rooms suitable for meetings, conferences etc.
Our theme for the meeting was gardening and 28 Somervillians and guest enjoyed an informative and challenging afternoon with a demonstration and talk on the cultivation of auriculas followed by a garden quiz.
Mr & Mrs Hudson of Leominster were the speakers, with some assistance with ‘props’ from their daughter, an undergraduate at St. Hilda's.
We were grateful toJudith Sorley for suggesting and persuading the speakers.
We had been a little apprehensive about our chosen date as the May Fair was in full swing in the streets of Leominster, but everyone managed to reach the right car park and transport their offerings for a bring and buy produce stall which raised over £30.00 for the College Appeal.
On October 6th we met in Malvern at the Girls' College for an education afternoon.
Four VI formers, two in their Lower VI year and two Upper VI talked to us of their education and plans for the future under the title ‘Education for the 1990's’.
Each had had a different school experience: one in a G.P.D. S.T. school right through from its junior department, another going from a local primary school to the secondary school for year, then to a formerly all-boys but now mixed public school up to the V form, and then back to the VI form College in her home area.
The Head Girl of Malvern Girls' College and a scientist contemporary represented the Upper VI, and here again they had different backgrounds, one having joined the school from a smaller boarding school for the Vl form, and the other having gone right through at Malvern.
The poise and capability of these young women was impressive, as was the revelation of the varied opportunities available to them in their VI forms.
Many of us wished that the same breadth of opportunity had been on offer in our own day.
Somerville College souvenirs were on sale on the stall at this meeting.
Numbers were smaller on this occasion, several of those who have come regularly had unavoidably to miss this one, and we numbered only 17 in all.
The May meeting for 1991 is already well in hand and will be led by two Hereford Somervillians: in the morning Barbara Forryan (Seccombe 1946) has kindly volunteered to lead a guided walk round Croft Ambrey (Iron Age fort) and Bircher Common, starting from the car park at Croft Castle.
Afterwards a buffet lunch will be available for any who would like at The Forbury, Leominster-prepared by Amy Ormond (Wootten 1943)— and in the afternoon at The Forbury Vicky Archard (Lloyd 1966), member and past president of the Hereford and Mid-Wales Philatelic Society will give a talk and display on a philatelic theme.
Vicky has also kindly volunteered to give a general valuation of  anyone's long-forgotten schoolgirl stamp collection — if not too cumbersome to bring to the meeting!
So there will be something in the day to suit all ages — morning or afternoon or both — and we hope there will be a good turn out of Somervillians, families and friends for all or part of May 11th.
Please note it in your diary — detailed notices will, of course, be sent nearer the time.
The Wessex Group
The Wessex Group is hoping to start again this year and there will be another lunch and garden party at Langton Matravers some time during the summer.
Somervillians in the area will be hearing more nearer the time.
The Bath and Bristol Group
Senior Members living in or near Bath and Bristol gathered in October for a very enjoyable talk and lunch kindly hosted and arranged by Margaret Heath (nee Bragg 1950).
Patricia Hutchinson, President of the A.S.M. and Liz Cooke the Appeal Organiser joined about 25 local Somervillians to hear Philippa Bishop (nee Downes 1948) talk about William Beckford and after lunch they visited Beckford's Tower and Museum.
All proceeds went to the Appeal.
Two other Somervillians in the area have offered to host events and details will be sent to those who have shown an interest in keeping in touch.
College Hospitality
Old Somervillians visiting Oxford are invited to make themselves known to the Librarian, Pauline Adams (History, 1962) who is the Governing Body's representative on the A. S. M. Committee and would be delighted to meet them.
Accommodation in College for Old Somervillians: We also warmly welcome graduates visiting Oxford, out of term, who would like to stay in College; the Domestic Bursar can usually provide bed and breakfast at moderate rates, though not always at short notice.
Indeed, this sometimes possible even during term.
In the long vacation, a graduate wishing to stay a week or more may be able to take a room in the Margery Fry and Elizabeth Nuffield House and cater for herself.
There is a minimum charge for this of one week's rent, and single accommodation only is available.
Conferences: The College is open for conferences during vacations and we welcome applications for bookings.
Our conference prospectus is available from the Domestic Bursar,
President's Report
Our congratulations to Margaret Thatcher on the signal honour of becoming a member of the Order of Merit, where she has joined her tutor, Dorothy Hodgkin.
So two Somervillians in a prestigious order limited in numbers to twenty-four.
Professor Kathleen Tillotson is also to be applauded on her C.B.E.
as are the recently appointed O.B.E.'s: namely Ann Gray (1953) Deputy Head Teacher of Wakefield Girls' High School, Mrs Mary Lobel (Librarian 1946–8) for her work on the Victoria County History and Esther Rantzen (1959) for her remarkable work for children.
We were delighted that Antonia Byatt's (1958) novel Possession won the Booker Prize and would also like to congratulate Penelope Fitzgerald (1935) whose novel The Gate of Angels was shortlisted.
Sadly, we note the deaths of Lady Ogilvie (1919) former Principal of St. Anne's and Mrs Thilo Hunter (1917) mother and grandmother of Somervillians.
And what about the undergraduates?
An attractive bunch.
More importantly they have admirable zest and wide interests.
We older generations almost envy the fact that the whole world is their oyster and that the number of careers for educated women has recently notably increased.
Yet the young are living in an age which over the past year has become dramatically uncertain.
Their gifts and education will be much needed.
The completion of the New Building is to be celebrated in May.
A near miracle to those of us who have been contemplating what seemed an eternal building site.
An advance group of undergraduates moved in for the Michaelmas Term.
Reportedly they are delighted by their new surroundings.
I retire from the A.S.M. Presidency in the summer.
It has been a privilege to enjoy close contact with the College and so many Somervillians.
My sole regret is that feed-back from A. S. M. members has been patchy.
Main grumbles seem to be:—
a.
Why not more Gaudies, especially for the years of my interlocutors?
b.
Why are the College and also the A. S. M. so obsessed by finance?
Gaudies
After enquiry, I report that, apart from exceptional circumstances e.g. the retirement of a Principal, the College operates a scrupulous rotation system.
Administratively, the College cannot cope with more than one Gaudy per year.
An additional factor is that there are significantly more  undergraduates nowadays in every year than there were in earlier generations.
Yet the Dining Hall is still the same size.
However, the College would be happy to help organise lunches for particular years or specialised groups provided an A. S. M. Member takes the initiative.
So over to you.
Please contact Mary Keen.
Finance
Sad that so important a subject should be so turgid for most of us.
However, my Presidency has impressed upon me the Sea-Change in recent years of governmental policy as it affects University and College finances.
Some A.S.M. members have told me that current official policy is wrong.
So while they are prepared to battle actively against such policy, on principle they do not respond to Appeals.
I respect their views.
However, contemplating our political parties and their programmes I see no hope of a potential Fairy Godmother prepared to wave a financial wand which would render unnecessary either University or College fundraising.
In these circumstances those of us who have benefited from the excellence of Somerville and Oxford must surely do what we can to ensure that future generations may also have the opportunity to benefit from the privileged education that we enjoyed.
The French, very wisely, make a distinction between ‘instruction’, the acquisition of knowledge and ‘education’, which produces well rounded human beings the much wider preparation for life.
Oxford and Somerville produce both at present, to the advantage not only of individuals but also the country as a whole.
However, the A.S.M. is not just a fund raising adjunct to the College.
Surely it is an association of women with a shared experience who enjoy meeting each other.
Membership can not only be fun but also useful.
Even a tough Somervillian can profitably offer or receive practical support from a fellow Somervillian.
Regional groups, sadly, do not exist everywhere.
We could do with more.
Still, the A. S. M. computer can provide information about Somervillians wherever.
Back to Money.
Despite information elsewhere in Annual Reports, not all A. S. M. members are aware of the modest Senior Members Fund which exists to help Somervillians in temporary financial trouble.
Please help.
With additional resources the Fund could do more.
The Secretary of the Fund,(Christina Roaf) also needs your help in letting her know about people who could do with a spot of temporary help.
Proud Somervillians in trouble are bad at making direct approaches.
Please also note the Picture Sale, to be held in the Vaughan Exhibition Room, from 27 to 29 June about which there is also a separate leaflet.
My contract with the Somervillian Art Fund has taught me, inter alia, that my bliss is somebody else's horror, and vice-versa.
Some of us also may have pictures that we like but cannot use because of lack of space, changing decor or whatever.
Others of us have forgotten what we have.
It is amazing what emerges from attics, glory holes and ancient trunks.
Please search.
To conclude.
I hope that my successor enjoys the A. S. M. Presidency as much as I have.
However, neither the A. S. M. nor your President could function without the expertise, devotion to duty and above all the sense of humour of our Secretary.
So on behalf of us all, a Great Thank you to Mary Keen.
M.C.R. Newsletter
The year of 1990 was truly the beginning of a new decade.
The M. C. R. voted in its first African President.
Pembroke, in the form of Michael Heseltine, wrought revenge on Somerville for its defeat in the Head of the River earlier in the year.
In some ways, the instability of national politics was mirrored in the resignations which occurred in the M. C. R. Executive.
The Secretary, Shiban Akbar, resigned on successful completion of her M. Phil.
in English, whilst the Housechair, Melanie Florence, resigned in order to move into ‘greater things’— a Junior Research Fellowship at Wolfson College.
Other members ofthe M.C.R. also performed well.
Elizabeth Francis has now moved to St. Anne's where she holds the Evans Pritchard Junior Research Fellowship in the Social Anthropology of Africa.
Perhaps the greatest triumph was that of Susanne Bobzien, originally a Somervillian, who moved from Balliol to Queen's College to take up a Philosophy Fellowship.
Despite these ‘defections’ a wealth of academic talent remains at Somerville.
Sophie Mills tutors in Classics at Somerville, Trinity, and Oriel where she holds a lecturership, while Michelle O'Callaghan tutored a Registered Visiting Student for Somerville, and the new Housechair, Diane Mynors, took Mathematics tutorials.
Malia Fullerton was awarded a distinction in her Diploma programme in the Biological Sciences, and Suzanne Matheson won our admiration with the successful completion of her D. Phil.
in English within three years.
Old members of the M. C. R. continue to keep in touch.
Their post-Somerville lives are a testimony to the diversity of interests of our members.
Susan Hyland joined the British Foreign Service, while Anne McGivern survived the torturous B.C.L. programme and is now training to be a barrister in Northern Ireland.
Anne Davies, a former Senior Scholar and Social Secretary, moved back to the United States and is now working in the children's section of a leading publishing house.
In the light of these academic triumphs, it is surprising that the M. C. R. has managed to maintain a social life at all.
Traditional events such as the May Morning breakfast and the M.C.R. At Home organised for the S.C.R. were greatly enjoyed by all (or so the S.C.R. assured us!).
We invited Corpus Christi to tea and they in turn invited us to a sumptuous Sunday brunch in their garden overlooking Christ Church meadow.
Those of us who have recollections of the cocktail party organised in conjunction with Lady Margaret Hall seem to remember that it went off rather well.
The old adage ‘The mind is willing but the flesh is weak,’ could be said to apply to the M.C.R. and its attitude towards sport.
I played (well, attempted) netball for Somerville.
The rest of the team, all undergraduates, referred to me as ‘the M.C.R. bod’.
Malia Fullerton and Emma Durham, the M.C.R. treasurer, rowed for Somerville.
I have never been able to understand why anyone would want to wake up at the dead of night (5 a.m.) to go and paddle a canoe, but I am assured that the challenge is worth it.
Diane Mynors saved us from oblivion by playing in the Oxford Women's first eleven cricket team which defeated Cambridge.
Earlier in the year I received a letter from the M.C.R. President of another College asking how the M.C.R. managed to maintain good relations with the S. C. R. Sitting down to reply, I could not pinpoint a specific thing.
Was it the joint M.C.R./S.C.R. table at lunch on Thursday or was it the joint Symposium held each term.
Both no doubt contributed, but they were not exclusive.
Perhaps what makes the M. C. R. /S. C. R. relations in this College work is that both groups are accessible to each other for consultation and, very rarely, confrontation.
This ensures that lines of communication are always open.
In this vein, the M.C.R. is grateful to the College for the provision of new refrigerators, for its pledge of a new computer and for its help in so many ways.
It only remains for me to thank everyone who made this year both a pleasure and a challenge for me.
To Tessa Pollard and Liane Saunders who have at various times voluntarily assisted with secretarial chores.
To Emma Durham, the Treasurer, who against difficult odds kept us solvent, to Michelle O'Callaghan, the Social Secretary, whose art of mixing cocktails ensures that she will always have something to fall back on should the need arise, and to Diane Mynors, the Housechair  for her ability to seek out bargains (how many people do you know that could get 14 bottles of dishwashing liquid for 64 p.
?) On a more serious note, my thanks are due to Dr. Peach, the Tutor for Graduates, for being available and interested without being intrusive, and to the Principal for understanding so well the fears and uncertainties of being new on the job.
Our greatest debt is to our Scouts for putting our post-cocktails lives together.
J.C.R. Newsletter
1990 was a happy and constructive year for undergraduates at Somerville.
Fortunately this did not lead to complacency.
Despite the languid summer J.C.R. members were energetic and resourceful.
In 1990 Somerville excelled at sport.
In Eights Week Somerville's mighty First Eight won back their position as Head of the River.
Three members of the crew — Boat Club President, Erica Othen, Tasmin Brew and cox Fiona Pleavin — were also members of the Blues Boat crew.
The Second Eight were second highest crew on the river and the Third Eight won blades.
Boat Club Captain Jo Clarke must be congratulated on such an outstanding year for the Club.
Charlotte Fischer, the new J.C.R. Sports Captain, organised weekly fun runs for Somervillians which resulted in a general increase in fitness and well being.
Somerville's Cross-Country and Tennis Teams came first in the annual Cuppers competition while the Hockey Team reached the final.
Charlotte Fischer, Emma Sokell and Sarah Spittle ran both for the College and the University Blues Team, and Vicki Edwards and Katherine Walker played for the University Women's Tennis Team.
Other Somervillians who were selected to play for the University are Judith Buttigeig (cricket), Mary Haslop (fencing) Jane Greenall (football), Rose George and Ruth Roboski (hockey), Katherine Walters (netball) and Anna Turner (lacrosse).
At the end of the year it was agreed that Somerville would share Wadham's Sports Ground from 1991.
Many thanks from the J. C. R. to the Governing Body for their contribution to the fee.
Now that facilities will be freely available and not the subject of constant negotiation we hope that even more undergraduates will participate.
We listened with interest to reports of expeditions.
Vicki Heaney and Paula Hill went to the Seychelles, Julia Aglionby and Katherine Walker to Indonesia and Claire Sketch to Dominica.
Rachel Sylvester spent the summer helping orphans in Mozambique and came back with graphic and horrific reports of the tragedies resulting from the civil war.
The Registered Visiting Students enriched our experience by their contributions to College life and we were delighted to welcome back Emma Sky who went out to fly back with Mona Wahbe, from Gaza, who is sponsored by the Oxford Student Scholarship Fund and is famous for her sparkle and animated use of English.
Somervillians Rachel Sylvester and Sophie Wright were part of Cherwell's editorial team and Cressida Heyes and Sarah Joyce were joint editors of Amazon.
Jess Bawden completed a busy term as an executive officer for O. U. S. U. and Sarah Carter, Therese Coffey and Theresa Roque were all elected to positions in the Oxford Union.
Somerville Drama Society was involved in the highly successful University production of Under Milkwood in Michaelmas Term.
Rose Briant added to her previous achievements by producing the show.
Social events at Somerville continue to be very popular, especially with members of other colleges.
During 1990 there were many crowded ‘Bops’, Barn Dances, Jazz Evenings, a ‘High School Prom’ and an outdoor summer extravaganza with Hertford whose tickets required ‘Black Tie and Shorts’.
The committee for the 1991 Somerville Ball is already working hard under the supervision of Auriol Miller.
Undergraduates benefited also from the enterprising approach of the College.
It was satisfying to see the Dorothy Hodgkin Quadrangle near completion and already partly occupied, giving much needed additional undergraduate accommodation.
It will also provide additional conference facilities which have become so important to College income.
We are also aware of the need to find additional income from industrial sponsors and, happily, facilities provided in this way are well used.
A Japanese television company came to Oxford to make a documentary comparing student life here with that at Harvard.
They chose to concentrate on Somerville and were surprised but satisfied to find almost too many activities to report.
Sadly the year ended on a sombre note.
World events were worrying us more and more and some of us were fearful for the safety of family and friends.
We realised how much we depend on each other.
We felt more strongly than ever that while differences of race, nationality, culture and religion are interesting and mean we can learn much from one another, they should never be manipulated to lead to conflict on a personal or international level.
We can at least ensure that they are not the cause of any disharmony within Somerville.
The last major (no pun intended) event of 1990 for the college was a memorable Michaelmas Dinner.
After the meal Pauline Adams led a Musical History of Somerville which we greatly enjoyed.
It was a time for looking back, for appreciating the warmth and supportive atmosphere which is characteristic of Somerville and which seems to give Somervillians the confidence and enthusiasm to develop and contribute in so many different ways.
News
Based on information given on forms received in 1990 and not previously announced.
This year's form is to be found at the end of the book.
Please complete and return before December.
1913
Gladys Hill writes (aged nearly 96) that she enjoys reading a wide range of subjects and appreciates having some of the books from her days at Oxford.
She was interested to read in the Report of Dr Kay Davies's research.
1921
Alice Kohn-Speyer (Mrs Auerbach) still plays the violin (2nd fiddle) in a senior group and coaches string quartets.
1925
Joanna Bourne was awarded the B. E. M. in the New Year's Honours 1989 for heritage conservation at Ditchling Museum.
Sadly, she died on the 4th January 1991.
1927
Gwendolen Truda Brock (Sister Truda C. R.) who spent 1927–8 at Somerville as a research student from South Africa working for her Zoology D. Phil under Professor Goodrich has been made an Honorary Doctor of Laws of Rhodes University.
She joined the Community of the Resurrection in 1940 and devoted herself to the training of Primary and Secondary school teachers at Grahamstown Training College.
Olivia Ensor (Mrs Coolidge) has been exhibiting in various local art exhibitions.
She says that the area where she lives, Essex Meadows in Connecticut, is much frequented by artists.
1928
Gwen Davies (Mrs Koblenz) sent an account of a reunion in the United States of herself and her sisters Mair Burman and Ellen Williams, the first since 1943.
They were immortalized by their father, Professor J. Glyn Davies, in one of his many Welsh songs Gwen a Mair ac Elin.
When they were small they spoke only Welsh and had a black mongrel called Benja who is also referred to in this song.
1929
Sheila MacDonald (Mrs Lochhead) has been re-elected to the Council of the Royal Commonwealth Society.
In April she visited Northern Uganda to travel round the wilds of Karamoja with her daughter Alison who is working with village women, helping them to take a practical, active part in their community's well-being.
1932
Sheila Danby spent most of her working life in education, latterly in adult literacy as part of Operation Upgrade which involved working in Soweto.
In 1978 she moved into editing and after editing professional magazines and papers in the mining and mineral field she set up in 1989 her own business Editorial Services and now works freelance from home.
She has always painted botanical illustrations of flowers in watercolour some of which she published in a portfolio in 1982 and others she sold.
Rachel Young has been awarded an Honorary M.A. ‘for services to history’ by the University of East Anglia.
1937
Elizabeth Daunton much enjoyed staying with Ann Toulmin in Oxford and attending a Somerville reunion.
She retired in 1987 from her appointment as Associate Professor in Child Therapy at Case Western Reserve University.
She continues part time work at the Hanna Perkins Therapeutic Nursery School in Cleveland, Ohio.
Jean Stuart has been diagnosed as suffering from crural neuropathy after a considerable period of weakness and loss of balance.
Her condition is irreversible and she writes, ‘this is not so much news as an appeal to Somervillians who might bring the existence of these neuropathies to the attention of the public, some of whom are probably in the early stages.’
1939
Dr Helen Muir has since 1977 been Director ofthe Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology and since 1982 has been Scientific Trustee of the Wellcome Trust.
In 1989 she was elected Foreign Member ofthe Royal Swedish Academy of Science.
She has published numerous scientific articles mainly of relevance to arthritis research.
1939
Margaret Evans (Mrs Neville-Rolfe) works voluntarily for the Mental Health Foundation in Wiltshire Community Care-work which she regards as essential following proposals to close mental hospitals.
Her daughter, Lucy Packer (1970) besides mothering three sons has been appointed Head of Personnel at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
1941
See special report.
Majorie Boulton was President of the British Esperanto Congress in May at which she lectured on the history of Esperanto in Oxford.
She translated from Latin into Esperanto the Somerville song written in 1903 by Helen Darbishire, Margaret Moor and Margaret Robertson for the programme of Oxford songs, poems and lore.
She comments, ‘luckily for everyone, I found others to do the singing, while I gave the commentary and some of the recitations’.
1942
Felicity Bushell (Mrs Secretan) was widowed in 1985 and now works as a freelance medical editor.
She does a variety of jobs for learned bodies in law, psychoanalysis and physiotherapy and is an active grandmother to two small children.
1943
Margaret Gantzer (Professor Chatterjee) over from Delhi is a visiting Fellow at Wolfson College, Oxford, fromJanuary toJuly 1991 and is looking forward to meeting old friends and making new ones.
Kathleen May Herbert took early retirement from teaching.
She continues her interest in Old English studies kindled byJ.
R. R. Tolkien and has added Old Welsh.
She belongs to Da Engliscan Gesipa's, a society for promoting all aspects of O.E. Studies.
In the course of gathering material on Dark Age Cumbria she has come across marvellous stories in medieval languages and has published three novels based on them.
1944
Shirley Windle (Mrs Sawers) retired in 1987 after 22 years teaching English, Latin and Classical Studies to girls of 11–18.
Since then she has taught English to foreign students as house guests, under the aegis of a language school.
Her husband retired as Director of Extra Mural Studies, University of Birmingham in 1988.
1945
Alice Schacke (Mme Boyer) continues to paint in both oils and watercolours and exhibits locally.
Her pen and ink drawings have been used to illustrate local regional magazines and she has had several commissions.
She has now five grandchildren who are a great joy and visit her regularly.
She will be glad of visits from any Somervillians passing through France, with telephone warning.
Barbara Lockwood (Mrs Forrai) in January went skiing in Siberia to celebrate Grade A GCSE in Russian.
She looked after the Georgian (International) Youth Choir at the Isle of Man International Music Festival and is invited to visit Georgia in 1991.
She is teaching an Introductory course in Russian Language at Bromley High School VI Form.
1947
Dorothy Armitage (Mrs Turk) has moved from Manchester to Rye because she and her husband are both retired and will now be near their family in Kent.
Elizabeth Taylor (Mrs Longmate) in June gained a London External B. D. (upper second) after three years' residence in Oxford.
She sang with Trinity College Chapel Choir.
1948
BettyJones (Mrs Judge) has retired from Primary teaching and is acting as a freelance reading consultant.
1949
Mally Shaw (Mrs Yates) in September moved to Great Longstone near Bakewell.
Her husband has been awarded a Research Fellowship at Queen's College, Birmingham, so for the next two years they will be dividing their time between Birmingham and Derbyshire.
She hopes to continue tutoring for A level and GCSE and will be a member of the staff of the Readers' training course in the Derby Diocese.
She adds ‘Our children (20 and 18) are both at the stage of being half in and half out of the nest!’
1950
Chloe Gunn (Mrs Blackburn) in May won a NACF award for promoting art in public buildings.
It was in recognition of her imaginative purchasing of paintings to enliven the walls of Arlington House, north-west London, a hostel for 400 homeless men.
1951
Professor J.M. Bately (Janet Summers) has been elected Fellow of the British Academy.
Lucia Glanville (Mrs Turner) wrote to say that, sadly, her elder daughter, Rosalie, was killed in a car crash in 1989.
Her two other children work in London.
Her husband, Christopher, has retired as Headmaster of Stowe.
They are both thoroughly involved in parish and village life and further afield and are also exploring the needs of an ‘overspill’ estate on the southern edge of Birmingham.
1954
Molly Bryant (Dr Scopes) in July was appointed a Vice-Principal of Queen Mary and Westfield College, University of London.
Elizabeth Goldby since 1985 has been Principal of Eare Shilton Community College, a 14–19 Upper School and Community College serving a semi-rural area of South West Leicestershire.
Meg Pattison (Mrs Twycross) in May was elected to a Readership in English Medieval Studies, Lancaster University.
She has written various articles on medieval theatre.
1955
Jean Moncrieff (Mrs Seglow) has been seconded to the Department of Health to set up an information ‘clearing house’ on the Children Act 1989.
She produces a monthly newsletter for local authorities, social work courses and other relevant people, giving information about the implementation ofthis new piece of legislation which comes into force in October 1991.
Dr Helen Ross, Reader in Psychology University of Stirling, has been elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
1956
Helen Hughes (Mrs Brock) has been elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries.
She lectured at a conference in Czechoslovakia on amber in archaeology.
Stephanie Pickard (Mrs West) in July was elected a Fellow of the British Academy.
1957
Diana Clements (Mrs Brown) inJanuary became Chairman of Population Concern, a U. K. Charity which raises funds for population and development programmes around the world and also tries to raise awareness of world population problems.
She writes ‘I would like very much like to hear from any other Somervillians who would be interested in supporting this work’.
Virginia Luling spent five months in 1989 revisiting the town in Somalia where in the 1960's she first did here fieldwork as an anthropologist.
She is now working on a book which combines the information from both her stays there.
She continues to work for Survival International, the organisation that campaigns for threatened ‘tribal’ people.
1958
Averil Sutton (Professor Cameron) has been given a newly established Chair in late Antique and Byzantine Studies at King's College, London and will have the British Academy/Wolfson Research Readership in History from 1990–1992.
1960
Rosemary Cargill (Mrs Raza) has since 1986 been a journalist writing for a current affairs publication.
Claire O'Brien (Mrs Coghlin) is imitating her children (of which she has five) by taking a year off.
For the past ten years she has been teaching part time at Roedean and between 1987–9 she completed a part time M.A. at Sussex University in Northern Renaissance Studies.
Margaret Thomas (Mrs Davies) now teaches part time at North London Collegiate School, Edgware.
1961
Maya Bradshaw (Mrs Slate) is Senior Lecturer in French at the new Queen Mary and Westfield College, London University.
Anne Charvet works for Artech House, a small specialist, Americanowned publisher.
She travels in Britain and the rest of Europe commissioning books from electronic engineers.
Z.J. Hargreaves (Maria Perry Robinson) was on the Shakespeare Globe Gala Committee.
She devised the decorations at Middle Temple following a design used by Elizabeth I herself for a party at Whitehall which is described in detail in the State Papers.
1962
Sally Hunt is Director of National Economic Research Associates.
Dr Christine Lee (Mrs Pounder) has been awarded M.D. (London) July 1989 in recognition for her work on Hepatitis in haemophilic patients.
Shc adds, ‘please note D.M. Oxford rejected 1985!’
She was elcctcd F.R.C.P., April 1990.
She works as a Consultant Haematologist at the Haemophilia Centre and Haemostasis Unit at the Royal Free Hospital, London.
She is mainly involved in the clinical care of haemophiliacs infected with the HIV.
She has made various publications on the subject of HIV infection/AIDS and hepatitis in haemophiliacs, including books of collected papers on hepatitis and blood product therapy.
1963
Claire Lucas (Mrs Tomlinson) and her husband Simon have started the Beaufort Polo Club at Westonbirt, Gloucestershire, keeping the name of the Polo Club which was there in the 1930's.
1964
Sue Weston (Mrs Griffin) has after a period of secondment returned to the National Childminding Association where she now works as their National Training Officer.
Jill Winter (Mrs Bromley) lives in West London with her husband and sons aged 12 and 15.
She is currently working as General Marketing Manager for Birds Eye Walls Ltd, the Unilever frozen food company.
1965
Fenella Wojnarowska has been elected a Council Member, Royal Society of Medicine, section of Dermatology.
She is a clinical lecturer, University of Oxford and back at full time work as Consultant Dermatologist after maternity leave.
Lesley Mary Yardley (Mrs Daniel) is a product manager at SD SCILON.
1966
See special report.
Avril de la Portas lived in Margery Fry House while studying for her B. Litt which widened her interest in Afro-Carribean and other cultures.
She is now divorced and after periods of University Lecturing at Bristol and Manchester she has become a teacher at Withington Girls' School.
She comments, ‘It was not my first career choice but it is satisfying in many respects’.
Mary Fay (Mrs Warrent) is a doctor, wife and mother of four children.
After a gap for her family she is retraining in Radiology.
She passed part I F.R.C.R. in 1987 and is working for part 2.
She comments, ‘Having children before I really started my medical career has meant that ambition in that field has had to be put aside.
While I do not regret spending the time with my children in their early years, I feel that the medical world is not the place for people trying to combine a family and career.’
Janice Flook (Mrs Boniface) writes ‘after a varied career during which I migrated from chemistry to computing to telecommunications, I am now enjoying the early years of our son Keith who was born last year.
Virginia Ross (Mrs Ross Hirsh) came as a graduate to Somerville and feels that now provision for and care of graduates is much more comprehensive and well thought-out than in 1966.
She comments, ‘I doubt if my working life has been well organised enough to call it a career, but running various businesses has been very satisfying’.
She lives in Oxford, belongs to several conservation groups, is divorced, has a daughter and works at present as a financial manager.
Jenny West (Dr Bywaters) obtained membership of the Faculty of Public Health Medicine (M.F.P.H.M.) inJuly 1989.
In May 1990 she was appointed Consultant on Public Health Medicine, Central Birmingham Health Authority.
1967
Michele Roberts having seen her fifth novel In the Red Kitchen published in 1990 is currently working on a screenplay for French television and on a new novel.
Margaret Sidebottom (Mrs Clark) Bristol obtained her Ph.
D. (C.N.A.A.) via Trinity College.
1968
Carole Hillenbrand since 1979 has been lecturer in Arabic at the University of Edinburgh, where here husband Robert, is Professor of Islamic Art.
1969
Jacqueline Clements writes ‘In 1989 I became a partner in the Lincoln's Inn Firm of Hunters — the first woman partner in 275 years’.
Stephanie Hall is a voluntary assistant to Barnardos Children's Charity Appeals Organiser.
1969
Kay Partridge (Dr Davies) has been granted an Honorary D.Sc., University of Victoria, Canada.
This year her team at the Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital and colleagues at Columbia University, New York have made significant progress in their search for the exact location of the gene for causing spinal muscular atrophy, a muscle-withering disease which is the leading inherited cause of infant death.
1970
Lucy Neville-Rolfe see Evans 1939
1971
Patricia Burns (Mrs Sellers) since July 1989 has been working as Assistant Secretary, Dept. of Energy, with responsibility for safety, health and environmental issues in the nuclear industry and for accident and emergency planning at civil nuclear sites.
She has shared the post with another Oxford graduate — the first example of a ‘job-share’ at Assistant Secretary level in the Civil Service.
Penelope Eltis (Dr Rapson) is busy leading Fiori Musicali to fame and glory.
The group, which she directs from the harpsichord, specialise in 18th Century music which they play on period instruments.
They now have three records to their credit.
The first, the Four Seasons by Vivaldi with Elizabeth Wallfisch (violin) has received good notices in Gramophone.
Their latest release is a recording of cantatas by Scarlatti (Domenico) with Kate Eckersley, and to be released early in 1991 is their most ambitious venture yet, Purcell's ode Hail Bright Cecilia.
Ruth Thompson writes ‘I was promoted to Grade 5 (Assistant Secretary) in the Department of Trade and Industry in April.
As well as travelling quite frequently for work, particularly in connection with the Single Market in financial services, I have managed to visit friends in Mexico, the U. S. A. and Spain this year.
I still contribute the occasional academic article on Argentine history’.
Trudy Watt has been College Lecturer in Biological Statistics at St. John's College, Oxford.
She was elected in April Lecturer in Statistics at London University (Wye College).
1972
Alison Hardie spoke on ‘Ji Cheng's Yuan Ye (The Craft of Gardens) in its social setting’ at a conference on the ‘Authentic Garden’held in Leiden on 8–11 May 1990 to mark the 400th anniversary of the Leiden Botanic Garden.
She is still working as Assistant to the President of  Delaware North Companies International Ltd. with her responsibilities recently enlarged to include personnel and legal matters in their Asian subsidiaries.
The Conference proceedings were published in the autumn and she contributes to Apollo, Artention (Hong Kong) etc. articles on Chinese art and culture.
1973
Barbara Habberjam has returned to work part-time in the Civil Service.
She has been seconded to the Civil Service Selection Board, where she is helping to devise the entrance competition for the ‘fast stream’ applicants to the Civil Service, Diplomatic Service and Tax Inspectorate.
In her spare time she does some translation from French.
Aileen Simkins (Mrs Hingston) is Assistant Secretary in the Finance Division of the Department of Health.
She looks forward to relocating to Leeds with the NHS Management Executive in 1992.
Rachel Sims (Mrs Miller) is still serving with the Metropolitan Police Force, and for the last few years had been at the rank of inspector, until recently holding the post of Staff Officer to the Deputy Assistant Commissioner in charge of the North West London.
Now she has gone to a post at Hendon responsible for training new recruits.
She has married a chief inspector with the Met.
and moved to St. Albans.
She writes, ‘We live very happily here with not enough hours in the day to cope with very full lives!’
Hilary Walters teaches Classics at Loughborough Grammar School.
She serves on several committees connected with classics teaching.
She still travels in the Mediterranean whenever possible and is learning Modern Greek (and a little Turkish and Arabic).
She makes the most of concerts, plays, films, opera and ballet in Nottingham.
1974
Clare Lawrence (Mrs Hatcher) writes, ‘Since qualifying as a solicitor specialising in corporate and commercial work in private practice I worked in industry 1986- 8 as a Legal Director of Bricom plc.
While there I was part of a management team that led a successful buyout of the Bricom Group from B & c .
In 1988I returned to private practice where I am a consultant with Clyde & Co., City Solicitors’.
Teresa Moylan (Mrs Clements) has given up full time work because of her children.
She has obtained a City and Guilds qualification in Horticulture which at present she uses ‘only working part-time at a garden centre!’ but hopes to do more with it in the future.
Sue Owen has been appointed to a (temporary) lecturership in English at the University of Leeds.
Victoria Tietze (Mrs Larson) teaches Classics at Montclair State College, N.J., U.S.A. 
1975
Rosalind Sharp is working on The Independent on Sunday.
C.J.E. Williams is a solicitor, an associate with Simpson Curtis Solicitors, in Leeds.
1976
Vanessa Couchman completed her M.B.A.
at Warwick Business School in September, having decided to leave the publishing industry after ten years.
She has been appointed to the Audit Commission as a manager in their Special Projects Unit, providing management consultancy to local authorities and the N.H. S. She is based in the Midlands.
Sandra Amelia Delmonte (Mrs Bendyk) works as a commercial property solicitor at Nabarro Nathanson in London.
She works full time, juggling her career with raising two small children.
She comments, ‘Life seems like being on a perpetual moving merry-go-round but I love every minute of it.’
Penelope Lord (Mrs Baines) since 1988 has been Principal Clinical Psychologist with the North Devon Health Authority, based in Barnstaple.
Latha Menon is an editor in Science and Technology in the Educational Division of Oxford University Press.
Rachel Walton (Mrs Bertenshaw) was promoted Head of Modern Languages, Dane Valley High School, Congleton, Cheshire.
1977
Emily Driver worked in dictionary publishing for some years whilst campaigning on the subject of child abuse.
She founded a G.L.C. funded organisation to combat it, and wrote a book about it.
In 1988 she was called to the bar and now practises in London.
She specialises in criminal and family law but hopes to develop an environmental practlce.
Cindy Gallop has given up her career in theatre marketing and gone into advertising.
She worked for various companies but is now an account director with Bartle Bogle Hegarty.
She runs the advertising for Phileas Fogg Snacks, Babycham and Shell which she describes as an interesting mixture.
She would be interested in hearing from other Somervillians in advertising.
Rachel Hetherington works as a teacher in Egypt where her husband is a writer with the Church Missionary Society.
She has several years' experience of teaching in the Sudan.
1977
Angelika Manyoni (Mrs Arend) is Associate professor at the University of Victoria, Canada.
She has received for her 1990–91 sabbatical year a Research Grant from the Social Sciences and  Humanities Research Council of Canada to support her work on a new book on Gottfried Benn's lyrical poetry.
Margaret Robbins (Dr Mohamed-Salih) has been working since January in the Health Care Evaluation Unit, Dept. of Public Health Medicine, University of Bristol as a M. R. C. Research Fellow.
Katherine Taylor (Dr Black) works part time for Worcester Diocesan Adult Education of fice.
She and her husband live in Tenbury Wells where he is Rector of the six parishes of the Teme Valley South group.
Sally Owen (Mrs Blenkinsopp) has been awarded an M. B. A. by Manchester Business School and is now an independent business consultant.
Ann McAllister Olivarius in December 1989 moved to Virginia where her husband Jef McAllister is working for Time Magazine as its State Department correspondent; she herself works as a lawyer for Perot Systems Corporation.
In May she came to Oxford for her D. Phil viva.
She writes, ‘The children are thriving and our jobs give us a great sense of contribution and pleasure!’
Helen Tattersfield (Dr Lenzi) has taken up a G.P. partnership in Downham, Kent.
1979
Dr Claudine Dauphin (Lady Carlisle Research Fellow) met several Somervillians at her lecture in Oxford in May on Dor which she mentioned in last year's Report.
She repeated the lecture in Cambridge.
After spending two weeks in Edinburgh and London, discussing plans for the final publication of her surveys in the Golan undertaken while she held the Lady Carlisle Fellowship, she returned to Oxford and enjoyed the hospitality of Somerville S. C. R. for a fortnight's intensive work in the libraries.
She has been elected to the editorial board of the Bulletin of the Anglo-Israel Archaeological Society, London.
Katherine Jones (Dr Pelly) after completing her D.Phil in 1987 worked for about three years at Phillips and Drew, stockbrokers, where she specialised in the financial analysis of publishing companies.
She has nowjoined Maxwell Communications Corporation to work in Robert Maxwell's office as the Corporate Analyst.
She writes, ‘The work is interesting, ever changing and demanding; Mr Maxwell doesn't recognise conventions like weekends!’
Her daughter Anna is now ten and has moved up to her next school.
1980
Mary Jane Attenburrow in February began to work as S.H.O. Psychiatrist (Oxford Rotation).
Kerry Monaghan (Mrs Monaghan Smith) started a two year full time M.B.A.
at the London Business School.
Jane Stemp won a £50 prize in the 1989 National Poetry Competition.
She is in frequent contact with Mary Pring (M.C.R. 1983) and Sara Fletcher (1980).
She persuaded Dr Helena Hamerow (M.S.R.F.) to address the Oxford University Archaeological Society, of which Jane is President.
Hannah Sunderland (Mrs Houghton-Berry) teaches at a prep.
school in Robertsbridge.
1982
Helena Drummond (Mrs Johnstone) qualified as a solicitor in 1989.
She now works in corporate tax at Richards Butler in the City.
1984
Anita Mathias in 1989 received her M.A. in English and Creative writing from the Ohio State University.
She now works as a freelance writer at Palo Alto, California, where her husband does research in Computer Science at Stanford University.
Victoria Worsley appeared in Make Me A Statue, a one-woman show at the Burton-Taylor rooms, Oxford Playhouse, in April.
1985
Michelle Armstrong is an editor at Thames and Hudson publishers.
Robyn Payne (Mrs Wright) has married a farmer, Nigel James Wright, in South Leicestershire.
She continues to work as an account manager with ICI for an area in the South East which includes Oxford.
Besides honeymooning in deepest China (off the traditional tourist route) she still helps to organise the modern pentathlon (run-swimshoot-horseride-fence) Varsity matches as President of the Old Blues Association.
Kate Wall works for Unilever in manufacturing management.
She is training to become a Chartered Engineer.
1986
Devinka Goonetileke (Mrs Wanigeskera) is working for the Department of Primary Industries.
Jessica Rainford has given up publishing and returned to Oxford.
She won a Hodgson Graduate Scholarship at St. Hugh's and is starting research in Medieval Icelandic Literature, hoping to do a D.Phil.
1987
Jane Maycock is training for the ordained ministry in the Church of England.
Articles and Reviews
The Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke, 1605–1675 and Contemporaries of Bulstrode Whitelocke, edited by Ruth Spalding (Oxford University Press for The British Academy, 1990)
Does Bulstrode Whitelocke's diary merit nearly nine hundred pages of beautifully-edited text, plus another five hundred pages of biographical notes?
Despite his three wives and seventeen children, Whitelocke as a diarist lacks Pepys's psychological fascination.
He does not have Evelyn's elegance, either, although his spare, laconic, style can produce some memorable passages; here, for example, is a Queen Christina of Sweden — very different from her portrayal by Greta Garbo — telling Whitelocke, who had hesitated to pass on a letter and a mastiff sent by the preacher, Hugh Peter, that ‘the dog and the letter did belong to her, and she would have them’.
Indeed, the style has its own charm, as when Whitelocke comments after the quaker, William Penn, had preached in his study that the congregation, although substantial, was ‘the fewer because it was very wet’.
But Whitelocke is to be read primarily for his account ofthe extraordinary events of the 1640s and 1650s, events in which he was closely involved as a member of parliament, a commissioner of the great seal and, in 1659, Lord President of the Council; he also served from November 1653 to May 1654 as ambassador to Sweden.
Whitelocke was constantly sceptical of the motives that impelled the politicians and men of affairs who surrounded him, and he was always ready to voice his doubts.
Thus, in 1652, when Cromwell raised with Whitelocke the momentous question, ‘What if a man should take upon him to be king?’,
Whitelocke replied with brutal honesty that in his opinion, ‘it should be more to his prejudice than advantage to do so’, a remark that, predictably, displeased Cromwell.
However, Whitelocke, like  Cromwell himself, was not ‘wedded or glued to forms of government’, and in 1657 he was one of those who urged Cromwell to accept the crown, in the hope that it would wean the Protector from his military power-base.
Given this, Whitelocke was lucky to escape prosecution at the Restoration; to the credit of both, he and Charles II made their peace when Whitelocke returned some royal manuscripts that he had saved from plunder and lectured the king about Welsh, which he said was ‘his Majesty's more ancient native language than English’.
It is a pity that the otherwise excellent index has no headings under topics such as‘music’, ‘women’, or ‘servants’, for the diary tells us much on these and other matters of cultural and social interest.
However, the reader who has to look herself for these useful references will find much else to inform and entertain.
The Student Cook Book by Sarah Freeman,(Collins & brown , 1990) £4.99
Sarah Freeman's The Student Cook Book is snappily sub-titled ‘Eating well without mixer, microwave or money’.
The recipes in it (there are over 100) are indeed ideally suited to students; Sarah Freeman sensibly assumes a fairly restricted range of kitchen equipment, and the ingredients are all basic supermarket supplies.
But there are lots of categories of cooks who would greatly appreciate a collection of cheap, quick, simple, healthy and trendy meals; The Parents of Students Cook Book springs to mind as one of many alternative titles.
The major restriction must of course be culinary inexperience.
The Student Cook Book is exceptionally good at providing basic, helpful advice without sounding patronising or comic, and it is refreshing to have clear, reasonably technical explanations of, for instance, what chemical changes happen to the yeast in bread dough.
This book treats cooking neither as a mystery for initiates nor as a skill only the mentally deficient will not have mastered intuitively.
There are also informative sections on nutritional values, and storage and hygiene.
Dwelling on these restrictions, and all this wholesome, worthy advice, gives a very poor idea of how much fun the recipes are, and how tempting.
They are trendily cosmopolitan: tabouleh and tsatziki, gazpacho and gnocchi.
Most are suitable for vegetarians (and conveniently marked as such in the index) and the book as a whole is very well organized.
As well as conventional chapter divisions (Soups, pasta, pastry, rice and so on) there's a good section called ‘Parties and Dinner parties’ and finally, engagingly, ‘When you're really broke’.
The constant stress on healthy, fresh ingredients makes the book a pleasure to browse through, and there's enough variety for students to base all their meals on it.
The Student Cook Book could be the most useful book on their reading list.
Life before Somerville
Coming Up to Oxford by Lady Redcliffe-Maud (Jean Hamilton 1924)
It all happened by accident — for me, one of the most fortunate accidents in my life.
In September 1922 I went to the Royal College of Music to study the piano under Harold Samuel (the great Bach player of the time).
I enjoyed the College enormously, the life in general, the friends I made, and the music in particular .
I had no idea of doing anything else but study there for the first three years after school, for which my hardworking and frugal parents had saved enough money.
Then, in the summer of 1923 I went to stay with an old schoolfriend in Grasmere, whose brother, Micky, was a Scholar at Brasenose.
He suggested my coming to see him in Oxford in the Autumn Term.
On the appointed Saturday in October, Micky met me at the railway station and drove me (in a fairly elderly Morris Oxford with a canvas hood) right down the High as far as the University Church, and there he parked (no problem then).
He immediately took me up the tower, and — stepping out onto the balcony — I saw Oxford for the first time.
Walking round the tower, one sees the whole thing from every angle.
It was like a flash of light!
I gasped — and I knew I must come up somehow.
For the next few weeks I thought of little else, and planned to read music there.
My parents were incredulous and — rather naturally — disapproving.
Harold Samuel was furious, ‘What do you want to go to that place for?
Who do you think you will learn from there?’
I said nervously ‘Oh, I thought perhaps you would teach me Mr Samuel if I came up to London for lessons’.
(I hadn't really thought the thing out properly.
) Somewhat mollified he said perhaps he would, but he thought the whole scheme quite mad — which indeed it was.
However, the Director of the Royal College of Music, Sir Hugh Allen, a pretty terrifying man to a young student, was also Professor of Music  in Oxford, so I tremulously consulted him.
My plan was to take a Bachelor of Music degree — for which, at that time one did not even have to go into residence.
It could be taken externally — First and Second B.Mus. followed by an ‘Exercise’ for Chorus and Orchestra.
This I could have done from the Royal College — but it was Oxford I wanted — and to go to Somerville where I had a friend who told me about it.
In the end my parents agreed that I could go up for one year instead of being at the Royal College of Music.
If I took First B. Mus. at the College I could go to Oxford and take Second B. Mus. there, and afterwards write my Exercise — as that was financially possible for them.
But how to get into Oxford?
At that time, to get into Somerville, one had to do an examination in four subjects — the alternative being
1) Latin or Greek,
2) Maths,
3) Science,
4) English,
5) History,
6) French or German,
7) Music.
(There were no doubt others, but these seven were a remote possibility for me to choose from.
) At school, so that I would have time to practise two hours a day, by the age of 15, I had been allowed to drop Latin (Greek did not at any point arise) and Maths.
I had never learnt any Science — or History — because at school we were taught by a savage creature of uncertain temper, who had favourites, of whom I was terrified, so I learnt nothing.
And, as one later moved into other divisions to be taught by other people one always seemed to come back to the Roman Conquest of Britain, which I found particularly boring, and learnt nothing.
So how was I to get into Somerville?
Well, of the necessary four subjects Music was obvious.
English equally delightful.
French was just possible as there would be no oral examination.
But what about Latin or Greek?
Latin really was impossible as I couldn't face a prose, but it was discovered that the Greek papers consisted only of two papers:
I) a thorough knowledge of two Euripides plays, the Alcestis and Medea, and
2) a Platonic Dialogue translated into English!
So by offering English, French, Greek and Music I could at least attempt to get into Somerville by December 1923.
But I must learn some rudimentary Greek — starting from the alphabet onwards.
In the early Spring of 19231 began having Greek lessons from a charming elderly lady — Miss Rose Montague — who was a friend of my housemistress at St. Leonards.
I enjoyed the lessons a great deal, and became fascinated by Greek.
I worked on faithfully through the Summer holidays, and on into the Autumn Term.
It was a terrific grind with all the work at the College to take first place, and Greek and French to be squeezed in somehow.
Then the time for exams came.
In December 19231 went up to Somerville — was shown my room and looked at my timetable.
On   Monday there was the English paper — mainly Twelfth Night, which was money for old rope as I had played Feste at school.
Tuesday was the Music Exam which was not difficult as I was already working at the Theory of Music at the Royal College.
On Wednesday came the Greek paper.
I knew the two plays almost by heart.
Though very tense throughout the whole week, I felt that things were not going too badly.
But I was dreading the French paper to which I had only given the dregs of my time as I had had so much else on my plate.
The paper was at 2 p. m. on Thursday.
So that morning I went to the College library and began trying to remind myself of the intricacies of French verbs.
I stopped after a short while and said ‘this is nonsense — I can't learn any more of this sort of thing by two o'clock — I must just do a prose right through and see how I get on’.
Fortunately I had with me a book of prose exercises that we had used at school, so, at random I chose one which I vaguely remembered.
I worked right through it and then looked up the proper translation, which was at the end of the book.
I corrected it.
The clock struck one and I went down the lunch in Hall.
I then bicycled down to the Schools — sat down in my place.
With a trembling hand I turned over the paper which was face down.
There was one question — and one only.
It was the prose at which I had been working all morning.
The other papers had apparently satisfied the examiners.
So, after a very busy two more terms at the Royal College in which I gave my first recital, and also had a chance of playing the Beethoven Concerto No. 4 in G major at one of the Patron's Fund Concerts with Adrian Boult as conductor, I left the College and came up to Oxford in October 1924.
Eventually I stayed until 1926 as I made the composition of my ‘Exercise’ my excuse for being there.
I played everywhere, and because we, in the Music School, were taught by tutors in men's colleges I got to know them well, and went in and out in defiance of the chaperone rules — which were then still in force…
In my case the question of chaperonage came up with regard to the O. U. D. S. At that time all the women's parts in the O. U. D. S. plays were taken by professional actresses who came down from London for the rehearsals and performances — and very glamorous they were too — Peggy Ashcroft among them!
I was playing with the orchestra accompanying Peer Gynt, conducted by the New College organist, Dr (and eventually Sir) William Harris.
Permission for my taking part was asked of the Proctors.
The answer was that I could play as long as I stayed the audience side of the footlights!
Fortunately it became necessary for me to accompany the well-known Solveig's Song on a dulcitone, which meant that I had to be close beside her in the wings.
Having got across the footlights I became part of the O. U. D. S., and was invited to their  club in George Street just opposite the theatre — the New Theatre as it then was — now the Apollo.
So that added to the delight and fullness of life.
During my last term, the Summer Term of 1926, the Heather Festival was held commemorating the foundation of the Music School by William Heather in 1626.
Sir Hugh Allen — as professor — had organized a tremendous week of choral concerts, symphony concerts, ballet and other delights.
On 6th May — the day on which, incidentally, it actually snowed!— I had the good fortune to play in the Brandenburg Concerto No. 5 in D major, which formed one halfofa concert in the second part of which was the first performance of Vaughan Williams' Sancta Civitas.
The concert was at 2.30 and there was a rehearsal in the morning.
I was, as usual, appallingly nervous, so went back during the lunch hour to practise.
A large figure was there going from one music stand to another with a pencil.
It was Vaughan Williams.
He greeted me, and said ‘I'm correcting the loud instruments first.’
But as this May was the time of the General Strike the situation was pretty uncertain.
Trains were not running, or if they were, they were driven by undergraduates or other amateurs.
In those days private cars were relatively rare, and I don't think that there were long-distance buses on the road.
There was the question of cancelling the whole Festival, but fortunately that did not prove to be necessary, and by the end of the week the strike collapsed — and, tragically, the men went back to work having gained nothing.
A few very happy weeks followed.
I fufilled my Mus.Bac. obligations.
Commem Balls followed.
Then I went down to live in London and face reality.
Somerville-1941 Special Report
Degree courses vary in length, but because of the war our stay at Somerville varied even more.
Only the young, intending teachers, and medicals were allowed the full normal course for their subject.
The rest took ‘shortened honours’, some returning for a further year after the war to complete full honours — three achieving firsts, to bring the score for our year to seven.
One or two went down without taking examinations.
The W.R.N.S. enlisted Elizabeth Adams, Valerie Dundas-Grant, Christina Muir, Stephanie Mullins and Marigold Phillips, and the A. T. S. Margaret Butterworth.
Among those who joined the Foreign Office/Army Intelligence at Bletchley Park were Lorna Bottomley, Mary Humphrys, Lucienne Palmer and Janet Seligman.
Connie Bethwaite and Corinna Cochrane joined departments of the Air Ministry and Janet Hartley worked in the Ministry of Aircraft Production.
Of the scientists Margaret Sharman did research in the Department of Zoology at Oxford, Monica Shorten worked on rat control in the Bureau of Animal Population and Jean Stanier worked on a nutritional survey at the National Institute for Research in Dairying at Reading.
Maurine Rowan nursed at St. Thomas's Hospital and Tessa Wilson trained in Housing Property Management.
Pamela Walford joined the B.B.C. Staff Training Reserve and subsequently the Ministry of Information; and Pen Scott-Stokes married her Army husband.
As far as I can discover from replies received or from the 1959 College Register the rest of us, either from choice or to fulfil the conditions of grants or the needs of wartime, became teachers, the length of our service varying accordingly.
The Special Report for 1940 last year recorded wartime memories of Somerville, many shared by us, so I have tried to augment, not repeat.
We were blissfully sheltered in those years at Somerville from most of the grimness of war — fully aware of this as we look back now, but even then conscious of our privileged position.
The impact of the war was felt indirectly.
Valerie Dundas-Grant worried about the repeated air raids on her home area, and felt guilty at not being herself involved in the war effort.
Janet Seligman's parental home was partly destroyed by a bomb, and Rita May's damaged.
Christina Muir recalls the shock of seeing badly burned airmen being treated in the Radcliffe when doing her ‘war-work’ as a ward maid in the hospital.
Some had fathers or brothers in the forces, one at least killed on active service.
But many of us were conscious of having escaped any significant impact from the war.
Tessa Wilson: ‘I, for one, was remarkably, perhaps disgracefully, cocooned from the world.
Wartime recollections are thus mostly from the ‘fun’ side of'war work'; bicycling round as  College Messenger; working in the Radcliffe laundry on my own after the staff had gone, with no sound but the crickets, and the smell of damp clean sheets and steam; walking into a lamp-post in the blackout; no church bells…
’ A book in the J. C. R. had to be signed each week to record the hours of war work required of us in return for the privilege of remaining students, and the variety of jobs was immense, including, in the long vacation, harvest and fruit-picking camps in various parts of rural England.
Nevertheless the idyllic side of undergraduate life was there to be enjoyed — though short on male companions as the pre-war ratio of male and female undergraduates was about reversed.
Cycling was certainly less hazardous than today, as petrol rationing restricted motor traffic.
Mary Humphrys wrote: ‘I fell in love — with Oxford itself and with its people; with breakfasts in Wytham Woods; teas in punts; Iying on one's tummy watching the blue of the lake at Blenheim after the cycle ride; carols in New College chapel…
’ Lucienne Palmer: ‘I was so greedy for Oxford Life that I simply did not do enough work, I know.
’ And Lorna Bottomley: ‘I liked simply being in Oxford, the long peaceful days, the endless talk about life, the gentle witty courtesy of my tutor Miss Farnell, the few unobtrusive but sufficient rules about hours and gowns and guests…’
References to the senior members from whom we learned were many and it is interesting that several who felt grateful for the quality of the intellectual challenge offered also, in retrospect, appreciated the problems of College and University in maintaining this when so many dons, male and female, had gone.
Male lecturers were almost all elderly and women dons worked extremely hard.
Barbara Davies writes: ‘It is astonishing how Somerville, as well as feeding us on the meagre wartime rations, saw to it that we had our full ration of tutorials; and that University lectures were given in the Arts subjects when almost all the male academics had departed for the forces or war-work.
How much work the women tutors especially must have done, and how little we, as undergraduates, were aware of it!’
Elizabeth Stewart, post-graduate chemistry student, recalls that Sir Robert Robinson under whom she was to work was away working for a government department and his students rarely saw him: ‘We never knew when he would do a lab round, and often it would be at the lunch hour, when I was out’.
Particular lecturers remembered with appreciation were Donald Mackinnon, A.J.P. Taylor, C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Professor Nicol Smith and Lord David Cecil; also Mathematicians unnamed, but who would certainly have included Dr Busbridge of St. Hugh's who took under her tutorial wing all women Maths undergraduates at that time.
Mentioned with particular regard among our   own Somerville fellows were the Principal (who would often conduct her class in Radcliffe House with Joshua purring contentedly on her knee), Miss Farnell, Mrs Hodgkin, Miss Lascelles, Mrs Foot, Mrs Snow, Mrs Henderson, Miss Hartley and Dr Starkie (‘I never cease to think of tutorials with Enid Starkie in her garish red-gilt rooms in 41 St. Giles’, writes Margaret Brown).
That we were grateful to Miss Stonedale and Miss Stott was frequently evidenced by entries in the Food Suggestion Book such as‘That the Bursar be thanked for banana custard in Hall last night’, signed by a string of appreciative consumers grateful for any tasty variation from the limited wartime menu recalled by many.
And one of our number commented: ‘The courtesy of dons to younger people taught me more about manners than any nagging at School’.
Awareness of having moved into a fresh and wider environment brought some interesting comments on our attitudes, reactions and problems as undergraduates.
Marjorie Boulton wrote: ‘The whole Somerville experience was a revelation to someone who had previously had a largely stultifying education and a narrow background’; it gave ‘freedom of discussion, dignity of life, stress on truth in scholarship, study in depth, no fear of victimisation, undenominational chapel, fine library, interesting friends…and Joshua, the Principal's tabby cat.
’ Pamela Walford wrote: ‘The revelation to me was being able to plan my own activities within reason.
The thing I most disliked was the disapproval of the dons because I admitted I would like to write!’
Christina Muir: ‘Coming from a small boarding school evacuated and decimated by the war it was paradise to be with girls with intellectual interests.
But I should not have been sent straight from school to Somerville on Classics; I wanted to swap to History but did not know enough, so I was encouraged to do P.P.E. I was bored by both Philosophy and Economics so I only worked at Politics’.
Pen Scott Stokes had a similar problem when steered from P.P.E. to Greats, which necessitated learning Greek from scratch.
Pamela Grant wrote:’ Some tutorials I was sent to were way above my head — I didn't dislike them, but they worried me.’
Monica Shorten: ‘My only regret is that the rival claims of the science departments and university clubs and social life distracted me from taking full advantage of my time in such an interesting community.’
Elizabeth Adams: ‘I think perhaps I did not require from Somerville as much as I might here, fromJean Stanier: ‘Somehow the fact that it was wartime put a sharper edge on things, as if we had to make the most of something that might not last’.
Some of us were still there to see Oxford when the lights came on again: V.E. night saw floodlighting return not only to some of the ancient buildings but also (with apparatus hastily improvised by members of  the university) to a magnificent horse chestnut tree in Parks Road in full blossom, its blaze of floodlit white ‘candles’ making a spectacular welcome to the return of peace and light.
Now, after almost fifty years we look back and the rich variety of our doings in the years between fulfills the concept of university as a preparation for life rather than training for a specific walk of life.
For medicals, of course, the degree course is the basis of a career.
Before having her family Alison Miles (Mrs Fergusson) held various hospital appointments including a lectureship at St. Bartholomew's Medical college.
Sadly news of Alison's recent death came as this report was being written.
Jean Ritchie (Mrs Patterson) specialised in Radiotherapy (D. M. R. T.) and was for three years Consultant Radiotherapist in Singapore.
After marriage she took a break while her two children were small, returning later to a fresh specialisation as Research Fellow at St. Mark's Hospital, London (gastroenterological/ coloproctological diseases) She has M.R.C.P. (London) 1950 and D.M. 1971.
Among her leisure occupations is birdwatching, and she admits to being invariably the oldest of the few women ‘twitchers’ on the scene when a rare bird is reported.
Our only non-biological scientist was Elizabeth Stewart (Mrs Fyfe) who returned to Aberdeen to marry in 1943 and later emigrated to Halifax, Nova Scotia where her husband became Professor of Anatomy.
She herself did not continue scientific work but raised a family of four and has enjoyed many interests, though less actively since a stroke three years ago.
Jean Stanier (Mrs Velecky) gave up her scientific work when her son was born in 1966.
She gained her D.Phil. in biochemistry, and her research was mainly in nutrition and physiology in Germany, Oxford, Harwell and Southampton.
She has had various papers and articles published.
Now, amongst varied voluntary work she enthusiastically organises and participates in orienteering, ‘It is a good family sport and it takes one to interesting and beautiful places in this country and abroad’.
Monica Shorten (Mrs Vizoso) has continued research and writing, her specialisation being the grey squirrel.
She worked with the M.A.A.F. on grey squirrel control, now enjoys retirement and describes family life and the upbringing of two sons thus: ‘It's been a battlefield!
Very exhilarating!’
After holding a research fellowship at Reading, Pamela Grant (Mrs Warren-Wilson) gained her D. Phil in 1951 (Botany).
She had returned to Somerville to complete her degree course after two years' school teaching (‘Taught all the sciences Botany, Zoo, Chemistry.
What confidence at 20!
Had done these three subjects for Mods!’).
Married after finals Pam has continued research in plant anatomy in  collaboration with her husband in England and Australia as well as bringing up a family of three.
Since 1978 she has had an Honorary Visiting Fellowship in the Research School of Biological Sciences at A.N.
U. Canberra, where her husband is Professor of Botany.
Anita Kronheimer (Mrs Schmidt) and Margaret Sharman have died.
We heard from only one of our four Mathematicians.
Two have died Anne Evans (Mrs Bach) andJanet Hartley.
Lenore Reynell, who has followed a teaching career, switching from Mathematics to Music (L.R.A.M. 1944), is thought to be abroad.
She was Head of Music at Holland Park Comprehensive School.
Connie Bethwaite (Mrs Anscombe) married after one year at R.A.E., Farnborough, where she met her husband but disliked the work!
Having said she would never teach she found it the only way to keep up her Mathematics and bring up a family, so via an evening Technical College Lectureship she slipped into school teaching and has enjoyed it!
She is Head of Mathematics and of Sixth Form at Farnborough Hill.
Connie has enjoyed much in her life — her family of three and now their children and much else.
‘I have been extremely lucky,’ she says.
Of our nine linguists two have died: Blanche Price (Mrs Hughes) and Sheila Wright.
Only Margaret Brown (Professor Davies; now Lady Mitchell) and Valerie Dundas-Grant have made careers of their degree study.
Valerie taught languages in schools until 1964 when she became a Lecturer in the Department of Education at Keele University.
She has had published various writings on comparative education and language teaching/learning, and writes that her career has given her great satisfaction.
She is continuing educational research in retirement and has recently accepted part-time work with a national research institute.
Margaret always hoped for a career in University.
She married in 1944, maintained her writing and research and gained the Doctorat de L'Universite de Paris (1948) as well as bringing up her two children.
Apart from a year at Westfield College she has been on the staff of the Department of French at Reading University since 1962, progressing from Tutorial Assistant to a personal chair as Professor of French.
Now elected Professor Emeritus, she also has a 3-year appointment as Special Professor at Nottingham.
She writes: ‘I have enjoyed my university career enormously and felt that only then was I beginning to live’.
The other linguists all retained lasting interest in their subject without building careers on it: Lorna Bottomley joined the temporary Civil Service (Ministry of Education) after the war, enjoyed educational administration and in 1947 moved to become Assistant Secretary at the Westminster Medical School where she remained contentedly until retirement in 1982.
Suzanne Budgen taught for a year and then financed her painting by some work in  educational administration and part-time teaching.
She had a studio in Reigate and exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Royal Society of British Artists.
Rheumatoid arthritis diverted her to film, and she gained distinction in both the Certificate and Diploma in Film Studies (London Extramural) and taught in the film unit of the Slade School of Fine Art.
She has also been a Governor and one time Chairman of the Reigate School of Art & design .
For interest shejoined the Southwark ordination course to study Theology and for some years has written a regular Bible commentary for her Parish Magazine.
Margaret Butterworth developed a lifelong concern for social care after living and working with mentally ill young people after the war.
She has worked variously as teacher, canteen assistant, auxiliary nurse.
Now retired she enjoys ‘having all of life to use to whatever purpose I choose’— and one of her choices is voluntary work among relatives of people suffering dementing illness.
After the war Lucienne Palmer (Mrs Hill) embarked on an acting career and thence to playwriting, translation and adaptation from the French, part-time work as a lay psychotherapist in an N.H.S. therapeutic community, and, latish in life, her very first love of all-painting: London exhibition 1988.
She had three children from her second marriage and immensely enjoyed their upbringing — dovetailing motherhood with a career working from home.
FinallyJanet Seligman after a period working with an antiquarian bookseller joined Sotheby & co as cataloguer of rare books and manuscripts.
She has also freelanced as translator of art-historical material from German and French, finding her degree very relevant to this part of her work.
Of our five Greats students Barbara Davies (Mrs Mitchell) remained in Oxford and began teaching at St. Anne's soon after her marriage to a tutor at Worcester.
She combined this with bringing up her family of four, becoming lecturer and eventually Fellow of St. Anne's, working in the sub-faculty of Ancient History.
Commenting on the change at St. Anne's to become a mixed college she writes ‘The college is distinctly noisier, socially livelier and rather less academic work is done over all’.
Daphne Hereward has been teaching at the Ghana Empire school in Accra since 1977 after a career devoted to classical and archaeological studies and teaching, in both university and school.
She has had published many articles and has produced scripts for Ghana Radio.
Joanna Piercy (The Hon.
Mrs Turner) taught classics in independent schools until 1966 when she became Headmistress of Badminton prior to her marriage two years later and continued with some part-time teaching while living in Shropshire.
Sadly widowed in 1983 after a very happy marriage, Jo has returned to her native Cotswolds and enjoys time spent with her nieces and nephews and  their children.
She is interested in the history and life of Burford, where she has been churchwarden and is active in the Burford Society and in local politics.
Barbara Stace (Mrs Taylor) does not regard herself as having had a career other than marriage and family life though she admits to having done ‘some teaching, some voluntary work especially with the local community association, learning a few new skills, keeping up with my old hobbies’ and she can invariably be met behind the souvenirs stall at Somerville Gaudy.
Margaret Telford (Mrs Woolley) regretted not having returned after the war to complete Greats, but has ‘had a thoroughly happy life and wouldn't want it altered’.
She taught various Arts subjects besides Greek and Latin, full-time until her marriage and part-time until her husband's retirement.
As one would expect campanology has played a part in family life, and is shared with husband, daughter and grandsons.
Of those who started on P. P. E. only two sat finals: Elizabeth Adams (Lady Kennet) married in 1948 and had a family of six, but combined their upbringing with a considerable amount of research in international affairs, particularly arms control and maritime affairs.
Having invented the phrase ‘Sea Use Planning’ she has been delighted to note the emergence of departments of Sea Use Planning at some (not U. K.!) universities.
Her work has been very much as ‘back-room’ for her husband in his political career, and jointly with him in their shared interests — two books on the church architecture of London and one on Northern Lazio in Italy.
Margaret Clifton taught for a time in England, and then at the British Institute School in Madrid.
In 1950 she went to Italy to become a nun (Sister Thomasina) in the Monasterio S. Chiara.
After the W.R.N.S. Christina Muir (Mrs Bewley) travelled in Africa and worked injournalism and publishing before her marriage.
Since her two daughters have left home she has been researching 18th Century records preparatory to writing biographies of some political reformers.
John Horne Tooke is almost completed and Muir of Huntershill (Oxford) already published.
Pen Scott-Stokes (Mrs Evans) always enjoyed working with people.
She equipped herself with secretarial skills when her family was growing up, and has worked for many interesting people and for the Diocese of Bath and Wells with Bishop John Bickersteth.
Golf has replaced hockey as her sport, and she still enjoys acting and painting and especially line drawing.
Sadly she is recently widowed after her second marriage.
Of our historians only three have responded, and we know that Joy Herbert (Mrs Macaskill), Mary Kent-Smith (Mrs Whitehouse) and Jill Lovedee (Mrs Henderson) have died.
Stephanie Mullins was prevented by bereavement from contributing, and we have not  heard from Maurine Rowan or Dorothea Lawson (Mrs Kay).
Beryl Davies has been to several meetings of the Shropshire A. S. M. group.
She retired early from teaching and lives in Newport (Shropshire) where she did some secretarial and legal work.
She keeps busy with local activities and has been for many years editor of her church magazine.
She writes a little poetry and prose, and indulges her great love of cooking, at which she excels.
Mary Dobson too, retired early from teaching at Tiverton Grammar school, where she taught History, ran the library and was Head of First Year.
She has suffered poor health from time to time, but has fought back to establish a variety of activities in her retirement including stewarding at a National Trust property and giving practice interviews to pupils from Tiverton school.
Lastly the English school: Two of our number have died: Cathleen O'Connor (Mrs Epstein) and Margaret Partington who, after a period teaching and another working as copywriter with Kodak in Harrow while tending her ailing parents, worked for many years on the Encyclopedia Britannica, becoming Classification Editor for Literature and Music.
She continued writing for the Britannica Yearbook and Britannica Extension Service after the closure of the main London office.
We had no reply from Marigold Phillips (Mrs Freeman-Atwood) though she is in touch with Corinna.
Pamela Walford (Mrs Vandyke-Prince) has had an interesting but not always easy life.
She shared with her husband a love of travel, and learned from his expertise something of the finer qualities of wine and food wliich helped her, when his illness necessitated it, to enter journalism and become the breadwinner.
After his death, members of the wine trade enabled her to become the first person outside the trade to study for and sit its examinations.
Since then she has written widely on food and wine topics and has broadcast, lectured and conducted wine-tastings.
She is President of the Circle of Wine Writers, and won two ‘book of the year’ awards for Wine.
Lore, Legends and Traditions.
Corinna Cochrane (Mrs Peterson) became a headmaster's wife after three years in the Civil Service.
Then came two years in Malaya, where she assisted her husband who was Director General of Information, before returning to Oxford.
Here Corinna did some English tutoring, and research on moral and religious education.
Later she trained as a Jungian analyst and, now widowed, she is working full-time in this field, but finds time to enjoy the company of grandchildren and greatnephews and nieces.
Rita May (Mrs Archer), whose husband died very suddenly, has been grappling with all the problems of being now on her own after forty years of happy marriage, the last 20 of which were spent at Failand near Bristol, only a short distance from the former family home of Somerville's Margery Fry.
Rita has moved to Amersham, nearer her son and daughter.
She writes: ‘I have been pleased with myself in a small way, because I have succeeded in making a different life’.
She is learning German, working on the biography of a distant relative, a Victorian actor, and has been able to offer help from her long experience of managing a large cottage garden to the wife of the curator of Milton's cottage at Chalfont St. Giles.
Mary Humphrys (Mrs Kenyon) went into publishing, becoming Director's Assistant at Eyre & spottiswoode until her marriage.
She and her husband moved to Essex after the first of the three children was born, and have stayed in the same house since, Mary busying herself with a multitude of activities locally, and now caring for her husband since his stroke.
She wrote a well-received history of her old school for the Essex Record Office and is working on a local history having followed up her study in this field by taking the London University Diploma in Local History.
Noreen Baker (Mrs Laird) married in 1946 after two years teaching, thereafter doing occasional F.E. and Technical College teaching.
She had a family of four, and for the past ten years or so she has worked voluntarily at the Citizen's Advice Bureau.
The three spinsters of the English school have had full-time careers for most of our years since Somerville!
Tessa Wilson qualified in 1946 for the Women Housing Managers' Certificate of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors and worked in Housing Departments in London until 1959, always finding interest in the people, the buildings and the River Thames in all its moods.
After a four month stay with her brother in Zambia, she returned to make a new career in nursing.
She trained at Liverpool (S.R.N., S.C.M., Q.1.D.N.S., Hospital Gold Medal 1963) and then went on the district in her native Westmorland.
‘A most satisfying career’, she writes.
In retirement she has time to enjoy her leisure interests, choral singing, fell-walking, wild flowers, as well as being involved in many local organisations, doing ‘Meals on Wheels’ and perusing a hoard of old family letters dating back to 1809.
College Report has recorded over the years most of Marjorie Boulton's considerable output of writing, both in English and in Esperanto, a field in which she has become a leading international figure and through which she has enjoyed much travel and many friendships.
She always wanted to write and only regrets that she did not sooner have the courage to devote herself to it.
She taught English, mainly in teacher training colleges, becoming vice-principal of one and then Principal of Charlotte Mason College, Ambleside until 1970.
‘I was enormously happier once out of the teaching profession’, she confesses, ‘but grateful now for pension rights’.
Majorie gained B.Litt in 1948 and D.Phil in 1976, and expresses gratitude to Somerville for enabling her to return to Oxford to work for this.
My own career,(Ursula Everest), has been plain schoolteaching in various schools.
(I sometimes wonder how ‘Teacher Appraisal’ would have rated me!)
Somerville had my record straight in the 1959 Register, but mysteriously erroneous in 1970!
I became Senior English Mistress at Shrewsbury High School (G. P. D. S. T.) in 1959 and Headmistress of Basingstoke High School in 1965.
When Hampshire established the Vl form college in Basingstoke we became a contributory 11–16 mixed comprehensive school, Harriet Costello School.
The change brought some unexpected experiences and challenges, but all my years as a Head were full of interest and happy working relationships and I thoroughly enjoyed my career, a memorable and refreshing interlude in it being the Centenary summer term back at Somerville as a Schoolmistress Fellow.
It has been a privilege to be entrusted with the preparation of this report, and a joy to renew contact with so many of our year.
I am more than grateful for their generous and spontaneous responses to our questionnaire, made in some cases in times of personal difficulty, strain or distress.
Space has allowed me to use only a fraction of the wealth of material provided; I only hope I have not made too many mistakes or significant omissions and have done at least some justice to all.
I hope too that a good many of us will with true Somervillian spirit defy the grey hairs and wrinkles and turn up to celebrate our golden anniversary for lunch at Somerville on Sunday September 29th 1991.
Report on the Year of 1966
‘Catherine Freemantle, good God!
But she had been only two years senior to Harriet.
Very brilliant, very smart, very lively and the outstanding scholar of her year.
What in Heaven's name had happened to her?…
Catherine Freemantle, it seemed, had married a farmer, and everything had gone wrong.
Slumps and sickness and tithes and taxes and the Milk Board and the Marketing Board, and working one's fingers to the bone and trying to bring up children…
What a damned waste! was all Harriet could say to herself.
All that brilliance, all that trained intelligence, harnessed to a load that any uneducated country girl could have drawn, far better.’
So wrote Dorothy L. Sayers in 1935 in Gaudy Night, describing the ‘Shrewsbury’ graduate whose brilliance and scholarship had been dulled by marriage and children.
Dorothy L. Sayers clearly saw the two courses open to women — of marriage and a family on the one hand and of a fulfilling career on the other — as implacably opposed.
She herself left her son to be brought up by strangers and lived a life devoted to her writing.
The model for Catherine Freemantle, however, shows us a different picture.
Doreen Wallace, who became Mrs ‘Roly’ Rash of Wortham Hall, combined the traditional role of farmer's wife and mother with an implacable battle against the Church Commissioners over the then current practice of tithes and a successful career as a novelist.
In the thirties, indeed, her books were as popular as those of Dorothy L. Sayers herself.
So it is clear that the two kinds of productivity — children and intellectual achievements — can be combined, as is borne out by the subsequent careers of the forty two students who matriculated in 1966 and who answered the questionnaire.
Their productivity on both counts has been phenomenal:— the' Shrewsbury' grandchildren they mother total sixty-nine and they have also produced collectively in excess of one hundred and fifty publications — fiction and non-fiction, scientific and socio-political.
Nor has the production of the one noticeably interfered with the production of the other.
Ilona Roth writes: ‘I ‘faxed’ off one of the final chapters [of her book Introduction to Psychology]on the morning of the day on which my third child, Raphael, was born!’
Somerville's children bring pleasures, both expected and unexpected.
Elizabeth Masters (Mrs Shaw) gives a balanced view: ‘Motherhood has brought more bonuses than regrets.’
Catherine Oates (Mrs Wright) concurs: ‘Of course they have radically altered my life but I was glad to exchange the tyranny of the nine-to-five day for the tyranny offour-hourly feeds.
The children are the most exciting and rewarding  aspect of my life.
’ These pleasures, too, are on-going.
Judith Searle's elder son, Matthew, is now eighteen: ‘It has been a source of real satisfaction that my elder boy has this month (October, 1990) joined Wadham as a mathematician, so I can start all over again.’
Many of us now have children in their mid to late teens.
The pressures of a career, and the pleasures of repeated pregnancies, though, have meant that some of us also have very little children.
Ilona Roth writes: ‘It is particularly nice having a baby again after a gap of five years.
’ Imogen Egford (Mrs Pravda) has experienced the novel situation of having her eldest daughter take G.C.S.E. maths while the youngest is still not weaned.
And Anne Marie Kelly (Mrs Braun) writes: ‘It's hard to describe the joy of seeing my six foot son playing lego with Emma Kirkby's little Nicholas!’
Two of us have been productive both in our personal lives and in the wider worlds of music and literature.
Emma Kirkby's international reputation as a performer of Early Music is a unique achievement.
Let her own words speak for her: ‘It's always best to start from the point of view of total commitment.
Sing a lot in a silence, just sing to yourself without anything to cover it up.
You have to listen for the centre of your voice’.
(The Times, October, 1983).
Maggie Gee had her first novel, Dying, In Other Words, published in 1981, to considerable critical acclaim.
She has subsequently had three other novels published-The Burning Book, Light Years and Grace.
On television, at the 1990 Booker Prize ceremony, Maggie gained the admiration of her audience by the skilful and scholarly way in which she parried Germaine Greer's more vitriolic attacks.
Maggie also has a small daughter.
Thirty-three of us were married, though four have since divorced (one twice), and one is widowed.
Some of us are ambivalent about the workability of marriage or the desirability of children.
Helen Wise, from Boston, writes: ‘I remember a group of us at Somerville deciding that marriage would get in our way.
There are some things you know at twenty.
With children, your alternative is hard but I think it's like a John Donne paradox: you're bound but you're also free’.
Sarah Alexander (Dr Boswood) muses: ‘Children have affected life in taking chances of my own away.
Working full-time and their interests leave little time for my own’.
Caroline Bacon (Mrs Macpherson) comments, philosophically: ‘Children are lovely, but contingent and of necessity itinerant’.
Another writes, cryptically: ‘I also realise, looking back, how a few relationships with the opposite sex have added a golden thread and tinged my life with deep regret’.
For many, though, marriage and children are the bedrock of existence.
Judith Searle (Mrs Piper) writes that she is ‘satisfied, but not smug, I hope’, about her twenty-one-year-long marriage.
Jacqueline Pardoe (Mrs Mitton) writes: ‘I have been determined…to be as good a traditional mother as I can while at the same time demonstrating to my daughters that it is possible to combine a family with an independent and complementary ‘other life’.
I don't think that would have been possible if our marriage were not such an ‘equal terms’ partnership'.
Ann de Stratford (Mrs Seed) echoes this sentiment: ‘I consider myself to be extremely fortunate to have a very happy marriage to someone who has never considered me as anything but an equal.
Being single, too, is a congenial option.
Dr Rosalind Hursthouse puts it succinctly: ‘Unmarried.
No children.
Far from celibate.
Very happy about all three!’
Dr Hursthouse came to Somerville to do the B.Phil in Philosophy.
She subsequently took her D.Phil and joined Corpus Christi College as a lecturer.
She is now ‘by very deliberate choice’ on the Staff of the Open University.
Of Somerville she recalls: ‘My two years in the Somerville Graduate House were, I think, the most ecstatic in my life’.
By contrast, Dr Alison McHardy, also a post-graduate, comments briefly: ‘I never lived in and was certainly never made to feel welcome’.
Dr Margaret Smith, however, feels differently: ‘I greatly appreciated my one year in Graduate House and the chance to rub shoulders on a daily basis with such a cosmopolitan cross-section of people’.
Dr. Smith is now in University Administration in Leeds.
She also holds a R. Y. A. Coastal Skipper Certificate.
Suzanne Elcoat's career shows enviable stability.
She is now Head of Modern Languages at Queen Elizabeth's School, Faversham, Kent, where she went after taking her P. G. C. E. at Hull.
Barbara Goodwin, who after reading P.P.E., obtained her D.Phil at St. Antony's, is also still in her original post, but now as a Reader, in the Department of Government at Brunel University.
She comments wryly: ‘I doubt if anyone should be an academic for her whole life’.
Dr Goodwin enjoys the intellectual freedom of her profession, and has published widely in her field of political philosophy.
She also works hard as a J.P.
in her area of West London.
Dr Goodwin's position as a J.P.
introduces a theme common to Somervillians of every generation — that of a high level of commitment to public service.
Three-quarters of our number are, or have been, involved in public service — the range of which varies from Trade Union organisation to membership of various P. C. C. s, from work for the Conservative Party (Anne Greasley) to membership of the   Communist Party of Great Britain (Meiriona Davies).
Jenny Salaman (Mrs Manson) was a P. P. C. for Labour in 1987 and is active in her local Labour Party.
She has combined the upbringing of two daughters, which she greatly enjoys, with being a Tax Inspector for the Inland Revenue.
‘I really like and can recommend work for the Inland Revenue’.
Anne-Marie Kelly was a founder member of the S. D. P. and stood as Alliance Candidate in Deptford in 1987.
She has devoted much of her time to bringing up three children and is the only person to classify herselfas a housewife in her reply.
However, the fact that she can ‘still do a two hour ballet class — after one hour of Keep Fit to warm up —’ and is contemplating a new career in millinery shows enviable versatility.
Pre-eminent among those to be counted as public servants is Alyson Bailes.
She writes: ‘I entered the Diplomatic Service straight from Somerville, and was already abroad on my first assignment in Hungary at the age oftwenty-one.
Since then I have spent a solid twenty years in the service, with posts at the U. K. Delegation to N. A. T. O., Bonn, Peking, and now Oslo…
I have had the opportunity to learn Hungarian, French, German, Chinese and Norwegian (in declining order of fluency)‘.
Alyson thinks that her most useful legacy from her time at Somerville was ‘not the history I learned…but the techniques and mental disciplines (including not least a good arguing style!)’
She was once very close to death, in March 1979, when our then Ambassador to The Hague was shot dead at her side in the official car.
Jenny West (Mrs Bywaters), with a first degree in Theology and subsequent medical qualifications, published two papers on the services provided for women with breast disease.
‘From 1976 to 1986 I worked part-time in Family Planning Services to fit in with the demands of three children’, she writes.
She then returned to full-time medical work, and now her religious, political and medical commitments have led her to the position of Consultant in Public Health Medicine for Central Birmingham Health Authority.
Sue Waller (Mrs Malcolm) is currently Reader in Molecular Genetics in the Department of Paediatric Genetics at the Institute of Child Health in the University of London.
(This is the medical school for Great Ormond Street Hospital).
Her post is partly funded by Mothercare plc.
She writes: ‘This is a great time to be working in Human Genetics and I like the human and applied aspects of my research’.
Her two daughters are now eight and nine years old.
Rosemary Reynolds (Mrs Wolfson), a social worker, writes: ‘My career has evolved through work with children and families, adoption and fostering, to my current work as a Guardian ad litem’, and she has just obtained a Diploma in Child Protection from London University.
Of her own experience of parenthood  she writes: ‘For all its frustrations and heartaches it has been, so far, a good career’.
Ines Oppenheimer (Mrs Newman) has had wide experience in research and planning in London, including involvement in research on theJoint Docklands Action Group.
She has published widely, as well as having three children.
Meiriona Davies (Mrs Bielawski, formerly Mrs Noon), is an experienced careers of ficer of twenty years' standing: ‘Still doing it, but government policy means we shall probably soon cease to exist as a public service, so I shall no doubt be looking for something else unless by great good fortune the Tories lose power!’
Her political and union activities are too numerous to record.
Two of us have chosen to sail in the calmer waters of librarianship.
Anne Greasley (Mrs Bradley) was an Archive Trainee at the Bodleian and now works as an archivist at the Bristol Record Office.
She still finds the Greek and Latin languages fascinating and writes: ‘I hope to infect my children with this outmoded obsession’.
Alexandra Marr (Mrs Nicol) has worked in the Public Records Office since finishing her B.Litt in 1969.
She says of her job; ‘Am very lucky and happy with it.
A mixture of service and academic challenge’.
Throughout the careers described has run a thread common to them all, the confidence in one's own abilities and one's intrinsic worth that Somerville instilled.
This, coupled with the flexibility that women both need, to cope with their dual and triple roles, and excel at, has resulted in several of us making successful, sometimes even spectacular, changes in direction.
Ines Oppenheimer comments: ‘I actually think I have had a more interesting career as a result of the many changes I have made.
I have also been able to clarify what I am good at and what I enjoy’.
Quite the most spectacular change of direction has been made by Margaret O'Riordan (Dr Rayman).
Dr Rayman completed her D.Phil thesis in 1969, and until 1977 was engaged in scientific research and academic teaching.
During this period she published no fewer than ten books and articles in her field-the relationship between chemical structure and carcinogenicity.
After a long career break occasioned by her husband's job's being moved to Paris, and her having her two children, she found herself, back in England, designing her own kitchen.
This was such a success that now, as she writes: ‘I run my own design business mainly designing kitchens in appropriate styles for period properties, my most challenging having been a ‘Gothic’ kitchen…
I like to be my own boss'.
Anne de Stratford, married to Geoffrey Seed, an independent television producer, and mother of three young children, went from Somerville to become a Market Research Executive for Unilever.
A deliberate change of direction then took her to Granada Television in Manchester as a programme researcher.
She left there just before the birth of their first child, and proceeded to change direction yet again.
While her three children were small she opened a restaurant which won an award in the Taste of Wales Restaurant ofthe Year Competition in 1989.
She writes: ‘The continued running of such a business is much less satisfying than the creation and setting up of it’, so now that it is sold her next challenge is the restoration of an ‘old Montgomeryshire half-timbered gentleman's residence and its apothecary's herb-garden, dating from 1720…
Who knows where it will take me next!’
Jacqueline Pardoe went to Somerville with the object of furthering her life-long interest in astronomy.
Her career since then has been challenging and varied.
She comments: ‘I used to worry about not having a traditional career.
Eventually I came to terms with doing what I call a ‘sequence of interesting things’.
Her curriculum vitae reads like Raymond Chandler's: ‘My jobs have included post-doctoral research, school-teaching, Head of Information at the British Antarctic Survey, and selling life insurance’.
Her publications include eight books, one a new Dictionary of Astronomy for Penguin books.
She is also the mother of two teenagers and a Conservative councillor for Cambridge.
Catherine Oates is one of several of us who has retrained as a teacher.
Indeed nearly half our number are employed in the profession that is most flexiblc for married women, whether at school or university level.
As she herself says: ‘Teaching is such an obvious choice if you want to be at home most ofthe time your children are’.
She began work as a graduate trainee with the Bank of England —‘A glorified name for a computer programmer’— then when the youngest of her three children started school she did a P. G. C. E. course at Durham.
She now teaches at a local girls' school where she finds the all-female staff ‘extremely supportive of each other’.
Judith Searle is also now a teacher.
Her career has been affected by their desire, as a family, to stay in Cornwall.
She looks forward, in retirement, to researching local history.
Helen Tritton (Mrs Stammers) worked for some years as a Hospital Physicist before the birth of her three children.
She writes that while the children were small: ‘I had a steady stream of private pupils in need of Physics coaching — lessons were on occasion conducted with a baby over my shoulder!’
She now teaches Physics part-time at King Edward Vl Five Ways School, in Birmingham.
‘I would really prefer to teach girls, but this school was  kind enough to give me a part-time job when I wanted it, so here I am’.
Sue Berry (Mrs Fletcher, now Mrs Hughes), first worked in the B.B. C. and then injournalism.
From 1974 to 1988 she lists her activities as: ‘Mother, small-holder, deserted mother etc’.
Having retrained as a science teacher she is now at St. Mary's R. C. High School in Hereford.
Of her time at Somerville Sue comments: ‘I'm afraid I got far more from my extra-curricular activities than I did from my studies’.
Some of us have moved the other way, out of teaching.
Elizabeth Masters who has a young son, spent ten years teaching History, but is now a Student Counsellor.
She says of her new career that it is ‘partly choice, but I wanted to leave school-teaching anyway as I had become disillusioned’.
Marilyn Galt (Mrs Robinson), mother of three teenage girls, trained initially as a Primary School teacher, though her work included a spell teaching English to adults in France, when her husband's job took them abroad.
She never really enjoyed teaching and is now, by a happy chance, employed as a social worker for the elderly, ‘very much involved with organising community care’.
Vicki Lloyd (Mrs Archard) has made some startling changes of direction.
She had three years as an Operational Research Assistant for British Rail, then was ‘hijacked into teaching Maths’ in Nairobi when her husband was moved there, then retrained as a secretary.
She had great difficulty getting herself accepted on a government-sponsored TOPS course because she was considered over-qualified.
She held various responsible and stressful secretarial posts in education, from the last of which she resigned last September suffering from acute exhaustion.
She now works part-time on the Disablement Information Advice Line where, in a caring environment, she feels more at peace herself.
Gillian Murphy (Mrs Seagrave) has three young children and found that her career break made it difficult for her to get back into her chosen field of computer programming.
She writes: ‘At nearly forty, ageism seemed to be as much of a problem as sexism’.
She now works at Bath University.
Janet Foster (Mrs Smith), who has a daughter, Nicola, took her degree in French and Spanish.
She writes, however: ‘Since the Sixth Form I have regretted not being able to combine Science and Modern Languages’.
She has recently completed the Science Foundation Course of the Open University, but has had to postpone further study in the sciences for the time being because changes in Modern Language teaching at the Sixth Form College where she works have consumed so much of her time and energy.
The boldness of so many of her contemporaries in changing direction in their career or in life generally  should encourage Janet to be bold in following her own inclinations.
Imogen Haskins (Mrs Olsen) read Jurisprudence but comments: ‘No further links with the law, nor indeed much interest in it’.
Her career so far has been in publishing, and, following the birth of her son James in 1982, this has enabled her to work from home.
Imogen now contemplates a change of direction: ‘I have toyed with the idea of retraining as a Primary School teacher as I do love helping on a regular basis at my son's school’.
Good luck to you, Imogen!
Sarah Venables (Mrs Jackson) first taught Biology, with subsidiary P.E.
and Latin.
Later she taught English and History, then, with the advent of her second child, developed a career in English as a Second Language, as a Foreign Language and finally in Adult Literacy.
‘This work has been very flexible and has fitted in very easily with holidays’.
Sarah has an encouragingly positive attitude to being a teacher: ‘I have seen enough children enjoying their studies to repay the effort’.
Sarah is a practising Christian and active in her Union.
Her love of choral singing, fostered at Oxford in the Bach Choir, gives her continuing pleasure.
Dr. Ilona Roth (married to David Lehmann) became a lecturer in the Open University, where she still is.
She has published widely and has also produced three children.
Of their impact on her life she writes, as a result, ‘I have become increasingly interested in Developmental Psychology’.
A great many of us do seem to have become teachers, of one kind or another.
The other professions are, however, represented.
Caroline Bacon read Philosophy and Psychology at Somerville.
Then she and her husband ‘took turns’ to qualify, she as a solicitor, he as a doctor.
She is now a partner in a large firm in the East Midlands, specialising in litigation.
She writes: ‘We have to admit to being workaholics and both love what we do…
Our two teenage daughters are ‘delighted and tolerant of us’.
Shirley Pen) rose (Dr Hodgson) and Sarah Alexander have both made their careers in medicine, the latter as a principal in General Practice.
Shirley has two children and Sarah three.
Shirley writes: ‘Medicine does provide satisfactory jobs for women if you are prepared to compromise’.
Somerville has always had strong links overseas, principally through Graduate House.
Dr ShobitaJain from the Indira Gandhi National Open University in New Delhi is an outstanding example.
Her second child was born during her time at Somerville while she was studying for an M. Phil in Social Anthropology, and she describes ‘the time when Mrs Indira Gandhi was awarded the Hon.
D.C.L. degree by  Oxford University and the College gave me the honour of welcoming her with flowers’.
She speaks very warmly also of Barbara Craig and of the pleasure of dining on High Table.
Dr Jain has published three important studies in social anthropology, and is at the moment involved in ‘writing a socio-legal manual, in Hindi, for displaced persons’.
Dr Gundrun Helgadottir, who obtained her D.Phil from Somerville in 1968, has to her credit numerous publications on early Icelandic poetry, including women poets.
She writes: ‘My time spent ‘at the University of Oxford’ broadened my outlook in many respects and this helped me with my academic studies and writing from then on'.
Margaret Newens, whose degree in Animal Physiology at Oxford was followed by an M. Sc.
in Community Medicine at Manchester, spent nine years lecturing, then moved to become Secretary of the Community Health Council for Ealing and Southall, and then spent ten years working for Leeds City Council in Planning and Development in the Social Services.
1988, however, saw her move to the island of Lombok in Indonesia, where she works with CARE in a Primary Health Care Project in a team with six Indonesian colleagues.
She has also worked in East and West Java.
Her commitment to the welfare of others stemmed from her involvement in the Christian Movement for Peace at Oxford.
She enjoys a ‘high level of satisfaction’ in her work.
Lynn Schofield (Mrs Haight) has been living in Toronto since 1974, where her husband is an E.N.T. specialist, and is at present Executive Assistant to the President of Scotiabank.
Earlier, her work as a U.N.
Consultant took her to Venezuela, Jamaica, Bolivia and Bangladesh.
Two children are also part of her busy schedule, which she aptly describes as ‘a mosiac’.
Helen Wise, who has two sons, has lived in the U.S.A. since 1970.
Her work experience has been various, including that of Director of an environmental research institute.
Since 1981 she has been feature-writing for the bi-monthly alumni magazine of the University of Massachusetts, which gives her scope for science reporting and reporting on contemporary issues.
Her 1982 article, ‘What Is Acid Rain Doing To Massachusetts?’ sparked offwide interest in a monitoring project at the University which continues to this day.
Of her time at Oxford Helen writes: ‘I think being an ‘Old Somervillian’ is more important than being an Oxford Graduate.
DameJanet (Vaughan) used to tell us about flying the flag of freedom around the world actually a good message to hear!’
What else, then, did we take with us when we went down from Somerville?
Self-confidence, certainly, self-awareness, and the ability to organise are qualities which many of us value.
The friendship and  support of Dons were important to some: our two principals, Dame Janet Vaughan and Mrs Barbara Craig are mentioned with love and respect, as well as Hilary Ockenden, Olive Sayce, Elizabeth Anscombe and Philippa Foot.
Anne Greasley and Imogen Egford recall the daunting experience of Professor Fraenkel's seminars on Greek Metre.
Many of us, but not all, are keen to see Somerville remain a women's college.
Above all, however, is the recurring theme of lasting friendship.
That, perhaps, is the most enduring gift that many of us received from our years at Somerville.
I hope, then, that this report on those who matriculated in 1966 will give some of us the opportunity to renew some of those special friendships — formed at a peculiarly impressionable time of our lives — with those with whom we have failed to keep in touch.
Imogen Haskins wrote, encouragingly, ‘I can't wait to read it!’
A.S.M. Events
Jill of all Trades
A.S.M. Winter Meeting, 1 December 1990
Speakers:
Ruth Spalding (1932)
Felicity Sieghart (Baer, 1944)
Anna Kingsmill Vellacott (Kingsmill-Stocker 1983)
About 50 old Somervillians met in the library of the University Women's Club to be welcomed by the A.S.M. President and brought up to date on Somerville news by the Principal.
Saturday of eighth week found her breathless and becolded, but heartened by the energy of third year Somervillians, bursting with ideas, talking of running B. R. and thinking of the next century.
Somervillians are already active in Europe.
She warned that we should have to continue to fund ourselves, and gave encouraging news of the near completion of the Woodstock Road buildings.
Somervillians have never lacked energy, as was made clear by the first of ourJills of All Trades, Ruth Spalding.
She had escaped education until she was fourteen, and her subsequent career had not been structured or sensible.
A hot temper had perhaps helped fire her many activities, starting as artistic director of the Oxford Pilgrim Players, which she founded after a year as a dogsbody in a Norwich Theatre.
Their slogan was Plays Anytime Anywhere, and she gave a vivid description of playing in air-raid shelters, in the stables of grand houses, and to Welsh  miners.
But times changed: theatres became offices and Ruth became a typist.
Not for long, however, and with her nextjob in Adult Education, lecturing and arranging conferences, she began to write: plays and radio scripts.
Her last post had been General Secretary to the Association of Headmistresses.
To her surprise, this had been a very happy period.
Her bosses, unlike some, loved achievers, and encouraged her to write and broadcast, until with the publication of her biography The Improbable Puritan she left to become a full time writer.
Anna Kingsmill Vellacott's education very nearly finished at an age when Ruth's had not begun.
Expelled from school at fifteen, she had found herselfstarting work at a period of full employment.
‘Temping’ in Battersea one could walk straight out of one job into another, whether as secretary or crane driver.
When she got bored she looked further afield, and took a job with Universal Aunts as an ‘au pair’ in Switzerland.
But this seemed to be more work than charring — for less pay.
Naturally she switched to being a char!
After a further period in the translation agency of a chemical firm, she returned to England and had a child.
As a single parent family she tried to set up her own business, but selling jam at 2/6 a pot and crocheting hats was not a great success, particularly while being visited by a social worker wearing diamonds.
She began taking A-levels while working as a secretary for the Commission for Racial Equality, and, urged on by an old Somervillian, wrote to Somerville.
They sent her back to get another A-level, then welcomed her as a mature student at the ripe old age of 34.
Since then she has married and embarked on a career with Royal Insurance.
She felt that her success had been very much due to the ‘enterprise society’.
Felicity Sieghart declared herself not dedicated to a career and therefore well qualified to address us.
She was, she said, one of the last of the dinosaurs: born of Victorian parents when girls were expected to arrange the flowers and marry well.
Escaping to Somerville during the war, she remembered her wonderful last year, when battle-scarred heroes were returning to university.
This was followed by a time of crisis: employment!
She wouldn't teach, her father had no useful city contacts, and thejob as librarian at Chatham House (5 guineas for a 51/2 day week) proved to have prospects as poor as the pay.
A change to teaching English to Italian children brought worse problems with ‘il Signor Conte’, and a period married to a sisal farmer in Portuguese East Africa found her in the worst place on God's earth.
Her knowledge of Italian brought release with ajob with an archaeological unit in Eritrea, and she followed this by becoming a guide-lecturer in Liverpool: thinking on her feet in French, Italian or Portuguese in front of audiences ranging from rich Texans to poor shop assistants.
Marrying again and starting a family had found her coping with a highly-gifted child, and this had led to her founding the National Association for Parents of Gifted Children in order to help families who find themselves thrown by their brilliant off-spring and to encourage local authorities to make provision for them.
In the last ten years she had also been a magistrate, and had become chairman of the Committee of Magistrates.
Throughout her life, she had been grateful to Somerville for teaching her to think and to write.
Dame Gillian Brown thanked the speakers with great enthusiasm, congratulated the Principal on ensuring the succession, and also thanked Patricia Hutchinson and Mary Keen for a successful meeting, and the University Womens' Club (worth joining even if it is known as Pussy Cat Hall by my irreverent 88 year old cousin, a St. Hugh's gal) gave us rather a good tea.
Gaudy 1990
Seven months later, I suddenly think how remote that one wet weekend in July now seems from this world enGulfed: Oxford ever cocooned and safe.
Then I'm ashamed of the cliche: plenty of Somervillians know the thick of things, the Principals for starters: Miss Pestell and Lady Park at the F. O., Mrs Craig with the British Council, and of course our own DameJanet, at the end of that last war….
There was a different harsh reality waiting in the lodge: I stood with chums, amazed at what looked like Som.
Coll.
Inc.: mugs, postcards, engraved vases, vast red and black umbrellas, well, why not?
We need the money, and from all I heard at the Gaudy, Somerville still deserves it.
Impressions of the day-and-a-bit creep back: standing on the blowy lawn with tea, trying to fix names, remember what they've done (‘I'm not a day older…you're wearing well…
She's aged.’)
…glancing at the door of Penrose where three Principals pose for a snap.
By seven we were crammed into the lobby, downing Pimm's, and nodding over the letter pinned there, deploring the ‘Thatcher Building’.
I'd stood near that very spot with a chum and rejoiced at Wilson's victory.
His was a sudden fall -and as for hers!
I suppose we're ‘Post-Thatcher’ now, as well as mid-Gulf, if anyone's labelling.
Then there was Hall, with the rising shrill of women's voices, just like in ‘Gaudy Night’; a book, I know, responsible for many a Somerville application.
It's been on T. V. now, destroying some of my mental scenery for ever.
The seating plan had given me no view at all of my now-giggling pals, but the great bonus of being next to Patricia Hutchinson, and opposite the Principal, who is most gracious, and doesn't miss a trick.
The food was impeccably tasteful, wine excellent, speeches fine: undeniably last was best with Sue Solomon dressed like an exuberant garden, released from her barrister's black and white reminding us of DameJanet's odd stress when asking us (long ago of course) to give three cheers for Mrs Gandhi ‘Somerville's first woman Prime Minister’— Sue added ‘I sincerely trust that Somervillians of the future will never have to drink a toast to Somerville's first male P.M.!’
Dorothy Sayers' Harriet Vane was 31 at her Gaudy, yet her nostalgia and sense of life-lived-since put her nearer our mid-forties; paradoxically I think we're much closer to our former selves — or do they all say that?
It isn't that anybody's stood still: my lot are now heads of departments, globe-trotting business woman, national charity organisers…and have produced a lot of daughters — for Somerville?
We, like most I suspect, continued the party back in our rooms (info pack, flowers, bottle-ette of wine) and talked into the night as I suppose we used to, way back when, before the sixties were the sixties.
I'm still not sure where, or when, they were…
But those Somerville years remain with us, and the friends, and the ageless dons, some livelier, more liberal, than one ever knew; and it's good to go back and recall old times, good and bad.
Something should be celebrated after all, in these dim days.
Blackfriars Settlement-The Fight for Survival
The past year has been, in the words of the Director's Annual Report, ‘twelve months of some anxiety and upheaval’ during which both Council and staffhave made determined efforts to ‘confront the problems calmly and constructively, and to find solutions that will secure the future of the Settlement’.
Staffing
Early in the year, Harbinder Kaur was appointed as Assistant Director,(Development), to strengthen the central management team and enable it to support, evaluate and develop the work of all the projects, and begin a survey of the space and resources which should be provided if new purpose-built accommodation is to be made available.
As was mentioned in last year's report, Nick Mearing-Smith, the Hon.
Treasurer for many years, resigned, and no one has yet been found to take his place.
Is there a Somerville accountant living or working in London who might be able to give her time and expertise to this task?
Financial Problems
Although the London Borough of Southwark agreed to maintain the level of funding to some of the projects for a short time after the demise of the I. L. E. A., that support can no longer be guaranteed.
Indeed Southwark has warned that grants to all voluntary community groups will be very severely cut in April, and has advised issuing provisional redundancy notices, which the Settlement is loath to do.
However, when staff leave, they are not being replaced, and at least one senior worker,(Shirley May, head of the Literacy Project) intends to take early retirement in the summer.
Opportunities for major fund-raising from other sources are very limited: partly because trust funds usually direct their resources to new short-term projects rather than to longestablished work, and partly because such trusts have been inundated with requests from other agencies suffering from withdrawal of Local Authority grants.
All is not gloom, however.
The Literacy Unit, recently re-named Blackfriars Education Centre, has secured a grant of £1,500 to open one new class for a year.
Short-Term Measures
The Director's flat has already been let as office accommodation, there are plans to rent out car-parking space at the Pickwick site and also to let unused rooms both at Pickwick and Nelson Square to bring in extra revenue.
Number 47, Nelson Square has been put up for sale, and I understand that a buyer is interested in the property, subject to a structural survey.
Longer-Term Plans
The Settlement still plans to sell or lease the Pickwick site,(with outline planning permission) for office/commercial development which would include a purpose-built wing to house the Settlement's projects.
The remaining properties at Nelson Square could be sold, perhaps as student accommodation, after the move to rebuilt premises on the Pickwick site.
But, of course, the plans to realise these assets have been badly hit by the recession and more recently by the war in the Gulf.
However, the financial experts still advise that the properties are saleable.
And, somehow, the work of the Settlement goes on.
Worried local residents still come to the Advice Centre for help with their legal problems, children still play safely in the refurbished Adventure playground, the Work Centre still sells Christmas cards, rugs and wooden toys, adults still learn to read and use computers at the Education Centre, and the clubs for the blind and the elderly still meet at 44, Nelson Square.
But for how much longer?
Senior Members' Fund
Treasurer's Report for the year ended June 30th 1990
We made two grants this year totalling £150.
They were both gratefully received.
Although our main source of income remains the interest from our TSB Deposit Accounts (our total assets now stand at £12,833.06) we have had a welcome increase in donations and subscriptions this year, with a generous donation of £200 and a renewed Deposited Covenant of £120.
We are very grateful as such gifts will enable us to be more generous in the sums we dispense.
May I, once again, ask anyone who knows of someone who could benefit from a grant to please let us know.
Grants can be made to assist members in cases of illness or convalescence, to provide money for necessary holidays, to tide over temporary financial difficulties, or to meet other emergency situations.
Grants may also be made to retired members of the College administrative staff where appropriate.
Anyone wishing to apply for a grant for herself or anyone else should write to the Treasurer, All requests will be considered by the Committee in confidence.
Mrs Barbara Taylor has again audited the accounts and the Committee is grateful for her continued help.