

1.
LABOUR AND EUROPE
EUROPE IS THE ISSUE THAT DEFINES POLITICIANS AND PARTIES IN MODERN BRITAIN.
LABOUR HAS A CLEAR VISION OF THE NEW EUROPE WHICH WE WANT TO HELP TO CREATE.
WE FOUGHT AND WON THE RECENT EUROPEAN PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ON A EUROPEAN PLATFORM.
OUR PROGRAMME WAS DESIGNED TO GET THE BEST FOR BRITAIN, TO BRING BRITAIN'S ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, OUR PENSIONS, PROVISION FOR PARENTS AND CHILDREN, ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS AND LEVELS OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING UP TO THE BEST THAT EXISTS IN EUROPE.
WE KNOW TOO THAT MORE AND MORE PROBLEMS — ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, INDUSTRIAL — ARE TOO BIG FOR ONE COUNTRY TO SOLVE: THEY HAVE TO BE TACKLED ON A EUROPEAN LEVEL.
Making Europe more democratic, more equal and economically stronger are not the only objectives of our socialist policies.
We believe in fairer, more equal and freer world.
But Britain and Europe can only play a full role in reducing divisions between North and South from a position of strength.
Faltering economies rarely run to the assistance of others.
Strong ones can.
Our vision of the New Europe is shared with many people throughout the European Community.
Labour's European MPs — the European.
Parliamentary Labour Party — are not only the largest national group in European Parliament; they are also part of the largest political group, the Socialist Group, within the European Parliament.
The Conservative Party is irrevocably divided on the European question.
Even those Conservatives who claim to be Europeans have a mean and narrow idea of the European project.
Conservative MEPs stand virtually alone in the European Parliament.
At last year's European Parliamentary elections, the Conservatives paid the price of Mrs Thatcher's xenophobic anti-Europeanism.
Labour is the serious European party in Britain.
The British people — especially young people — increasingly feel themselves to be European too.
Britain is our country and we are proud of our identity.
But we are Europeans too, and we know that Europe is our future.
2.
THE NEW EUROPE AND 1992
RAPID changes are taking place in Europe's economies.
The development and completion of the Single Market is a natural outcome of the growth of companies and trading relationships in an increasingly competitive global economy.
It is not something which will magically be achieved by 1992.
The Single Market is a process, not a date.
But it brings problems in its wake.
Left to itself, the Single Market will favour the strong ‘core’ states and regions over the weak ‘peripheral’and ‘semi-peripheral’areas of the Community — many of which are in Britain.
Unless Britain catches up with the progress being made in the wealthiest EC countries, Britain as a whole risks becoming a backward ‘region’ of the Community.
If the Community is truly to mean a better life for the people of the United Kingdom and all the people of the Community — women as well as men, ethnic minorities as well as the white majority — then the EC's future development cannot simply be ‘left to the market’.
We must manage change to improve people's lives, instead of allowing change to make people its victims.
The development of the Single Market must therefore be accompanied — nor merely followed — by development of the Social Community.
Intervention to set high social standards throughout the Community is vital to Europe's economic development as well as to the welfare of individuals.
The Community's progress must also be guided by recent pan-european developments.
There is no reason to postpone enlargement of the Community until the Single Market is completed.
As the EC opens membership negotiations with the members of EFTA, and as we develop closer relations with the emerging democracies of Central and Eastern Europe, we can look forward to a European Community which, by the year 2,000, is truly becoming ‘our Common European Home’.
Furthermore, we have to recognise Europe's place in the world economy dominated by Japan and the USA.
Europe's political future rests partly on its economic strength.
Yet, currently, Europe is being outperformed by the USA and Japan.
Our low level of investment in science and technology is an indicator of our relative economic weakness.
With the USA, in the long term, set on irreversible decline the question is whether Japan or Europe can replace it as the world's leading economy.
Europe should not try to mimic either Japan or the USA: instead we have to find our own path to successful modernisation.
Central to our vision of the New Europe, therefore, is an industrial strategy which can enable us to compete and succeed in the modern world.
3 A EUROPEAN TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY
IF Europe is to succeed in an increasingly competitive world economy, then we have to make a qualitative leap in our ability to use modern technologies, production processes and telecommunications.
Europe must not try to compete by cutting costs.
We can only succeed by producing high-tech, high-quality, high-value-added and environmentally benign goods and services.
These will not only defend existing markets, but also help European companies penetrate the growing markets of the rest of the world.
Science and technology are not neutral or unchangeable.
We need to question our science and technology: will they destroy or create jobs? protect or pollute the environment? enhance or undermine individual autonomy?
We have a choice of technologies, and Europe's science and technology strategy must be designed to promote those which respect ecological requirements, enhance individuals' control over their own lives and create new prospects for employment.
The Single Market — together with intensified global competition — will force massive industrial restructuring in Europe.
The profound shake—up necessary to modernise European industry could have high social and regional costs.
But unless we restructure and modernise, declining global competitiveness will have social and regional costs which are equally—high but even longer-lasting.
We have no option but to modernise.
Left to the ‘free market’, however, industrial restructuring will victimise millions of people throughout the European regions.
That is why we need a socialist industrial, regional and social policy to manage the process of change and thus create a society which is both prosperous and just.
That can no longer be done primarily at the national level; it requires a socialist, European strategy.
In process of modernisation, science and technology are the leading force.
Europe is falling behind, particularly in comparison with Japan and other countries of the Pacific Rim.
The European Community has a vital role to play: increasing European investment in science and technology; promoting joint ventures between companies and countries; reducing duplication; investing in technology transfer and diffusion; and raising the standards of basic science and technological education in schools, colleges and universities.
The EC's limited resources will not deliver results if they are used to give a little to every possible project.
Rather, resources should be concentrated on selective priorities, giving preference to near-market research designed to improve Europe's industrial performance.
A distinctive European technology must also be driven by the needs of civil society, not those of the military.
The skills and resources now employed in defence R&D; and armaments production should be a driving force in Europe's industrial modernisation.
The application of advanced electronics and telecommunications to the production process offers a new opportunity to escape from the trap of rigid work hierarchies and the deskilling of workers.
Modern technologies cannot be successfully used if they are simply imposed on an unwilling and underskilled workforce.
Using new technologies to their full potential requires trained people, able to work in small teams with a high level of autonomy and to see the potential for new goods and services.
4.
INVESTMENT IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING
IMPROVING Europe's investment in education and training is vital to our future economic success.
National efforts are needed.
But a European strategy is essential to promote the development of a highly-skilled workforce in the ‘peripheral’ regions and to develop language teaching within an increasingly integrated European workforce.
The European Community has a particular responsibility for promoting and popularising language teaching at every level — within primary as well as secondary schools, and amongst adults as well as young people.
Above all, we need a European strategy to promote the highest possible levels of education and training amongst people currently marginalised in the workforce: women, ethnic minorities, older workers and people with disabilities.
Their exclusion is unfair and unjust.
It is also a waste of talent and ability which no modern economy can afford.
Development of the Single Market, together with the proposed European industrial and technology strategy, rests upon the growing integration of the European economies.
Britain's early entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism, as outlined in the Labour Party's statement,Looking to the Future , is essential to future economic stability.
Like the Single Market itself, progression towards economic and monetary union (EMU) is a logical outcome of the Europeanisation of production and finance.
National economic sovereignty is already sharply qualified: Britain took a mere ten minutes longer than Denmark to follow the Bundesbank in raising interest rates earlier this year.
However, any new European Central Bank must be properly accountable for its overall policy.
It should also have a role in promoting industrial and regional investment in order to secure stable and coordinated growth throughout the Community.
5.
A CHARTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
We propose that the Community should adopt a European Environmental Charter, bringing together and building upon existing provisions for environmental protection in order to protect the individual's right to a better environment.
It would be safe—defeating for Europe to pursue industrial growth regardless of the environmental consequences.
Europe has to fulfil its own environmental responsibilities for its own sake and also so that the Third World can develop without irreversible damage to the global environment.
Environmental degradation knows no boundaries and nor should environmental policy.
Increasingly, decisions will have to be made at European level by properly accountable European institutions.
It is essential, for instance, that environmental standards for industry are set at a European level so that companies do not compete by seeking out those locations with inadequate environmental protection.
Environmental protection cannot be tacked on to the end of industrial development.
Ecology and economy must go hand in hand.
The issue is not ‘growth or no-growth’— no-growth can be environmentally disastrous.
Environmental modernisation is an integral part of a socialist strategy for industrial modernisation.
We have to ensure that European companies ‘get ahead of the game’, investing in clean, safe and environmentally benign processes and products that will meet the demands of consumers and environmental regulators throughout the world.
Similarly, environmental requirements must be integrated into science and technology policies.
We should choose to promote environmentally aware and responsible science — as well as to prioritise investment in environmental science itself.
In promoting the environmental transformation of industry, we need to use every possible policy — environmental taxes and charges as well as regulations.
There may, for instance, be scope for a ‘green VAT’ as part of the harmonisation of indirect taxes.
6.
A CHARTER FOR THE REGIONS
OUR goal as socialists is to equalise interests and opportunities across Europe.
Growing European integration has gone hand-in-hand with the growth of regional and sub—national movement.
Both reflect the declining power of the nation-state to control modern economic forces.
It is essential that development of the Single Market does not compound regional inequalities, causing massive emigration from poorer regions and inefficient ‘overheating’ in richer regions.
Trade imbalances within Europe are a constraint on growth throughout Europe.
The German surplus, and corresponding deficits in every other Community country except Ireland, represent a structural problem for the entire Community.
Growth in the richer regions will be assisted by the development of the poorer regions of Europe — just as, on a global scale, it is essential to end the ‘reverse transfers’ of wealth from the poorest to the richest countries of the world, if the world economy as a whole is to prosper.
We therefore envisage a far greater role for European structural funds to promote industrial development and modernisation — including education and training, transport and telecommunications — in regions.
Priority should be given within the science/technology strategy to regional centres for technology strategy to regional centres for technology and to skill training.
Today, the Common Agricultural Policy still absorbs the largest part of the European Community's budget.
But the 1990s demand a Common Industrial Policy, rather than continued investment in the over-production of food.
The CAP should be scaled down — thus releasing resources for industrial and investment — and replaced by a European Good Food Policy.
This new Good Food Policy would avoid the over-production which has marred the CAP and serve the interest of the consumer: promoting more diversified crops, reducing pesticide use and ecological damage, limiting additives and wasteful packaging, and promoting effective labelling and a healthier diet.
A restructured CAP must a]so take account of the interests of the Third World, for instance by reducing the production of the sugar cane substitutes which reduce exports from many poorer countries.
The new European Industrial Charter must create incentives to capital to invest in the peripheral regions of Europe, by creating the right environment for modern industries.
High-speed transport and telecommunications — the fast movement of people, goods, information and ideas — are vital as is the development of a highly-trained workforce capable of using the new technologies.
For a transitional period, industrial policy should include the option of erecting external barriers in some sectors to allow them to restructure and modernise.
Weak European industries cannot face global competition without support — any more than the weak economies of Central and Eastern Europe will be able to cope with immediate entry into the Single Market.
But any protection must be conditional upon restructuring, and must be temporary.
It is not a long—term strategy upon which Europe can depend.
7.
A SOCIAL CHARTER
EUROPE must be a Community for people, not merely a Market for business.
The Single Market is taking place.
But concerted European action is needed to create a ‘social space’ in which individuals, communities and regions can enjoy a live.
This ‘Social Europe’ is vital to the economic success of the New Europe.
Without high social standards throughout the Community, the Single Market will encourage companies to continue trying to compete by cutting costs — moving to the areas with low wages, low environmental protection and low skills — instead of pursuing the only strategy which offers success in the global economy, that of high-skill, high-wage, high-quality production.
Our commitment as socialists to the Social Charter, therefore, is based on our economic analysis as well as our determination to give individuals equal life—chances.
But the Social Charter has been seriously weakened in the process of bargaining which preceded its adoption — particularly because of the opposition to all of its provisions from the Conservative government in Britain.
We therefore envisage a ‘Stage 2’ when the Social Charter will be widened and deepened: widened to include groups — particularly pensioners — who are omitted from its present provisions; deepened in terms of the protection which it offers those included.
Thus, future provisions must include effective strategies against racism and sexism and the guarantee of a minimum income as well as a fair wage.
The first priority is to ensure the most effective possible legislation to implement the Charter's existing provisions.
But Stage 2 should begin by 1992, when the present work programme will be complete.
Europe's demography is changing.
The rapidly falling birthrate in every country, combined with longer life-expectancy, have created the ‘oldest Europe in history’.
The four-generation and even five-generation family is increasingly common.
Social and employment policy must reflect these new realities.
Compulsory retirement for all at a fixed age is no longer appropriate as people live longer and healthier lives.
Instead, we should promote opportunities for flexible retirement and combinations of part-employment, part-retirement which suit the different needs of older people.
As employers find themselves competing for a falling number of young workers, there is a real opportunity to change out-dated and discriminatory attitudes towards older people.
It is vital that we integrate women and minorities fully into the workforce, in positions of high skill, responsibility and pay, not as peripheral and under-paid workers.
Equal opportunities to earn a good living are cental to our vision of a better life for all.
But they are also a matter of economic necessity, as Europe competes against other countries, particularly in the Pacific Basin, who are already investing substantially in the skills of their rapidly growing and younger population.
The social strategy must therefore include full rights for employees, including the right to information and consultation about their company's plans, particularly regarding a possible takeover or merger.
It must include stronger protection for workers' health and safety, so that industrial modernisation is not pursued in ways which damage the working environment.
It must include measures which women and men to combine paid employment with family responsibilities, personal leisure, education and training and community involvement.
Shorter working hours and a shorter working lifetime have always been central to the Labour movement's demands.
Today, the challenge is to create working time arrangements which give individuals far greater autonomy in their own lives, including the opportunity of lifetime learning.
Support for families is particularly vital, including better maternity, paternity and parental leave and high-quality child care provisions.
8.
A RESIDENTS' CHARTER
EUROPE'S people must not be a divided people.
We are proposing a European Residents' Charter, guaranteeing equal rights and equal duties to every European resident.
Without these basic rights and duties, migrant workers — from Eastern Europe as well as the traditional sources of ‘guest workers’— may be used to undercut working conditions.
Creating common standards for every individual throughout the Community is also a vital plank of our campaign against racism and xenophobia.
The Europe of the 1990s must ensure to all its residents the right to vote, move freely round the Community, to work, to marry and to live with one's family.
These appear self-evident rights.
We will ensure they are realised.
Full participation in society, however, means enabling hitherto under-represented groups to play a full part in shaping their future.
The EPLP will play its part in moving towards equal representation for women and for ethnic minority people in all decision-making bodies — from the Court, the Council and the Commission to the European Parliament and its staff.
It is no longer acceptable for white men to dominate the great decision-making institutions of our countries.
9.
A CITIZENS' CHARTER
THE shift in decision-making from nation states to Europe is an inevitable consequence of economic Europeanisation and internationalisation.
The debate about ‘sovereignty’ is often misconceived.
As Europe's economy has become more integrated, more power has inevitably moved to Europe and will continue to do so.
‘Stop the world, I want to get off’ is no option for any European country, including Britain.
The completion of the Single Market need not delay the process of enlarging the Community.
Negotiations about Austria's membership should start immediately and we should seek applications from other EFTA countries.
Closer association with Central and Eastern European countries will lead to full membership at the appropriate time.
The European Community is the economic anchor of the New Europe, a force for stability in a time of turbulence.
This will best be done by bringing other countries into membership, not by keeping them out.
The direction is clear — towards greater European integration.
But there will still be important debates about the form of European decision-making, and the relationship between political accountability at a European and a national level.
The central problem is not that power has shifted from national governments and Parliament to Europe, but that it has shifted towards the Commission and the Council of Ministers.
Neither are effectively accountable to democratic bodies.
Correcting the democratic deficit is vital to Europe's future.
As people increasingly realise that decisions are being made which affect their daily lives, but over which they have little influence, they will demand more say — for themselves and for their elected representatives.
If European institutions do not respond, the Community itself will be threatened.
Not all decisions are European.
We must implement the principle of ‘subsidiarity’, that decisions should be made at the appropriate level whether that is local, regional, national or European.
The role of the European Parliament must be enhanced, to give it an effective power of co-decision within the Community.
It should have the right to initiate legislation for consideration by the Commission and the Committee of Ministers in addition to its existing right to comment on those bodies' legislative proposals.
National Parliaments' relationship with the European Parliament should also be strengthened, to promote effective scrutiny of European decision-making.
Enlargement of the Community makes it essential to develop a more efficient, as well as a more democratic, structure of decision-making.
Majority voting on a wide range of social and environmental issues will be needed for an enlarged Community to function.
The debate about whether the priority is to ‘deepen’ or ‘broaden’Europe is sterile.
We need a wider, deeper — and faster — Europe.
10.
A STRONG AND PEACEFUL EUROPE
THE map of Europe has been redrawn.
The Cold War has ended.
Europe must rethink the assumptions on which our security has rested for over forty years.
It is vital for Europe to speak with a European voice on security and peace.
In the short term, NATO's role should increasingly be to help manage common security within the Helsinki framework.
The procedures for European political cation need to be brought within a process of democratic accountability if they are to made more effective.
Renewed nationalist pressures within parts of greater Europe pose a serious threat of instability, which Community institutions must address.
The transformation of Europe has profound implications for the defence industries.
Progress on nuclear and conventional disarmament negotiations will mean substantial cuts in European — and especially British — defence spending, with many defence contracts being cancelled.
Left to the ‘free market’, defence contractors will either try to sell more arms to the Middle East and the Third World — perpetuating a disastrous misallocation of resources and dangerous instability — or they will close factories and create unemployment.
Instead, it is essential to manage disarmament on a regional, national and European level by intervening in the process of defence diversification.
Shifting defence industries into civilian production is vital to Europe's industrial modernisation.
The Community must ensure that employees are retrained.
that workers and managers together are enabled to develop alternative, civilian production strategies for their firms, that investment in R&D; is shifted from military to civilian purposes, and that the enormous skills and technological investment which exist in the defence industries are harnessed for environmental protection.
Major savings can be made throughout Europe as a result of disarmament and the decreased military base, and through a programme of common arms production and procurement.
The European Peace Dividend must not be wasted.
It must be invested in industrial restructuring, in science and technology, and in the development of social services — East and West.
It is not only the countries of the Community who are scaling down their military spending: as the USSR itself moves away from the military base of its economy, we should seek ways of working together over arms conversion.
11.
OUR COMMON EUROPEAN HOME
BY the year 2,000, the European Community will be very different.
It will include Austria and other EFTA countries as well as a united Germany.
It could also include Hungary, Czechoslovakia and possibly others — at least as associates if not yet as full members.
We can truly imagine that the Community will be close to becoming ‘our Common European Home’.
We have a vision of this New Europe.
We are determined that, by the year 2,000, Europe should have reversed its relative economic decline and begun the investment in science and technology, in transport and telecommunications, in education and training which will enable it to compete against the rest of the world.
The EPLP is ideally placed to work alongside other Parliamentary groups in the Community to set the agenda for Europe and for its people.
This is a wonderful time to be a European.
The revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe, the ending of the Cold War, the unification of Germany, all open up for us and our children the prospect of living in a Europe which is whole and at peace.
Rapid changes in the European Community itself — progress towards the Single Market, creation of the Social Charter, greater economic integration, the prospect of a far larger membership — all offer enormous opportunities, if only we will seize them.
The New Europe holds out the hope of a better life for Europe's people — with all that implies for cultural and social enrichment as well as industrial modernisation, environmental protection and an improved standard of living.
Of course, New Europe has its problems, not least in the revival of old nationalisms and the prospect of renewed conflicts.
There are some whose fear of instability is so great that they would prefer a return to the old divisions.
We do not believe that Europe divided was either stable or just.
We celebrate the changes taking place, without ignoring the risks involved.
The European Community was born out of an unswerving determination that the countries which had fought each other in two terrible wars during this century should never be at war again.
Now, in the last decade of the century, we have an opportunity through our European institutions to create a wider prosperity and a more lasting peace for all the peoples and all the countries of Europe.