

Agriculture and Food
Commission fears biotechnical mutants
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution has repeatedly asked Environment Minister Chris Patten for tighter controls to be imposed on biotechnology.
Since its report on the problem in July 1989, the commission has been concerned that the gene pool and ecosystem may be irrevocably changed should man-made mutants escape into the environment.
This could happen should genetically altered plants become weeds, or should insects designed to eat certain pests develop a taste for others.
The commission recommends to the government.
These include statutory backing for a register of authorities and individuals considered competent to release genetically altered organisms and a committee to advise on whether individual such releases should be permitted.
Patten is expected to address most of the committee's concerns in his amendments to the bill, but has apparently decided against a public register.
The government has already invested large sums of money in engineering crops that resist insect pests and the climatic extremes expected to come with global warming
Guardian 5 October
Conservation: Land
Plans for Midlands forest
Britain's first national forest, to be planted in the Midlands between Leicester and Burton upon Trent, is being planned by the Countryside Commission.
The Commission acts in an advisory capacity to the government.
It is estimated that the three million trees required for the new forest — mainly broadleaved tree species interspersed with conifers — will take 30-40 years to plant and cost £3 million.
A forest on this scale would absorb large amounts of carbon dioxide.
The 150 square mile forest would be grown on the site of the ancient forests of Needwood and Charnwood, covering parts of Leicestershire, Derbyshire, Staffordshire and Warrington.
It is intended that it will draw in towns, villages, fields and woods and, according to the commission, 20 million visitors from an 80 mile radius.
The current landscape of the site is bleak, suffering from the effects of intensive farming.
It includes many derelict industrial sites from the north-west Leicestershire coalfield, including spoil heaps.
It is described by the Commission as "an exposed, degraded landscape" .
Thus far, the Commission has no funding for its project, but Environment Secretary Chris Pattern is being approached regarding possible financial support from the government.
The forest will take 100 years to reach maturity
Times 6 October Financial Times 6 October Independent 6 October Guardian 6 October
Conservation: Land
Swamping the swamp
The ecosystem of the world's largest wetland, the Pantanal in southwest Brazil, is being threatened by tourists.
The 60,000 square-mile swamp contains 650 species of birds, 230 of fish, 80 of mammals and 50 of reptiles.
It was here that Brazilian television producers — intending perhaps to "enlighten" viewers on their natural heritage — set the racy soap series "Pantanal" .
The series became a huge success and tourists have flocked to the area ever since.
Volunteers recently picked up eight tons of litter left by them.
As in other parts of the continent, land in the Pantanal is under pressure from intensive farming.
Immigration from Brazil's cities is increasing mercury poisoning by gold-prospectors and the taking of species by trophy hunters.
Animals such as capybara, jaguars, jacare (alligators) and hyacinth macaws are particularly vulnerable.
Some are near extinction in other parts of the country.
The disruption of habitat by tourists, who might appreciate the wild, but as yet have not learned how to care for it, are compounding the Pantanal's problems
Washington Post 3 October
Conservation: Land
Spanish airforce to bomb wildlife sites
The Spanish Airforce is to go ahead with plans to build a firing range near Anchuranas, 200km south of Madrid.
The range will seriously jeopardize wildlife in the area including the Black Vulture and Imperial Eagle.
The decision to go ahead was made two years ago, but has been prevented by opposition led by the local Anchuranas Defence Co-ordination.
The plans are opposed by most political parties, with the exception of the ruling socialists.
The Defence Ministry claims that the range would benefit wildlife as it would drive people away.
Targets are planned for an estimated 300 jet sorties daily
Green Magazine October
Conservation: Species
US reveals plan to protect owls
President Bush's administration has revealed its plan to save the Pacific Northwest's spotted owl, and thereby some of the "old growth" forests which are its homeland.
The plan calls for a 17 percent reduction in timber felling over the next year, but avoids offering long tern protection to the owl or its habitat.
The owl was officially listed as an endangered species in June, when US Forest Service researcher Jack Ward Thomas and other scientists produced a report containing specific, far-reaching recommendations for its protection.
The administration set up its own special task force in order to find an alternative less likely to antagonise the logging industry.
The task force, however, has ended up by endorsing the Thomas report recommending that large chunks of forest containing dead trees where the owls live be preserved.
Yet it also recommends that Congress convene a Cabinet-level committee to make exemptions from the Endangered Species Act should it prove economically or socially necessary.
The plan has confused environmentalists and loggers alike.
The owl is the focal point in a much larger battle over the future of the Pacific Northwest's ancient forests of spruce and Douglas fir, located mainly on federal lands in Oregon and Washington.
Officials say they have identified new sources of timber that would not conflict with protecting the owl, but environmentalists are concerned that the government has called for a much smaller reduction in the timber "harvest" than the Thomas report.
They are currently considering whether the proposed reductions would withstand court challenges under the Endangered Species Act
Washington Post 22 September
Conservation: Species
UK blocks drift net ban
A proposal to abolish all drift net fishing in the Mediterranean was abolished after surprise opposition from Britain at the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The conference finally agreed to "suggest" that Mediterranean nations "should not use drift nets" .
British representative John Robson was concerned that the ban might be extended to the North Sea and the Atlantic, possibly affecting British fishing plans for the future.
He rejected claims by environmentalists that drift nets led to overfishing.
The UN has called for a ban on drift nets worldwide by 1992, and in the South Pacific by 1991.
The nets, which can be up to 40 miles across, have also been blamed for snaring and killing thousands of sea birds, non-commercial fish and marine mammals.
*Meanwhile, the US Senate has voted to ban the use of large drift nets in US waters up to 200 miles offshore, as well as their use by US fishermen in international waters
New Scientist 27 October Financial Times 13 October
Conservation: Species
UK bans antique horn — but international ban needed
The Department of the Environment has banned all buying and selling of antique rhino horn in order to discourage the trade worldwide.
Previously, only trade in new horn was banned but, with a single horn fetching as much as £30,000, Chinese dealers have been buying up big game trophies for export to the Far East.
Selective thefts from country houses have also occurred.
Rhino horn is believed to have numerous medical applications, and such is the demand for it in China that Ming dynasty cups and bowls, worth up to £75,000 in Europe, are now being ground down.
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), all four species of rhino face extinction within ten years unless Eastern medicine finds alternatives.
The black rhino is particularly vulnerable.
There are an estimated 5,000 white rhino left in the wild, about 3,500 black rhino in Africa, 1,950 Indian rhino and 65 Javanese.
Asian rhino horn is believed to be more potent and is worth around £30,000 a kilo, while the larger African horn fetches only £1,000 a kilo.
The Control of Trade in Endangered Species (Enforcement) Regulations were agreed by Far Eastern countries in 1985.
According to the WWF, trade has ceased in those countries where the ban has been enforced: Japan, Hong Kong and Macao.
Here, the horn is valueless.
The organisation has called for international pressure to be brought to end the trade in South Korea, Taiwan, China and Thailand, where horn is sold openly.
This, they say, is the only chance the rhino has of surviving in the wild
Guardian 20 October Times 20 October
Conservation: Species
 "Dolphin-friendly" labels to be introduced
An agreement was reached in early October between British canned fish companies and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society to introduce a "dolphin friendly" labelling system.
Hailing the decision as a major breakthrough, campaigners say it signifies that the tuna-dolphin issue is being taken seriously by British industry and will lead to other negotiations between industry and environmentalists.
The companies, which include John West, Princes, Glenryck, Loverings, Gerber Premier Foods and the Co-op, have also agreed not to process drift-net tuna for other firms.
These importers have have agreed to finance and police an inspectorate to ensure that they are not unwittingly buying drift-net tuna.
However, there is no evidence to show that British importers ever used fish caught by drift-net which suggests to some that the agreement may be nothing more than a clever marketing ploy.
Almost all tuna imported to Britain is skipjack, as opposed to the yellowfish tuna commonly caught in drift-nets.
Sceptical of the implications, Greenpeace fears that the labelling will lead to consumer complacency.
The group questions whether the two weeks grace period — to monitor any drift-net tuna coming in — will be effective
Times 3 October
Conservation: Species
Walrus tusks replaces elephant ivory
Marine biologist Sam LaBudde has presented new evidence to the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea that Alaskan Indians are killing walruses for their ivory.
The Indians have a subsistence quota but 90 percent of the carcasses are being left to rot.
It is feared that the walrus may be replacing the elephant as a source of black market ivory, since the trade in elephant tusks comes under tighter international control.
A pair of tusks is valued at up to $2,000 and often exchanged for drugs.
Walrus numbers are currently healthy, but the animal has been threatened with extinction twice this century
Green Magazine November Guardian 24 October
Conservation: Species
Europe's butterflies disappear as habitat destroyed
Europe's butterfly population has been decimated as accelerated agricultural production has turned grassland, marshland and woodland into farmland.
Nearly all of the 380 known species, a third of which are exclusive to Europe, have declined drastically.
Several face extinction.
According to a report by Dr Chris Van Sway of the government funded Dutch Butterfly Foundation, the Netherlands has lost 15 of its 63 species and 10 more could be under threat.
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, 13 of 25 protected species have declined due to changes in farming practice.
Of western Germany's 175 species, 13 are verging on extinction and 27 are highly endangered.
The growth of European Community funded farming has increased losses which began at the beginning of the century.
The rich grassland habitat of the past, which could support up to 20 species, has been replaced by pesticide-drenched monocultures which can barely support a single butterfly.
The Berne Convention for the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats obliges European signatory states to protect butterflies and their habitats, but at present only 20 species are listed.
Butterfly protection is being pioneered by a Council of Europe expert group, which is preparing recovery plans for rare species.
The Netherlands is allowing land to become wild in an effort to encourage the butterflies to return.
Scientists stress, however, that the best solution for Europe's butterflies would be to prevent further loss of habitat
European 14-16 September
Conservation: Species
Redundant elephants
Bangkok has a rapidly expanding elephant population due to a government ban on logging.
If Thai superstition is anything to go by, a concomitant expansion in the human population can be expected.
Thai women believe that walking under an elephant will increase their fertility, and are paying 10 baht a time for the privilege.
The elephants were formerly used to haul trunks from the logging operations.
Now they can be seen strolling around the city alongside their mahouts or drivers, or earning their living as tourist attractions, tethered to hotel lawns and bars.
On the more serious side, it is doubtful that the elephants have anything to gain from their new highly polluted and noisy environment.
International Herald Tribune 19 October
Conservation: Species
Wildlife perishes near nerve gas site
Scientists from the National Rivers Authority are investigating possible leakage from a former nerve gas factory following the deaths of 10 dolphins, scores of sea birds and a giant leatherback turtle between Portreath and Newquay this year.
The deaths cannot be medically accounted for and environmentalists fear that costal erosion could be releasing buried poisons from the site.
The clifftop factory at Nancekuke, Cornwall, began life as a nerve gas factory until it switched to control agents such as CS gas in 1956.
In the 1960's local people claimed it was poisoning them.
It has been shut down since the early 1970's and now functions as a radar station known as RAF Portreath.
The Ministry of Defence (MOD) admits that "chemically treated" compounds such as incinerated mustard gas and white asbestos are buried in five marked sites in the area, but denies that these could be polluting the environment.
Cornwall County Council and the National Rivers Authority have asked for more information but have been refused by the MOD on the grounds that there is insufficient evidence to merit further investigation
Observer 23 September
Energy
World's first open sea wind power turbines
The world's first off shore wind farm will be in operation within six months.
Denmark, which has more wind turbines than any other territory with the exception of California, expects to have 10 per cent of its energy produced by wind power at the end of this year.
Power companies are under an obligation to install at least 100 megawatts of wind power capacity by the end of the year under contract to the government.
The offshore wind scheme, due to come on stream early next year, is currently being built off Vindeby, on Lolland Island in the Baltic Sea.
Designed to carry 11 turbines, each with a capacity of 450 kilowatts, the farm will produce electricity costing around 0.63 Danish krone (5.8 pence) per kilowatt hour, generating 12 million kilowatt-hours a year.
This exceeds current output for a similar onshore group by 70 per cent(3.4p per kilowatt-hour).
Most of Denmark's 3,000 wind turbines are owned by private co-operatives.
New Scientist 20 October
Energy
Hawaiian geothermal energy plans conflict with forest
Hawaii has erupted in a dispute over geothermal energy.
A geothermal plant, which converts steam and water heated by underground magma into power, has been built on the side of a live volcano at Pahoa.
Geothermal energy does not involve the burning of fossil fuels and therefore makes a negligible contribution to global warming.
Environmentalists, however, are concerned about the effect that the plant will have on the immediate area, the nation's last large scale expanse of lowland tropical forest.
Several companies are either waiting for permits or are already drilling the area around Wa Kele O Puna forest.
Plans vary, but the most ambitious, supported by the government and the Hawaiian electric company, seeks to phase in 500 megawatts of geothermal power between 1995 and 2007.
This would involve the creation of the world's longest and deepest electrical transmission line.
Cables would be sunk over land and under sea (6,200 feet under the Alenuihaha Channel) to Honolulu 200 miles away.
Proponents claim that the plant goes a long way toward addressing the heavily oil dependent state's energy needs, and, would entail the destruction of at most 2 percent of the Wao Kele tract.
Conservationists object to the network of steam wells, roads, power plants, cables and pipelines across the forest that the project will entail.
They say that the extra energy would be unnecessary if modern conservation methods were adopted.
Other Hawaiians have claimed that geothermal exploitation disrupts their worship of the goddess, Pele.
Feeling around the issue runs high: there have been several demonstrations at which protesters have been arrested.
Cabinet and scientific opinion is split over the issue.
Geothermal power is currently used in California, Nevada, Utah as well as 18 countries outside the US.
The Washington Post 22 September
Energy
Where there's a willow there's a way…
A plan to turn over millions of hectares of unused agricultural land to the growing of willow trees is to be implemented in Britain.
The trees will be used as fuel to generate electricity for farm generators.
The scheme, backed by the government, the European Community, engineering and water companies and landowners' associations, relies on the ancient art of coppicing to provide a reliable fuel source.
The Wood Energy Development group believes that the reintroduction of short-rotation schemes could help solve land-use problems such as crop surpluses and forestry management which are currently at odds with environmental concerns.
By 2000, there could be a surplus of up to one million hectares of arable land, and studies have shown that willow and poplar, which thrive on poor land, could provide about 6 percent of the UK's electricity needs.
Times 6 October
Environmental Politics
Californian electorate rejects "Big Green" 
Californian voters rejected by a two-to-one majority proposition 128, the citizens' initiative known as "Big Green" .
Promoted by an alliance of environmental groups and backed by film stars and a $10 million advertising campaign, the bill initially looked set to pass, but was finally defeated by a decisive 64-36 per cent.
In a ballot paper that ran to 39 pages, the bill stipulated some of the toughest environmental regulations yet seen in the industrial world.
Its provisions included: enforcing a 20 percent reduction in Californian carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2000, with a 40 percent reduction by 2010; protecting the earth's ozone shield by speeding up the internationally agreed phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons and other damaging chemicals; banning offshore drilling for oil in state waters; saving the ancient redwood forests; and requiring that a new tree be planted for every 500 square feet of development.
Its most controversial aspect was to attack agro-chemical risks in food by banning all pesticides known to cause cancer or harm a developing fetus.
This could have led to up to 350 pesticides being outlawed in the state, along with the banning of all foods containing residues.
The California Farm Bureau and several chemicals companies (including Shell, BP and ICI) combined to form an opposition group, the "Careful Initiative" , dubbed the "Big Brown" by environmentalists.
The Bill's initial popularity began to wane after an intense media barrage of highly critical commercials.
The public, already faced with recession, balked at the prospect of dramatically increased costs and changes which would have affected every aspect of Californian life.
California has long been at the green cutting edge, and had the bill been passed, other states and possibly nations may have followed in its wake.
The impact on the Californian economy would certainly have been dramatic, with its repercussions felt far beyond the state itself.
The Bush administration was strongly against the bill, California's independent politics having forced many industries to adapt to its standards rather than those of the federal government.
At the government's request, a report was being prepared by the International Trade Commission which, had the bill been passed, may have led to it being declared illegal for blocking international trade under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Financial Times 17 October, 8 November Observer 11 November New Scientist November Times 30 October
Environmental Politics
US environmental protection agency criticised
An internal investigation by the US Interior Department has found that hundreds of species face extinction as a result of gross mismanagement by the government's Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The report identifies 34 species of animals and plants which have become extinct over the past 10 years due to inadequate protection under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
The EPA is within the jurisdiction of the Fish and Wildlife Service and is an agency of the Interior Department.
Extinct species range from wild flowers, fish and gophers, to the largest mammal on the list, the Montana Woodland Caribou.
Officially, 550 species have been formally identified as endangered but an additional 3,600 threatened species have not been listed despite evidence that they required protection.
The report estimates that $4.6 billion is needed to enforce the laws required to save all threatened species.
At present, only $33 million has been allocated
International Herald Tribune 3, 19 October
Environmental Politics
Finland and Soviet Union talk green
A service exchanging environmental information is to be set up between Finland and the Soviet Union.
The "green line" will keep both states informed of accidents which may affect their mutual environment.
It will be set up at the beginning of 1991.
The new accord was formalised at a meeting between Finnish Environment Minister Kaj Baerlund and the Soviet Union's Nikolay Vorontsov, Chairman of the State Committee for the Protection of the Environment.
Telephone and fax links will also be set up between border towns
Helsinki home service 9 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
France takes green initiative
The French parliament has been presented with a white paper from Environment Minister, Brice Lalonde, containing measures designed to bring France's environmental performance up to par with Europe's "greener" countries.
The resulting debate was the first the parliament has held on green issues.
According to the white paper, the administration lacks environmental policy as well as research funding.
There is no comprehensive studies programme, and the country lacks "environmental initiative" .
The report recommends the setting up of a national environment institute and national education programmes.
Practical measures include a ban on CFCs by the year 2000, a reduction in air pollution and an increase in recycling capacity.
Should the white paper's recommendations be adopted, spending will be doubled to £20 billion over 10 years.
Meanwhile, disagreements between ministers have led to the shelving of a detailed reallocation of environmental responsibilities.
* Drought conditions have led to the introduction of a new French water bill, scheduled to go before parliament before end of 1991.
Under the new legislation, water levels would be monitored and a charge would be levied for water used for industry and agriculture.
Fines for water polluters, up to £100,000 or two year prison sentences, have also been included in the recommendations.
The report says that consumers can be expected to pay double for water by the year 2000 to cover the cost of cleaning up.
Criticism of the burden this places on consumers has been countered by the argument that the public is prepared to pay
Le Monde 12 October New Scientist 20 October
Environmental Politics
French dam blocked
The French Environment Ministry has prevented the building of a dam at Chabonchard, on the Cher River.
Proponents of the dam, including two local mayors, claim that the dam is necessary if the town of Montlucon, upstream from the site, is to have an adequate water supply.
The report, however, finds that requirements have been overestimated.
It has been welcomed by environmentalists, who feared that the dam would upset the Cher's ecology.
Le Monde 17 October
Environmental Politics
RSNC report on "Health of UK" 
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation has published a report entitled The Health of the United Kingdom.
The report identifies key environmental issues affecting the UK and its wildlife, and goes on to suggest ways of reversing or minimising the destruction.
The report calls for a nationwide audit of endangered species and places to be followed by a nationwide conservation scheme.
A greater value needs to be placed on "wild places" in order to ensure their protection, it says.
In regard to pollution, the report calls for far tighter controls, particularly with regard to global restrictions on air pollution.
An integrated transport policy which gives priority to government funding of public transport is also recommended, as is increased research and education, more accountability from industry and support for the "polluter pays" principle.
The Royal Society has adopted a noticeably more radical stance following the fragmentation of the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
Chief executive, Tim Cordy, is reported as saying that the enforced break up of the Council meant that there was no longer a "national voice for nature" .
The society was deeply disappointed with the government white paper, he said.
The Prince of Wales, patron of the society, was present at the launch and fully endorsed the report.
Guardian 26 October Times 26 October
Environmental Politics
UK nature councils to get extra £10 million
The government has announced that it will increase the staff of the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) and the Countryside Commission by 30 per cent.
At a cost of £10 million a year, the additional funding is nearly double the NCC's annual budget prior to last year's decision to split up the organization.
The NCC was divided into three groups for England, Wales and Scotland, which diminished its effectiveness as an ally for pressure groups.
Environment Secretary, Chris Patten, has since tried to compensate for the ill-favoured move with assurances that the new bodies would have the resources to perform at least as well as the old NCC.
In the view of the Council for the Protection of Rural England, however, the administration is fundamentally unworkable.
Extra staff will mean that the three branches will simply duplicate each other 's work, and that there will be less resources for environmental activities.
Staffing allotment will be 654 for England, 225 for Wales, 385 for Scotland and 86 for the joint UK Nature Conservation Committee, which was set up by the Department of Environment to provide a central voice for the NCC.
Guardian 18 October
Global Warming
EC agreement on greenhouse gas curbs
The Economic Community (EC) has reached agreement on the stabilisation of carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2000.
It was vital that the Community compose itself in order to present a united front at the Second World Conference on Climate Change to be held in Geneva, where world levels for carbon dioxide emissions are to be discussed.
The UK's refusal to bring forward its target date for reducing emissions from 2005 to 2000 proved an obstacle.
There were fears that if the date for stabilisation was altered from that promised in a recent government white paper, the privatisation of the electricity industry would be jeopardised.
The indusry consumes large amounts of fossil fuels.
The deal was made possible by some countries, notably Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands, taking on larger carbon cuts than others.
The compromise prevented a potentially embarrassing stalemate.
Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal remain exempt from carbon reductions on the grounds that they are still developing countries.
It was generally agreed that the costs of cutting emissions would be economically impossible for them.
Exactly how the member states will share the burden of the cuts is expected to be a source of continued controversy over the next few months.
Disagreement over how the cuts are to be implemented is also expected.
The EC is likely to back a tax on energy in order to convince both public and industry of the energy-saving imperative.
* Meanwhile, a report for the European Commission has shown how EC countries could implement a 20 per cent cut in carbon dioxide emissions over the next 15 years (by 2005) at a cost that is almost negligible.
The report was commissioned from scientists in five countries in order to assess the impact of dramatic reductions in carbon emissions.
It is believed to advocate measures such as fuel substitution and energy efficiency.
Publication of the report, which could prove somewhat embarrassing for Britain, is not expected until the end of this year.
Times 30 October Financial Times 30 October European 29 October Independent 29 October
Global Warming
Physicist warns of sea oxygen depletion
A leading physicist, Professor Freeman Dyson, has put forward the possibility that the depletion of oxygen in the oceans presents an even more serious threat to the global ecology than the build-up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
At the annual Radcliffe lecture in Oxford, Dyson pointed out that eight tonnes of oxygen are used up for every three tonnes of coal or oil burned.
About 16 billion tonnes are thought to be lost every year.
The professor said that the depletion rate was currently believed to be 13 parts per million per year, but that accurate measurement was urgently needed.
 "So long as we are not measuring the rate of depletion year by year, we have no basis for guessing how soon the asphyxiation of large parts of the Pacific might begin" , warned Dyson.
He said that the oceans would suffer the effects of oxygen depletion before the atmosphere, because there is proportionately less oxygen in water
Times 12 October
Global Warming
Bleached reefs warn of global warming
Some marine biologists are warning that widespread coral reef "bleaching" — a reef disorder believed to be caused by unusually warm water — is an early biological effect of global warming.
The bleaching has been reported at coral reefs in the Caribbean, Bermuda, Hawaii and Okinawa, Japan.
The problem occurred in the 1980s several times but appears more serious now.
There is preliminary evidence that repeated stress means the corals are less likely to recover.
Walter Jaap of Florida's Department of Marine Resources said: "We are getting very concerned that this is happening with greater frequency" .
International Herald Tribune 13, 14 October
Global Warming
Cities face flood risk
Major cities across the world are vulnerable to serious flooding even without any global warming effects, say an East Anglian team of scientists in a newly published study, Cities at Risk.
The vulnerable cities, in which about 500 million people live, include Alexandria, Bangkok, Hamburg, Leningrad, London, New Orleans, Shanghai and Venice.
The risk of flooding has been increased by a combination of factors.
Sea levels are rising by about 15 cm per century — due to temperature increases that have already occurred and which may or may not be linked with the greenhouse effect.
Many cities are sinking either because of natural land movement or because of water extraction from beneath the city.
The south-east of England, for example, is sinking by about the same rate as the water is rising — about 15 cm a century.
Sea levels around Venice have risen by about 23 cm in 50 years.
Bangkok was lowered by about 1.5 metres during the 1970's after groundwater beneath the city was pumped out.
Dr Mick Kelly, a co-author of Cities at Risk, said 60 per cent of the world's population live in low-lying coastal zones that are at some risk from sea-level rises.
The report included a detailed review of London's flood defences.
If the worst-case predictions of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change are fulfilled, with sea level rises accelerating to a 10 cm rise every decade, the Thames barrier can be expected to fail by around 2030.
The team suggested that hard engineering, such as flood barriers, can offer only a short-term respite whereas "soft engineering" could be more useful.
The report pointed out the benefits of beach replenishment, large-scale sand pumping and the protection and enhancement of natural features like sand dunes and shingle banks.
Times 10 October Guardian 11 October Observer 7 October
Global Warming
Iceberg yields climate clues
An iceberg that has floated 2,000 km from the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica has established the existence of a complex series of currents along the Antarctic coast.
These could provide vital clues to climate change.
The iceberg was 155 km long until it broke up last year.
It had been tracked over a three-year period by satellite and radio beacon and its movements have demonstrated that four separate currents affect the region of Antarctica near the Ross Ice shelf.
Knowledge of the currents is important to scientists studying the ebb and flow of the Antarctic ice sheet which contains about 90 per cent of the world's ice.
At present the ice sheet is believed to be replenished by snow fall at about the same rate as ice melts or is lost into the sea.
Information like that yielded by the travelling iceberg will help scientists to determine whether climate change due to the greenhouse effect is influencing Antarctica's ice.
International Herald Tribune 10 October
Global Warming
Sulphur shield may counter greenhouse effect
United States climatologists are discussing preliminary evidence that sulphur dioxide — a major pollutant and contributor to acid rain — may be inducing localised cooling effects that are countering the warming influences of greenhouse gases.
Sulphur dioxide particles in the atmosphere act as reflectors and bounce some of the sun's rays back into space.
Furthermore, the particles act as nuclei for droplets of water vapour.
The droplets thus formed — of dilute sulphuric acid — are smaller than normal water vapour droplets and therefore clouds containing them are brighter than normal.
Brighter and more extensive clouds send more of the sun's heat away from the earth's surface, adding to the albedo effect.
There is some evidence that the cloud cover over the US has increased since 1950 by 2 or 3 per cent, according to James Angell of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The quantity of man-made sulphur in the atmosphere now rivals amounts produced by several major volcanic eruptions which had significant climatic effects.
Paul Mayewski of the University of New Hampshire, who has compared current levels of sulphur dioxide with those after volcanic eruptions, said: "I would say that we're underestimating the effect of warming due to carbon dioxide because we're dumping so much sulphur dioxide into the system" .
A British researcher, Tom Wigley of the University of East Anglia, has also reported that sulphur clouds may have "significantly offset the temperature changes that have resulted from the greenhouse effect" .
A major problem for climatologists has been the fact that temperatures in the southern hemisphere have risen more than in the northern hemisphere.
Unlike the greenhouse gases, which spread evenly across the globe, sulphur dioxide's effects are short-lived and regional.
After a few days or weeks, the sulphur particles are precipitated as rain or snow.
The sulphur effect, therefore, could be one reason why the northern hemisphere, which produces most of the world's sulphur pollution, has not warmed despite the release of greenhouse gases.
Researchers at NASA claim that even if the sulphur effect does exist, it could at most only delay the greenhouse effect until fossil fuels run out.
They say that although sulphur dioxide may play a role in climate change, its effect is unlikely to be sufficiently widespread or to last long enough to offset the influence of the greenhouse gases.
They recommend measures that make economic sense regardless of whether or not global warming is occurring, such as limiting deforestation and increasing energy efficiency.
Washington Post 17 September
Global Warming
New warnings for Second World Climate conference
The Stockholm Environment Institute has issued a report recommending that limits be defined for average global temperatures and sea level.
The report lists practical measures that, if implemented, will help restrict greenhouse gas emissions with a view to meeting these targets.
Released by a group of independent scientists to coincide with the Second World Climate Conference, the report said that to minimise the risk of environmental damage, the rate of increase of average global temperature must be held below 0.2C per decade.
An absolute increase of more than 2C above pre-industrial levels will, said the report, lead to "rapid, unpredictable and non-linear responses" .
According to the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the world has already warmed by about half a degree since industrialisation began.
It is not officially known whether this is attributable to the greenhouse effect or natural climate variability.
There may already be enough heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere to raise temperatures beyond the 2 degree target.
 "Unless we take very prompt and significant action to reduce greenhouse emissions we're very likely to experience severe impacts" , said Peter Gleick, a co-chairman of a working group contributing to the Stockholm Institute report.
Practical measures recommended by the new report include improving energy efficiency, using more natural gas and renewable energy sources like wind and wave power.
Nuclear power and hydropower — controversial because of their adverse impacts on the environment despite the fact that they do not produce significant quantities of greenhouse gases — are also recommended as substitutes for fossil fuels.
A worldwide move away from reliance on fossil fuels could, according to the report, reduce carbon dioxide emissions by between 25 and 50 per cent.
Other measures proposed are global tree-planting programmes and a halt in the burning of tropical forests so that by 2005, no carbon dioxide emissions come from deforestation.
According to the Institute's report, the control measures could contain the rate of climate change to a level which will not do severe harm.
Unprecedented co-operation between nations and strong leadership and intervention from governments will be required
Independent 17 October Financial Times 17 October International Herald Tribune 18 October
Global Warming
Met Office storms theory
The severe storms that have affected Britain in the last few years may be linked with sea-surface temperatures which have been fractionally higher than the long-term average.
This theory is being considered by the Meteorological Office in Berkshire.
In the past the storms, caused by a plunge in atmospheric pressure after mixing of warm and cool air, have not reached Britain.
Recently, however, the violent weather fronts have travelled further than normal and devastated parts of Britain.
The Meteorological Office is studying the possibility that the recent warm summers have raised sea temperatures enough to alter the behaviour of the storms.
This year the sea-surface temperatures in the eastern Atlantic — on the same latitude with southwest Ireland — have been 0.6C higher than normal.
The Times 4 October
Global Warming
CO2 emissions plans
An international consensus on the need for governments to impose tough targets for the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions seems to be developing as Japan presents a new and demanding strategy to the Geneva World Climate Conference.
The Japanese position initially highlighted the weak commitment of countries such as the US and Britain to commit itself to any targets.
The European Community (EC) has since agreed to stabilise or reduce emissions by 2000.
The Japanese government has resolved an internal split between its Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and the Environment Agency by simultaneously presenting both departments' favoured policies in its Action Programme to Arrest Global Warming, which will go forward to the world climate conference.
The MITI target is to stabilise emissions per head at the 1990 level by the year 2000.
This in effect would result in a net 6 per cent increase.
The second target, which had been proposed by the Environment Agency, is to stabilise emissions at the 1990 level by 2000.
The second target is more demanding and was blocked by MITI on the grounds that Japan is already an efficient user of energy whose emissions of gaseous carbons are the third lowest in the industrial world.
The Japanese government has agreed to review the programme each year until 2010.
Greenpeace, however, said that the Japanese strategy shows that industrial development is still perceived as more important than environmental protection.
Saburo Kato, who is head of the Environment Agency's global warming department, said: "We believe that such targets can be met without significant economic impact" .
But the new measures are not legally binding.
They do not go as far as some countries, who plan to make actual cuts in emissions rates.
Germany has a target of a 30 per cent reduction by 2005, France recommends cuts of up to 50 per cent by 2030, Italy has made a parliamentary resolution for 20 per cent cuts by 2005 and Australia also is aiming for 20 per cent cuts by 2005.
Canada, Belgium, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland and Ireland have all committed themselves to stabilise emissions at 1990 or pre-1990 levels
New Scientist 27 October Financial Times 19, 24 October Independent 24 October
Nuclear Power
Safety teams for East European plants
Following the identification of serious problems with early Soviet designed nuclear power plants, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is to create teams of specialist engineers to advise on and improve the safety of these plants in central and eastern Europe.
The teams will examine ageing power plants in Bulgaria, the USSR, Czechoslovakia and what was formerly East Germany.
Causing particular concern are a generation of pressurised-water reactors (PWRs), known as VVERs, which were built throughout the Eastern bloc during the 1970s.
The engineers will examine a number of these 440-megawatt PWRs, concentrating on electrical and control systems, fire protection and instrumentation and the organisation and management of operating staff.
Among the problems with the PWRs identified by the IAEA is a tendency for the walls of the reactor's pressure vesssel to become increasingly brittle with age
Public and government concern within eastern Europe is increasing.
The new Germany is to close down VVERs which do not meet the former Federal Republic's safety standards.
In Poland the proposed construction of a VVER reactor at Zarnowiec, on the Baltic coast, has been halted.
The Polish government has also shelved plans for a nuclear plant on the River Warta, near Poznan, following public protest
New Scientist 6 October
Nuclear Power
French nuclear industry admits radioactive leakages
France's atomic energy board (CEA) has admitted that "radioactive elements" had been "detected" at the sites of former nuclear waste dumps it had officially declared clean.
The two sites at St-Aubin and Itteville, 40 km from Paris, held radioactive waste from 1948 until the 1970s when it was sent to La Hague, France's nuclear waste treatment centre.
The CEA's official reports on the Itteville dump claimed radioactivity levels reached only a few hundred becquerels per cubic metre.
However, the CRII-RAD, which is an independent scientific agency, has recently found 14,000 becquerels per cubic metre, a measurement close to the authorised maximum level.
At St-Aubin, soil contains 30 times the acceptable level of radioactivity.
Over 4000 people live close to the dumps.
European 28-30 September
Nuclear Power
Sellafield plant pronounced unviable
New doubt has been cast on the viability of the Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant due to open at Sellafield in 1992.
Estimates that the plant is likely to sustain losses of more than £3 billion in its first ten years have been published by an energy consultant, Colin Sweet, on behalf of the lobby group, Cumbrians Opposed to a Radioactive Environment.
Sweet has predicted that Thorp will cost between £6.3 billion and £8.3 billion before 2002.
Revenues, from reprocessing domestic and imported nuclear fuels, are not expected to exceed £5.2 billion.
Sweet used the best figures available to make his calculations on the issue, which he said was clouded by "disinformation" .
He concluded that Thorp was likely to be the first of British Nuclear Fuel's (BNFL) projects to be closed if the company was to come under financial pressure.
Guardian 9 October
Ozone Layer
Scientists confirm increased ozone depletion
The thinning of the ozone layer over Antarctica has been far worse than expected this year.
In October, scientists from the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the British National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration concurred that levels had reached the lowest point for the year.
It is feared that the year may prove to be the worst on record
Financial Times 19 October International Herald Tribune 12 October
Pollution: Air
New approach to European acid emission cuts
Europe's current approach to cleaning up acid emissions by cutting permitted levels equally in all countries has been criticised by David Newbery, Professor of Applied Economics at Cambridge University.
He told the Centre for Economic Policy Research that what was needed was an in-depth comparison of the costs of cleaning up emissions on the one hand with the economic benefits on the other.
Scientists had so far failed to include this in their models.
Newbery argued that a more useful approach was for each country to be looked at separately and the level of damage quantified to see how it could be most effectively and economically put right.
Prioritisation was necessary, he said, citing the example that tree death was more important than fish death, which was sad but economically unimportant.
Europe's reduction in acid emissions would have to be huge in order to achieve an ecologically acceptable balance, he claimed.
If the new approach were adopted, Britain would have to cut emissions by more than almost anyone else — 60 percent — in order for Europe to achieve an overall cut of 30 percent.
Independent 20 October
Pollution: Air
British pollution record questioned
The National Audit Office and opposition MP's have criticised the pollution records of 10 British-built overseas power stations.
The 10 projects were agreed under the £98 million a year Aid and Trade Provision (ATP), and cost more than £150 million to the British taxpayer.
An independent report found that many of the plants did not match up to European safety standards, burned high sulphur coal, and were badly sited.
The use of public money was also questioned [see ED 40, Acid rain deal for India].
Anne Clwyd, Labour's Shadow Minister for Overseas Development, requested further information on Overseas Development Administration (ODA) project evaluation.
The ODA have refused to comment on allegations of £35 million worth of "bribes and backhanders" to secure a British bid for a £400 million hydroelectric scheme in Pergau, northern Malaysia
Guardian 10 October
Pollution: Air
Athens air pollution emergency
Atmospheric pollution in Athens reached such a high level on October 3 that authorities had to ban all traffic from the centre of the Greek capital.
Over 200 old people were hospitalised for cardiac and respiratory trouble.
Car owners now take turns to enter the city centre, those with their registration plates ending in odd numbers one day, and even numbers the next.
Le Monde October 10
Pollution: Water
California cleaning
A comprehensive offshore oil spill prevention and cleanup plan has become law in California.
Governor George Deukmejian, at the launch of the new safeguards, said that the law "will give California an unprecedented ability to prevent spills before they happen and to fight the effects of spills if they do occur." 
An extra 25 cent tax on each barrel of oil — which adds less than one cent to the retail price of a gallon of petrol — will finance a $100 million oil spill cleanup fund.
New mechanisms are created for helping ensure the safe transportation of oil along California's coastline.
The law guarantees that sufficient additional funds are available to act quickly in the event of a spill.
These funds would be repaid by the oil companies who must have $500 million of oil spill liability insurance, before tye qualify for permission to transport barrels of crude through state waters.
In order to ensure a rapid response, cleanup crews will be guaranteed immunity from liability for property damage for the first 60 days after an accident
Los Angeles Times 23 September
Pollution: Water
Privatised water companies to be prosecuted
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has announced its decision to prosecute five out of 10 privatised water companies for pollution from nine sewage treatment works.
Anglian, North West, Northumbrian, and South West all face charges, and Yorkshire is to be prosecuted on five cunts.
Evidence is being gathered which could mean a further 169 prosecutions, involving all 10 companies in England and Wales.
In its first annual report, the NRA spelt out its intention to maintain a tough "watchdog" stance towards the water companies.
Until now, the Authority has been prevented from taking action because of a Water Act requirement that samples be collected over a 12 month period.
A large number of works with low effluent quality do not face prosecution.
Strict standards of pollution control are relaxed for those "offenders" who are committed to spending money on improving methods of sewage treatment.
NRA chairman Lord Crickhowell said that after the Authority began taking samples many works had improved performance.
The Water Services Association, representing the privatised companies, defends the water industry's condition.
 "We will be spending £26 billion over the next 10 years to put right years of neglect, and that includes investments in sewage works." 
Financial Times 11 October Times 11 October Guardian 11 October Independent 11 October
Pollution: Water
Oil tankers put fragile marine life at risk
One of the richest habitats in the world for seabirds, fish and marine mammals is at risk from oil spills.
That is the conclusion of a report commissioned by the Department of Transport, which shows that a government-recommended deep water route around the North-West coast of Scotland is being ignored by 80 per cent of loaded oil tankers.
This means that the sea channel between Skye and the Western Isles, known as The Minches, is threatened by oil pollution.
Friends of the Earth (Scotland) are calling for recognition of the dangers inherent in transporting oil through the Isles.
They have written to Transport Secretary Cecil Parkinson, proposing that oil tankers should avoid the area.
The organisation claims that The Minches are one of Europe's most important marine areas, and that an oil spill would bring economic ruin to local fishing, salmon farming and tourist industries as well as environmental tragedy.
The government, whilst expressing concern about the risks to the UN International Maritime Organisation, have said that tankers cannot be banned from the area as captains must have the option of using the route in rough seas.
The General Council of British Shipping quotes a survey as reporting that those ships which had been found to use the Minches route had done so only because of poor weather conditions.
They considered that this was the "environmentally-friendly thing to do" 
Guardian 22 October
Pollution: Water
Greenpeace launches first water prosecution
The first private prosecution of industry to be made under the 1989 Water Act has been launched by Greenpeace.
The defendant is Albright and Wilson, manufacturer of chemicals for detergents and toiletries.
The case concerns the company's Marchon works, in Whitehaven, Cumbria.
Under the provision of the Water Act, the company is permitted to discharge limited amounts of effluent into the Irish Sea.
According to samples taken by both Greenpeace and the National Rivers Authority (NRA), the plant is also discharging a range of metals of which authorised levels of zinc, chromium, copper and nickel are all being exceeded.
In addition to these chemicals — for which the Marchon plant has a license — discharges of uranium, aluminium, beryllium, boron, titanium and other metals have been found in the effluent.
Albright and Wilson have acknowledged their breach of the legal limit.
In the company's defence, the NRA said that because of a regional water shortage, less water had been used by the plant, at the request of the local water authority.
This meant that discharges had been less diluted.
The Greenpeace action is intended to be followed up by a series of prosecutions involving companies who, the organisation believes, are exceeding limits of discharge into the Mersey which is one of Europe's most seriously polluted rivers.
Greenpeace have named the "toxic top 20" companies who, they claim, share a large proportion of responsibility for continued pollution of the river.
According to their research, 18 have exceeded discharge limits into the river on 859 occasions in the past five years.
* In a report to the European Commission, Friends of the Earth (FOE) criticised the arrangement whereby Marchon is licensed by the Government to pump large quantities of cadmium into the sea.
Albright and Wilson have cut discharges of the toxic metal but FOE believe a European directive is being disregarded
Times 24 October Financial Times 19, 24 October Guardian 19, 24 October
Pollution: Water
Disappearing Soviet Seas
Three British scientists have confirmed the extent of devastation which has resulted in the shrinking of the Aral Sea in the Soviet Union.
In a report to the Royal Geographical Society, they have called this the worst "ecological disaster" in the world.
The scientists, recently returned from a visit to the region, detailed how irrigation and agricultural policies — in particular, the Soviet cotton industry — are continuing to destroy what was once the fourth largest area of fresh water in the world.
Cotton production has been concentrated in the region with catastrophic results.
Such large quantities of water have been diverted for irrigation of the crop that the rivers which once ran into the sea no longer reach it.
The level of water in the Aral has fallen by more than 14 metres in the past 30 years.
Denys Brunsden, professor of Geography at King's College London, described the effects on human health caused by the use of pesticides and defoliants on the cotton crops.
Residues of agricultural chemicals left on the 50 miles of exposed sea bed are causing huge increases in heart disease, cancer and deaths from chronic gastritis, kidney disease and tuberculosis.
Professor Brunsden said that more than 10 per cent of children are dying in their first year.
The scientists reported also on the change in climate and the destruction of a flourishing fishing industry.
Tony French, of University College London, expressed concern that, if present trends continue, there is a danger that the shrinking Aral Sea will have virtually disappeared by the end of the century.
*Diversion of water is threatening the life of another Soviet sea: Agriculture and industry are preventing around 30 per cent of annual fresh water supply from reaching the Sea of Azov.
Salinity has reached 14 parts per thousand which represents a 40 per cent increase since 1951.
A third of sewage pumped into the sea is untreated.
Other major pollutants include an annual discharge of 12,000 tonnes of oil products, pesticides, lead, chromium, nickel, manganese and iron.
The fishing industry has been devastated
Green Magazine November Times 23 October
Pollution: Water
Cleaning the Elbe
A treaty stipulating that one of central Europe's most polluted rivers be cleaned up has been signed by officials from Germany, Czechoslovakia and the European Community.
Their common purpose is to restore the Elbe as a source of drinking water, and to reestablish commercial fishing on the river, which flows from Czechoslovakia to the North Sea.
The treaty was signed at an October meeting in Berlin where it was agreed that there must be a reduction in levels of pollutants poured into the 1,170 km river.
In recent decades the Elbe has become an open sewer in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
Monitoring stations will test pollution levels and an international committee based in Magdeburg, in eastern Germany, is to be responsible for directing the cleaning operation
International Herald Tribune 11 October
Pollution: Water
Toxic algae report
A report published by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) warns that toxins produced by blue-green algae could prove a hazard to human health should water become contaminated.
Animals have died as a consequence of coming into contact with the algae, and it is known to have caused serious illness, such as liver damage, in human beings, as well as producing skin reactions and allergies.
Although there is no evidence, at present, of drinking water being contaminated in Britain, many reservoirs and lakes have had algal blooms on their surface waters for the last two summers.
The blooms usually occur at the end of the summer if there have been long hot spells and settled weather.
Phosphates in the water, from agricultural run-off and discharge from sewage works, provide nutrients on which the algae thrive.
The NRA admits that there are no easy solutions to the problem, and says that cases need to be looked at individually, but agrees that ways have to be found of reducing phosphate levels in the water.
One possibility would be for water companies to install phosphate strippers in sewage works, and machinery to keep water moving in reservoirs, as the blooms do not form on active surfaces.
The NRA also warns against attempts to dispel the blooms with algicides, as these release the toxins and the algae soon reappear and multiply even more rapidly
Daily newspapers 2 October
Tropical Forests
Tropical Forestry Action Plan to be revamped
The Tropical Forestry Action Plan (TFAP), which is seen by some as a loggers' charter, is to be reformed.
In the five years since its introduction, the plan has been accused of being geared toward extracting the optimum "harvest" from remaining forests and of lacking consideration towards forest peoples.
During a Rome-based conference on forestry, the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) heard a critical review of the existing plan by an independent three-man team including former Swedish Prime Minister, Ola Ullsten.
The FAO's forestry department, responsible for co-ordinating the plan, accepted most of the team's recommendations.
A major criticism has been the delay in meeting requests for assistance from developing countries.
Only six out of more than 75 interested countries have had forestry plans inaugurated under the plan.
The FAO forestry department admitted that it has had problems meeting demand, which had far exceeded expectations.
Amongst those that had received assistance in completing forestry plans, Cameroon and Colombia have had difficulty obtaining funds, partly because of the prominence given to logging.
The plan is to be renamed the Tropical Forestry Action Programme and will have the reformed objective of "conservation and sustainable development of forestry sources in the interests of the country concerned and the global community" .
The co-ordinating body within the FAO is to be strengthened, and increased emphasis placed on rapid response to requests for assistance.
Southern nations called for specific funds to be made available to support the improvements, but this was rejected by the northern donor nations.
This makes it unlikely that such a fund will be established.
A proposal for an international forest convention, which would cover all types of forest and lay down uniform standards, was favoured by the north but strongly opposed by the south.
Developing countries are suspicious of any restrictions or "code of conduct" that would allow wealthy nations to direct their resources.
The forest convention idea is likely to be linked to a UN Environment Programme proposal for a convention on climatic change.
It is probable that both will be discussed in the forthcoming conference on environment and development to be held in 1992 in Brazil.
Financial Times 4 October
Tropical Forests
EC finances forest
destruction A report to the European Parliament has shown that European Community (EC) aid to underdeveloped countries is being spent on projects directly destroying the forests of Asia, Africa and South America.
The parliament has called for a more rational approach to trade and aid schemes as well as investigation into the EC's role in granting funds in certain cases.
It also recommended that EC countries tighten up import controls.
According to the report, by Dutch Socialist MEP Hemmo Muntingh, the EC has financed the construction of a road cutting through one of Zaire's forests in order to increase production at a meat processing plant.
Similarly, in Equatorial Guinea, the EC is financing a timber extraction project intended to quadruple production over the next four years.
The most blatant example of inappropriate EC aid, the report claims, is the Carajas iron ore project in the Brazilian state of Para.
The project has decimated the Amazon forest and led to the deaths of 1,000 Indians since their habitat was opened up 10 years ago.
Four million tons of charcoal — the equivalent of 100,000 hectares of virgin forest — are used every year to smelt the iron ore into pig iron for export to the European and Japanese markets.
Half of of the 200,000 square km forest has already been destroyed.
The mine was paid for by a loan package of which $257 million came from European Coal and Steel Community funds via the EC.
Funds were also contributed by the World Bank.
After complaints by the European Parliament, the EC claimed that supervision of environmental effects of mining was the World Bank's responsibility.
However, the parliament has called for an investigation into how this particular project came to be funded.
Despite its concern, Europe is still the biggest importer of tropical timber.
At the beginning of the year, the Dutch government bowed to consumer pressure and banned all imports of tropical hardwood from countries which lack effective forestry management schemes.
The parliament has called for other EC countries to follow the Dutch lead.
European 10 September
Tropical Forests
Brazil's Amazon policies criticised
A Paris conference on the Amazon forests has given publicity to the continuing destruction of the area.
The conference, which was organised by the Rome-based Lelio Basso Foundation for the Rights and Liberation of Peoples, was attended by Brazilian Indian leaders, trade unionists, opposition leaders and anthropologists.
Environmentalists surmised that Brazil's public image had improved, but that its environmental politics had not.
The Brazilian government's environmental protection agency (Ibama) claims that forest destruction is half what it was last year.
If confirmed by official figures, this will be an 80 per cent reduction on 1987's figure, when carbon emissions from burning rain forest were said to be the third largest contributor to the greenhouse effect.
The biggest single curb on deforestation has been the government's temporary seizure of private savings, which left farmers without cash to buy chainsaws or pay logging teams.
Other reforms include the abolition of landowners' right to offset farming losses against profits from other business.
Land speculation has declined dramatically.
Brazil's best known green congressman, Fabio Feldmann, warned that several state governors in the Amazon have recently been elected on an anti-ecology ticket, promising to protect farmers who burn down the rain forest.
 "The world is being much less demanding of the Collor government than it should be" , he said.
Meanwhile, Indian leaders are showing growing scepticism about the white attitudes.
This was voiced by Itabira Surui, an Indian leader from Rondonia, who said: "Once we've got our land properly demarcated we can go home and forget all this talk about peoples of the forest" .
* Brazilian timber company Gethal Amazonia has been fined a record of £1.4 million after a helicopter survey revealed it had illegally chopped down Amazon rain forest trees
Guardian 10 October Independent 12, 18 October
Tropical Forests
EC protects Central American forests
The European Commission is to spend the largest sum ever allocated to an outside environmental project on protecting tropical rain forest in Central Africa.
The 24 million Ecu grant is being offered within the framework of the Lomé Convention, a trade and aid pact between the EC and various African, Pacific and Caribbean countries.
The new fund is intended to establish a regional network of protected areas in seven countries.
These will be used for research projects covering a range of rainforest topics.
It is hoped that the findings will help protect forest elsewhere.
Under the scheme, forest management and surveillance will be maintained and local people will be permitted to continue to exploit the forest in ways that are supportive of existing ecosystems.
Financial Times 4 October
Waste and Recycling
London dumping convention curbs dumping at sea
The 43 nations attending the week long London Dumping Convention eventually agreed to end all depositing of industrial waste at sea by 1995.
The convention is a UN body responsible for the regulation of sea dumping.
At present, anything excepting specifically blacklisted substances can be dumped at sea.
From 1995, the dumping of all forms of industrial waste will be prohibited outside of territorial waters.
A survey to gain a clear picture of where the dumping occurs is to be carried out by the North Sea Conference.
It will be the responsibility of member countries to prosecute those of their own ships which transgress the convention.
The ban was initially opposed by the USA, France, the Soviet Union and Britain, who wanted to keep open their option of dumping nuclear waste.
It was also argued that the ban was premature and that undeveloped nations would have their industrial development impaired as a result.
Such arguments were strongly opposed by environmental groups such as Greenpeace.
However, as the week long conference progressed, all opposition was dropped in preference to being outvoted.
The resulting decision was unanimous.
* The London Dumping Convention has made moves to establish a global control mechanism over land-based emissions which are responsible for 80 percent of marine waste.
The Convention's remit has to date only included dumping from ships.
A report and proposals will be submitted to preliminary meetings of the 1992 Conference on Environmental Development.
Times 3 November Financial Times 30 October, 2, 3 November Guardian 2 November
Waste and Recycling
Free trans-europe green information for business
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has launched a cleaner production programme aimed at persuading business to adopt greener methods.
The International Cleaner Production Information Clearinghouse (ICPIC) is a computerised information system based in Paris.
It is accessed by personal computer and offers a free, round-the-clock service.
The project, established in tandem with a similar effort mounted by the US Administration's Environmental Protection Agency, aims to encourage business to monitor its entire production process rather than looking for piecemeal solutions.
This involves reevaluating the whole life-cycle of a particular industrial process and planning modifications with a view to limiting hazardous emissions to the atmosphere, water and soil.
The programme also offers advice on reducing consumption of energy and raw materials.
ICPIC gives access to details of global environmental legislation including case histories of other companies and the policies they have developed in response to environmental problems.
It also gives access to a bibliography containing hundreds of documents on clean technology and a directory of contacts.
According to UNEP, a lack of availability of reliable information has been a major reason for the lack of the best corporate environmental practise
Financial Times 24 October
Waste and Recycling
Waste exporters find Polish haven
A Greenpeace report published in Warsaw reveals that toxic waste which has been refused by the third world is now being exported to Poland.
The country is the first in Eastern Europe to be investigated, but the organisation expects that Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Romania will also be revealed to be importing toxic waste, albeit in some cases unwittingly.
Following third world waste dumping scandals, 68 African, Pacific and Caribbean governments negotiated a waste-export ban with the European Community.
Waste exporters are now seeking less sensitive areas.
Poland, which is poor and already highly polluted, opened its borders to Western business in 1984.
Since then, 47,000 tonnes of waste are known to have been imported.
Greenpeace say that this can only be the tip of the iceberg, as far more arrives clandestinely.
According to their report, "dismantling" or "recycling" are often used euphemistically for dumping, as toxic residues resulting from the process almost always end up staying in Poland rather than returning to their country of origin.
Waste incineration and oil recycling plants have been offered free to Polish companies on condition that they accept all shipments and keep all waste.
Greenpeace's six month investigation revealed 64 plans for waste dumping operations involving 62 foreign firms in 13 countries.
Half of these originated in West Germany.
Cases included 7,000 tons of ash from a Berlin power plant which was sent to be mixed with cement but found to be radioactive.
Similarly, several thousand tons of "commercial" waste from a German steel works was found to contain lethal polychlorinated biphenals (PCBs).
In another incident, 4 million tons of "harmless" Rhine river sludge that was sent to be dumped in a Silesian coal mine, was found to contain cobalt and cadmium.
The Polish government reacted by imposing a strict ban on waste imports last July.
Greenpeace, however, say that the effect of such legislation can only be negligible because of the ease with which waste can be illegally imported.
This especially true in countries where there is an acute hard currency deficit.
Greenpeace are pressuring the EC for a total ban on exports of toxic waste
Guardian 23 October
Waste and Recycling
Reed beds "natural" chemical recycling method
ICI has introduced a new way of recycling toxic waste by processing it through seven reed beds planted next to one of Europe's largest chemical plants at Billingham, Teeside.
The technology for a reed bed was pioneered in Germany 20 years ago, and has been perfected by ICI over the last two years.
The roots of the reeds contain naturally occurring bacteria which transform toxic elements contained in factory effluent, into benign substances.
The main toxic waste product in the effluent are amines, used in the production of plastics and phenols.
The effluent is already so highly diluted as not to be dangerous, and the resulting near-pure water will be used in ICI cooling towers.
The reed beds cost £5 million to develop and cover 12 acres of land.
Once fully operational, they should process 3,000 tons of effluent a day.
Previously, discharge from the chemical complex was pumped directly into the river Tees.
Times 4 October
Waste and Recycling
MacDonald's plastic containers to go
McDonald's finally bowed to consumer pressure and announced the abolition of the polystyrene boxes that contain its hamburgers.
For years, the US's biggest fast food company has staunchly defended its right to use the plastic box in its restaurants, claiming foam packaging to be not only the best deterrent for grease and insulator of heat, but environmentally sound too.
It has not reneged on any of its claims, but, with the box having become a symbol of the garbage crisis, it concedes that "our customers just don't feel good about it" .
The MacDonalds box has a useful life of only several minutes, but languishes for decades in litter or landfill.
The company, which owns more than 11,000 restaurants around the world, will begin phasing out the boxes within 60 days as replacement materials are found.
The operation is to be staged with the help of the Washington-based Environmental Defence Fund.
Daily newspapers 2 November
Waste and Recycling
European countries urged to take responsibility for waste
European Community Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, has called on ministers to approve a draft agreement on the handling and transport of toxic waste.
The new directive is intended to ensure that national authorities process toxic substances as close to source as possible, thereby minimising the risk of accidents while in transit.
A previous 1984 directive has been applied patchily across the community.
It has never been translated into law in Spain or Portugal, and only partly in Holland.
The more stringent requirements are aimed at ensuring unilateral compliance with European Community safety standards
European 28-30 September