

Agriculture and Food
Farmers and environmentalists unite over CAP reforms
A National Farmers' Union (NFU) proposal to halt over-production has been warmly welcomed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
The NFU plan aims to offer the farmer a choice between setting land aside and receiving the full, subsidised rate for produce, or producing at maximum capacity without support.
The RSPB applauded the scheme on the grounds that farmers should only benefit from European subsidies if they were prepared to join schemes which protected the countryside.
The organisation commented that farmers, politicians and environmentalists were presenting increasingly similar "green" proposals for reforming the EC Common Agricultural Policy.
Daily Telegraph 18 April Financial Times 18 April Economist 18 April
Agriculture and Food
Europe braces itself for third year of drought
The European Commission is embarking on a four-year, £52 million study of climate change, named Epoch, as Europe braces itself for its third year of severe drought.
In Czechoslovakia, farmers face ruin after two years of drought, whilst in south-eastern Spain, people are compelled to buy bottled water after their depleted subterranean supply became contaminated with salt.
In Greece, farmers expect disaster should there be no rain next year.
In France, the drought has been the worst on record and unreplenished aquifers mean that underground water supplies are also at critical levels.
Meetings are underway to redesign the country's water system, particularly as 75 per cent of France's power supply is generated by nuclear reactors which rely on water for their cooling systems.
In Britain, water tables are expected to remain at a low level throughout the summer.
The drought may lead to severe cuts in domestic and agricultural water supplies across Europe.
European 12-14 April
Agriculture and Food
BSE eradication to take longer, says MAFF
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) has revised its estimates of how long the BSE epidemic will take to die out, following the discovery of an infected calf, which probably inherited the disease from its mother.
The calf was born after the government had imposed a ban on the feed suspected of causing BSE, leaving maternal transmission as the most likely cause.
MAFF officials and farmers are opposed to the culling of the offspring of infected animals, as they believe that the disease will die out anyway.
 "Eradication of the disease might take longer than would otherwise be the case" said David Maclean, the Food Minister.
 "Even if this were to be a case of maternal transmission, it would have no significance for public health" .
Richard Kimberlin, a member of the Tyrrell committee which advised the government on BSE, has expressed concern that the new evidence may mean that the disease will never be eradicated.
New Scientist 6 April
Agriculture and Food
European piglets perish from mystery epidemic
A mysterious disease which has killed off more than 4,000 piglets in Europe is spreading.
Mystery Reproductive Syndrome (MRS) was first detected in Germany in January and has since reached Belgium and the Netherlands.
The EC has responded by imposing restrictions on infected areas, but farmers, faced with piglet losses of between five and ten per cent, are increasingly worried.
French farmers have called for a ban on imports.
The disease kills piglets and causes sows to abort.
Infected adults develop a cough and their skin and ears turn blue.
Pigs in an infected herd become immune to re-infection after a few weeks.
The disease is very similar to one which has affected pigs in the US over the last four years.
Scientists in both continents are now working discover the cause of the plague, and how it could have spread to Europe.
MRS is most likely to be caused by an airborne virus, rather than a bacterium or agent like that which causes BSE.
New Scientist 4 May
Agriculture and Food
Namibia turns to South Africa to protect fisheries
The Namibian government has turned to South Africa to help it prevent illegal fishing in its territorial waters.
The seas off the Namibian coast are some of the richest in the world.
Three Spanish trawlers which had been observed fishing in Namibian waters at the end of March were boarded by South African coastguards and returned to Windhoek.
Namibia plans to earn an annual total of over £600 million from fishing.
Last year, it cut by half the quota allocated to foreign fleets; a further reduction of 35 per cent is due in 1991.
Le Monde 2 April
Agriculture and Food
First "environmental accounting" reveals the true cost of farming
A new study by UN economists claims that farming contributes one-XXXX third less to national economies than the totals given by official figures, which do not take account of environmental losses such as soil erosion.
The UN study is part of a growing initiative from environmental economists to give specific values to natural assets such as soil, water and forests.
In traditional accounting, no depreciation charge is made for the loss of such assets, contrary to the practice on man-made capital equipment.
The study, which is based on a fictitious less developed country, illustrates that, although the GNP of some countries may appear to be growing, their "real" economies may be in decline.
An example of this is in Java, Indonesia, where hillside farming has led to so much soil erosion that a 4 per cent gain in output thanks to fertilisers and seed improvements is effectively cancelled out.
Parallel studies in real countries such as Papua New Guinea and Mexico are now underway.
Independent on Sunday 7 April
Agriculture and Food
Fertile growth for organic farming
An Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) report has predicted that organic farming will expand by 25 per cent a year over the next five years.
The report anticipates sales of organic produce to rise from last year's £900 million to £2.7 billion by 1995.
EC organic land use will increase from 255,821 to 776,000 hectares, with greater output leading to lower prices and thereby further encouraging consumption.
Common handicaps to organic agriculture in all European countries include lower yields, poor distribution networks and insufficient capital, in addition to "accusations of crankiness" .
Meanwhile, "the chemical industry continues to hold farmers in a tight grip, benefiting from the innate conservatism of the farming world" .
The report suggests legislation to ensure that organic produce is subject to EC standards and inspection, allowing producers to export their goods under an EC logo.
Organic Produce in Europe (report no 2128), the Economist Intelligence Unit.
Financial Times 5 April
Agriculture and Food
Europe at war over biotechnology
The EC's new policy for the biotechnology industry has been criticised by both environmentalists and chemical companies.
The strategy proposes removing constraints on EC biotechnology industry, whilst setting up a committee to deal with the moral and ethical issues raised by genetic, environmental and human embryo research.
Chemical industry representatives have expressed concern that a European Commission paper has not, however, addressed the issues raised by the use of developing biological techniques for use in the agro-chemical, pharmaceutical and food industries.
The European Chemical Industry Federation (CEFIC), is worried that such products will be disadvantaged by an extra level of testing, regardless of type.
The Commission has proposed that specific decisions be taken over controversial projects such as the introduction of synthetic milk-producing hormones (such as BST).
It is concerned to remove barriers to the process of product authorisation, to unify standards and ensure patent protection for EC biotechnology products in order to compete with the US industry and attract investment.
Conversely, Green MEPs are concerned that the Commission's paper has been drawn up without reference to the effects that patenting will have on farmers, breeders, consumers and the developing world.
 "It's as though the bio-tech industry had given the Commission its wish-list, and the Commission turned it into their basic position paper" said MEP Hiltrud Breyer.
A range of consumer and environmental groups fear that the patenting of plants and animals will give large companies increased control over agriculture.
There is concern that this will lead to uncompensated exploitation of the third world and decreasing choice and higher prices for consumers in the west.
The Food Magazine April/June Financial Times 19 April
Agriculture and Food
Not a lot of bottle in bottled water
A year long investigation by a US Congress subcommittee, prompted by last year's Perrier scare, has claimed that some bottled waters may be less safe than tap water.
The committee has accused the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of failing to impose adequate regulations on the bottled water industry, which at present is not obliged to maintain the same standards as the public water supply.
Some bottled waters, costing from 200 to 1,000 times more than tap water, may even have originated from the same source.
Consumer belief in "safer" bottled water has led to the quadrupling of sales over the last ten years.
The UK Consumer's Association has called for the establishment of an EC minimum requirement for minerals in "mineral water" , after a study of 29 popular brands found most to be virtually devoid of minerals.
The study also found that "spring water" could have fallen as rain only days before bottling.
No harmful organisms were detected in either study.
Washington Post 10 April Guardian 4 April
Conservation: Land
Fifty year ban on Antarctic mining agreed
Contrary to expectations, Antarctic Treaty nations agreed on a 50-year ban on mining and mineral extraction as part of a draft protocol concluded at the end of their Madrid meeting.
The agreement went a long way towards meeting demands of organizations such as the World Wide Fund for Nature and Greenpeace, which had staged lengthy public campaigns in favour of preserving the Antarctic as the planet's last great wilderness.
The 50-year ban, which now needs to be ratified by the governments of the 26 "voting members" of the Treaty, was a compromise between those nations which favoured the eventual opening of the Antarctic to mineral exploitation (notably the USA and UK), and those which supported proposals for the continent to be declared a "world park" (led by Australia and France).
Observers agreed, however, that it was the pro-mining delegations which had given the most ground.
The British delegation in particular were reluctant to agree to the proposal, and did so only after consultations with officials.
The climb-down by the pro-mining countries came in the wake of dramatic reversals of position by Germany and Japan, which announced in the days leading up to the agreement that they would support the prohibition of mining.
This in effect left the UK and USA, together with other supporters of eventual exploitation such as Saudi Arabia and South Africa, in an untenable position, with a majority of the Treaty's voting members in favour of a ban.
The Japanese decision, announced on April 23, was particularly unexpected, and was welcomed by James Martin-Jones of the World Wide Fund for Nature as a "body blow to the pro-mining camp" .
The ban will remain in force for 50 years unless reversed by a consensus among the Treaty's voting members.
At the end of this period, it can only be overturned by a 75 per cent majority of all states attending a Treaty conference, which must include the present 26 voting members.
The full text of the protocol will remain secret until formal signature following ratification, tentatively scheduled to take place in Madrid at the end of June.
However, in addition to the mining ban, it is thought to cover the protection of the marine environment, the disposal of waste from the numerous research stations in the area, and the preservation of fauna and flora.
[The Antarctic Treaty was originally drawn up in 1959, and entered into force in 1961.
At that time, the principal issue was that of regulating territorial claims to the continent; mining and mineral extraction were not seen as likely economic options.
The Madrid meeting was technically the second part of the 11th special session of the Treaty conference, the first part of which had been held in Vina del Mar, Chile, at the end of 1990 [see ED no. 41-42].
Daily UK and US newspapers, and Le Monde, 23-30 April (prohibition of mining decision reported 30 April) New Scientist, 20, 27 April, 4 May
Conservation: Land
Alaska poised for massive oil exploration
Republican Senator Frank Murkowski has introduced a bill to open up a huge Alaskan wildlife reserve to oil exploration.
The 19 million acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is home to polar and grizzly bears, wolves, caribou and peregrine falcons.
Exploitation costs would be relatively cheap, since the under-XXXX utilized 900 mile long Alaskan oil pipeline is already in place.
Alaska's largest existing oil field, at Prudhoe Bay, is declining in productivity, and the state's oil-based economy is facing recession.
The wildlife refuge may contain as much as three billion barrels.
A bill to allow exploration in the refuge had been introduced earlier, but was withdrawn in the light of public reaction to the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
It remains popular with many Alaskans, however, who are keen to improve local employment prospects.
Oil companies insist that exploitation can go hand-in-glove with caring for the environment, and have begun an intensive lobbying campaign to support the bill.
A Washington Greenpeace spokesman claimed that existing oil production in Alaska leads to the dumping of waste and toxic chemicals, and pollutes the air.
But she added that, since the Administration was portraying the alternative to domestic exploitation as being increasing dependence on imports from the volatile Middle East, the Arctic drilling would probably go ahead.
 "The President has done a good job of putting himself in the position where Arctic drilling is seen as patriotic" , she said.
Observer 24 March
Conservation: Land
Utah salt flats "vanishing" 
Utah's renowned salt flats are disappearing at the rate of 1 per cent a year, and may disappear completely within decades.
A survey by the US Interior Department's Bureau of Land Management says that the flats now cover only 25,000 acres, compares to 96,000 in 1926, when the area was first mapped.
The flats are the only relic of the lost Lake Bonneville, which once covered parts of Utah, Nevada and Idaho to a depth of 1,000 feet.
Chief among the recent causes of the rapid decline is thought to be the operations of a nearby mine, which pumps salt-laden ground water to produce potash for fertilizer.
A major highway, Interstate 80, which crosses the southern edge of the flats, may also be contributing to their depletion by causing new patterns of drainage for the salt water.
As the salt crust thins, so cracks appear in the surface and the flats begin to break up.
Principally known as an ideal setting for hot rod car racing and speed trials, the flats are a geologically very rare environment, with only three or four other similar areas in the world.
Environmentalists have joined with racing enthusiasts and the Utah Film Commission, which makes extensive use of the flats, in an unusual alliance aimed at their preservation.
Washington Post 7 April
Conservation: Land
Impasse in discussions over Danube dam
Hungary and Czechoslovakia have reached a deadlock in discussions over a hydro-electric dam to be built on the River Danube, which according to environmentalists and scientists, presents serious hazards.
The two countries were committed to the scheme until 1989, when Hungary withdrew.
Opposition to the project became the focus of the resistance to the Communist government and Hungarian Greens claim that it was their mobilisation of the country against the state on this particular issue which led to the regime's downfall.
The scheme would have entailed the destruction of one of Europe's last areas of primeval forest.
Czechoslovakia, however, intends to proceed with the work in progress at Gabcikovo, south-east of Bratislava.
A power station at Nagymaros is almost operational.
The Czechoslovakian scheme could entail diverting the Danube and redefining the border between the two countries, a violation of national treaties.
Guardian 20, 23 April Independent 23 April
Conservation: Land
Operators responsible for "tourist blight" , says report
A report on the tourist industry and the environment has urged operators to make a greater a contribution to schemes which help protect the environment from excessive numbers of tourists and developments.
The report, produced by a working party drawn from all sectors of the tourist industry, predicted that "tourist blight" would lead to environmental problems.
Employment Secretary Michael Howard warned that the tourism industry's "glittering prospects will be tarnished unless it takes its responsibilities to the environment seriously." 
Financial Times 2 May Independent 2 May
Conservation: Land
Conservation areas to be drilled for oil
Oil companies are planning to carry out exploratory drilling at sites adjacent to Hadrian's Wall and within an area of outstanding natural beauty in Surrey.
Both plans have drawn opposition from local people.
Arco British, a subsidiary of the Atlantic Richfield Company of the USA, is planning to sink a 6,000 foot borehole on woodland near Corbridge, in Northumberland, just 50 yards from Hadrian's Wall.
Northumberland County Council has overruled objections from English Heritage and Tynedale District Council.
At Box Hill, in Surrey, Cairn Energy has agreed in principle to lease land on the edge of a reservoir owned by the East Surrey Water Company.
The proposal is opposed by Mole Valley District Council.
Guardian 9 April
Conservation: Land
Flow Country faces peat-digging threat
The Flow Country of Caithness and East Sutherland, a rare wetland habitat which has already been diminished by conifer afforestation, is facing the threat of peat extraction on an industrial scale.
A planning application has been lodged by Caithness Charcoal for the construction of a factory on the edge of the Dubb Lochs of Shielton site of special scientific interest (SSSI).
The factory's main product is intended to be peat briquettes and charcoal for barbecue fuel.
The planning authority, the Highland Regional Council, has supported development of the Flow Country, and is thought likely to approve the application, on the grounds of bringing employment to the area.
Such employment is, however, likely to be short-term, ending when the peat reserves are exhausted.
Caithness Charcoal claim that their operations would have no damaging environmental impact; its 130-foot tall factory chimney would, however, release gases including sulphur dioxide and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
As well as its own peat-cutting operations, the company is also encouraging local farmers to use mechanical excavators to exploit their own reserves.
Environmentalists claim that industrial peat extraction is one of the most ecologically-ruinous forms of development in such areas, and point out that alternatives to peat exist for both fuel and horticultural purposes.
BBC Wildlife May
Conservation: Land
Cardiff barrage supported by government
After MPs sat all night to defeat a private members' bill to enable building of the Cardiff Barrage, the government announced that it would introduce its own bill to ensure that the measure passed into law.
The barrage plan has been criticized as endangering wildlife habitats and leading to a raised water table within the city, which could damage buildings.
Its cost is estimated as £77 million.
Construction is supported by the Cardiff Development Corporation and Labour-controlled South Glamorgan County Council.
Guardian 18 April
Conservation: Land
Public access to forest land "deleted from maps" 
The Rambler's Association has accused the Forestry Commission and the Ordnance Survey of entering into a "secret deal" to exclude details of public access to forest land from the Survey's maps (the definitive public maps on sale in Britain).
The Association's Director, Alan Mattingly, claimed that the decision to phase out indications of which land was Forestry Commission-XXXX owned had been taken in the light of plans to sell off Commission land.
A Forestry Commission spokesman denied charges of a secret arrangement, but acknowledged that the Ordnance Survey had "clearly felt that it would be misleading to their customers to publish maps indicating Commission land when they are aware that one tenth of this land has to be sold off by the end of the century" .
Labour MP Martin Redmond has introduced a bill into parliament which seeks to protect public access to forest land after it has been sold off.
Institutions such as insurance companies which had bought Forestry Commission land had closed off woods to the public.
Times 17 April
Conservation: Species
Thailand cracks down on wildlife trade
The Thai government has responded to conservationist pressure by announcing its intention to crack down on its illegal wildlife trade [see ED no. 45].
Species traded, dead or alive, in contravention of domestic and international laws, include elephants, tigers, monkeys rhinoceroses and orchids.
Many animals are captured, caged and transported in conditions of extreme cruelty, with large numbers failing to survive.
The government's renewed determination followed strident criticism from the World Wide Fund for Nature, which described Thailand as "probably the worst country in the world for the illegal trade in endangered wildlife" .
The WWF called on tourists to boycott the country until the Thai government took action to end the trade.
Thailand was also criticized by the standing committee of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
The WWF reported that some live animals are smuggled into and out of the country in oil drums, plastic bags and even cigarette cartons.
Many die in transit.
Pet-seekers are among the major customers for monkeys, while rhino horn, tiger bone and bear gall bladders are sold for use in "traditional" oriental medicine.
Large numbers of alligator skins are exported to Latin America to be made into handbags, shoes and watch straps.
Within Thailand, the mothers of sought-after baby primates, such as gibbons, are shot out of trees as a means of capturing the young.
The Thai government responded to the charges by staging a high-XXXX profile raid on Bangkok's Chatachuk market, with police seizing baby gibbons, wild cats and other species during a visit to the market by interim Prime Minister, Anand Panyarachun.
The government also announced that it was beginning a public awareness campaign, and would draft new legislation to fill in gaps in its 1960 wildlife protection laws.
These fail to cover animals imported from other countries, and stipulate that a trader can only be arrested if caught completing a deal.
Many traders offer falsified certificates of country of origin, which also purport to show that the animal was captive-bred.
Thailand's leading conservationist, Sueb Nakhasatien, committed suicide in 1990 after complaining repeatedly that official corruption and a lack of resources were preventing him from acting effectively against wildlife poaching.
Independent on Sunday 7 April Independent 9 April International Herald Tribune 6-7 April Times 5, 9 April
Conservation: Species
Launch of campaign to end trade in rhino products
The World Wide Fund for Nature has launched a campaign to end the trade in rhinoceros products, against a background of reports warning of the imminent extinction of three species of the animal.
Only 11,000 rhinos are believed to remain worldwide — a decline of 85 per cent over the last 30 years.
Poaching is increasingly seen as the main culprit.
Despite international and domestic bans, trade in rhino products appears to be on the increase, mainly in Asia, where there is a ready market for their supposed medical and aphrodisiac properties.
Rhino penises can fetch as much as $700 on the open market, while powdered horn is prescribed for everything from high blood pressure to fevers, nose bleeds and insomnia.
The four remaining countries where rhino product trading still continues are China, Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea and Thailand.
International pressure has compelled the governments of Japan, Malaysia and Hong Kong to close their rhino markets.
Under particular threat are the 1,700 remaining greater one-XXXX horned rhinos, native to Nepal and India, the 3,400 black rhinos of east and southern Africa, the last rhinos in Sumatra (700) and Java, where only 65 remain [see ED no. 45].
Heavily-armed poachers regularly fight battles with game park guards in Kenya and Zimbabwe.
The wildlife trade monitoring body, TRAFFIC, reports that the trade appears to be on the increase, with Asian rhinos (the rarest) particularly sought after.
In the South Korean capital, Seoul, TRAFFIC found that 85 per cent of clinics were now selling rhino horn, compared to 51 per cent in 1987.
During the intervening period, prices had tripled.
The first government inventory of rhino horn stocks carried out in November 1990, recorded 1,415 kg in the hands of 386 traders.
In Taiwan, rhino horn can sell for as much as $60,000 per kilo.
Bans on trade in rhino products have been imposed by the Convention in Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
However, both Thailand and China, which are signatories to CITES, have failed to introduce laws to impose the ban within their borders.
Taiwan and South Korea have refused to join CITES.
Observer 21 April Independent 26 April
Conservation: Species
Panda successes in Sichuan
Attempts are being made to set up a comprehensive "protection and control network" for pandas in China's Sichuan province, according to officials of the Chengdu wildlife protection department.
Pandas in the area were threatened with extinction in the early 1980s as a result of the failure of the local arrow bamboo.
The bamboo groves are now recovering.
Xinhua News Agency 2 April (BBC summary of world broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Great white shark earns South African protection
The South African government has declared the great white shark (carcharodon carcharias) a protected species, making it illegal to hunt it within 200 miles of the South African coast.
It is the first country to enact such a ban.
The great white, or blue pointer, shark is also found off the coasts of the USA and Australia, as well as in smaller numbers elsewhere in the world.
Its numbers have dwindled as a result of hunting.
In South Africa, trophy hunters can sell the jaw for up to $5,000.
The declaration of protection will also forbid its sale.
Permits will be issued to allow some hunting for research purposes, and trapping in nets to protect bathing beaches.
The great white has a certain notoriety for being the only shark species to attack humans without apparent cause.
Nature 25 April International Herald Tribune 12 April
Conservation: Species
Iceland demands a resumption of whaling
Iceland may leave the International Whaling Commission (IWC) unless it is allowed to resume limited-scale commercial whaling.
The country has been seeking permission to hunt fin and minke whales, pending the introduction of new management measures to prevent over-hunting.
According to Iceland's Ambassador in London, there is evidence that stocks are no longer threatened.
If Iceland were to leave, the 36-nation IWC might disband.
Countries in favour of whaling, such as Japan, the Faroe Islands and Norway have already set up their own whaling organisation.
, Mesoplodon peruvianus, the first new species of whale to be identified since 1936, has been discovered on the central and southern Peruvian coast.
Seven members of this little-known beaked or Ziphiidae whale family were accidentally caught in drift gill-nets intended for sharks.
Independent 29 April Green Magazine June Nature 18 April
Conservation: Species
British minister opposes commercial whaling
Agriculture Secretary John Gummer has given an assurance that the British government will not support a resumption of commercial whaling until a method of killing the mammals humanely has been invented.
His statement followed speculation that the UK government might favour the end of the whaling ban.
In an interview with The Times, Gummer said: "I do not think that any of the mechanisms for killing whales which are available now are commensurate with humanitarian views of our treatment of living things" .
He added that he did not expect such an acceptable method of slaughter to evolve in the near future.
 "We would not allow a farmer to stick something in a cow and chase it three times around five fields before it died" , Gummer said.
, Norway has announced that it will cease whale hunting for 1991.
Under International Whale Commission rules, Norway is allowed to kill a limited number of whales "for scientific purposes" .
, Japan's whaling fleet returned from a trip to the Antarctic with 327 minke whales, all caught under the "scientific purposes" guise.
Times 15, 16, 18, 26 April Independent 12 April
Conservation: Species
Mild winters led to dolphin deaths
Unusually mild winters resulted in the deaths of large numbers of Mediterranean striped dolphins from a combination of viral infections and toxic pollutants.
That is the conclusion of a team of Spanish marine biologists led by Alex Aguilar, president of the European Cetacean Society.
The deaths of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of the dolphins last summer had puzzled scientists.
Aguilar's team concluded that two successive mild winters with little rainfall and low winds had reduced food stocks significantly, forcing the dolphins to draw on their reserves of blubber.
This released accumulations of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) into the bloodstream, which together with hunger, helped weaken the dolphins enough for them to succumb to infections of herpes and distemper.
, The Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, has been presented with a petition from 33 environmental groups urging him to take action to reduce the numbers of Dall's porpoise and striped dolphins being killed by Japanese fishermen.
Last year, 30,000 of the porpoises were taken, despite the International Whaling Commission's insistence that the total catch should be limited to one-third of that number.
Both species are being exploited increasingly as a substitute to whale meat.
New Scientist 13, 27 April
Conservation: Species
 "Emerging viruses" threaten rare breeds
Researchers are re-assessing the benefits of re-introducing species to the wild after a small group of golden lion tamarins were found to be carrying an infectious disease which could, in the worst case, have led to the devastation of vulnerable species.
The tamarins were due to be taken from Washington's Zoological Park to Brazil, as part of a programme aimed at increasing the numbers of endangered species.
The animals were found to be carrying antibodies against a variant of the hepatitis virus, indigenous to Old World primates, but unknown in the New World outside captivity.
The disease has infected animals in at least ten US zoos and can spread through rodents.
Diseases such as hepatitis and AIDS are known as "emerging viruses" , which, although they do not always threaten their original hosts, can destroy entire populations by moving on to new hosts and locations.
Human interference has often been responsible for such introductions.
In the case of the rare hooded crane, the introduction of a foreign herpes virus has threatened the remaining wild population.
The black footed ferret is now extinct in the wild due to canine distemper virus, probably introduced by domestic dogs.
Zoos are host to a great many viruses.
Nature 9 May
Conservation: Species
Cyprus acts against killing of migratory birds
Cypriot President George Vassilou has announced his intention to enforce a ban on the killing of migratory birds.
The practice is widespread in Cyprus, with an estimated 25 million birds killed every year by shooting or trapping in mist nets and on limesticks.
The birds use Cyprus as a resting place en route to Europe.
Species killed include the robin and chiffchaff.
Most are plucked and pickled for sale as the "ambelpoulia" delicacy.
The ban, first proposed last year, comes against a background of mounting criticism by conservation groups of the springtime slaughter of migratory birds throughout southern Europe, focused around the International Council for Bird Preservation's Migratory Birds Campaign.
BBC Wildlife May 1991
Conservation: Species
Maltese fight for the right to kill birds
A Malta-based tour company which specializes in bird-shooting trips to Egypt is taking to court a conservation group which campaigned against the killings.
Sphinx Tours claims that it has lost revenue as a result of the campaign mounted by the Malta Ornithological Society, which succeeded in persuading the Egyptian government to place restrictions on the shooting of small birds.
As a result of the court case, the Society's assets have been frozen.
Bird-killing is a popular sport in Malta, with some 250,000 song thrushes, and 1,000 honey buzzards, shot down every year, according to the International Council for Bird Preservation.
The number of bird species indigenous to the island has fallen from 32 in 1916 to 13 today, largely as a result of trapping.
The island has 15,000 licensed hunters.
European 26-28 April
Conservation: Species
Widespread killing of rare British birds outlined
Gamekeepers and farmers are illegally killing large numbers of Britain's rarest birds, according to a report published by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) in association with the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
The report lists 814 recorded cases of illegal killing during the years 1979-89.
Among those poisoned, trapped or shot were 40 golden eagles, 65 peregrine falcons, 367 buzzards, 24 red kites and 39 goshawks.
The total represents a three-fold increase on the previous decade, but the real death toll is thought to be far higher.
According to Richard Porter, RSPB head of species management, "deliberate persecution has had a crippling effect on some of our rarest birds of prey" .
It is also threatening species reintroduction efforts.
Of the 44 red kites released into England and Scotland last year by the NCC, three have already been poisoned.
Three white-tailed eagles, which were exterminated in 1916 but reintroduced in the late 70s, have also been illegally killed.
The majority of deaths result from deliberate shooting or trapping, while others are due to poisons such as strychnine, laid for crows and foxes.
Some of the traps used are illegal, such as the pole trap, outlawed in 1904.
Gamekeepers blame birds of prey for taking the eggs of game birds.
Amendments to the Wildlife and Countryside Act should help stem the practise by making landowners more responsible for the actions of their gamekeepers.
The RSPB wants stricter controls on poisons, and government-backed training for gamekeepers and farmers on how to protect game birds and lambs from predators.
Times 18 April New Scientist 20 April
Conservation: Species
Silent swans make a comeback
Britain's mute swan has made a rapid recovery after years of poisoning by anglers, according to a census by English Nature.
Lead fishing weights were banned in 1987 after thousands of the birds died from swallowing lead that had accumulated on the bottom of lakes and rivers.
The survey showed that breeding had been so successful that there were now three times as many swans than at the last census, taken in 1983.
The mute swan population stands at the highest it has been for 40 years.
Times 15 April
Conservation: Species
Return of the Large Blue Butterfly
The Large Blue Butterfly has been returned to its natural habitat after 11 years of near extinction.
Maculinea arion died out from West Country hedges and fields as farmers ceased to graze livestock on scrub-land.
The butterfly needed short grass, wild thyme and Myrmica sabuleti, a particular ant species, all of which it has at its new, secret Devon location.
The new breeding ground was established by the Nature Conservancy Council (now English Nature) who imported ten females and 100 eggs in 1983.
The present colony of 40 adult butterflies is expected to produce up to 2,000 eggs by July.
Times 17 April
Conservation: Species
Hare population booms in the heat
Two hot summers in succession have helped Britain's hare population to increase by 20 per cent during the period 1989-90, according to the annual survey of the Game Conservancy.
Hot weather prolongs the breeding period of the brown hare (lepus europaeus), produces bigger litters and allows more young to survive.
Total hare population in Britain is now estimated at around one million.
Intensive farming techniques had led to a rapid decline in hare numbers during the 1960s and 70s, as traditional hare habitats were destroyed.
The increasing adoption of less intensive agriculture should further encourage a hare recovery.
Times 11 April Independent 12 April
Energy
Bush makes a move toward energy conservation
In something of an about turn from previous policy, President Bush has commanded the reduction of energy use within federal agencies to 20 per cent below 1985 levels by the end of the decade.
A ten per cent reduction in fuel use by federal cars by 1995 has also been ordered.
Each agency is to submit annual progress reports to the Energy Department.
Presidents Ford and Carter issued energy-saving orders which led to substantial savings by the federal government, the nation's biggest energy consumer.
Under President Reagan, such policies were discontinued.
Agency heads have been instructed to work within existing budgets and no extra funds have been granted for energy-saving equipment and renovation.
Critics say that this means that the reforms are unlikely to be effective [see ED 44].
Washington Post 18 April
Energy
MPs attack government energy policy
An all-party committee of MPs has strongly criticised government plans for energy conservation — citing current strategy as a shambles.
It argued for the urgent creation of a new comprehensive energy strategy.
The energy committee found a serious lack of co-ordination between government departments.
For example, an increase of approximately 100 per cent in vehicle mileage by 2025 is widely acknowledged as likely to be responsible for huge increases in energy consumption and pollution, yet the Department of Transport "isn't interested in energy efficiency" .
The committee identified conflicts of interest within the power industry, such as a responsibility to inform the public about energy efficiency, whilst at the same time having to increase demand to satisfy shareholders.
It was recommended that energy conservation be made the responsibility of the Department of the Environment, and that the government's Energy Efficiency Office be taken out of control of the Department of Energy and made an independent agency.
Government spending on energy efficiency has decreased by £9.5 million since 1985.
New Scientist 27 April
Energy
Companies queue to build wind power installations
Applications from companies wishing to build wind power farms have exceeded Energy Secretary John Wakeham's expectations by 100 per cent.
Bidders include PowerGen, National Power and the water companies.
The largest bidder is the Wind Energy Group, a company jointly owned by Taylor Woodrow Construction and British Aerospace.
Renewable energy projects benefit from a price premium financed by a levy on the power industry.
Financial Times 27 April
Energy
Solar energy could rival fossil fuels
Solar power could become a viable energy source in the near future, rendering fossil fuels obsolete, according to BP research director, John Cadogan, speaking at a Royal Society of Chemistry gathering.
He predicted that if technological developments maintained their current momentum, it would soon become possible to use sunlight to derive hydrogen fuel from water.
The technology, centring on silicon, uses materials that trap sunlight, which is converted into electricity.
This is then used to split water into hydrogen and oxygen, creating a fuel which is portable, cheap and very clean.
When burned, hydrogen reacts with oxygen to produce energy and water only.
Solar power costs about £2.26 a watt — a reduction of about £6 since 1980.
Costs need to come down to about £1.13 before solar power makes an impact on the energy market.
 "I don't know what the next step will be but someone will make the breakthrough" said Cadogan.
Guardian, Independent 10 April Times 11 April
Energy
 "Green" light bulbs get a red light from report
Claims that compact fluorescent light bulbs lead to substantial energy savings are misleading, according to a report published by a group of independent energy consultants.
The bulbs' internal circuitry alters the mains current so that the actual load placed on the grid is larger than that recorded on consumers' electricity meters.
Although this means that the consumer will pay less for their electricity, the overall environmental gain is less not as great as widely thought.
New Scientist 13 April
Environmental Politics
Francophone countries align in environmental plan
The 43 French-speaking states have decided on a common approach to environmental issues which is to be their platform at next year's UN Conference on Environment and Development.
At a meeting held in Tunis, the states undertook to devote at least five per cent of their territory to nature conservation.
The countries emerged with a five point plan of action, of which the first step is to "encourage the widest possible participation of Francophone countries in all international meetings on the environment" .
Commentators have seen this as an acknowledgement of the slowness of the French-speaking nations to take up the challenge of an international role.
Each member country presented a report to the summit, from which desertification, soil erosion and deforestation emerged as the main problems.
Aid for environmental planning in developing countries has been designated a top priority.
New Scientist 4 May
Environmental Politics
Algeria hosts first Arab green party
The first official green party of the Arab world has been founded by a group of Algerian intellectuals.
Ismael Boulbine, president of the Ecology and Liberty Party, spoke on local radio about how his party would seek to improve the quality of life, teaching Algerians to live in harmony with nature.
This would include tackling the problems of housing shortages and population growth.
An unofficial but active green party already exists in Egypt.
Middle East Times 16-22 April Guardian 3 April Radiodiffusion-Television Algerienne 2 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
South Korean Environment Minister dismissed over water scandal
South Korea's Environment Minister has been sacked following a major scandal in which tap water in millions of homes twice became severely polluted.
The incident has also led to the replacement of the Minister's deputy.
The dismissals followed the resignation of the chairman of the Doosan Electro-Materials Company, which had admitted responsibility for leaking highly toxic phenol waste into the Naktong River.
The company had just reopened following a shutdown after a similar incident in March.
The leaks provoked angry protests from citizens and environmentalists.
South Korea is to have its own green party by the end of May.
International Herald Tribune 20 April Guardian 26 April Yonhap News Agency 22 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Hitch in green Eurobank spending
Plans by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) to assist the clean up of environmental black spots in former communist countries are being impeded by a rule which says that the Bank cannot lend more than 40 per cent of its funds to finance state projects.
The 40 per cent rule was introduced to make sure that the EBRD did not become a prop for state industries, but rather helped to build market economies.
The problem is that a large number of environmental black spots inevitably fall within the public sector.
For example, environmental audits of the prioritised projects of reducing chronic air pollution in Silesia and cleaning up the Baltic Sea, have shown that the most effective ways of dealing with the problems are to modernise Silesian state-owned coal burning power plants and provide sewage plants for Poland's Vistula River.
Both require investment in the public sector.
Also on the Bank's agenda are the setting up of companies to manufacture clean-up equipment and loans to strengthen existing environmental agencies responsible for overseeing environmental matters.
New Scientist 20 April
Environmental Politics
 "Green Helmets" urged by EC Commissioner
Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC Commissioner for the Environment, has announced plans for an EC police force to ensure the implementation of the community's environmental policy by member states.
The international force of police inspectors would have the power to fine non-compliers.
Speaking at an Italian scientific conference on climate change, Ripa di Meana also urged the creation of an international UN-style super-fund and an international corps to intervene in environmental emergencies — parallel to the UN's "blue helmets" .
The EC would, he said, propose a "permanent international tribunal" at next year's UN Conference on Environment and Development.
Amongst its duties would be the setting up of an environmental Geneva Convention — to decide how environmental regulations should apply in wartime.
New Scientist 27 April
Environmental Politics
Green Party to put forward candidates despite troubles
Despite financial difficulty, the Greens are to put forward a record number of candidates in the forthcoming general election — 332 in the case of a June poll and 400 in the case of an autumn election.
Members at the Party's Bridlington conference were told that this was a "make or break" time for the Greens.
The party is facing internal wrangling and an acute cash crisis which has forced it to adopt cuts and implement crisis management schemes.
The party has increased its subscription fee by 25 per cent[see ED 43].
Independent 13, 15 April
Environmental Politics
Government restructure may harm wildlife trusts
The Royal Society of Nature Conservation (RSNC) has predicted that plans for the restructuring of local government will have a detrimental effect on Britain's wildlife.
According to a recent report, the abolition of the county councils, as proposed by Michael Heseltine, will mean that environmental planning at council level will become a thing of the past and control over protected sites will be weakened.
The 47 wildlife trusts, the backbone of the British conservation movement, are anticipating a substantial loss in funding and influence.
The trusts stand to lose direct grants from the councils.
In London, funding of the London Wildlife Trust is in jeopardy because the 33 boroughs represented on the grants committee cannot agree on a budget.
, The government has appointed a new "green" committee to advise on the role of business and industry in improving the environment.
John Collins, chief executive of Shell UK, is to chair the committee.
Green Magazine June Financial Times 26 April
Environmental Politics
Industry "expects to double pollution spending" 
A survey by the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) has reported that major industrial companies expect to double their spending on cutting pollution over the next decade.
A poll of 173 of the world's largest companies led to the conclusion that environmental expenditure would rise from 2.1 per cent of sales revenue to 3.3 per cent by the year 2000.
The figures were announced at an ICC conference on industry and the environment held in Rotterdam.
Its chairman, Helmut Sihler, said that environmental concerns would add tens of billions of dollars to industry's costs.
Over 200 companies have signed the ICC's Business Charter for Sustainable Development, which urges industry to commit itself to the development of products which require the minimum amount of energy and natural resources to produce, and which can be recycled or disposed of safely after use.
Among those supporting the Charter are ICI, Du Pont, Ford, General Motors, Volvo, Volkswagen and Shell.
The ICC is to work with the UN Environment Programme on exploring means of assessing companies' compliance with the Charter's aims.
, The Chemical Industries Association in the UK has predicted that environmental spending by its member companies will double within the next few years, despite an overall drop in capital spending of 14 per cent in 1991-93, compared with 1988-90.
Financial Times 13 April Independent 13 April
Global Warming
US panel calls for urgent action on global warming
Existing US Administration policy represents an inadequate response to the threat of global warming, according to a report presented to the US Congress by the National Academy of Sciences in Washington.
While acknowledging continuing scientific uncertainties over the existence and extent of global warming, the report argues for a number of steps to be taken as "insurance" against the consequences of climate change.
The report, Policy Implications of Global Warming, calls for increased emphasis on energy efficiency and conservation.
It supports the principle of increasing energy prices so that consumers pay the full environmental cost of the resources they use, although it acknowledges that increases would have to be phased in over time, preferably in line with international agreements.
It calls for fuel consumption standards for motor vehicles: a guideline of 32-46 miles per gallon could cut CO2 emissions by up to 40 per cent, the report claims.
It counters criticism that anti-pollution measures would harm the economy by arguing that reductions of between 10 and 40 per cent in overall greenhouse gas emissions could be achieved "at relatively low cost" .
The report was commissioned by Congress in 1988, during the final year of the Reagan Administration.
It criticizes the Administration's decision to withdraw support from international population control initiatives, arguing that population control is essential to limit depletion of natural resources.
The report also urges the Bush Administration to play a more constructive role in the present round of international negotiations aimed at a treaty on limiting global warming.
As a longer-term insurance, the report proposes creating seed banks of crop species that could be wiped out in their existing locations as a result of global warming.
It also discusses the possibility of using various "science fiction" techniques to counter climate change, including breaking up atmospheric CFCs with laser beams, and dumping huge quantities of iron filings in the sea in order to facilitate the absorption of carbon dioxide.
Washington Post 12 April
Global Warming
Norfolk plans for global warming
Norfolk County Council has proposed a ban on coastal developments which could be at risk from sea level rises due to global warming.
The council's draft structure plan calls for a "setback" line at least 75 metres from the shore.
The sea is advancing on parts of Norfolk's coastline at the rate of one foot per year.
Global warming is expected to result in a rise of two feet in sea levels by the second half of next century.
Vulnerable areas include the coastal stretch from Great Yarmouth northwards.
Professor Keith Clayton of the University of East Anglia has warned that the odds of a disastrous storm surge, similar to that of 1953 which claimed many lives, have now narrowed from 1 in 100 to 1 in 25.
A one-foot rise in sea level would reduce this to one in ten.
Critics have accused the council of blighting existing properties which lie inside the setback line.
The draft structure plan is currently under consideration by the Department of Environment.
Independent on Sunday 7 April
Global Warming
Tree planting to "offset" carbon emissions criticized
The developers of a new gas power station planned for the Isle of Grain have offered to plant trees in Central or South America as a means of offsetting the station's emissions of carbon dioxide.
But the plan has drawn criticism from environmentalists who see the establishment of "carbon sink" plantations in the third-world as an unwieldy and politically-dubious method of limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
Applied Energy Services Electric, the UK arm of AES Corporation of America, is the first British operation to propose an offset scheme.
Its parent company has already given offset undertakings in the USA.
Some estimates, however, suggest that vast areas would need to be planted to compensate adequately for the plant's greenhouse gas emissions.
The Coal Research Establishment gives a figure of 32,273 hectares — nearly the size of the Isle of Wight.
If such estimates are correct, then offset schemes would be impractical on a large scale.
The new plant, using high-XXXX efficiency gas-burning technology, would only contribute 1.5 per cent of forecast peak electricity demand in Britain.
Friends of the Earth are sceptical of the idea, arguing that improving energy efficiency remains the most effectuve method of combating global warming.
Times 26 April
Global Warming
Pollution controls "will boost employment" 
The received wisdom that the imposition of stringent pollution controls will come at the expense of jobs is wholly wrong, according to a report by Professor David Pearce, adviser to the Environment Secretary.
In a report for the Employment Institute, Pearce argues that the introduction of carbon taxes and the compulsory replacement of polluting equipment will create many new jobs.
In part, however, this would depend on the government deciding to cut other taxes, particularly VAT, to offset the effect of levies on pollution, and on other nations adopting similar policies.
Pearce reached his conclusions after conducting a review of detailed studies into the impact of environmental taxes.
Guardian 22 April Times 22 April (Growth, Employment and Environmental Policy, Employment Institute)
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl's fifth anniversary
The fifth anniversary of the accident at Chernobyl nuclear power station, in the Soviet Ukraine, was marked by continuing controversy over its causes and the safety of the remaining Soviet nuclear capacity.
There were over 32 design faults in the RBMK 1000 reactor, which was at the centre of the Chernobyl incident, according to a report by the deputy head of the Soviet state committee for atomic energy, N. A. Steinburg.
The report was leaked to the British television programme, This Week.
It concluded that the design "blatantly contravenes the requirements of the rules of nuclear safety" .
A further 15 RBMK 1000 reactors continue to operate in the Soviet Union, despite appeals by Soviet scientists for them to be shut down to avert a similar disaster.
, A Ukrainian physicist has claimed that at least 7,000 people involved in clean-up work following the accident had died of radiation sickness.
Speaking at a press conference in London, Dr Vladimir Chernousenko said his figure was based on a tally kept by victim support groups.
It was dismissed by other experts, however, who argued that a longer period would have to elapse before sufficient people developed cancer.
In a "worst-case scenario" , the UK Atomic Energy Authority has suggested that up to 10,000 Soviet citizens could be expected to die of radiation-induced cancer as a result of the accident, with a further 30,000 fatalities possible worldwide.
, The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet has passed a series of laws lowering the ceiling of permissible radiation levels in the area.
As a result, a further 73,000 people could be evacuated from the Chernobyl area, bringing the total moved since the accident to 250,000.
Independent 19, 26 April Times 19, 22 April Guardian 19, 25 April Independent on Sunday 14 April
Nuclear Power
Microbes may relish nuclear waste
US scientists have identified a microbe which feeds on radioactive metals and may be encouraged to find an appetite for nuclear waste.
Researchers at the Geological Survey in Virginia have shown that the bacteria, which feeds on iron, gains twice as much energy from uranium.
It has been shown to thrive on a diet of soluble uranium ions converting them into solid waste and thereby making them easier to remove.
The nuclear industry produces waste streams which contain a variety of radioactive metal ions, the extraction of which minimises radioactive discharges.
Current removal methods are very expensive and unsuitable for the quantities involved.
The team's findings suggested that it may be possible to immobilise uranium contamination by the introduction of microbes into ground water or aquatic sediments.
It is possible that other radioactive metals such as plutonium could be similarly dealt with.
Guardian 5 April
Nuclear Power
Dounreay to be tested for nuclear dumping
Nirex's plans to drill up to 6,000 test bore holes for an underground nuclear waste dump at Dounreay, Caithness, have been approved by Scottish Secretary Ian Lang.
The nuclear waste agency had launched an appeal against the Highland Regional Council, which had refused all applications to test for the dump.
The council is continuing a vigorous campaign against nuclear dumping in the area.
, Norwegian fisherman are so worried about pollution from Dounreay nuclear power station that they have suggested that their government unite with those of Iceland and the Faroes in the creation of new jobs for those working at the plant, should their campaign to have it shut down prove successful.
Scenes (Scottish Environmental News) March Times 1 May
Ozone Layer
Ozone depletion doubles
New research by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has shown ozone depletion to be occurring twice as fast as previously thought.
The depletion rate over the US has been measured at 4 to 5 per cent since 1978.
The EPA has warned that deaths from skin cancer will double as a result.
The effect on plant life and aquatic systems is also expected to be devastating.
Unavailable when last year's protocol was signed, the new evidence could cause a reappraisal of policies and commitments such as prompting the US to endorse the EC pledge to phase out CFCs by 1997, and step-up incentives to avoid their use in the developing world.
Nature 11 April Financial Times 6 April Guardian 6 April Times 6 April Washington Post 5 April International Herald Tribune 6/7 April
Ozone Layer
Norwegian claims ozone layer getting "thicker" 
A Norwegian scientist has challenged US space agency's claims that the ozone layer is rapidly thinning.
According to Kjell Hernriksen, at the Northern Lights Observatory, the average ozone layer is unchanged, "or in the summer, thicker" .
Guardian 20 April
Pollution: Air
US coal mines "doctoring" dust samples
The US Administration is planning legal action against 847 of the nation's 2,000 coal mines over alleged "doctoring" of dust samples sent to federal safety inspectors.
The samples are tested as part of a process to minimize health risks to miners.
Among the mine-owning companies involved are major corporations such as Du Pont and General Dynamics.
Investigators from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) report that in many cases dust had been vacuumed or blown out of sampling devices prior to being sent to inspectors.
The MSHA has the power to close down a mine if it finds too much dust in the air.
Such closures could cost mine companies hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost production.
A thorough investigation of possible tampering was launched after the Peabody Coal Company was found guilty of tampering with dust samples and fined $500,000.
The President of the National Coal Association has rejected the latest government charges, denying that tampering is routine in large numbers of mines.
Washington Post 4, 5 April
Pollution: Air
Soviets demand cash aid for clean-up programmes
Moscow is asking Scandinavian governments to contribute up to $1,000 million towards the cost of cleaning up polluting industries on the Kola Peninsula, in the far north of the Soviet Union.
Acidic emissions from mines and industrial plant in the area is blamed for the decay of forests and plant life in Lapland — which stretches across Norway, Sweden and Finland and into the Soviet Union.
At least 1,000 sq km of forest has been destroyed in the vicinity of the Kola Peninsula's four nickel mines, south of the port of Murmansk.
Annual emissions of sulphur from the mines are thought to amount to 700,000 tonnes, together with large quantities of metals such as nickel, copper and zinc.
A further 1,500 sq km of forest has been "seriously damaged" , and 50,000 sq km has suffered secondary decay.
The Soviet government's insistence on cash aid is seen as hampering efforts to develop cross-border co-operation in cleaning up the region's pollution, 80 per cent of which is believed to originate from Soviet plants.
European 12-14 April
Pollution: Air
Native American technology set to transform industry
A Recovery Scrubber, developed for use in the cement industry by the Passamaquoddy native American tribe, is set to transform the way the world burns coal.
The new technology takes waste material from a manufacturing plant, mixes it with waste gases from the same plant and recycles it so that it can be used again.
The process cuts emissions by more than 90 per cent.
The US Deputy Secretary for Energy has described the Passamaquoddy scrubber as"creative and innovative.
And it's simple to install.
You don't have to close down your plant to do it, it simply bolts on".
The US Department of Energy paid £3.5 million of the £11 million total cost of the first installation at the Dragon Products Company cement plant in Maine, under the Innovative Clean Coal technology Scheme.
The Recovery Scrubber will initially be used throughout the cement industry but can be adapted for coal-fired power stations.
The Passamaquoddy tribe, traditionally one of the poorest peoples in the US, stand to make millions of dollars from their invention.
Financial Times 26 April
Pollution: Air
Councils fail to implement pollution act, says Green Party
The Green Party has published a survey which claims that nearly all councils have failed to implement the law on air pollution.
Clause 79 of the Control of Pollution Act permits councils to monitor any factory emitting smoke.
The factories can be reported to the pollution inspectorate if unacceptable levels of pollution are found.
The survey found that only four councils — Poole, New Forest, Bromley and Salford — had made use of these powers.
Green Party representatives have claimed that their findings invalidate other political parties' claims to be green.
The report was released at the time of the local elections, for which the Party is putting forward a record number of candidates, contesting fighting one in nine seats.
Guardian 30 April
Pollution: Air
Acid rain damage in Britain spreading
Unpublished figures compiled as part of research by the Department of the Environment reveal that acid rain is causing more extensive damage in Britain than previous estimates had suggested.
Government officials have acknowledged that existing policies to limit acidic emissions — notably of sulphur dioxide — are inadequate.
S02 emissions would need to be cut by 81 per cent to halt damage to trees, wildlife and buildings.
The present target is a 60 per cent cut on 1980 levels by 2003 — to be achieved in large part by limiting S02 emissions from power stations, either through fitting flue-gas desulphurization (FGD) equipment or burning low-sulphur coal.
The figures have been presented to the UN Economic Commission for Europe in Geneva, which is co-ordinating a continent-wide response to acid rain.
The most seriously-affected areas are Scotland, Wales and the Pennines.
Prevailing westerly winds spread acid rain across the country, however.
Scientists have argued that the fitting of FGD equipment to power stations in the west of the country should be a priority.
After electricity privatization, however, the government is allowing power companies to select which stations should be fitted with FGD; the majority thus far have been in eastern England.
Andrew Tickle of Greenpeace commented: "Britain is seen as dragging its feet by the rest of Europe, giving minimum information and talking political rather than scientific targets." 
Guardian 6 April
Pollution: Water
Oil spill affects French and Italian coasts
Oil leaking from the Cypriot-registered Haven tanker, which exploded during a routine pumping operation off Genoa, caused pollution along the Mediterranean coast eastwards towards Nice.
The full extent of the pollution was, however, less than had initially been feared, with gale force winds helping to break up the 40km long slick.
The closed nature of the Mediterranean would mean, however, that effects could be long-lasting, as oil continued to seep out of the sunken vessel.
The Ligurian Sea, where the explosion occurred, is an important area for sperm whales.
Daily UK and European newspapers, 12-26 April
Pollution: Water
Great Lakes Governors agree pollution measures
The Governors of the eight US states abutting the Great Lakes have agreed on a series of voluntary pollution controls.
Endorsed by the federal Environmental Protection Agency, the "pollution prevention" package aims to reduce emissions of toxic chemicals into the Lakes by 50 per cent over the next five years.
The states involved are Minnesota, Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, Indiana, Pennsylvania and New York.
The agreement has received a cautious welcome from environmentalists, some of whom, however, are sceptical as to whether a purely voluntary approach can be effective.
The co-ordinator of Greenpeace's Great Lakes project also claimed that, in focusing on 17 named chemicals, the programme was ignoring thousands of others which pour into the Lakes.
Among incentives for companies to co-operate is the promise of an official endorsement which could be used in advertising campaigns.
Washington Post 13 April
Pollution: Water
Government in "secret deal" to allow water companies to pollute
The Labour Party has accused the government of allowing newly-XXXX privatized water companies to adopt a lax approach to anti-XXXX pollution measures — in contrast to the government's tough public statements on the matter.
Shadow environmental protection minister Ann Taylor claims that some companies have been allowed "blanket relaxations of toxic and microbiological standards" with the result that drinking water in some areas may be unsafe.
Despite the government's commitment to bring water up to EC standards, she claims, some water companies have been told that they need not fear prosecution if they continue to fall below these levels.
The allegations have been strongly denied by the government, which insists that all agreed water quality standards are publicly available, and that all drinking water is safe.
Independent 18 April Financial Times 18 April
Pollution: Water
Effects of Exxon Valdez spill "worse than thought" 
The effects of the Exxon Valdez oil spill have been more severe and persistent than originally thought, according to a comprehensive report from US government scientists.
Some of the clean-up methods, including the use of pressurized and heated seawater, also had damaging effects on the coastline of the Prince William Sound in Alaska.
The report was drawn up as part of the evidence in the recently completed court case against Exxon [see ED no. 45].
The report summarized a total of 58 scientific studies, including analyses of effects of the spill on individual species.
These found that populations of sea otters, harbour seals, bald eagles, sea ducks, murres, clams and snails had all plummeted, and few were showing signs of recovery.
Killer whales had also suffered a large decline in numbers.
A high rate of abnormal defects had been found in herring and salmon which had spawned in shallow waters at the time of the incident.
A total of between 350,000 and 390,000 seabirds had died as a result of the spill, while the effects had spread into the food chain over 500 miles from the Prince William Sound.
Spraying pressurized hot seawater onto the shore had killed marine life and sterilized the beaches, changing the composition of the shoreline by washing sand and rocks into the shallows and burying the lower part of the beach in oily sediment.
Barnacles, mussels, clams, eelgrass and rockweed were killed.
The scientists concluded that it would have been better to leave the beaches alone, but as one commented: "At the time it made sense.
You had a great desire to do something.
People were running around wiping the rocks with towels."
, Exxon is likely to be asked to increase its $1,100 million settlement, following a ruling by a US judge that the $100 million criminal fine was an inadequate reflection of the damage.
Judge Russell Holland said: "These fines send the wrong message, suggesting that spills are a cost of business which can be absorbed." 
, Staff at the oil industry consortium which was charged with overseeing operations in the Prince William Sound had warned that their oil-spill equipment was inadequate before the Valdez incident, but their request to purchase better gear had been overruled by management.
The revelation came in the form of internal documents of the Aleyeska Pipeline Service company, which were leaked to a congressman.
Washington Post 10 April International Herald Tribune 11, 26 April Financial Times 26 April New Scientist 20 April
Pollution: Water
NRA to use "fingerprinting" to catch polluting farmers
The National Rivers Authority is set to use "biological fingerprinting" techniques to identify farms which allow silage to seep into rivers.
The new techniques will enable the source of silage pollution to be traced by comparing the biological composition of the polluted stream with that of silage heaps in the area.
Biological "tracers" placed on farms can be used to match against samples of polluted water.
An exact match will be sufficient to convict the farmer of a pollution infringement.
The process will be particularly useful in areas of porous rock, where silage pollutants can travel many miles before entering the river system.
Such areas are also among the most vulnerable to pollution, since the limestone rock reacts with the silage to form a more poisonous compound.
Guardian 4 April
Transport
California launches natural gas transport
The Californian authorities have announced the first form of public transport to be powered by alternative energy sources.
The state has some of the most stringent air quality regulations in the world.
In September, 10 school buses are to be powered by newly-developed compressed natural gas engines, which emit less than one-third of the limit set by the state authorities on polluting emissions from vehicles.
The engines were developed by a commercial company with the backing of a $700,000 from the California Energy Commission.
Washington Post 10 April
Transport
Japan's transport increase cancels out environmental gains
A report from Japan's Environment Agency has argued that steadily increasing emissions from the country's burgeoning transport and consumer sectors are rapidly cancelling out pioneering advances in anti-pollution technology being made by Japanese industry.
The report, in the form of a white paper, breaks down carbon dioxide emissions into four sectors: industry, domestic use, transport and energy conversion and electric power transmission losses, giving a clear indication of where Japan's carbon problems lie.
The Agency claims that this is the first time such a model for analysis has been used.
Emissions from industry have reduced dramatically since the oil crisis of 1973, through the introduction of energy-efficient technology and production process.
Levels have fallen from 60.2 per cent of total national carbon emissions to 49.5 per cent in 1989.
Transport's contribution however, has increased from 13 to 20 per cent.
According to the white paper, the biggest culprits are Japan's many trucking companies.
Ironically, although Japan's pollution laws for petroleum-run vehicles are some of the world's toughest, they do not extend to vehicles running on the cheaper diesel.
Hence, the trucking companies have expanded their operations.
The boom has been fuelled by accelerated demand for consumer products with even small grocery stores receiving up to 12 deliveries every day.
The trucks are also responsible for much for the country's nitrogen oxide pollution.
The problem is compounded by Japan's grossly inadequate road system, on which daily jams extend for miles.
Even Tokyo's toll-charge system, built in the 1960's, is only two lanes wide and narrows to one at some key junctions.
Toshiro Kojima, Director of planning and research at Environment Agency, has recommended the changes in taxation to eliminate the difference in price between diesel and ordinary fuel.
Nature 2 May
Transport
UK road schemes "break EC rules" 
Environmentalists have reported the government to the European Commission over nine road schemes which have been given approval without an environmental assessment.
Such an assessment is required by an EC directive which has the force of law in Britain.
If the Commission finds that the directive has been ignored, the road schemes could be delayed while assessments are carried out.
Some might even be abandoned.
The schemes affected include: the East London Crossing (through Oxleas Wood); the M3 (over Twyford Down); the A20 (along the White Cliffs of Dover); the A34 Newbury by-pass; the M11=Hackney link road; the A6(M) Stockport by-pass; the A5/A49 Telford-XXXX Shrewsbury road; the A41 Berkhamsted by-pass; and the widening of the A1 near Wetherby in Yorkshire.
Independent on Sunday 7 April
Transport
Austria seeks to impose "ecological carnet" on EC traffic
Austria is negotiating with the EC with a view to setting up a system for monitoring and limiting the pollution caused by heavy lorries in transit across Austria.
The system would impose an upper annual limit on total emissions from EC lorries.
According to Austrian estimates, nearly 80 per cent of transit goods traffic is due to EC vehicles.
The Austrian scheme, which has been broadly accepted by the EC, involves an "ecological carnet" , or customs document, in which a tally of each lorry's emission levels would be recorded and a total number of pollution points allocated.
These would then be subtracted from an overall annual total of permissible pollution.
Le Monde 27 March
Transport
Government on road to greener transport
The government is keen to develop a more environment-friendly approach to road planning and may consider increasing rail services as a way of reducing traffic, according to an announcement by Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind.
Rifkind has commissioned the Department of Transport's Policy Unit to explore ways of encouraging rail traffic, including freight.
He said that he saw his department as becoming "the second department of the environment" .
Daily Telegraph 29 April
Tropical Forests
Indonesia launches huge logging project in Irian Jaya
A plan to clear fell huge areas of lowland tropical rainforest in Irian Jaya (West Papua) has been announced by the Indonesian government.
The forest, in the Digul Valley area of south-eastern Irian Jaya, is to be replaced by eucalyptus plantations, which will fuel a paper and woodchip plant.
The programmed is likely to displace some 15,000 Auyu tribal people, most of whom depend on the forest as hunter-gatherers or rubber tappers.
They have lived in the area for hundreds of years.
Under Indonesian law, however, they have no recognized right to the land.
The programme will take the form of a joint venture between the state-owned forestry company, Inhutani II, and PT Astra, Indonesia's second largest private company, which has interests ranging from car assembly to plantations and agriculture.
Inhutani II has been brought in to replace the multinational Scott company, which pulled out of the project at the end of 1989 after an intensive campaign by environmental groups, centred around the Women's Environmental Network and Survival International.
One of the major shareholders in PT Astra is the International Finance Corporation, a subsidiary of the World Bank.
The project has been allocated 800,000 hectares of land, of which 300,000 ha will be planted initially, at a cost of $1,000 million.
Inhutani II intends to finance its 40 per cent share of the project by means of levies on logging companies, which were originally earmarked for reforestation work.
Indonesian law stipulates that an environmental assessment must be carried out on all major industrial investments.
This has yet to take place.
Survival International has launched a campaign against the programme and its likely effects on the indigenous inhabitants of the forest.
In response, the President of Inhutani II has claimed that the project will benefit the local people.
In a letter to Survival, he states that: "We will ask the local people to participate in the project, and we will teach them and upgrade their lives.
This is one of our main tasks as directed by the Indonesian government, which will hopefully give good result and no more tribals later on [sic]."
A spokesman for PT Astra has however gone on record as saying that the majority of the 6,000 jobs to be created will go to incomers from Java, settling in Irian Jaya under the Indonesian government's Transmigration Programme.
In addition to the direct effects on the forest and the tribal people, environmentalists fear that the pulp and paper mills will lead to severe pollution problems, notably from chlorine and dioxins.
Survival International information, April Independent on Sunday 21 April
Tropical Forests
World Bank researchers criticize forest policy
The tropical forest policies of the World Bank have been criticized by its own researchers.
A confidential internal Bank report leaked to Friends of the Earth commented that "absence of comprehensive forestry sector work has been a marked shortcoming in Bank operations" .
The report urges the Bank to co-operate with other organizations to build an agenda for sustainable exploitation of rainforest reserves.
It suggests that "the Bank can play an important role in refining sound and practical valuation techniques for assessing environmental costs and benefits of forestry projects" .
The report warns against an international boycott of tropical timber, arguing that "if forests become unprofitable, then wasteful deforestation will occur" .
It advocates a greater role for the International Tropical Timber Organization in promoting sustainable tropical forest management and the expansion of plantations as a replacement for logging natural forest.
The report has been attacked by Friends of the Earth, which insists that it represents no new departure.
 "It is business as usual at the Bank" , says rainforest campaigner Tony Juniper.
 "There will be more logging and deforestation on a far larger scale." 
Financial Times 9 April
Tropical Forests
Debt-for-nature swap for Californian forest
The State of California is negotiating the purchase of 1,200 hectares of old-growth redwood forest, in the first attempt to apply a "debt-for-nature" deal in the USA.
The Headwaters Forest, in the north of the state, is owned by Pacific Lumber, a subsidiary of the Maxxam Corporation, which has been struggling to pay off nearly $70 million worth of borrowing from Columbia Savings and Loan.
The federal government has assumed responsibility for Columbia's debts after the company went bankrupt, and California is now negotiating to pay off some of the monies owed by Maxxam in return for taking over the forest.
In its efforts to raise revenue to pay off the debt, Maxxam has been logging at twice the usual rate.
As well as containing many fine ancient redwood trees, the Headwaters Forest is also one of the three remaining nesting sites in the state of the marbled murrelet, a sea bird whose main colony, in Alaska, was devastated by the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
New Scientist 27 April
Tropical Forests
Chilean government divided over logging proposals
Chilean environmentalists are appealing for international support in the latest phase of their campaign to stop large tracts of natural forest being clear felled and replaced by pine and eucalyptus plantations.
Logging has intensified in recent years, mainly due to massive Japanese investment in woodchip production, which has grown from virtually nil in 1985 to 1.7 million tonnes in 1989.
The government appears to be divided over the issue.
Opposition to the proposed clear felling of 23,000 hectares in the Corral region by the Marubeni Corporation led President Patricio Aylwin to commission a report on the plan.
This has broadly supported the stance taken by the Committee for the Defence of Fauna and Flora (CODEFF), which is co-ordinating campaigns against this and other logging plans.
However, a report commissioned by the Economy and Exchequer ministries has called for logging concessions to be granted over a further 30 per cent of the country's native forest.
Economy Minister Carlos Ominami argues that proposals such as Marubeni's should be judged on "economic" criteria alone.
CODEFF has now launched an international appeal for help to safeguard the forests, while a further report commissioned by President Aylwin awaits publication.
New Scientist 13 April
Tropical Forests
Malaysia tightens up on log exports
Faced with rapidly diminishing timber reserves, the Malaysian federal government has decided to assume control over log exports from the state of Sabah.
It is also considering a similar step for Sarawak, scene of heated confrontations with tribal people who claim that the logging is destroying their homeland.
BBC Wildlife May
Tropical Forests
Satellite link-up provides climate clues
A series of automatic weather stations linked to a satellite is to help researchers to assess the effect that deforestation in Brazil has on the climate.
The study is part of the five-year Anglo-Brazilian Amazonian Climate Observation study (ABRACOS), resulting from an agreement on environmental co-operation which was signed by the UK and Brazil last year.
The stations will be situated just above the rainforest canopy (or where the canopy was) on 40-metre-high masts.
Here they will collect detailed data relating to atmospheric changes.
The stations will work in pairs, one in a deforested area and the other in the rainforest.
Data will be relayed by satellite to three centres in Brazil and to the Oxfordshire Institute of Hydrology in Britain.
Here it will be fed into computer models where it is expected to provide far more accurate predictions of the effects of deforestation.
The stations, designed by British scientists, are believed to be the first satellite-linked automatic weather stations.
New Scientist 6 April
Waste and Recycling
Yorkshire people protest against dump plan
Local people have taken part in a mass trespass to protest the building of Britain's biggest dump on a historic Yorkshire site.
The owners of the site have made planning applications to Wakefield District Council to extract clay and fill the hole with 6.5 million cubic meters of waste of a "special" or "difficult" nature.
The Warmfield company has claimed that all procedures for dumping — which it claims will consist mainly of meat and fish and industrial waste — are safe, although it has refused to disclose full details.
Residents are concerned that toxic waste may be dumped.
There are also fears about the build up of methane gas at the site, which is yards away from a railway bank made of thousands of tonnes of coal waste.
The bank was set alight 20 years ago and continues to smoulder.
The co-ordinator of the local pressure group, RATS (Residents Against Toxic Scheme), describes the area as a"delightful valley where walkers can enjoy the wildlife and scenery.
This development will not only destroy the environment, it also has the potential to be extremely dangerous".
Observer 21 April
Waste and Recycling
The costs of recycling — public warned
The government's commitment to recycle a quarter of the UK's household waste by the end of the century will cost £200 million a year, according to government expert John Barton.
The extra costs of £9.60 a year per household are thought likely to be passed on through local taxation.
Speaking at a National Society for Clean Air seminar, Barton, head of a Department of Trade and Industry research establishment, warned that high recovery recycling initiatives were unlikely to be implemented if local authorities had to pay for them.
The newly introduced Environmental Protection Act obliges collection authorities to submit recycling plans for their localities.
Financial Times 11 April