

Agriculture and Food
FDA changes from "lap dog into a watchdog" 
Starting with a spectacular seizure of thousands of leading brand products, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has begun cracking down on misleading food labelling.
Raids on Procter and Gamble's Citrus Hill "Fresh Choice" orange juice, and Ragu "Fresh Italian" pasta sauce were followed by seizures of other items produced by Unilever Corporation.
The FDA's audacious new tactics gained massive media coverage and are widely seen as only the beginning of a serious assault on products whose labelling is thought to violate federal law.
The raids also mark a change in the FDA's role from observer to enforcer.
Previously, companies in violation of rules on labelling were able to prolong negotiations over years.
An FDA spokesperson said that they now anticipated approaches from companies proposing changes to their labels.
New York FDA consumer affairs commissioner, Mark Green, commented that the agency had"metamorphosed from a lap dog into a watchdog.
Washington Post 6 May
Agriculture and Food
Anglers given vague warning against eating their catch
The government has issued a warning that fish caught in inshore waters around Britain may not be fit to eat, but ministers will not say which fishing grounds are affected.
The pronouncement followed post-mortems on seals, eels and fish from the Liverpool Bay area of the Irish Sea.
The study, conducted by Liverpool University for the National Rivers Authority, Ministry of Agriculture and Greenpeace has revealed contamination by mercury, pesticide residues and toxic chemicals including PCBs.
The Ministry of Agriculture statement said that the warning had been intended as preventative advice.
A ministerial statement could be expected if the "message was not getting across" .
It advised individual anglers to obtain local information from the NRA.
Greenpeace say that the warning could apply to parts of the Humber, Tees and Severn estuaries, the Firth of Forth and the mouth of the Wye River.
Greenpeace's toxics campaigner, Tim Birch, accused the government of playing down the risks so as not to undermine its £4 billion Mersey basin clean-up campaign, which is backed by the EC.
Birch argued that the government was avoiding informing the public that it allowed companies to discharge dangerous chemicals and heavy metals directly into rivers.
A Greenpeace study of the Mersey area found the most polluting companies to include ICI, Shell, Associated Octel, Unilever and Pilkington.
The companies are allowed to discharge a range of pollutants including 16 tonnes of mercury and 583 tonnes of poisonous metals such as cadmium and lead.
Out of 859 transgressions of pollution laws by 20 companies between 1985 and 1990, only 1 per cent were prosecuted.
The government has argued that commercial fishing on the coast has declined dramatically.
However, anglers regularly take home large quantities of fish, selling it locally, storing it in freezers and eating it several times a week.
Trawlers still operate at the mouth of the Mersey and the Dee, selling fish at coastal inlets.
The North West Association of Angling Clubs has asked the government for guidelines.
, The Minister for Agriculture has put an end to scallop fishing in the north-east in an effort to prevent further outbreaks of paralytic shellfish poisoning which has no cure and can be fatal.
A health warning has also been issued against the consumption of mussels from the area, which extends form Berwick to Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Scientists have begun testing other species of shellfish for contamination.
Independent on Sunday 19 May Observer 19 May Guardian 23 May
Agriculture and Food
Goldsmith to fund green farmers
Financier Sir James Goldsmith has announced plans to provide £1 million in funding to a new organization, Sustainable Agriculture, Food and Environment (SAFE), which will group together small farmers, organic growers and green organisations.
According to his brother, Ecologist editor Edward Goldsmith, the move was precipitated by a stormy meeting concerning food additives between Sir James and Agriculture Minister, John Gummer.
SAFE will campaign for EC farm subsidies to be switched away from agri-business style agriculture to less intensive, more environment-friendly forms of farming.
Speaking after the meeting, Sir James said that: "He (Gummer) represents the agro-XXXX chemical industry and the large farms." 
He described as "wholly irresponsible" Gummer's rejection of the plan put forward by EC Agriculture Commissioner, Ray MacSharry, for sharp reductions in subsidies to large farmers.
Independent 6, 9 May Times 4 May
Agriculture and Food
North Sea cod shrink away
from nets North sea cod are becoming smaller in an evolutionary attempt to beat fisherman's nets, according to a study conducted at York University.
The breeding females are maturing younger and at smaller sizes than ever before, enabling them to reproduce before they are caught.
A comparison of historical records with modern data revealed that in 1893, the fish did not reach maturity until they were 75 centimetres long, but last year half the females were fertile at 50 centimetres.
Female cod can live up to 20 years, reproducing every year.
But there is now a 60 per cent chance that a fish will be caught after it reaches 35 centimetres (the legal limit to netting size).
Only 15 per cent survive to breed at age three, and 5 per cent at age four.
A similar study in 1974 failed to find any two year old fish breeding.
The recent study found that 10 per cent of the two year old females were breeding.
Guardian 1 June
Conservation: Land
World's largest hydro scheme halted
Construction work on the world's largest hydroelectric project, in Northern Quebec, Canada, has been halted by a ruling from the National Energy Board that the project must comply with federal guidelines on the environment.
Hydro-Quebec's James Bay development has met with strong opposition from Cree and Inuit peoples living in the region, who are supported by a growing tide of opposition from Canadian and US environmental groups.
Scheduled for completion in 2006, the development will comprise 23 power stations, involving construction of 215 dams and dykes, the flooding of 26,000 sq km of mainly forest land, and the diversion of 19 rivers.
It could have far reaching effects on the ecology of James Bay, an important wildlife refuge, with increased salinity posing a threat to fish, migratory birds, ringed seals and beluga whales.
A dramatic increase in mercury levels has already been recorded in newly-built reservoirs resulting from the damming of La Grande River in 1984.
As the flooded forests decompose, insoluble mercury in the soil and vegetation turns into soluble methyl mercury.
A high concentration builds up in the fish which are a staple part of the Cree and Inuit's diet.
This sharpens concern that the project may force them to abandon their traditional hunting economy.
Campaigners against the project point out that a mixture of economic recession and growing enthusiasm for energy efficiency may deprive Hydro-Quebec of the bulk of its potential revenue from the scheme, in the form of orders from US power supply companies, who are believed to be reconsidering the need to import power from Canada.
New Scientist 25 May
Conservation: Land
Finnish Wilderness Act criticised by environmentalists
The Finnish Parliament's Wilderness Act, which includes plans to log some of the county's most ancient forests, has come under attack from environmentalists who claim that it could result in the permanent destruction of the wilderness.
The Act has designated 12 new wilderness areas in northern Finnish Lapland, which consist mainly of tundra and cover 1.5 million hectares.
It also covers 112,000 hectares of coniferous forests pronounced economically "worthless" .
There are also plans to log 57,500 hectares of ancient forest, containing trees of up to 600 years old.
Conservationists claim that even "modern" logging techniques will thin out the forest, leaving just a few "mother" trees standing in clearings.
The northern coniferous forests have an ecological importance in preventing the tundra from advancing to the south.
The local people, the Saami (Lapps) use the ancient forests as their "winter pasture" and logging may jeopardise both their reindeer husbandry and eventual cultural survival.
Norway too, has complained that logging the Kessi area, not included in the act as a protected area, will destroy the forest between Finland and Norway.
The Act was hurriedly drawn up in response to quickening deforestation which included new roads being driven into virgin wilderness.
The committee which drew up the Act included a large representation from the Finnish National Board of Forestry.
The Board, which is to carry out the logging operation, has recommended felling the older trees as their younger counterparts are more resistant to air pollution.
The climatic extremes of the far north mean that forests take a long time to regenerate.
Some logged in the 1960s have completely failed to re-grow.
, Finnish forests on the border with the Soviet Union are being destroyed by sulphur pollution from antiquated smelting plants in the Kola peninsula.
Researchers predict that the forests will last only 10 years unless Soviet sulphur levels are cut.
The two countries are continuing to negotiate.
Independent 3 June
Conservation: Land
Soviet government pressed to divert Siberian rivers
The Soviet government is being put under intense pressure to revive a scheme to divert water from Siberian rivers to the decimated Aral Sea, in Soviet Central Asia.
President of Uzbekistan and Communist Party Chief, Islam Karimov, has strongly intimated that he will not sign the draft treaty on relations between the republics and Moscow unless the Soviet government promises to save the vast Aral region.
Karimov said it was vital to start the river diversion project now in order to find a way to supply the parched, heavy polluted central Asian republics and Kazakhstan with clean water.
 "The region's population will double to 34 million by 2005" , he said.
The grandiose Siberian rivers scheme proposed using water from rivers Ob, Irtysh and Yenisei (with a combined length of of 5,700 miles).
Opposed by Soviet intellectuals such as writer Valentin Rasputin, if was finally dropped when Gorbachev came to power.
Observer 26 May
Conservation: Land
Conifer plantations "economically justifiable" says Forestry Commission review
A review conducted on the part of the Forestry Commission assessing "the returns to the economy and to society from investments in forestry" , has concluded that conifer plantations are economically justifiable.
On the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee, the report was compiled for the Commission by academics who analyzed the cost-benefits of particular types of forestry.
In environmental terms, it concluded that conifer planting can help alleviate global warming because of the rate at which these trees take up, and store, carbon.
Conifers can thrive on upland areas with lower land value, and also grow faster than native, broad-leaved woodlands which are less efficient "carbon fixers" than pine, fir and spruce.
Conservationists are unhappy about the prospect of conifer plantations taking over more wilderness areas of Britain.
They point out that the conservation value of the land to be planted has not been considered in the report's assessment, and that commercial viability has taken precedence.
 "The Council for the Protection of Rural England stated that they were opposed to" further damage of Britain's vanishing natural uplands".
Some of Britain's rarest landscapes — such as the Flow Country of Caithness and Sutherland, with their unique peat bogs — would be destroyed by large-scale planting, together with their existing animal and plant life, say the conservationists.
Observer 12 May
Conservation: Land
CPRE fears loophole in government green belt development
Government plans to plant 12 new English forests could be used as a loop hole to secure land deals and development on green belt areas, according to the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE).
The new plans being drawn up by the Countryside Commission and the Forestry Commission for sites near urban areas, mean that half of each site would be planted with mixed forest and the other half would be developed for recreation and farming purposes.
A CPRE spokesman warned that without proper funding and planning policies, "landowners and local authorities will be tempted to do" deals "— planting trees only where planning permission for otherwise unacceptable development is also granted." 
The CPRE has published a 12 point charter which it says will ensure that current planning policy will not be undermined.
Environment Minister David Trippier has been asked to provide more information on the scheme.
, Newcastle-upon-Tyne City Council has announced plans to take more than 3,000 acres of land out of the green belt in order to facilitate economic regeneration in the area.
According to the architects of Newcastle's development plan for the next 15 years, the north east of England will be lost to large-scale economic development unless good quality sites can be made available in the region's capital.
More than 11 percent of the workforce are currently registered as unemployed.
The council claims that potential investors are leaving because the city has hardly any land for industrial purposes, no suitable sites for an out-of-centre business park and insufficient land for housing.
The plan is due to go before a public enquiry next summer.
Guardian, Times 3 June Financial Times, Independent 4 June
Conservation: Land
Decomposing dumps threaten three nature reserves
Two of Britain's remaining areas of lowland heath, and a coastal marsh used by thousands of migratory birds, have been found to be polluted by contaminated water leaking from neighbouring household rubbish dumps.
Hyde Heath and Lodmoor, both in Dorset, are Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), and the 1,200 acre Holt Heath — also in Dorset — is a National Nature Reserve owned by the National Trust.
Analysis of samples collected from puddles on Hyde Heath by Friends of the Earth found high levels of ammonia, nitrogen and chloride, pollution which they claim is damaging boggy areas and endangering resident species.
These include dragonflies, in particular the blue tailed damselfly, and several rare plant species.
Some vegetation on the heath is dying, according to the government's nature watchdog, English Nature.
Responsibility for the dumps, closed several years ago, rests with Dorset County Council — though in the case of Hyde Heath, responsibility is shared with a commercial company, Greenaways Landfill.
In an attempt to collect contaminated water, Greenaways dug a ditch around the dump enabling water to be removed by road tanker.
This has not prevented overflow after heavy rainfall, however.
Friends of the Earth campaigners suggest that old landfills throughout Britain "need to be investigated and, where necessary, cleaned up by those responsible" .
At thousands of locations the by-products of such decomposing waste pose "an unknown threat" .
Independent 20 May
Conservation: Land
Hedgerow protection laws debated
The Government's intention to revoke a Planning and Compensation bill amendment which encourages protection of Britain's hedgerows met has with opposition from Conservative MPs.
Inserted during the committee stage of the bill, the protection amendment proposes that farmers be paid to preserve, rather than remove, hedgerows — reversing a trend which has resulted in the uprooting of 100,000 miles of hedges since 1945.
The clause recommends compensation of £250 a year for every mile of hedgerow conserved.
A spokesman for the Council for the Protection of Rural England has claimed that if the Treasury refuse to "foot the bill" then the government's "environmental credibility will plummet" .
Some MPs are suggesting that local authorities should be given the power to compel farmers to protect hedges.
Guardian 15 May Independent 15 May Times 21 May
Conservation: Land
River revival plan launched
The National Rivers Authority has launched a programme to save some of England's disappearing rivers, including those that, during summer months, shrink to become dry gullies.
Some of the country's best fishing rivers are suffering from excessive abstraction of water by industry, landowners, and water companies, exacerbated by a succession of dry summers.
Although the NRA warned that the programme's cost will be high, and that there are no "quick fix" remedies, solutions have been identified for 10 of the rivers.
Five programmes, to be implemented this year, include reducing abstractions from the Pang (Berkshire), Piddle (Dorset), Ver (Hertfordshire) and Wallop Brook (Hampshire), and adding "compensation water" to the Lowther (in Cumbria) from Haweswater reservoir.
Similar steps are to be taken in 1992 to restore water levels in the Battlefield Brook (Worcestershire), Letcombe Brook (Oxfordshire), Misbourne (Buckinghamshire), Slea (Lincolnshire) and Wey (Hampshire).
A further five programmes, including one for the River Darent in Kent, are under consideration.
Financial Times 9 May Times 9 May
Conservation: Species
Whaling ban upheld for one more year
The ban on commercial whaling has been upheld for a further year — prompting threats from Iceland and Norway to leave the International Whaling Commission.
The ban on commercial whaling was agreed by the IWC in 1982, taking effect in 1985.
It was upheld at last year's meeting in Noordwijk [see ED no. 37/38].
The 43rd annual meeting of the IWC, held on May 27-30 in the Icelandic capital, Reykjavik, did however accept a plan for renewed commercial whaling on the basis of sustainable quotas, to be determined under a formula concocted by the Commission's scientific committee.
But anti-whaling nations, including the UK and USA, succeeded in delaying the resumption of whaling until at least next year, by insisting that further work on the formula needed to be undertaken, and by adding various amendments and qualifications which collectively would make it difficult for the plan to operate in practice.
In part, these acknowledged the continuing difficulty in establishing whale populations.
Next year's meeting is to be held in June 1992 in Glasgow, where environmental lobbying is expected to be at such a pitch that delegations may find it politically impossible to approve any renewal of large-scale hunting.
The loophole for small-scale catches for "scientific" purposes remains open.
The vast majority of Japan's "scientific" catch of 327 minke whales during the past year has been served in Tokyo restaurants, where they fetch up to £70 per lb.
Whales are now used almost exclusively for meat, and much of the remaining market is in Japan.
The core of the meeting's decision was the adoption by 18 votes to six of a resolution which would allow commercial hunting to be resumed when stocks had reached 54 per cent of their estimated population prior to large-scale exploitation.
An alternative proposal that commercial whaling be allowed to resume immediately on all stocks which had recovered to 30 per cent of pre-hunting levels was rejected by 19 votes to seven.
Support for this was centred around the strongly "pro-whaling" nations of Norway, Iceland and Japan.
The only commercial whaling which may gain relatively straightforward approval under the plan next year is the Japanese hunt of minke whales in the Antarctic oceans.
Some estimates claim that the minke population in the area has recovered to 80 per cent of its pre-exploitation levels, to its current total of about 760,000.
Given the fact that the minke's reproduction rate is estimated to be between 1 and 4 per cent per year, this would allow an annual sustainable catch of over 7,000.
The possibility of permission being granted for such a hunt was thought to be instrumental in persuading Japan not to break ranks with the IWC.
An Icelandic request for permission to take an "interim" commercial quota of 192 minke and 91 fin whales over the coming year was rejected.
At the end of the meeting, the head of the Icelandic delegation, Gudmundur Eriksson, said that he would recommend his government to leave the organization and resume commercial whaling at the earliest opportunity.
Such a move would be likely to draw consumer boycotts of Icelandic products from anti-whaling nations, and the possibility of economic sanctions under US law.
The IWC meeting took place against a background of growing acrimony, with the pro-whaling nations arguing that those opposed to commercial hunting on ethical grounds were: i) interfering unacceptably with the economic livelihoods of whaling communities; and ii) misinterpreting the charter of the IWC, which was set up to regulate catches, not to debate the morality of whaling as such.
Among the anti-whaling nations, however, there was a noticeable hardening of stance, with the UK in particular adopting a tougher line.
Its official delegation to the IWC included representatives of Greenpeace, the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society.
The UK position was in part seen as being due to the personal antipathy to whaling of Agriculture Minister John Gummer, who declared on the eve of the conference that "the way we kill whales revolts and appals many people, among them myself" [see also ED no. 46].
Prior to the IWC meeting, Japan's dwindling whaling industry staged an extravagant whale-meat banquet in opposition to the international ban on commercial whaling.
The feast was intended to boost morale prior to the IWC meeting.
Director general of the Japanese fisheries agency, Kazuo Shima, said"the Americans and Europeans have turned whales into a sacred animal, like the Hindu cow…
If we don't make our stand, next we won't be able to eat fish at all".
Forty members of parliament and 300 other guests attended the feast which included barbecued whale, deep-fried whale chunks, whale bacon, cubes of tongue and tail and strips of raw meat and pink skin.
UK Agriculture and Fisheries Minister, John Gummer expressed outrage over the feast, claiming that "the world knows perfectly well that whalers have attacked stocks almost to extinction" .
, The National Wilderness Conference, one of the largest conservation organisations in the US, has defended the rights of Iceland and Norway to exploit whale stocks in the North Atlantic.
The organisation invited Iceland's Foreign Minister to speak at its fourth annual conference, held in Colorado.
Guardian, Times 11 May News from Iceland May 1991 Times, Guardian, Financial Times, Independent, 27 May-1 June Observer 26 May Nature 6 June
Conservation: Species
Dolphins and porpoises "facing extinction" 
In a report presented to its 43rd annual meeting [see above], the International Whaling Commission's scientific committee warned that dolphins, porpoises and other members of the 66 species of small cetaceans are facing extinction in parts of the world, as a result of both deliberate hunting and accidental killing by fishermen, especially those using long drift nets.
Three specialized species are listed as being in immediate danger of extinction: the Indus river dolphin of Pakistan, the baiji and the vaquita (a small Mexican porpoise).
Other species also suffering disastrous population losses.
Other countries singled out for criticism included Turkey, which fails to prevent the illegal slaughter of huge numbers of dolphins and porpoises in the Black Sea, and Canada, which has allowed the beluga, or white whale, to be hunted to a point near extinction.
Large numbers of narwhal are also hunted off the Canadian coast as an ivory substitute.
Independent 8 May
Conservation: Species
Australia's maritime food chain "contaminated with toxins" 
The entire food chain in the seas off part of Australia's eastern coasts is likely to be contaminated by toxins, according to Cor Lenghaus, a researcher from Hamilton Regional Veterinary Laboratory in Victoria.
His findings mirror those of other studies elsewhere on the eastern coast.
They reached the conclusion after discovering that a number of whales and dolphins washed up dead on the shore between 1987 and early 1991 contained "significant" levels of organochlorides and heavy metals in their tissues.
The metals included arsenic, cadmium, mercury, copper, lead and zinc, while among the other toxins were DDT, dieldrin and hexachlorobenzene.
Some were present in potentially fatal quantities.
Lenghaus performed autopsies on nine cetaceans, of which seven were ill at the time of death.
"Several young adult males had died of severe, generalized bacterial or fungal infections.
This could be a result of immunosuppression caused by the toxins."
The dead cetaceans, predators at the very top of the maritime food chain, would have picked up the toxins from shellfish and smaller animals which accumulate pollutants, Lenghaus said.
New Scientist 1 June
Conservation: Species
Japan agrees to cut imports of hawksbill turtle pending research
Under threat of US trade sanctions, Japan has agreed to end imports of the rare hawksbill sea turtle within three years.
The turtle is used in the traditional shell carving industry, known as "bekko" (see ED 44).
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry announced that it will ban the capture of the turtles, and gradually reduce imports to zero "within a certain period of time" .
The decision came days before the Bush administration was due to impose sanctions against Japan for its commercial exploitation of the turtle.
Toyohiko Shimada, a ministry official, said that a decision to cease imports may be reversed if international research proved that turtle stocks were adequate for commercial trading.
In this case, he said, Japan would recommence trading and urge other nations to do so too.
Bekko carving, a $125 million a year cottage industry, employs about 2,000 people who work from their homes.
Claims have been made for government compensation of the artisans who fashion expensive spectacle frames, combs and jewellery from the shells.
The yard-long hawksbill turtle, with its hooked beak and scaly neck, is a living vestige of the dinosaur age.
The harvesting of their shells is often cruel, according to Dr Michael Klemens, a turtle specialist from New York's Natural History Museum.
The living turtles are placed on burning coals and heated until their top and bottom shells become malleable enough to rip off.
The living turtle is then thrown back into the water, in the mistaken belief that it will re-grow its shell.
The turtles however, die from infections within a few weeks.
International Herald Tribune 18-19 May
Conservation: Species
Coral reefs in imminent danger
Coral reefs in southeast Asia and the Pacific are being rapidly destroyed, according to scientists from the University of Guam's marine laboratory.
Pollution, mining, uncontrolled tourism and soil erosion caused by logging are to blame.
The reefs, which make up two thirds of those in the world, risk becomming underwater deserts.
According to Charles Birkeland, the laboratory's acting director, "within the last few decades, the increasingly intensive use of land, water bodies and the coast in Asia has created significant disturbance to coral reefs and the coastal environment" .
Reefs in the Philippines and Indonesia have been badly affected.
Birkeland commented that it was not useful to blame poor populations for exploiting the few resources that they had, when fishing or mining reefs could earn them millions of dollars.
International Herald Tribune 24 May
Conservation: Species
Rare frogs "blown up" to make way for Hong Kong's airport
An entire population of rare tree frogs on Hong Kong's Chek Lap Kok island is to be destroyed to make way for the construction of a new international airport, for which the island is about to be blown up.
Romer's tree frog, Philautus romeri, is indigenous to Hong Kong.
The tiny brown frog is found on only three islands in the world — Lamma, Lantau and Chek Lap Kok.
Discovered in 1953 by Hong Kong herpetologist John Romer, the frog's exceedingly primitive nature makes it of special interest.
Remaining populations in Lamma and Lantau are far from secure as their habitats have no legal protection and are also being threatened by rapid development.
WWF Hong Kong is currently collecting as many of the Chek Lap Kok frogs as possible before the island is razed.
The colonial government of Hong Kong has refused to provide funds for a rescue operation, which has been estimated to cost less than 0.001 per cent of the cost of building the airport.
BBC Wildlife June
Conservation: Species
French hunters shoot down migrating turtle-doves
French hunters in Bordeaux have celebrated a victory over environmentalists with a Whitsun holiday massacre of migrating turtle-doves.
The hunters defied European and French laws forbidding the shooting of the tourterelles on their annual nesting flight from the Sahara.
Police refused to intervene as protesters attempted to drive their cars to the point on the Atlantic coast where conservationists yearly attempt to count the birds before the hunters move in for the kill.
Pelted with rotten eggs and faced with armed threats, the protesters eventually turned back.
For years, the authorities have turned a blind eye to the slaughter, maintaining that it was a quaint custom which would eventually die out.
This is proving not to be the case, as feelings run increasingly high over what is evolving into a conflict of classes — between pro-hunting locals and what they feel is a wealthy Parisian clique.
Guardian 21 May
Conservation: Species
Drift nets "killing British dolphins" 
A survey by Liverpool University has shown that drowning in fishing nets is one of the commonest causes of dolphin and porpoise deaths in the waters around Britain.
It had previously been thought that pollution posed the greatest threat to inshore marine mammals.
The corpses of 56 cetaceans washed up on Welsh beaches since 1989 were examined to determine the cause of death.
A quarter of them were found to have drowned, several bearing the marks of struggle in monofilament netting, as used in the notorious Japanese "wall of death" drift nets.
Strung out over vast areas, the nets claim the lives of fish, sea birds and sea mammals in the Pacific.
They are used on a much smaller scale in Britain, but concern over their use and their effect on populations is escalating, especially as certain species of dolphin are believed to be in decline and sightings of porpoises have become rare.
The secretary of the National Federation of Fisherman's Organisations, Barry Deas, expressed surprise at the findings.
 "Catches of dolphins and porpoises are not something we hear about all that often" , he said.
, The government has announced that it will start a systematic record of accidental catches of dolphins and porpoises.
Environmentalists welcomed the move, claiming that some fishermen in Cornwall and the South-West were disguising the true extent of the problem.
The decision coincided with reports that at least four Cornish skippers had recently bought drift nets of up to four miles long.
Responding to the reports, Agriculture Minister John Gummer warned that the nets may be illegal from mid-July, under EC regulations.
 "I am not prepared to allow fishing which endangers dolphins', he said, adding that" we have warned these fishermen that if the law is changed they will have to cease fishing".
Independent 8 May Observer 12 May Times 28-30 May
Conservation: Species
Tail bounty produces tail-less rabbits?
Shetland's rabbits have become the first in history to evolve without tails, after a bounty of 25p was offered for every tail that hunters could produce.
More than 11,000 rabbits have been killed in the 12 months since the Shetlands council introduced the scheme, which is estimated to have saved acres of grass, cabbages and turnips.
The mutant strain appeared in the south of Shetland, just as the council approved the scheme for another year.
Tail-less rabbits are previously unheard of, and the reasons for their sudden evolution are unknown.
The curator of Edinburgh zoo has proposed adding a few specimens to the zoo collection.
Times 4 May
Conservation: Species
Endangered species round up
A year after a referendum failed to endorse proposed sweeping restrictions on hunting [see ED no. 35/36], the Italian Chamber of Deputies has approved a bill cutting the hunting season by three months, restricting hunters to designated reserves and limiting the number of species which can be killed.
But before it can become law, the bill needs to be approved by the Senate, where it is expected to become the target of pro-hunting amendments.
Research by the Nature Conservancy Council in Fife and Tayside, Scotland, has shown that between 20 and 40 per cent of frogs, toads and newts are killed crossing roads to reach breeding ponds.
Frogs are also trapped in roadside drains.
The NCC and the Scottish Herpetological Society are now carrying out a survey to determine amphibian populations in Fife, Kinross and Lothian.
Timber operations on 66,000 acres of US national forests in Oregon, Washington and California states have been blocked by a federal judge, acting in support of the law which protects the Spotted Owl as an endangered species [see ED no. 40].
Independent 25 May Times 25 May Scottish Environment News, April
Energy
European oil industry pledges environmental care
The oil industry in Europe has pledged to reduce the environmental damage that it causes.
Europia, a group representing 34 European oil companies including BP, Elf and Shell, agreed to be more diligent in avoiding spills and accidental emissions and in the handling of raw materials, the conservation of natural resources and the managing of waste.
, A Tass report from Moscow has said that a vast reserve of natural gas, capable of "meeting Soviet and Western demands for decades" has been found near to the Barents Sea.
Exploitation of the resource, however, would prove difficult as it was buried at a depth of 1,000 feet.
International Herald Tribune, 18 May Financial Times 18 May
Energy
Viennese referendum favours hydroelectricity plant
Viennese citizens have voted in favour of a hydroelectricity plant at Freudenau on the river Danube, south east of Vienna.
Of the 44 per cent of the electorate who took part in the poll, 73 per cent supported the plant.
Although the poll was not binding, Viennese mayor Helmut Zilk declared that it would be upheld.
Austrian Press Agency May 17
Energy
Power companies bid to keep fuel details secret from public
Operators of many of the nation's largest power stations are challenging the government's new environmental policy in an effort to keep details of their polluting activities secret from the public.
Their main concern is in divulging the sorts of fuel that they use to generate power.
The Environmental Protection Act of 1990 has made it obligatory for companies to provide details of their industrial processes and emissions for public registers.
The two largest companies, National Power and PowerGen, have appealed to Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine to overturn the decision after Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution rejected their request for secrecy.
The privatisation of the electricity supply in England and Wales means that power companies must compete fiercely over the supply of power to the national grid.
National Power has claimed that divulging information on the fuel that they plan to burn will give their competitors vital information about how their plants operate.
Companies such as ICI and Esso, which also sell power into the national grid, are also concerned to keep their fuel plans secret.
Environmentalists and officials at the Department of the Environment see the issue as a test case for the strength of the new green laws.
New Scientist 25 May Independent, Financial Times, Daily Telegraph 16 May
Energy
Banned offal may supply fuel for power station
Britain's offal industry is conducting a feasibility study into the effectiveness of a power station fuelled by dead cows, their intestines and other organs.
The research is backed by the government.
The Department of the Environment and Ministry of Agriculture are providing technical advice for the project.
The power plant could help dispose of the offal surplus which has gathered as a result of the BSE scare, which has led to a ban on the rendering of brains, spinal cords, spleens and tonsils into pet food or animal feed.
Since the collapse of the rendering companies, abattoirs must now find methods of disposal or storage for 1,000 tonnes of offal a week.
Once water is removed from the animal matter (about 60 per cent) the dried remains burn easily, producing about two-thirds of the weight of coal.
A power station could produce enough electricity to supply a small town.
A full scale offal-burning power station would qualify for premium payments under the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation — the government's incentive scheme for renewable energy sources.
Independent 1 June
Environmental Politics
US-Mexican trade pact attacked on environmental grounds
US environmentalists and trade union activists have united to demand changes to the proposed free trade agreement between the US and Mexico, which they claim fails to provide sufficient safeguards against the risks of cross-border pollution and the import of contaminated foods.
The fear is based on the difference in environmental control standards between the two countries.
A coalition of 50 groups, ranging from Friends of the Earth to the main trade union federation, the AFL-CIO, are lobbying Congress to vote against the present "fast-track" plan, which would allow the Bush Administration to negotiate all the terms of the agreement, presenting Congress with a simple decision to approve the whole package.
The coalition wants Congress to involve itself in the details of the agreement, as a means of ensuring adequate environmental and health guarantees.
According to a representative of the Public Citizen group, the Administrat-XXXX ion's present proposals "fail to offer substantial, enforceable guidelines that would protect US citizens from contaminated meat, pesticide-covered fruit and vegetables and toxic air and water" .
The Administration has, however, insisted that the agreement will not allow goods to be imported which fall below US safety standards.
, Large numbers of US-owned concerns are setting up manufacturing plants just over the Mexican frontier in order to escape increasingly tough federal anti-pollution regulations.
These maquiladoras are, however, having overspill effects with pollution of cross-border aquifers and river systems, leading the authorities in southern US cities such as San Diego, El Paso and Nogales to demand action ahead of the proposed free trade agreement.
In the wake of such an agreement, the maquiladoras are expected to multiply.
Currently, they number around 1,800 plants and employ about 55,000 people, and constitute Mexico's second largest source of foreign exchange after oil.
Washington Post 3 May Financial Times 17 May
Environmental Politics
EC environment agency establishment delayed
The delay in the establishment of the European Environment Agency, largely due to a dispute over its site, has been strongly criticized by Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana.
He blamed France for the delay, which he said was caused by Paris's continuing insistence that Strasbourg should be confirmed as the permanent site of the EC Parliament's plenary sessions.
The decisions on the siting of various EC offices, including the Parliament and the Environment Agency, must be made unanimously by all 12 member states.
Ripa di Meana demanded that the EC Commission take unilateral action to resolve the siting issue, "because every day's delay in the taking of a decision delays the start of the Agency's work by another day" .
Environment Ministers approved the establishment of the Agency in March 1990.
International Herald Tribune 1-2 June
Environmental Politics
UNEP report "out of date" 
The UN Environment Programme has produced a major statistical report on the state of the world's environment — but its latest figures refer only to 1986, and it admits to "outstanding gaps" in its data.
The Environmental Data Report includes figures on ozone-XXXX depleting chemicals, waste generation and water consumption.
On ozone, it records world consumption of chlorofluorocarbons and halons as 1.17 million tonnes, of which the EC accounts for 318,000 tonnes.
Subsequent non-UNEP figures show that in 1986-89, the EC's halon emissions rose by 27 per cent, while CFCs declined by 24 per cent .
On water consumption, the report warned that many countries were rapidly depleting non-renewable sources such as sealed aquifers.
One of the main functions of the report, however, is to demonstrate the difficulty of acquiring meaningful comparable data on world environmental problems.
, A league table of governments' contributions to UNEP reveals that the largest single donor is the USA ($11.5 million), followed by Japan ($6.8 million), the Soviet Union ($5.9 million), and the UK ($5.7 million).
UK Environment Minister David Trippier, speaking to UNEP's governing council in Nairobi, criticized other European countries for failing to provide adequate support, which he claimed was jeopardizing key UNEP work on global warming and the ozone layer.
Independent, Guardian 31 May
Environmental Politics
Eco-labelling plans fall behind schedule
The British government is set to introduce its own "eco-labels" if continued disagreement among EC partners prevents an all-XXXX European system from being introduced.
It will go ahead with unilateral implementation if the EC is unable to reach a common accord by the end of the year.
Whatever happens, the government will not be able to meet its target of introducing eco-labelling by the end of 1991 — the target date set in the Environmental Protection Bill.
Announcing the decision to go ahead unilaterally, Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine said that discussions within the EC had become deadlocked over the extent of information to be contained on the label.
On this issue, Britain takes a relatively advanced position, arguing for "cradle-to-grave" details, including environmental impact of manufacture, use and disposal (recycling, destruction or dumping).
Other states are reluctant to refer to disposal consequences.
Britain is also at odds with the terms of the EC's draft directive on the subject, which proposes that a single European body should have sole authority to award the labels.
Together with other EC countries, the UK is arguing that each government should award labels, following common rules.
It is also opposed to the directive's suggestion that the least damaging products in any given category be awarded a label.
Britain prefers absolute standards, which would exclude all products that failed to come up to the minimum acceptable level.
Financial Times 21 May Guardian 23 May
Environmental Politics
Russian Green Party formed
The Russian Republic has its first Green Party, formed at a meeting of environmentalists in Leningrad.
The party programme advocates the closure of all nuclear power stations and the reform of the industrial system.
It warns that no concessions detrimental to the environment should be made as a result of moves towards a market-orientated economy.
Tass and Neue Zürcher Zeitung June 1
Environmental Politics
German Green Party splits
After years of lengthy internal disputes between moderate "realos" and more militant "fundis" , the German Green Party has split, with a radical breakaway group leaving to form its own extra-parliamentary movement.
The split followed a particularly fractious session of the national congress, where the gulf between fundis and realos had been emphasized by policy differences on a wide variety of issues.
The newly-established Ecological Left/Alternative List is to be led by Jutta Ditfurth, who denounced the mainstream Greens on the basis that they had rejected their ecological and socialist origins.
She warned that the new movement, which is mainly composed of far left ecologists and radical feminists, would treat the Greens as "opponents and enemies." 
Independent 13 May
Environmental Politics
Advisory group on business and environment set up
The UK government has announced the appointment of an advisory committee on business and the environment, composed of leading industrialists.
It will be chaired by John Collins, chief executive of Shell UK, and among the 23 other members will be representatives of IBM, ICI, Norsk Hydro and Bowater.
According to Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine, the committee will be responsible for advising the government on issues such as environmental regulation, and for providing guidance to the business community.
At the same time as he announced the establishment of the committee, Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine also called on Britain's top 1,000 companies to form a "green club" committed to cutting pollution and producing environmentally sound products.
He criticized British management for failing to meet the challenges of the growing market in environmental technology, and called for a "green renaissance" of the British economy.
Financial Times 8 May Independent 8 May Guardian 8 May Times 7 May
Environmental Politics
Liberals pitch for green vote
The UK's Liberal Democrat Party has launched a raft of environmental policies in the form of a strategy document entitled Coming Clean on the Air We Breathe, thereby signalling its intention to make a pitch for green sympathizers in the forthcoming general election.
The principal points include:, setting a target for a 30 per cent reduction in global carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2005;, a total ban on the use of chlorofluorocarbons by 1994;, introducing an "energy tax" to encourage conservation of energy;, adopting a system of marketable "permits to pollute" , which could be traded between companies;, introducing road pricing and peak hour bans on cars in congested city centres;, phasing out tax perks for company cars and replacing the Vehicle Excise Duty with a local authority tax on car use.
The new strategy linked environmental concerns with the current controversy over the health service by claiming that 14 million people in the UK suffered ill effects from air pollution last year.
Guardian 30 May Times 30 May Independent 30 May
Global Warming
Chinese rice production may contribute to global warming
A study into the rate of methane production from China's rice fields may lead climatologists to revise their models of global warming.
The joint Sino-American study has measured the rate of methane production in four paddy fields in Szechwan, the heart of China's rice growing area.
The rice fields were found to generate between four and 10 times as much methane as fields in the US and Europe.
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas, each molecule trapping 25 times as much heat radiation as one molecule of carbon dioxide.
New Scientist 18 May
Global Warming
UK plan to avoid carbon cuts
The government is considering ways of meeting international commitments to curb greenhouse gas emissions without making large cuts in carbon dioxide, according to an internal Environment Department paper leaked to The Guardian.
Such a strategy would undermine EC initiatives for sweeping global reductions in CO2 emissions, but would be likely to appeal to the US Administration, which has thus far failed to set any formal targets for reducing carbon output.
It would also run counter to previous commitments made by the UK government on carbon emissions.
Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine is believed to be sounding out potential US support for the strategy.
In broad terms, the paper argues that as each nation has different economic priorities, it should be allowed to cut emissions in the way that seems easiest to it.
In some cases, this would mean giving a low priority to carbon reductions, and stressing instead cuts in CFCs, methane and other greenhouse gases.
It would also include controversial — and unproven — schemes such as large scale tree plantations, intended to act as "carbon sinks" .
The strategy would, for example, allow the US (the world's largest carbon producer) to increase carbon emissions by 14 percent by the year 2000, whilst claiming to have reduced total greenhouse gas output.
Greenpeace's atmosphere campaigner, Steve Elsworth, has warned that the plan was "carefully calculated to impress domestic opinion in Britain" .
He claimed it would allow Heseltine to avoid mentioning that Britain was lagging behind Europe in curbing carbon emissions in the run up to the general election.
If the proposals were accepted, said Elsworth, they would "let the US off the hook and allow business as usual throughout the world, exactly what the scientists warned against" .
Guardian 28 May Financial Times 3 June
Global Warming
Carbon could be stored in empty gas fields
Carbon dioxide could be pumped straight from power stations into empty gas reservoirs deep beneath the earth's surface, according to a Dutch preliminary study.
The gas could be compressed and pumped straight into depleted gas fields of which there are many in the Netherlands.
The process would increase electricity prices by 40 per cent.
At coal-gasification plants, up to 94 percent of the carbon within the coal could be buried as carbon dioxide.
The technique would, however, decrease the efficiency of power stations between 10 and 30 percent, hence the price rise.
Aquifers could be used as carbon stores, if they could be made gas-tight.
New Scientist 1 June
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl effects "not as bad as feared" 
A major report on the health consequences of the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station has concluded that the effects have been limited, and not nearly as serious as widely reported.
The report, undertaken by independent scientists at the request of the International Atomic Energy Agency and other UN bodies, has been fiercely criticized by some environmentalists and also by officials in the Ukraine and Belorussia — the regions worst affected by the accident.
Its main conclusion is that there has been no measurable radiological effects on the health of local people, and that the only significant problems resulted from psychological factors, notably stress.
The report's task was to assess the effects on 825,000 people living in the nearby area.
These did not, however, include the 100,000 residents evacuated from the 30 kilometre zone around the reactor soon after the accident.
Also not covered by the study were the 600,000 or so "liquidators" , the emergency workers who tackled the accident at the time.
The report was largely based on statistical analyses of Soviet data, supported by a series of spot checks by the investigators.
These factors led groups such as Greenpeace, together with Soviet-based NGOs, to dismiss the study as "fully insufficient" .
Friends of the Earth accused the report's compilers of "gross negligence and scientific incompetence" .
The study concluded that there has been no reported increase in any radiation-related illnesses, such as leukaemia, birth defects or thyroid cancer, in the villages surrounding the reactor, although it suggested that incidence of thyroid cancer might increase over the next five to ten years.
It appeared to confirm that the Soviet Union had not indulged in any sustained attempts to downplay the health effects, and went further by concluding that official Soviet measurements of radiation doses received by the populace were between two and three times in excess of the real amount.
The researchers were highly critical of the continued evacuation programme, based on these measurements, which they claimed was both medically unwarranted and psychologically traumatic.
One of those involved in compiling the report, Terence Lee of the University of Surrey, argued that recent Soviet legislation setting the maximum permitted dose of radiation as 0.5 rem above natural background level, was "absurdly low" , and set a dangerous precedent which, if followed by the UK, would compel the evacuation "of half of Cornwall" .
Lee added that the psychological effects of the exaggerated estimates of health dangers were "wholly disproportionate" to the biological threat posed by radiation, with any small illness being attributed to the accident.
 "If a child gets a nosebleed, it is considered a hospital case" , Lee said.
As well as criticizing the omissions in the sample studied, local scientists took issue with some of the health evidence.
The Chernobyl Help organization, chaired by chess master Anatoly Karpov, claimed that around 1,000 of the "liquidators" had died, 70 per cent of them under the age of 40, and that another 5,000 had contracted illnesses related to the accident.
It joined other groups in pointing out, on the basis of Japanese evidence from Hiroshima, that clusters of leukaemia would only become apparent between seven and nine years after the disaster.
Karpov also claimed that the Soviet Ministry of Nuclear Power, which he said had a vested interest in obscuring the facts, had exercised undue influence over the parameters of the study.
, The Polish State Nuclear Energy Agency has stated that the Chernobyl accident resulted in 25 per cent of Polish territory becoming highly contaminated, 50 per cent moderately contaminated, and the remainder slightly so.
Washington Post 23 May International Herald Tribune 25-26 May Financial Times 21 May Guardian 22 May Times 22 May PAP Radio (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
USSR plans to triple nuclear capacity by 2000
According to Soviet Minister for Atomic Energy, Vitaly Konovalov, the Soviet government is planning a dramatic increase in nuclear capacity and the sale of uranium on world markets.
Quoted in an interview in Pravda, Konovalov said that his ministry was set to triple output by 2000, adding an extra 19,600 megawatts of capacity over the next ten years.
This would involve the construction of approximately 20 new reactors.
Financial Times 28 May
Nuclear Power
India to reprocess nuclear fuel
As part of its effort to enter the international nuclear market, the Indian Atomic Energy Commission has announced that it is prepared to reprocess spent nuclear fuels from other countries.
Initially, it would focus on separating plutonium from spent fuel as a service to about 125 research reactors, most of them in developing countries.
The work would be carried out on the understanding that the resulting products would be returned to the country of origin.
Commission chairman, P.K. Iyengar, claims that such work is labour intensive, and hence India will be better placed to offer an economical service than more developed nations.
India presently has two reprocessing plants: in Bombay, and at Tarapur, some 60 miles to the north.
A third, near Madras, is close to completion.
India can now boast nuclear capability throughout the full cycle from uranium mining to waste reprocessing.
It would like to export research reactors to other countries, says Iyengar.
Negotiations are under way with Egypt and Syria.
Nature 30 May
Nuclear Power
Netherlands to lift freeze on nuclear power
The Dutch government is to lift its freeze on the building of new nuclear power stations, despite recent polls showing that most sectors of the population remain opposed to nuclear power.
The ban followed the Chernobyl accident, and was expected to last until at least the end of the century.
It will however, be removed at the end of the current government's term of office in 1994.
The majority of MPs in the Hague parliament believe that there are strong economic and social reasons for the continuation of the nuclear industry.
Last year, parliament voted to fund research into nuclear safety and waste disposal to the tune of £40 million.
More research is planned into safer reactors.
About 7 per cent of Dutch electricity is supplied by nuclear power.
At the time of the ban on nuclear power, demand was expected to rise by 1 percent a year.
In fact, it has risen by 2.5 percent, forcing the government to import about 7 per cent of its supply from France, Belgium and Germany, most of which originates in nuclear generation.
Guardian 4 June New Scientist 18 May
Nuclear Power
Czechoslovak nuclear plant remains open
Czechoslovakia is going ahead with a $50 million programme to improve the safety of its controversial V-1 unit at Jaslovske Bohunice plant, despite Austrian requests that it be closed on the grounds that its proximity to the border posed a threat to Austrian citizens.
The Austrian government had offered to make alternative energy supplies available to compensate for the loss of the plant's capacity.
Talks on the issue with the Slovak government proved inconclusive, however, with the latter estimating that "even with the best will" Austria had only the capacity to deliver a maximum of 400 MW, or about half of the unit's output.
, A total of 184 defects in Czechoslovak nuclear power stations were registered in 1990, according to a report by the Czechoslovak Federal Commission for Nuclear Energy.
Czechoslovak Press Agency (CTK) May 7, 29 (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
French nuclear testing in Pacific condemned
France's continuing policy of carrying out nuclear tests in the South Pacific has been condemned by the governments of Australia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea.
Responding to the latest test, carried out at Mururoa Atoll on 7 May, PNG Foreign Minister Michael Somare said France was ignoring the expressed wishes of the region's people for a nuclear-free Pacific.
 "If, as claimed by France, the tests are harmless" , said Somare, "then they should be conducted in metropolitan France" .
Le Monde 10 May Radio Australia 12 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
French resume search for nuclear waste burial sites
Geological testing of possible sites for the deep burial of nuclear waste is to be restarted in France, some 15 months after public protests brought a halt to the previous programme.
In an effort to meet accusations of a lack of public accountability, the government will allow parliament to decide on the final site to be chosen, on the basis of an independent report.
Previously, the decision was to have been in the hands of the state nuclear agency, the CEA.
An earlier parliamentary report concluded that deep burial was the only option for disposing of the waste, which is currently stored in surface sites at La Hague in Brittany and Marcoule in Provence.
Nuclear energy from France's 57 reactors supplies the country with 80 per cent of its electricity needs.
Financial Times 15 May
Nuclear Power
Scottish councils enlist Soviet help to measure pollution
Local authorities in Scotland are being asked to pay for a Soviet ship to measure radioactive and chemical pollution in Scottish coastal waters.
The proponents of the scheme — Nuclear Free Scotland — which co-ordinates nuclear policy for the majority of Scottish councils — has expressed frustration with the delay in the provision of pollution data by British authorities.
The Scottish authorities are particularly concerned about discharges from nuclear plants at Dounreay in northwest Scotland and Sellafield in northwest England.
There is also concern about heavy metals, the waste products of industrial plants on the mainland [see ED no. 44].
The proposed survey will track pollution plumes as they spread out from Sellafield and Dounreay, by measuring radioactive isotopes such as caesium-137, strontium-90, cobalt-60 and cadmium in both sea water and sediment.
The councils, some of whom are reliant on their income from fishing, will vote on whether to contribute to the £35,000 survey, which will need Foreign Office approval in order to go ahead.
A MAFF spokesman said that the survey was unnecessary: "Pollution controls are set locally to the nuclear sites.
We get it right there, and exposures to people farther away are much lower".
New Scientist 18 May
Ozone Layer
Ozone depletion "natural" 
The depletion of the ozone layer may be primarily a natural phenomena related to solar activity, according to researchers from NASA and the University of Virginia.
Speaking at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Lin Callis of NASA suggested that up to 75 per cent of the decline could be a result of the fluctuating solar cycle, with a build up of electrons and neutrons breaking down the ozone.
Fred Singer, from Virginia, suggested that there was currently little hard evidence to link ozone depletion with man-made chemicals, whose effects, he suggested, may be"very, very small.
Based on the data we have now, one cannot draw any conclusions about long-XXXX term trends because of the natural fluctuations", he said.
Times 31 May
Ozone Layer
US electronics firms go ozone-friendly
The US electronics industry is making more rapid progress than predicted towards phasing out the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in its cleansers, according to US environmental groups.
Only a few years after claiming that there were no known substitutes, the companies are discovering a wide range of alternatives — including soap and water — which are not only cheaper but in some cases better than CFCs.
IBM's massive San Jose disk-drive plant has cut its use of CFCs by 95 per cent since 1987, substituting soapy water and hot-air drying.
 "Some of the things we thought would be really big problems in 1987 turned out not to be" , said the plant's environmental spokesman.
International Herald Tribune 16 May
Ozone Layer
Australians face spacesuit future
Australians will be unable to go outdoors without protection by the year 2060, unless the depletion of the ozone layer over the southern hemisphere is halted, according to skin cancer expert Bill McCarthy, who predicted that the growing danger of cancer would render Australia uninhabitable unless its populace lived in glass-domed cities and wore spacesuit style protective gear for ventures into the open air.
Times 9 May
Pollution: Air
US proposes "sulphur allowances" 
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has proposed setting up a system by which "permits to pollute" with sulphur dioxide (SO2) could be traded among industrial plants.
The resulting market in pollution rights is seen as a cost-effective way for American industry to meet the provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act [see ED no. 41/42].
This stipulates that emissions of sulphur dioxide must be cut to 10 million tonnes below 1980 levels by the year 2000.
Under the EPA scheme, each SO2 producer would be allocated a certain number of "allowances" , each worth one tonne of SO2 emission per year, according to present emission rates and other factors.
These could be traded, within the overall ceiling, between plants.
Thus, those which would find the it relatively cheap and straightforward to cut pollution might be able to sell some of their units to producers which would find it difficult or expensive to do so.
Nature 30 May
Pollution: Air
Pioneer pollution clean-up agreement in Germany
A pioneering agreement between the German government and private industry is to provide for the clean-up and reconstruction of one of eastern Germany's most polluted industrial sites, centred on the old Mansfeld metal conglomerate, near Halle.
Employing around 30,000 workers, Mansfeld was formerly one of East Germany's largest kombinats (industrial groups).
It produced mainly copper and metal, but the high cost of its production methods and its heavy pollution have placed its future in doubt.
It is currently owned by the privatization agency, Treuhand.
Under the agreement, the Frankfurt-based metals and engineering company, Metallgesellschaft, will head a consortium of private companies interested in assuming control of the site in return for carrying out cleansing operations.
With an estimated total cost of over £300 million, these could include purifying and decontaminating the soil and re-equipping the plant with modern, low-polluting technology.
The agreement has been hailed as the first of a series intended to tackle the chronic industrial pollution problems of eastern Germany.
Financial Times 4 May
Pollution: Air
UK sets ozone levels at twice WHO limit
The UK government will issue health warnings about low-level ozone pollution only when it reaches 200 parts per billion — more than twice the safety threshold of 75 parts per billion set by the World Health Organization (WHO).
The decision was described by Friends of the Earth as "an appalling example of official complacency" .
The government accepted the recommendations of the Department of Health's advisory group on air pollution, chaired by Stephen Holgate of Southampton University, which concluded that even the highest levels of ozone pollution in Britain posed no severe or long-term threat to health.
A lower threshold, said Holgate, would be "alarmist" .
Only people taking "vigorous exercise" outdoors would be affected by high levels, the group decided.
Low-level ozone pollution is triggered by the action of sunlight on vehicle exhaust emissions, with still, sunny days providing the best conditions.
It becomes more concentrated as the day wears on, and by the time it reaches peak levels, in the late afternoon, the polluted air will usually have drifted away from the cities into the countryside.
Independent 8 May Guardian 8 May Daily Telegraph 8 May
Pollution: Air
Acid rain "long term threat to UK" 
Acid rain will continue to affect Britain for many years to come, despite new anti-pollution measures, according to a government report.
It estimates that by the year 2005, 8 per cent of the UK's surface area and 4 per cent of Scottish fresh water will be suffering damage from acid rain.
On land, the report says that acid rain's effects include soil loss, leading to the breakdown of organic matter and nutrient deficiency, stunting plant growth.
Acid rain on water can cause losses of fish population, and damage to the habitat of riverside birds.
Areas where soil will still be damaged in 2005 include the Lake and Peak District, the Pennines, Snowdonia, and the southern uplands and south-east highlands of Scotland.
, Acid rain from the burning oil wells of Kuwait could cause severe environmental damage to the Himalayan mountains and the valleys of Jammu and Kashmir, according to an Indian government report.
Financial Times 29 May Daily Telegraph 29 May
Pollution: Air
Pollution statistics "unpublicized" 
Daily statistics on air pollution issued by the Department of the Environment are largely unpublicized, according to the National Society for Clean Air.
Despite being faxed to newspapers, the statistics are not seen as newsworthy, with Today being the only national to report them.
A DOE public information phone line, set up last year, which gives information on sulphur and nitrogen-XXXX related pollution, receives only about a dozen calls a week.
Calls to it are, however, charged at a premium price many times higher than normal phone calls.
Green Magazine, June
Pollution: Air
Hospitals burn waste "at dangerously low temperatures" 
Hundreds of hospitals across the UK are incinerating potentially hazardous medical waste at temperatures which are too low to ensure the breakdown of pollutants, according to a report issued by the National Association of Waste Disposal Contractors.
The Association blames the fact that incinerators are not automatically checked by the Pollution Inspectorate or local environmental health officers.
The majority of the incinerators are incapable of reaching sufficiently high temperatures.
As a result, the report claims, dangerously high levels of pollutants such as dioxins, heavy metals, acids and sulphur are being released into the air above major cities.
Small hospitals incinerators do not have to comply with the latest emission standards set by the Department of Environment until 1996.
Until April 1991, hospitals also had Crown immunity from prosecution.
The Association argues that the DOE standards are in any case not strict enough.
In support of its report, the Association quoted figures from a 1991 select committee survey of Wales, which found that only 10 out of 36 health authority incinerators burnt waste at high enough temperatures, and that none monitored emissions from their chimneys.
The Association believes this pattern is repeated across the UK.
Independent 31 May
Pollution: Water
Exxon settlement rejected
The out of court settlement over the 1989 Valdez oil spill, agreed by multi-national oil company Exxon, and the federal and Alaska state governments [see ED nos. 45 and 46], has been rejected by the Alaska House of Representatives.
The House considers that the proposed $1.1 billion settlement — payable over a 10 year period — is inadequate.
A resolution passed by the Democrat-controlled House 27 votes to 13 advises Exxon to renegotiate and come up with a better offer.
Failing this, the case will return to court.
The House suggests that Exxon pay $1.2 billion damages together with a $500 million criminal fine and a civil penalty of $700 million, prompt payment of which would allow immediate implementation of environmental restoration projects.
It expressed particular concern over the welfare of fishermen and native American Indians, who depend on the Prince William Sound for their welfare.
Exxon subsequently withdrew guilty pleas to four misdemeanour charges relating to the spill, thereby formally dissolving the out of court settlement.
The case is likely now to be reopened, and may go to court.
Washington Post 3 May International Herald Tribune 4-5 May Financial Times 4 May Independent 26 May
Pollution: Water
US water quality standards "ignored" 
The quality of drinking water in the US is suffering from a failure by the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to enforce legal requirements, according to congressional critics.
The EPA itself admits that pollution of drinking water is one of the four greatest environmental risks facing the population, causing at least 1,000 new cases of cancer each year and impairing the mental development of 240,000 children.
Among the criticisms are:, Failure to take action to enforce standards set by Congress for toxic chemicals, including carcinogens such as dioxin.
, Widespread violation of the requirement that water quality be tested quarterly, with one utility in Washington not undertaking a test for seven years.
, Failure to issue public notices over violation of standards.
One of the most serious incidents concerned the town of Batavia, Illinois, whose 17,000 residents allegedly suffer a cancer risk several hundred times higher than that which the EPA regards as acceptable, due to a reported failure by the agency to take action over high levels of radioactivity in drinking water.
Earlier, the EPA had issued regulations allowing public utilities up to 21 years to remove dangerous levels of lead from drinking water.
The regulations set a ceiling of 15 parts per billion.
Utilities supplying large cities were given six years to meet the standards by taking chemical action to reduce the acidity of their water, which should cut the amount of lead leached from the pipes.
If this fails to achieve the desired results, then they would be given a further 15 years to replace lead service lines.
At a congressional hearing, the EPA's administrator, William K. Reilly, claimed that many of the lapses resulted from unrealistic statutory deadlines and inadequate staff resources.
But he insisted that US water supplies were "among the best protected in the world" .
One of the congressional critics, Representative Henry Waxman from California, however, said that the lack of thorough testing made it impossible to gauge water quality accurately.
 "We don't see people suffering immediately from drinking water, so the EPA can decide it's not a problem they have to deal with right away" , he said, adding that, "the programme is a shambles" .
International Herald Tribune 21 May
Pollution: Water
Love Canal dumping "may have involved Army" 
The US Army may have dumped radioactive waste from nuclear bomb programmes in Love Canal, many years before it became the site for disposal of toxic chemicals by a commercial concern.
The possibility had been raised before, but now appeared to be confirmed by documents released during a court case between the federal government and Occidental Chemical Corporation, which is accused of responsibility for the contamination as a result of its purchase of the company involved, Hooker Chemical and Plastics.
The Love Canal issue raised a scandal in the late 1970s, when it was revealed that families living in the area were at serious risk from chemical poisoning.
The families were relocated and paid compensation by the government.
The documents suggest that the radioactive waste was dumped during the Second World War or Korean War, from the Army's Niagara Falls plant or nearby private plants operating under government contract.
They include testimony from one witness who recalls dumping buckets of waste from the Manhattan Project, during work to produce the first atomic bomb in the early 1940s.
An Occidental spokesman claims that the government has repeatedly tried to cover up the Army's role for fear of diluting its case against the company and having to admit some federal responsibility for the situation.
The Army has consistently issued official denials of involvement.
Washington Post 18 May
Pollution: Water
Pollution regulations force US petrol stations' closure
The introduction of new federal regulations to protect ground water is leading to widespread closure of small town petrol ( "gas" ) stations in the US, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.
It estimates that up to 50 per cent of retail gasoline outlets could close in the face of the cost of complying with the new regulations, which include compulsory liability insurance, leak-detection systems and anti-corrosive tanks.
A number of state governments are introducing loan and grant programmes to help station owners meet the compliance costs.
International Herald Tribune 6 May
Pollution: Water
US companies transfer polluting factories to Mexico
Large numbers of US-owned concerns are setting up manufacturing plants just over the Mexican frontier in order to escape increasingly tough federal anti-pollution regulations.
These maquiladoras are, however, having overspill effects with pollution of cross-border aquifers and river systems, leading the authorities in southern US cities such as San Diego, El Paso and Nogales to demand action ahead of the proposed Free Trade Agreement between the US and Mexico.
In the wake of such an agreement, the maquiladoras are expected to multiply.
Currently, they number around 1,800 plants and employ about 55,000 people, and constitute Mexico's second largest source of foreign exchange after oil.
Financial Times 17 May
Pollution: Water
Government taken to court over pesticide residues
Friends of the Earth is to take the government to court over its alleged failure to ensure that pesticide levels in drinking water meet legal requirements across much of the Thames Basin area.
The move follows a survey by FOE which purports to show that the water supply of millions of people in the area is contaminated by 12 pesticides at levels up to 16 times above the legal limit.
The pesticides concerned are: atrazine, simazine, isoproturon, chlortoluron, diuron, mecoprop, MCPA, carbetamide, fenpropimorph, clopyralid, dichlorprop and terbutryne.
The survey concludes that illegal levels of pesticides are to be found in 70 per cent of the large Thames Water company's supply zones, and throughout the supply zones of the smaller West Kent and Colne Valley companies.
Other companies in the area supplying substandard water are East Surrey (76 per cent of supply zones), Lee Valley (51 per cent), Mid Southern (55 per cent ) and Rickmansworth (44 per cent ).
No data was provided for the North Surrey and Sutton companies.
Taken together, these figures means that over six million consumers are affected, including the occupants of the Houses of Parliament and Buckingham Palace.
FOE's case hinges on the "undertakings" made by water suppliers as part of the privatization process, under which the government allowed them a period of grace in which to bring water quality up to legal minimum standards.
In the case of Thames Water, this extends until 2001.
In 1980, however, the government committed itself to meeting standards by 1985.
Friends of the Earth information, 10 June
Pollution: Water
Potato pesticide pollutes rivers
A survey by Friends of the Earth has revealed widespread pollution of rivers by tecnazene, a pesticide used to stop potatoes from sprouting.
It is applied on 35 per cent of Britain's potato crop.
The worst pollution is at sites near outlets from industrial potato washing units and fish and chip shops.
Washwater from one chip shop contained tecnazene at 15,000 times the level which is safe for fish, while a brook in Somerset recorded levels at up to 520 times the safety limit.
Studies have showed that tecnazene appears to act as a narcotic on fish, causing disorientation and lethargy.
At high doses, it is lethal.
Earth Matters (Friends of the Earth) Summer 1991
Transport
EC to compel EIAs on British motorway plans
The European Commission is set to take Britain to the European Court over its failure to carry out environmental impact assessments (EIA) on three motorway extension projects.
Although no firm decision has yet been taken, the Commissioners for Transport and Environment have indicated that they intend to enforce the EC directive which makes assessments compulsory.
The three schemes in contention are: the M3 extension on Twyford Down, Hampshire; the East London River Crossing through Oxleas Wood (south-east London); and the M11 extension through Epping Forest to Hackney (East London).
The UK government argues that EIAs are not required for the first two schemes, on the grounds that they date from before July 1988, when the relevant EC directive came into force.
It also claims that the M11 extension is not covered by the directive since it is not officially designated a motorway, although the government admits that it is likely to be given motorway status at the time of opening.
Each of the schemes is the focus of strong local opposition.
Independent 1 June
Transport
UK government signals major policy shift
The Secretary of State for Transport, Malcolm Rifkind, has signalled a shift in government transport policy by declaring his intention to encourage freight traffic to move from road to rail, in part by ending British Rail's monopoly on freight, to improve public transport in cities and to investigate "road pricing" to cut congestion.
Environmental groups such as Transport 2000 welcomed the announcement, but stressed that it would not produce major changes in the transport balance.
At present, only 7 per cent by volume of freight goes by rail (compared to over 40 per cent in the 1950s).
Meanwhile, the road-XXXX building programme will continue.
Rifkind stressed that roads would remain "the pre-eminent means of travel" .
On rail, Rifkind stated that legislation would be put forward so that private operators would no longer be required to obtain British Rail approval to run passenger or freight services on BR track.
 "Monopolies are no more acceptable on the railways than elsewhere" , Rifkind said.
The existing "freight facility" grants available to companies who wish to build their own private sidings and freight depots are to be tripled.
They will now be available to any company which can demonstrate that new sidings would reduce lorry traffic on virtually any trunk road.
(Previously, the criteria were limited to urban and scenic routes.)
Critics from within the transport industry pointed out, however, that while BR remained as the track and service authority, there was no guarantee that existing freight depots would remain open.
A number have been closed in recent years.
Such uncertainty could deter potential private freight operators.
On transport within cities, Rifkind promised research into the development of new rapid transit networks, coupled with a range of initiatives to help buses move more freely.
The system of "Red Routes" (urban clearways with stringent parking restrictions), currently under trial in London, would be extended, after initial studies showed that it had proved successful in cutting journey times by up to 30 per cent.
The government would also look for ways of encouraging private investment in long-distance roads, with the possible introduction of a toll system.
Independent 29 May Times 29 May Guardian 29 May
Transport
Collapsing roads "will result in lorry bans" 
Highway authorities across the UK may be forced to impose restrictions on the movement of heavy lorries because of serious road damage, according to a confidential study compiled by the Transport and Road Research Laboratory, details of which were obtained by the industry journal, Local Transport Today.
The study concludes that up to 10 per cent of roads are giving way at the edges, requiring what is known as "haunch repairs" .
The damage is in part caused by the increasing incidence of road edges being dug up for laying pipes, cables and power lines.
The study concludes that, in order to carry out repairs and prevent further deterioration, heavy lorries will have to be banned from the roads affected, which include a number of A-class trunk routes.
Some roads may have to be narrowed to single-track width in order to force lorries onto the central sections which are sufficiently strong to bear their weight.
, A lack of qualified engineers is causing long delays to mount up in the programme of strengthening road bridges, which needs to be carried out ahead of the introduction of 40-tonne lorries, scheduled for 1998.
Independent 1 June
Transport
Vehicles "main source of smoke pollution" 
Lorries and cars, particularly those running on diesel fuel, are now the principal source of smoke pollution, ahead of power stations and domestic fires, according to a report by the National Society for Clean Air.
Although emissions of fumes from domestic and industrial sources of declined over the past decade, those from motor vehicles have increased considerably, the report states.
It predicts that, despite tougher standards for new cars, the problem is likely to increase for some years to come, largely as a result of a lack of any controls over the emissions of vehicles already on the road.
The Scotsman 29 May
Transport
Platinum-free "cats" developed
The Japanese car company, Nissan, has announced the development of platinum-free catalytic converters.
Using only palladium, the new "cats" would be up to one-third cheaper, Nissan claim.
Financial Times 31 May
Tropical Forests
Brazil re-commences destruction of the Amazon
President Collor has reintroduced financial incentives for the deforestation of the Amazon, according to the World Wide Fund for Nature.
Funding for the BR364 highway, to cut across the western Amazon, has also been granted by Collor.
The World Bank previously refused to fund the project on environmental grounds.
Last year, the rate of deforestation in the Amazon declined by almost 30 percent.
Collor's predecessor, Jose Sarney, abolished subsidies for cutting down the forest to make way for cattle in 1988.
The subsidies have now been reintroduced in the Finance Bill, disguised in a clause approving payments to the Brazilian National Fund for Investments in Amazonia.
Daily Telegraph 5 June
Tropical Forests
Controversial Indian forestry scheme launched
The forests of the Western Ghats, a mountainous region in Karnataka state in south-western India, are to be the focus of an ambitious conservation programme, launched by the Karnataka Forest Department with the support of the UK's Overseas Development Administration (ODA).
The project has been drawn some criticism, however, from those who argue that it does not take sufficient account of the interests of local tribal people.
Covering an area of 20,000 sq km within a state-owned forest reserve, the five-year project seeks to preserve the area's rich tropical rainforests, which are under threat from an expanding local population.
It divides the area into inner and outer zones, with the central core of 6,000 sq km to be left undisturbed as an ecological park, and the second inner zone scheduled for logging and replanting.
Two outer zones are to be jointly managed by the forestry department and local people, who will be able to plant trees for timber and firewood and harvest fruits and other produce.
The project outline claims that no-one lives in the inner zones, although this is disputed by local non-governmental organizations (NGOs), which insist that tribal people currently use all of the forest.
The NGOs are worried that local people will be excluded from their traditional lands, although an ODA spokesman has denied that this will be the case, while Indian officials say that voluntary agreements will ensure protection for the more "ecologically sensitive" areas.
Despite these criticisms, the new programme is widely seen as an advance on the Karnataka Social Forestry Project, inaugurated in 1983 with World Bank funding, which led to the expropriation of common land for eucalyptus plantations, and clashes between vilagers and foresters.
The World Bank has now withdrawn funding, and the project is being wound down.
New Scientist 25 May
Waste and Recycling
Germany to make recycling of packaging compulsory
The German government has decided to make compulsory the recycling of much of the packaging used by industry and commerce.
Announcing "the end of the waste society" , Environment Minister Klaus Topfler said that the move would be implemented in three stages, as follows:, From 1 December 1991, all external packaging used for transporting products must be recycled;, from 1 April 1992, shops will be under an obligation to re-use or recycle all packaging returned to them by consumers;, from 1 January 1993, there will be compulsory recycling of all bottles and containers for detergents and other household cleaning products.
Le Monde 10 May
Waste and Recycling
Swiss company begins world's first commercial battery recycling operation
A Swiss company, Batrec AG, has become the world's first company to begin recycling domestic batteries on a commercial basis.
By the end of the year the factory in Wimmis, canton Berne, will be able to recycle around 2,000 tonnes of household batteries a year (enough to process all of Switzerland's discarded batteries).
Batrec, set up in May 1989 by several Swiss cantons, uses a system developed by the Japanese company Sumitomo Heavy Industries, which allows 95 per cent of the component parts to be reused.
Prior to Batrec's operations, Swiss batteries — even those collected separately by local authorities — were either sent abroad to dubious foreign dumps or were incinerated at home — a process which raised fears that residues could eventually enter the food chain.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung May 21
Waste and Recycling
Munich's green burial laws
A new law in the German city of Munich has laid down strict environmental standards for burials and cremations.
It stipulates that the dead must be dressed in biodegradable clothes, and that coffins must be unvarnished and contain no plastic or PVC.
Undertakers who breach these rules risk prosecution.
The law was introduced after the discovery that crematoriums were emitting toxic pollutants.
European 10-12 May
Waste and Recycling
London polluted by old gas works
A study by Friends of the Earth has concluded that 68 sites, many of them now built over, may be suffering hitherto-unrecorded contamination from old coal gas works.
 "Town" or coal gas was produced in London from the early 19th century until the 1970s, when it was finally replaced by natural gas.
Coal gas by-products included a number of toxic chemicals, such as cyanide, mercury, cadmium, phenols and lead.
Among the sites affected include the headquarters of the Department of the Environment in Marsham Street, Westminster, built on land occupied by a coal gas works from 1813 to 1937.
The planning authorities of the various London boroughs had no knowledge of 27 of the sites.
Shortly before its abolition in 1986, the Greater London Council produced a report which warned that "many boroughs are not aware of the seriousness or extent of contamination" .
A recent Department of the Environment report suggested that there could be up to 5,000 old gas works sites throughout the country.
Independent on Sunday 19 May