

Agriculture and Food
Banana pesticide withdrawn
Aldicarb, a pesticide used to control mites and nematodes that damage crops, has been withdrawn for use on bananas.
Field tests on bananas grown in Central American countries for export to the United States had shown that some were contaminated with up to ten times the chemical's legal limit.
Although sprayed on the outside of the banana plant, the pesticide had been absorbed into the fruit.
When ingested, Aldicarb can cause headaches, stomach upsets, diarrhoea and blurred vision.
Aldicarb, manufactured by Rhone-Poulenc, has been on the market since 1970.
It was withdrawn for use on potatoes in 1990 after tests had also indicated contamination.
It is still widely used on citrus fruit, soybeans, coffee beans, tobacco, cotton and other crops.
Washington Post 5 June
Agriculture and Food
Parents launch pesticide labelling campaign
The pressure group Parents for Safe Food has launched a worldwide campaign for the introduction of a pesticide-labelling scheme.
It calls for an easily understood system to end the confusion surrounding pesticide names.
Food would be marked with a "P" to indicate that pesticides had been used on a product.
According to the World Health Organization, three million people worldwide will suffer from acute pesticide poisoning this year and 20,000 will die.
Green Magazine July
Agriculture and Food
Netherlands to halve pesticide use
The government of the Netherlands has proposed radical measures to cut pesticide use.
In a plan adopted by the cabinet, and sent to parliament for approval, the government calls for a reduction of 35 per cent in pesticide applications by 1995, rising to 50 per cent by the year 2000.
The reductions will be enforced by a system of permits.
Farmers' representatives have attacked the move, arguing that it would cut crop yields, but environmentalists argue that it is insufficient, and should extend to an 80 per cent cut.
Financial Times 18 June Times 18 June Guardian 21 June
Agriculture and Food
Dutch scheme to feed pigs on manure
The Dutch biotechnology company, Gist Brocades, is working on a scheme by which pigs could be fed with a product deriving from their own waste.
According to the firm's scientists, laboratory tests have shown that pig manure can be fermented with bacteria which would transform the ammonia in the manure into the amino acid, lysine.
This in turn could be added to standard pig feed to enrich its protein content.
, Scientists at the Dutch Central Veterinary Institute claim to have isolated the cause of the Mystery Reproductive Syndrome (MRS) disease which has been sweeping pig herds across much of western Europe over the past few months, leading to the loss of up to 10 per cent of offspring in some herds.
The Institute says that an undientified virus is to blame, thereby ruling out bacteria, mycoplasmas and other agents such as the ones which cause scrapie.
New Scientist 15 June Guardian 21 June
Agriculture and Food
Egyptian petroleum gel "fertilises sandy soil" 
An Egyptian scientist has developed a gel based on petroleum waste which he claims can dramatically improve the productivity of sandy soil.
Reda Aly Ibrahim Azzam, head of the Sandy Soil Reclamation and Arid Lands Plantation project at the Inshas Nuclear Research Centre in Cairo, claims that the "reclaimer-ameliorator-polyremic gel" (RAPG) helps to stabilise sand, preserve moisture and prevent bio-degradation.
Tests have shown that desert soil treated with the gel can grow rice and wheat.
Azzam says that the gel, which can be produced from waste material of oil refineries, petrochemical plants and nuclear facilities, is relatively cheap to manufacture and within the budget of a rural community.
Africa Economic Digest 17 June
Agriculture and Food
Thailand to control shrimp farm pollution
The Thai government has moved to control pollution resulting from the burgeoning number of shrimp farms.
Brackish effluent from the farms has been blamed for polluting fresh water on which rice production depends, particularly in the south of the country.
New regulations aim to improve the irrigation system of the shrimp farms, which last year provided Thailand with its sixth-largest source of export revenue.
Far Eastern Economic Review 13 June
Agriculture and Food
Tumours found on North Sea fish
A survey by German scientists has found that many fish in the North Sea suffer from tumours, bacterial ulcers and liver damage caused by pollution.
The research team monitored 61 catches at 18 North Sea ports over a two-week period.
Outside the mouth of the River Tay in Scotland, one out of three fish netted suffered from enlarged cells, a raspberry-shaped tumour which causes the skin to bulge.
Dab with bacterial ulcers and yellow swollen gills were found in hauls across the region.
Independent 27 June
Agriculture and Food
Laboratory animals "fit to eat" 
The government's Advisory Committee on Novel Foods and Processes has ruled that the carcasses of animals used in experiments on genetic engineering are fit for human consumption, and can be sold for butchering.
Under current practice, companies involved in conducting genetic experiments on animals destroy the carcasses of those which fail to incorporate the new genes under experimentation.
In some cases, the failure rate can be as high as 99.9 per cent.
The new ruling will mean that companies can recoup some of their resulting high costs by selling the meat, which the Committee has decided is "perfectly normal" .
Independent 12 June
Agriculture and Food
New NFU policy on pesticides
The National Farmers' Union (NFU) has announced details of a new policy on pesticide use in farming.
In the short term it proposes increased monitoring to ensure that the highest standards of pesticide use are maintained.
In the longer term it aims to encourage the use of new pesticides with more selected activity, reduce the use of pesticides overall, and increase the uptake of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) schemes, which aim to reduce pesticide use by minimizing prophylactic treatments and increase reliance on alternative means of control.
National Farmers' Union 2 July
Agriculture and Food
Organic food found to contain pesticides
A survey carried out by trading standards officers in Warwickshire has found significant traces of pesticides in six out of 16 samples of food labelled as organic on sale in retail outlets.
Levels of pesticide in some samples of cereals and flour were as high as in non-organic produce, with levels of lindane, which attacks the nervous system in excessive quantities, close to the government's safety limit.
A spokesman for the Soil Association, which monitors organic farming, said that the production of wholly pesticide-free food was impossible, due to residues in rain and groundwater, but that such accidental pollution could not explain the high levels discovered in the Warwickshire tests.
He suggested that these came from samples produced by "bandwagon jumpers" who were not complying with Soil Association regulations.
Guardian 11 June
Agriculture and Food
First irradiation licence issued
The government has issued the first licence permitting the irradiation of food.
The licence has been granted to Isotron, which plans to use the technology on stocks of black pepper.
Irradiation helps preserve the shelf-life of perishable food by killing off bacteria, but in the face of protests by consumer groups who allege that it reduces nutritional value, a number of supermarket chains have undertaken not to stock irradiated food.
Times 13 June
Agriculture and Food
 "Weatherfax" should cut agrochemical use
A new weather forecasting service for farmers could lead to cuts in the applications of herbicides, fungicides and pesticides, by advising on optimum times for spraying.
 "Weatherfax" will consist of customized facsimile reports prepared by the Meteorological Office, which will help farmers to avoid the need for respraying because of high winds or rain.
Times 13 June
Conservation: Land
US refuses to sign Antarctic mining ban
Plans for an historic ban on mining in the Antarctic were shattered by the US refusing to sign the treaty at the last moment.
The protocol would have banned mining and mineral prospecting for 50 years, remaining in force afterwards unless overruled by a majority of the 26 treaty nations.
The US is in agreement with a fifty year ban, but at the second round of talks, demanded changes in the procedures that come into play after that time.
The US has proposed that any country should have the right to resume mining if the nations cannot reach agreement within three years.
In an effort to salvage the protocol, other delegates have put together a counterproposal requiring any country that decided to mine under the terms the US proposed to withdraw from the entire environmental protocol and not just the mining clause.
The Bush administration wants more time to consider this, and a third meeting has been scheduled for September.
Independent on Sunday 23 June Le Monde 25 June Financial Times 18, 24 June New Scientist 29 June
Conservation: Land
World Bank takes stock of Narmada project
In an unprecedented move, the World Bank has commissioned an independent investigator to review its controversial Narmada Dam Project in the Indian state of Gujarat.
The project has been disastrous for the bank in terms of public relations, and has divided Bank's own officials.
Once completed the dam will provide water and electricity for 30 million people, but building it will require the displacement of 80,000 to 100,000 people and the flooding of 37,000 hectares of land.
Officials at the bank now admit that they failed to consider the affected population, and that more pressure could have been put on the Indian government to produce environmental plans.
The state of Gujarat has now offered two hectares of land to every displaced family.
Guardian 21 June
Conservation: Land
Australian mining project loses out to Aborigines
A major mining project has been turned down by the Australian Labour government in favour of preserving species unique to the area and defending the land rights of Aborigines.
Gold, platinum and palladium were to have been mined at the remote site in Kakadu National Park in the Northern Territory.
The mining industry has predicted that the ban will have dire economic consequences, forcing the loss of hundreds of jobs and forcing investors to sink funds into overseas mining ventures.
Local Aborigines have predicted that mining would waken an underground God and lead to mass destruction.
Independent 19 June New Scientist 22 June
Conservation: Land
Environmental damage visible from space
Environmental damage to the earth can plainly be seen in a film taken by US astronauts.
Taken from 190 miles above, the film shows pollution in rivers and oceans, the extent of rainforest destruction from burning and major silt damage in rivers as far apart as the Mississippi, the Yangtze and the Betsiboka in Madagascar.
The film was backed by the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum and Nasa, and made over five successive shuttle missions.
The latest mission witnessed environmental damage caused by burning oil wells in Kuwait.
Blue Planet has taken five years to complete and is made on the Imax (largest screen) format.
It will be shown in special Imax cinemas around the world.
Lt Colonel Ken Cameron, pilot of the last shuttle, commented that it was obvious that the earth should be regarded as a "space station" with its own vital life support systems.
Independent 25 June
Conservation: Land
Artificial forests may cool temperatures, bring rain
Libya is to conduct a pilot study into reforesting desert, using 40,000 artificial trees.
The trees were developed by Spanish engineer Antonio Ibanez, who claims to have interested an Italian multinational plus the French and more than one Arab government in his invention.
According to Ibanez, five years of experimentation show that his artificial trees, when planted in adequate numbers, cool ground temperatures enough to generate rain.
A plantation of 30,000 artificial palms would fundamentally shift cloud patterns near coastal deserts, drawing them overland from the sea.
Once regular rainfall was established, the palms could be removed and real trees planted.
 "Rain occurs when cold and warm fronts meet and all you need to do is create a source of low temperature to generate precipitation" .
The trees are anchored by 20 metre polyurethane roots, formed by injecting liquid chemicals down a steel tube.
The perforated plastic and foam trunk, branches and leaves absorb dew and frost during the night and gradually release water throughout the day, cooling surface air.
Financial Times 6 June
Conservation: Land
Countryside Stewardship scheme offers farmers £13 million
A scheme designed to pay farmers to preserve some of England's best landscapes has been inaugurated by Michael Heseltine, the Secretary of State for the Environment and John Gummer, the Minister of Agriculture.
The Countryside Stewardship scheme covers five types of landscape; chalk and limestone grassland, lowland heath, riverside woods and meadows, coastal land (salt marshes, cliff tops, sand dunes) and uplands.
All are in some degree endangered.
The scheme, to be supervised by the Countryside Commission, will be granted £13 million in its first three years.
If successful, it will be extended to cover other varieties of landscape.
Farmers are to receive payments of up to £50 per hectare a year for improving public access to their land such as the creation of footpaths or picnic areas.
Payments to preserve landscapes untouched by modern agricultural methods are lower — around £40 per hectare.
The highest payment of £250 per hectare per year will go to help recreate one of Britain's most endangered habitat — lowland heath — on common farmland.
The scheme is only operational in England but may eventually be extended to Scotland and Wales.
It has been approved by the National Farmers Union (NFU).
Agreements made between individual farmers and the Commission will last for 10 years, to be reviewed every three.
The commission will check the progress of the land and make annual payments to farmers.
Independent 26 June Evening Standard 25 June Telegraph June 26 Guardian 5 June English Nature press release 21 June
Conservation: Land
Cost of saving meadows £10 million, say RSNC
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation (RSNC) has called for the government to pay farmers to preserve Britain's remaining fragments of traditional pastures and meadows.
In a new report, the Society suggests the application of the Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) scheme, which already subsidises the use of traditional farming methods, and has costed the project at £10 million.
About 90 per cent of wildflower-rich meadows have disappeared since the Second World War due to intensive agriculture and drainage.
Outside of SSSIs, about 10 per cent continue to be lost each year.
Reviving them, according to the RSNC would involve reinstating traditional methods of management which encourage a wide variety of plants and animals.
Meadows would be cut for hay once a year, and pastures would be grazed and never ploughed, planted or plied with artificial fertilisers and pesticides.
According to the report, traditional pasturelands support up to 200 plant species whereas modern fields support only three or four.
This constitutes "a green desert" of no more use to wildlife than a regularly mown and weeded lawn.
, The Minister of Agriculture has announced that the system of ESAs, designated in 1986, will continue and measures are being proposed for its improvement.
Such proposals include:(i) longer term agreements so that the full benefits of the scheme can be realised;(ii) greater incentives for water level management;(iii) developing a tiered system of payments in all ESAs to reflect different levels of environmental quality;(iv) ensuring that farmers only enter the scheme if they can achieve the specified standards of water management etc.
RSNC press release 20 June English Nature press release 21 June Independent 21 June
Conservation: Land
Scottish SSSIs listings to be reviewed
New government consessions to landowners could result in hundreds of important Scottish nature conservation sites having their SSSI status removed within a year.
The Flow Country of Caithness and Sunderland and the Rhinns of Islay are likely to the first of 1,300 Scottish SSSIs to be reviewed under a last minute amendment to the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Bill.
The amendment was introduced by the government under pressure from land-owning peers led by Lord Pearson of Rannoch who, it later emerged, was backed mistakenly by 17 Labour peers who had misunderstood their brief.
According to environmentalists, the government could become liable for claims of millions of pounds in compensation for lost business opportunities should the sites become de-notified.
, The Scottish Lands Tribunal recently awarded £560,000 to ScotRail chairman John Cameron, who was prevented from planting Glen Lochay, the last forest-free glen in Perthshire, with conifers, An attempt by the Crown Estate to buy 77,000 acres of Scottish wilderness containing the four highest mountains in Britain and several endangered species has failed.
The owner of the estate, American John Kluge, agreed in principle to sell the estate to the crown rather than put it on the open market, but he did not consider the resulting offer to be high enough.
The Prince of Wales was involved in setting up the agreement under which, had the sale gone ahead, Crown Estate commissioners would have leased the land to the Nature Conservancy Council and its successor the Scottish Natural Heritage Agency.
Telegraph 24 June Independent 7 June The Scotsman 13 June
Conservation: Land
Sewage pollution on British beaches worsens
British beaches are becoming increasingly polluted despite 35 awards for the blue flag, the European Commission's highest commendation of beach excellence.
The organisers of the awards reported an increase in the fouling of beaches by solid sewage despite a multi-billion pound clean-up by the water companies.
The blue flag is awarded to those popular resorts which have a high standard of sea-water quality, beach hygiene, good facilities and a ban on dogs.
Most of the winners were on the south and south west coasts, from Kent to Cornwall.
13 beaches entered for the award failed due to the detection of sewage on the sand.
According to Friends of the Earth, at least six of those that won should have been disqualified through failing to meet the EC's virus standards.
A warning was also given that beach charges might prove inevitable if the government and water authorities did not begin a serious campaign to eliminate sewage pollution.
David Trippier, Minister for the Environment, has announced that the government is to spend £3 billion on improving sea-water quality over the next decade.
Independent, Times, Guardian, Financial Times 6 June
Conservation: Land
Farmers to be paid for preserving wetlands
Farmers on the Somerset Levels are to receive extra payments for agreeing to allow surface flooding of their fields between December and May, and ensuring that water levels in ditches do not sink below the mean field level in the summer months.
According to a recent report by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB), the draining of British wetlands has caused irreversible environmental damage, threatening rare wildlife.
Local drainage authorities have continued to lower water levels for intensive arable and cattle farming despite warnings from environmentalists.
The National Water Authority's flood defence committees, the bodies responsible for drainage, were found to be dominated by local farmers.
The Society found the Somerset Levels and Moors in particular to be in a "perilous state" with continued drainage resulting in a decline in breeding waders and the bewick's swan, teal, lapwing, snipe and black-tailed godwit all becoming threatened.
The Government is reviewing the operation of five Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs).
These are the Somerset Levels, the Norfolk Broads, the Pennine Dales, West Penwith and the South Downs.
Preservation incentives, in the form of increased payments, may also be made available to the remaining four ESAs.
Times 12, 15 June
Conservation: Land
Ponies may preserve ecology
A pilot scheme is using ponies to establish whether traditional methods of management can improve England's four and a half million acres of low-lying heathland and prevent the encroachment of trees.
The Surrey-based Heathland Countryside Management Project aims to see if the animals can regenerate and maintain heathland by eating the shoots of invading plants before they become firmly rooted.
Telegraph 26 June
Conservation: Species
World's reefs "bleaching" out — global warming suspected
In recent months, scientists have observed coral reefs around the globe to be turning gradually white.
Some oceanographers believe that the bleaching effect is being caused by global warming.
According the director of France's Tropical Biology Centre, Bernard Salvat, some reefs, such as that around Moorea, near Tahiti, have lost as much as 90 per cent of their colour since March 1990.
The colour of the reefs is derived from the presence of algae.
Changes in sea temperature or salinity can cause the algae to leave, causing white blotches to form.
If the algae do not return, the reefs will stop growing and eventually die.
The bleaching of reefs has coincided with the hot years of the 1980s, suggesting a link with rising sea temperatures.
Times 20 June
Conservation: Species
Environmentalists condemn Japan's Olympic plans
Japanese environmentalists have protested to the International Olympic Committee in Birmingham over Japan's offer to host the 1998 Winter Olympics.
It is thought that development at the chosen site could endanger wildlife.
Nagano prefecture, 400 kilometres north west of Tokyo, is a mountainous area famous for its snow and extensive skiing facilities.
Local wildlife includes a species of swallowtail butterfly known as the gifucho (Luehdofia japonica), and the endangered Iwasuge Himalayan bear.
According to one protester: "The president of the bidding committee is the governor of Nagano prefecture…and the chief executive of the committee is the mayor of Nagano city.
The price of land there has skyrocketed since Nagano announced its bid for the 1998 Winter Olympics".
Environmentalists are concerned that the environment will be sacrificed in the rush to provide facilities by 1998.
Many local people believe that development will profit them, and those concerned about the environment have been threatened as a result.
, In an unprecedented move, the European Council has refused to renew the status of the French Pyrenees National Park, development in which is threatening the Pyrenean brown bear [see ED 45].
Over the last five years, plans for a road linking Spain and France have gone ahead, a ski resort has been built and the environment ministry has been at odds with local politicians over their attempts to implement hunting and traffic in areas thought crucial to the bear's survival.
The Council has said that it will not renew the status of the park until an effective plan to protect the bears and the park has been implemented.
New Scientist 8 June New Scientist 29 June Le Monde 21 June
Conservation: Species
Animal traps banned from EC
The EC has ruled that steel-toothed animal traps are to be outlawed in all EC countries from 1993.
It is probable, however, that imports of fur from certain species caught in such traps in non-member countries will be permitted into the community until 1995.
Times 14 June International Herald Tribune, Guardian 15 June
Conservation: Species
US prepares to clamp down on wild bird trade
Two bills to prohibit the importation of wild birds into the US have been introduced in Congress after conservationists stepped-up their campaigns to have the trade banned.
The US is one of the largest markets for birds, usually snatched when young from their nests in the jungles and rainforests of Africa, South America and the Far East.
According to the US Fish and Wildlife Service, 100,000 were illegally imported last year.
The international market for captive birds is growing and according to the National Audubon Society, the trade has resulted in 77 of the world's 335 parrot species becoming threatened.
Conservationists maintain that the pet trade would not necessarily suffer from a ban on imports, as 85 per cent of domestic birds are bred in captivity.
In response, the largest bird importer in the US, A.A. Pare, has argued that"What we're doing is salvaging the birds…if they stay in the jungle, they're not going to have it in the next five years…
You can see them burning the forests down".
The bird campaign is part of a mounting international campaign to eradicate the $5 billion a year wildlife trade.
Washington Post 11 June
Conservation: Species
Northwest logging threatens seabird
US Fish and Wildlife officials have proposed that the marbled murrelet, a small coastal seabird, be designated an endangered species after its northwestern habitat has been depleted by logging.
Like the northern spotted owl, the tiny bird is dependent on old-growth forests.
The Sierra Club Legal Defence Fund has said of the decline of the murrelet "this is further evidence that our forest ecosystems no longer are capable of supporting the species that depend on them" .
A logging industry representative called the proposed listing part of an overall strategy by environmentalists to use the Endangered Species Act "as a first strike weapon against the northwest" .
Loggers, environmentalists and the timber industry are involved in a bitter and continuing dispute over the future of the Pacific Northwest's most ancient forests.
Washington Post 18 June
Conservation: Species
Norwegian whalers decide against illegal hunt
Having initially announced that it would continue with commercial whaling in defiance of an international moratorium, the North Norwegian Minke Whalers Association has called off its hunt.
Steinar Bastesen, head of the Association, had invited his countrymen to a whale hunt on July 4; "then you will eat whale meat until you puke" he said.
The Association, however, has left individual members free to make their own decisions.
Whalers face the threat of government reprisals should they start a commercial hunt which has been banned since 1985.
Guardian, Financial Times 17 June Telegraph, Times 2 July
Conservation: Species
New organisation forms to fight patenting of life
Third World development organisations have joined forces with leading environmental and animal welfare groups to launch Patent Concern.
The new organisation is to campaign to halt EC legislation which will allow patents on genetically engineered animals and plants.
It is petitioning the EC for a moratorium on the patenting of life on ethical, environmental and scientific grounds.
BBC Wildlife July
Conservation: Species
Collectors put wildflowers in danger
Cowslips, bluebells, water lilies, snowdrops and wood anemones are among the common flowers being threatened by amateur gardeners, according to a survey conducted by Gardening Which?, a journal of the Consumer's Association.
Wild species are in fashion and are being snatched from the countryside.
Several colonies of British orchids, including the lesser butterfly from Northamptonshire and the summer lady's tresses from Hampshire, have already been exterminated with the help of enthusiasts.
Fifty five nurseries have also reported a big trade in bulbs from the wild, although they have avoided participating in it.
The most recent practice has been the stealing of seeds.
Recently, all the seed heads of the surviving colonies of pasque flowers were taken from a nature reserve.
Although it is less damaging than the removal of bulbs and plants, consistent seed snatching can still effectively wipe out a species from a locality.
Under the Wildlife and Country Act (1981) it is illegal to collect bulbs, plants or seeds of 93 named varieties of rare plants.
The act however, is extremely difficult to enforce, and fines have so far been nominal.
Guardian, Times 21 June
Conservation: Species
Farmers will be paid to protect birds of prey
North Yorkshire farmers and landowners are to be paid for every bird of prey that breeds successfully on their land.
The plan is intended to prevent farmers from poisoning or shooting the birds, which is against the law.
The Yorkshire Dales national park authority is also to pay a bounty for every peregrine falcon that reaches maturity.
Payments will be based on black-market rates, said to be as high as £10,000 for a single bird.
The plan will be implemented next year and may be extended to other species such as hen harriers, buzzards and merlins.
The Dales authority has defended its plans as an extension to public subsidies to landowners for the preservation of the countryside.
Payments of up to £100,000 a year are already made to 30 farmers to preserve their land as rough pasture or hay meadow as opposed to farming intensively.
North Yorkshire has one of the worst records for the illegal poisoning and shooting of wild creatures.
Independent on Sunday 2 June
Conservation: Species
Oyster farms may threaten local breeds
English Nature believes that the Pacific oyster, cultivated in Britain since the late 1960s, could spawn and establish wild colonies that would threaten the survival of native species.
The organisation is seeking to ban the importation of the Pacific Oyster into Britain under the Wildlife and Countryside Act.
The Pacific Oyster was imported after pollution, overfishing and a disease called bonamia destroyed stocks of indigenous oysters.
According to Margaret Palmer, species conservation officer for the Joint Committee for Nature Conservation, Pacific Oyster spawn has been found in Poole Harbour in Dorset and in Loch Sween in northern Scotland.
In France, the Pacific Oyster had completely replaced the native species to the south of Brittany.
The Shellfish Association of Great Britain have claimed that there is no evidence to show the Pacific Oyster capable of breeding in the wild, and called English Nature's proposals "unrealistic" .
The oyster farming industry, already hit by recession, would face extinction should the proposals be implemented.
English Nature has asked the Department of the Environment to prohibit the importation of the American Hardshelled Clam for similar reasons.
Independent 24 June
Conservation: Species
Wart-biter cricket population perks up
A joint venture between English Nature and London Zoo's Invertebrate Conservation team has resulted in Britain's most endangered bush cricket, the wart-biter (Decticus verrucivorus) being successfully reared in captivity for the first time.
Eggs collected from wild crickets in 1988 have resulted in 86 wart-biters having reached maturity.
More eggs are set to hatch at London Zoo this spring, and it is hoped that wild populations will be re-established in appropriate locations in the south of Britain.
The wart-biter is so called because when first described by the Swedish naturalist Linnaeus, it was used by his native peasants to bite off their warts.
English Nature press release, Independent, Telegraph 24 June
Conservation: Species
Endangered species round-up
A Hong Kong Orchid smuggler has been caught with 2,269 plants in his flat.
The collection included wild slipper orchids from southern Chinese wilderness.
He received a six month jail sentence for this, his third conviction…
Irish Prime Minister, Charles Haughey, has declared all the seas around Ireland a whale and dolphin sanctuary…
Rare sand lizards are being taken from Dorset heathlands and sold in the Midlands for hundreds of pounds…
Britain's first inner-city butterfly sanctuary has opened in Stave Hill park, southeast London.
New Scientist 16 June Independent on Sunday 9 June Times 7 June, 1 July
Energy
Claim for hydrogen as viable power source
An American scientist has invented a fuel cell which he claims can store hydrogen safely, thus making possible its commercial use as a power source.
The new system, developed by Dr Roger Billings of the American Academy of Science and known as LaserCel, is being tested by car manufacturers and energy companies.
Scientists have been trying for years to realize the potential of hydrogen, but they have been thwarted by the problem of storing the gas, which is highly explosive and needs to be kept in high-pressure containers.
The Times 18 June
Energy
House of Lords committee attacks government energy policy
The House of Lord's Select Committee on Science and Technology is to strongly attack the Conservative government's reliance on market forces to achieve energy conservation in a report due to be published in July.
In its draft version the report declares that market forces alone will not ensure more efficient use of energy.
It calls on the government to:(i) provide financial incentives (such as exemption from value-added tax for energy-saving equipment);(ii) intervene to stabilize energy prices (so as to encourage business and industry to make long-term investments in energy conservation); and (iii) introduce specific energy-saving measures (such as creating a large differential between the prices of diesel and petrol).
The report also calls for increased funding and a higher profile for the Energy Efficiency Office at the Department of Energy and suggests that energy policy should in future be formulated more at the European Community level rather than the national level.
The criticisms contained in the report are expected to cause considerable embarrassment to the government, which maintains that since energy saving reduces costs it will come about naturally if market forces are allowed to function without interference.
Independent 10 June
Energy
CPRE urges planning bias in favour of energy saving
A report by the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) urges the government and planners to make energy conservation a top priority in building new housing and other developments.
To increase energy conservation and reduce pollution, the report, Energy Conscious Planning, calls for mixed developments with housing, shops, services and workplaces in close proximity to each other, linked by high-quality public transport services, cycleways and footpaths.
The construction of large out-of-town shopping developments and isolated housing estates should be opposed on the grounds that they are wasteful of energy resources.
Independent 12 June
Energy
Power company hands out free light bulbs
East Midland Electricity has issued free long-life light bulbs to the residents of Great Gonerby, a small village in Lincolnshire, as part of a pilot project to evaluate the effect of electricity-saving measures.
The company believes that the move may save it money in the long run — rather than merely lose it revenue — because reductions in electricity consumption should allow it to cut spending on new equipment needed to cope with increased demand.
This has been the experience of power companies in the United States, where such schemes have been tried on a larger scale.
Green Magazine July
Environmental Politics
Poland proposes world's largest debt-for-nature swap
The Polish government has proposed transforming 10 per cent of its debts to western governments (which total around US$32 billion) into a domestic fund aimed at cleaning up the country's environment.
Such a debt-for-nature exchange would be the largest of its kind to date.
Under the proposal Poland would allocate over a twenty-year period the zloty equivalent of the hard currency involved to set up and develop schemes to reduce pollution and improve the environment in Poland.
The money would be spent specifically on projects to reduce emissions of pollutants into the air and into rivers and the Baltic Sea.
The proposal has already been backed by the United States and France, and is due to be debated by the members of the Paris Club, the group of 16 creditor governments, in the near future.
Guardian 12 June
Environmental Politics
East European governments urged to preserve environment
Environment ministers from more than 30 European countries, the United States, Canada and Japan have urged East European governments to incorporate environmental concerns into their economic restructuring programmes and to bring local environmental standards in line with those obtaining in West European countries.
Many participants at the conference expressed the fear that pressure for rapid economic transformation in Eastern Europe would tempt governments to ignore environmental problems, already severe because of years of neglect by the previous communist regimes and the use of obsolete technology.
Delegates also expressed concern that western companies would try to take advantage of lax legislation in East European countries and the weakness of local enforcement agencies to use or sell environmentally damaging technologies which are banned in Western Europe and North America.
Meeting within the framework of the UN's Economic Commission for Europe in Prague, Czechoslovakia, ministers also committed themselves to the creation of a pan-European system to disseminate information on environmental issues and the prompt creation of a European environmental agency.
Financial Times 24 June Times 24 June
Environmental Politics
Prediction of faster population growth
The UN Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) has revised upwards its projections of the growth of the world's population over the next century.
It predicts that there will be 8.5 billion people in 2025, and that the world's population (currently 5.3 billion) is likely to double by the 2050s, not the 2090s as previously estimated.
Almost all the growth will occur in the cities of the developing world.
Washington Post 10 June Green Magazine July
Environmental Politics
Proposal for environmental "Geneva Convention" 
Deliberate destruction of the environment in times of war should be declared a war crime and a Geneva Convention on the protection of nature in times of war should be drawn up as a matter of urgency.
Lawyers, politicians and environmentalists have called for such action at an international conference in London organized by Greenpeace.
The convention, which has been proposed by Greenpeace, would not so much be concerned with enforcement and punishment but "would be more a guidance framework to be introduced into the thinking of governments" , declared Richard Falk, professor of international law at Harvard University and one of the keynote speakers at the conference.
Delegates expressed the hope that the environmental damage caused during the Gulf War — in particular Iraq's release of oil slicks and the firing of Kuwaiti oil wells and the UN coalition's bombing of nuclear, chemical and biological warfare facilities — would focus governments' attention on the need to deal with the environmental dimension of modern warfare and to outlaw environmentally damaging actions not directly related to war arms.
The proposals received the backing of the EC commissioner for the environment, Carlo Ripa di Meana, who also called for the creation of a "Green Cross" to mirror the work of the Red Cross in times of war.
New Scientist 8 June
Environmental Politics
German Greens to seek alliance with SPD
The German Greens want to link up with the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) for the next federal elections, due in 1994.
The change of policy was decided at a national conference in Cologne.
At the elections in December 1990 the West German Greens failed to reach 5 per cent of the popular vote, which is required for representation in the Bundestag.
The green movement is represented in parliament, however, through members from former East Germany, where different electoral rules applied.
, The congress called for the introduction of a solidarity tax on industry and a supplement on the higher levels of income tax to finance the reconstruction of former East Germany, which it said should be carried out according to "ecological principles" .
Independent 10 June
Environmental Politics
German Greenpeace in row over funding
German Greenpeace, the second-largest branch of of Greenpeace International, has been criticized for spending only a third of donations on campaigns and putting much of the rest aside.
German law does not allow charities to put more than a quarter of their donations into a reserve.
According to figures disclosed, German Greenpeace received around DM 70 million (US$40 million) in donations in 1990, but spent only DM 23 million in campaigns.
The organization also holds DM 50 million in a separate bank account.
According to Thilo Bode, German Greenpeace's operations manager, it was necessary to keep such large reserves to "plan long-term campaigns" .
He rejected claims of mismanagement.
Independent 7 June
Environmental Politics
Cresson outlines "ambitious" environmental policy
The new French prime minister, Edith Cresson, has described the environment, along with employment, as a priority concern for her government.
Speaking at a conference on the protection of coastlines in Paris, she spoke of the "moral injunction" to clean up and protect the environment.
Her government's environmental policy would be "ambitious" .
Industry should play a primary role in realizing its aims.
 "The battle for the environment will be fought on the industrial front" , she declared, and she suggested that environmental protection should be regarded as a "high-tech industry" .
Le Monde 16 June
Environmental Politics
Green gains in Irish local elections
Local elections on June 27 saw gains by the smaller parties and independents, with the Green Party winning 14 seats on the four councils in Dublin, their first success in local elections.
(The Green Party won its first seat in the lower house of parliament, the Dáil, at the last general election in June 1989).
Independent, July 1 Guardian, July 1
Environmental Politics
MoD gives staff environmental guidelines
In the first move of its kind, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) has issued its employees with guidelines on environmentally sensitive procurement, recycling and energy saving.
Among its specific instructions are a ban on the purchase of furniture made of tropical hardwoods and of refrigerators and other equipment using ozone-depleting chemicals, a call for the recycling of all paper used, and a ban on the purchase of skins and other products from endangered species when a suitable alternative is available.
The MoD is one of the Britain's largest landowners and employers.
The Environmental Manual was prepared as part of the department's contribution to the government's environmental programme.
Daily Telegraph 4 July
Global Warming
Arctic nations pledge to limit pollution
The eight nations that circle the Arctic have taken a first step towards protecting the fragile environment of the far north from increased pollution, most of which originates outside the region.
The pact, signed at the end of a conference in the Finnish resort of Rovaniemi, calls for the creation of co-operative programmes to monitor pollution by oil, radiation, heavy metals, organic contaminants, acidification and noise.
The US, Soviet Union, Canada, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Iceland have also set forth joint plans to cope with environmental emergencies such as oil spills in Arctic waters.
The agreement is the first between the nations since a 1970s pact on polar bear hunting.
Greenpeace International science representative Jeremy Leggett has called the agreement "full of wonderful rhetoric and pitifully short of substance given the breadth and magnitude of the threats we face in the Arctic" .
Leggett has argued that the countries should also be monitoring the effects of global warming on the thinning of the Arctic icecap and the release of methane from thawing tundra, both which could worsen global warming.
Both the US and Soviet navies should make their secret data on Arctic ice available, he said.
Guardian 13 June Times, Financial Times, Independent, 15 June Los Angeles Times 16 June New Scientist 22 June
Global Warming
Global warming research centre opened
A new centre for research into the links between society and global climate change has been opened by the Social and Economic Research Council (SERC).
The Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment is to find ways of prioritising environmental problems according to the risks posed to health and welfare.
At the opening ceremony, director Howard Newby said that global warming was one of the most important threats facing humanity and that research was needed into how global warming could be slowed and its effects managed.
The centre has been allocated £10 million in funds over the next five years.
Independent 7 June
Global Warming
Global warming may damage property
A leading climatologist has claimed that global warming will increase the risk of structural damage to buildings and will need to be tackled with new building regulations.
Professor Martin Parry, chairman of the UK Climate Change Impacts Review Group, said that drier, warmer summers and wetter winters will increase the rate of shrinking and swelling in clay soils.
This will dramatically increase the risk of subsidence and will affect central, eastern and southern England in particular.
A rise in soil salinity in coastal areas is also expected to damage buildings, as are increased storms and gales.
Parry recommended a revision of the practices of the construction industry, and said that he expected insurance costs to rise.
Times 13 June Independent 13 June
Global Warming
 "Mini-meadows" used for climate research
Scientists at Sheffield University's Comparative Plant Ecology Unit have developed a small-scale heating and cooling system which can simulate any global climate change.
This is helping them to investigate global warming.
They have converted a meadow into 30 "mini-meadows" of one square metre, each planted with grasses and plants.
The temperature of each square is regulated by pumping heated or cooled water through thin tubes in a frame positioned just above the soil.
The researchers have already found that the simulated effect of global warming in Britain (an increase in temperature of 30 C) produces two and a half times more new plant growth.
In future experiments other aspects will also be tested, such as levels of fertiliser input, changing cropping times for silages and the impact of longer winters.
Independent 3 July Times 3 July
Nuclear Power
Cuba must comply with IAEA, says US
The US state department has called on Cuba to co-operate with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to ensure safe construction and operation of a nuclear-power complex being built on the island near Cienfuegos.
US officials have raised questions about the quality of workmanship and safety at the complex, which is being built with Soviet help and is due to be commissioned in 1993.
Washington Post 1 June
Nuclear Power
Bulgaria's only nuclear power plant found unsafe
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has pronounced Bulgaria's sole nuclear power plant unsafe and has urged the capital, Sofia, to take immediate action to rectify the matter.
A statement said that the IAEA had conducted an extensive inspection of the two units that remain in action at the Kozloduy station on the Danube.
 "The IAEA team found the plants in very poor condition with a number of safety-relevant deficiencies" it said.
The statement came after Bulgarian radio broadcast denials of rumours of a Chernobyl-style nuclear disaster at the facility.
The plant, an older-style, Soviet-designed pressurised water reactor, has been plagued by problems for several years.
The Bulgarian government agreed to spend £6 million on safety improvements following an undisclosed accident in October last year, which resulted in two of the plant's four reactors being shut down.
There have also been difficulties in securing spare parts from the Soviet Union following a general decline in trade between the Union and its former satellites.
The German government has offered to spend £82 million over the next seven years to make the plant safe, and Electricite de France has agreed to train technicians at the plant which suffers from a shortage of skilled workers due to poor working conditions and low pay.
The completion of a second Soviet designed nuclear plant, under construction on the Danube, is now in question as it is being built in an area prone to earthquakes.
Financial Times 29/30 June Guardian 29 June Times 29 June International Herald Tribune 29/30 June
Nuclear Power
Caesium leaking from Mururoa, say Greenpeace
Greenpeace claim to have detected radioactive caesium leaking from the French nuclear test site on Mururoa atoll in the South Pacific.
France has conducted more than 120 underground nuclear tests on the atoll since 1966, claiming that here has been no leakage during that time.
The environmental organisation detected radionuclides in zooplankton from the tidal currents which flush Mururoa's lagoon.
The findings included caesium 134 which, as it only has a half life of two years, indicates that it must have originated in recent tests.
Greenpeace members were arrested by the French authorities on attempting to carry out tests nearer the atoll.
The organisation has called on the European Commission to use its powers under the Euratom Treaty to investigate contamination around Mururoa.
Staff at the Commission have claimed that it has insufficient funds to do this.
New Scientist 29 June
Nuclear Power
Japanese peace sect converts French atomic scientists
A Japanese religious group has successfully converted several French nuclear scientists to the cause of peace.
At least six Atomic Energy Commission scientists have now been identified as members of the strongly anti-nuclear movement.
According to documents leaked to a newspaper, the French Secret Service has been monitoring the Soka Gakkai Buddhist group which has set up bases near to nuclear reactors and research centres.
Le Parisien claims that warnings have been sent to all nuclear establishments to guard against infiltration.
At least one of the scientists has admitted on television that he is now denied access to "defence secrets" .
The issue has increased tensions between the two countries, which have been escalating since the new French Prime Minister, Edith Cresson launched an attack on Japanese business practices.
Soka Gakkai has about 7,000 members in France where much of its wealth is invested.
Derived from a Buddhist sect, its representatives claim that they are concerned only with peace and self-actualization.
Critics claim it to be equally concerned with the actualization of wealth and power.
Telegraph 19 June
Nuclear Power
Ministers block adverts for nuclear industry
Government ministers have intervened to stop a £7 million television and newspaper advertising campaign by the nuclear power industry.
Nuclear Electric, the state-owned operator of power stations in England and Wales, had planned a promotion of its corporate identity.
It is believed that the campaign was abandoned after direct intervention from ministers, possibly to prevent an embarrassing resurrection of nuclear issues just prior to a general election.
The company has, however, gone ahead with £1 million of research into public attitudes to nuclear power and has completed filming at least one television commercial, although it is not known when it will be broadcast.
Like recent commercials by British Nuclear Fuels, the tenor of the campaign was to present Nuclear Electric as being open and willing to communicate with the public.
This is in direct contrast to the company's more secretive past as part of the Central Electricity Generating Board.
Independent 19 June Guardian 19 June
Nuclear Power
Scottish Nuclear opts for long-term storage
Scottish Nuclear, Scotland's nuclear power company, has submitted plans to build two long-term storage sites for spent fuel from Scottish reactors.
The stores would be located on the sites of the company's two advanced gas-cooled reactors at Hunterston and Torness in Northern Scotland.
Currently, all spent fuel from British nuclear power stations is sent to be reprocessed at Sellafield in Cumbria.
Reprocessing is a highly technically demanding and extremely expensive operation, involving the extraction of uranium and plutonium from the spent fuel.
These metals can then be re-used.
The process leaves behind a highly radioactive liquor as a waste product.
The liquor is left to cool and is eventually turned into harmless glass blocks.
Scottish Nuclear's plans are the result of dissatisfaction with new reprocessing contracts currently under negotiation with British Nuclear Fuels.
Subject to approval by the Scottish Office, the company will apply for planning permission at the end of the year.
Should the project go ahead, spent fuel would be stored in a series of air-cooled concrete vaults and kept there for fifty years, after which the company would decide whether it was to be reprocessed or buried.
Long-term storage is favoured by environmentalists as less nuclear waste is produced, although spent fuel cannot be stored indefinitely.
Canada, Sweden and the US have decided against reprocessing on political, environmental and moral grounds.
New Scientist 29 June
Nuclear Power
Scottish islanders absorb radioactive caesium
People in the Western Isles have five times the normal levels of radioactive caesium in their bodies, due in part to discharges into the sea from the nuclear reprocessing plant in Sellafield, Cumbria, further south.
A study published in the British Medical Journal traces the excess caesium to locally produced lamb and milk from cows which have eaten coastal grasses contaminated with nuclear waste.
The measurements were taken between 1979 and 1986.
The study stresses that the levels of caesium observed do not pose any risk to health.
But it claims that the findings are significant because they illustrate how discharges into the sea can return to land a considerable distance away and enter human food chain.
Independent 28 June Guardian 28 June Times 28 June
Ozone Layer
Physicist warns against CFC replacements
Joe Farman, the British atmospheric physicist who "discovered" the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic, has warned that chemicals offered by the chemicals industry as a substitute for ozone-destroying CFCs could be far more damaging than the manufacturers admit.
Both of the proposed substitutes, hydrochloroflourocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) cause global warming as well as damaging the ozone layer when released into the atmosphere.
Farman has claimed that the assertion of the chemical industry that its activities would only contribute 1 per cent to the green-house effect over the next 120 years are "seriously underestimated" .
The chemicals industry has spent hundreds of millions of pounds developing CFC substitutes.
The companies say that if they are not allowed to produce HCFCs and HFCs for long enough to make a return on their investment, users will face a crisis when CFC manufacturing comes to a halt in the late 1990s.
The refrigeration industry will be the most badly hit.
Preliminary findings by the Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability Study (AREAS), claimed that "replacement of CFCs with suitable HCFCs or HFCs can yield a dramatic benefit in reducing the total global warming impact for all CFC end-use applications" .
AREAS is funded by the international chemicals industry and is part of that industry's increasingly vociferous lobbying effort.
, Swedish scientists have called attention to the large amount of halon gas, hundreds of times more damaging to the ozone layer than CFCs, which was used in the gulf war.
Halon gas was sprayed into aircraft fuel tanks during refuelling to minimise the risk of accidental fires.
Researchers are still compiling figures but claim the quantity of halon gas emitted to be "a very large amount compared to what is normally emitted in the world" .
Guardian 21 June Financial Times 19 June
Pollution: Air
Acid rain "threatens Kashmir" 
Acid rain from the oil fires burning in Kuwait is threatening to cause substantial ecological damage in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, according to a government report.
The report warns that the pollution "may cause disastrous environmental consequences by way of death to forests, poisoning by soil and water, microclimatic changes and outbreak of disease and epidemics" .
It recommends that the government should seek compensation on the "polluter pays" principle — a highly unlikely eventuality, given the fact that Iraq is seen as the guilty party after it fired the Kuwaiti wells at the end of the Gulf War.
Far Eastern Economic Review 11/17 June
Pollution: Air
Moscow's air pollution measured
Nitric oxide levels in Moscow are five times above the national average, and levels of ammonia and methylene oxides one and half times the national average.
Motor vehicles account for 72 per cent of all harmful emissions.
These are among the findings by the city's Nature Conservation Council on the state of the environment in the Soviet capital.
On the basis of its research the council has prepared a blueprint of environmental measures for the city and its suburbs, which has been sent for consultation to local authorities, environmental groups and research centres.
TASS 13 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Athens smog provokes car ban
The Greek government issued a temporary ban on traffic in central Athens and warned people to stay indoors after an unprecedented build-up of air pollution led to hundreds of people falling ill with respiratory and heart problems.
The city's persistent smog problem, known locally as nefos, or cloud, has become a feature of Athenian life.
Hot weather and still air compounded the problem during the third week of June, with ozone levels reaching an unprecedented 393 mg per cubic metre of air, and nitrogen oxide 382 mg per cubic metre.
The danger level is 300 mg.
Under the traffic restrictions, only taxis, buses, foreign cars and those carrying at least four people were permitted to travel in the central part of the city.
, The Mexican state oil company, Pemex, is to implement a 50 per cent cut in the lead content of its cheapest petrol.
Guardian 20 June Daily Telegraph 21 June Independent 6 June
Pollution: Air
German coke filtering mechanism "cleans coal gas" 
German technologists have developed a system of filtering out sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the flue gases of coal-fired power stations.
Developed by the DMT Institute for Heat and Power Generation in Essen, the process involves passing the pre-cooled flue gases through "active" coke pellets, filled with tiny pores containing catalysts which filter out the pollutants.
The two-stage process involves the conversion of sulphur dioxide into sulphuric acid by the addition of water and oxygen, with the acid collecting in the coke pores (which are periodically washed to remove it).
In the second stage, ammonia is added to filter out the oxides of nitrogen.
The process has been tested with dramatic success at a plant in Arzberg, Bavaria, which burns lignite ( "brown coal" ) from Czechoslovakia — among the dirtiest fuel sources in the world.
It succeeded in removing all but 10 mg of the 4,000 mg of sulphur per cubic metre of coal — a success rate of 99.99 per cent.
It is now being hailed as a possible saviour of many of the notoriously polluting eastern European plants.
According to Wolfgang Wunnenberg of the DMT Institute, the coke filter also absorbs other toxic pollutants, such as mercury and dioxins, thereby making it equally suitable for incineration plants and the steel industry.
Filters are to be fitted shortly to some waste incinerators in Italy.
New Scientist 8 June
Pollution: Air
Green industry slow to take off
A lack of environmental awareness and weak environmental legislation have left British manufacturers behind in the race to develop the new equipment required to monitor the environment and assess pollution levels, according to a report by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The report states that Britain is well equipped in terms of research and development to meet the opportunities but "the country's manufacturers appears incapable of supporting the development of new ideas and their translation into new products on the strength of home markets" .
Financial Times 20 June
Pollution: Air
Vehicle pollution "promotes allergies" 
Pollution from car exhausts may explain the rise in allergic conditions such as hayfever over the last 20 years, according to Professor Robert Davies of Bartholemew's Hospital, London.
Davies believes that nitrogen oxide — a common product of vehicle exhausts — damages the skin lining of the inside of the nose, allowing allergens such as pollen easier access to the system.
Nitrogen dioxide levels in central London rose by 40 per cent between 1979 and 1989.
Particles from diesel exhausts may also cause allergic reactions in their own right.
Hay fever has increased four-fold over the last 20 years, with some five million people now suffering from the condition.
it has a higher prevalence in cities than in the country, despite the fact that pollen levels are lower in built-up areas.
Cases of asthma and eczema are also rising by about 5 per cent every year.
Davies warns that "we are now on the verge of an epidemic in allergies" .
Times 13 June Independent 13 June
Pollution: Water
Jakarta to sue firms over pollution transgressions
The Indonesian Government plans to sue 500 companies for pollution breaches.
Environment Minister Emil Salim said that the 500 firms, spread over 11 of the 27 provinces of Indonesia, have failed to comply with water effluent standards which were set two years ago.
The move was welcomed by environmentalists who claim that pollution laws fail to be enforced in Indonesia.
Far Eastern Economic Review 13 June
Pollution: Water
EC agree on reduction in nitrate levels
EC ministers have agreed on measures to reduce water pollution by nitrates from chemical and natural fertilizers after a debate lasting two and a half years.
The new directives aim to bring down the maximum permitted level of nitrates in drinking water to 50mg per litre.
At the centre of the directive is an agricultural code of conduct, which prescribes a limit of 170kg per hectare per year in the amount of manure farmers can use.
This limit is to be obligatory in vulnerable areas which are to be designated over the next two years.
The new measures will be phased in between now and 1999.
Brussels will be able to grant permission to exceed limits in particular areas on the basis of "objective criteria" which suggest that the use of larger amounts is safe.
Nearly a quarter of all agricultural land in England and Wales is likely to be designated as nitrate vulnerable.
Guardian, Independent 15 June Financial Times 13, 15 June Times 17 June
Pollution: Water
Dutch ban polluted British water
The Dutch authorities have banned polluted river water being brought over from Britain.
The ban, effective from October, was introduced after an incident in which the water discharged by a British coaster into Amsterdam harbour was found to contain high levels of heavy metals and other pollutants.
The water had been picked up in the Humber estuary and used as ballast.
The Humber estuary has been identified in several recent studies as one of the most polluted stretches of North Sea coast.
Greenpeace has described the Humber as the most polluted river in Britain and a substantial contributor to North Sea pollution.
Other recent studies have suggested that it is far more polluted than the Rhine, traditionally regarded as Europe's dirtiest river.
Independent on Sunday 16 June
Pollution: Water
Harwell leaks poison
Highly toxic chemicals from the Atomic Energy Authority's research centre at Harwell in Oxfordshire have been leaking into the groundwater, according to a report commissioned by the authority.
The report found that groundwater next to one of the two waste dumps at the centre contained chemical levels more than 220 times above those permitted by European Community.
In March 1990 the National Rivers Authority (NRA) had found that untreated drinking water from a nearby borehole was contaminated with chemicals.
Thames Water, the local water company, has declared that there is no risk to people living in the area since the contaminated water is treated before being used.
, More than 60 High Court writs have been issued against South West Water, the water company accused of negligence and misconduct in the Camelford drinking-water poisoning accident in 1988.
Independent on Sunday, 30 June
Pollution: Water
Head of pollution watchdog resigns
John Bowman, the chief executive of the National Rivers Authority (NRA), has resigned less than two years into his five-year contract.
The authority was set up in September 1989 to supervise the newly privatized water industry.
A statement by the NRA stated that "shortcomings in internal management arrangements" had led to the resignation by mutual agreement.
Both sides refused to elaborate on the reasons for Bowman's departure, but press reports attributed it to disagreements over the pace at which the authority sought to bring water standards up to European Community standards.
It had been clear that Bowman, a research scientist and administrator, was anxious to press ahead as fast as possible, and this had brought him into conflict on several occasions with industry, the government and the NRA chair, Lord Crickhowell.
Financial Times 25 June Guardian 25 June Independent 25 June
Pollution: Water
Textile company allowed to continue polluting
The Department of the Environment (DoE) has allowed a company — located in the constituency of one of its ministers — to continue discharging pollutants into a local river in contravention of European Community legislation.
Belmont Bleaching and Dyeing has failed consistently to meet legal standards since 1988 but has not been prosecuted.
The company has been given 12 months to fit equipment to control discharges of the highly toxic chemical pentachlorophenol (PCP).
It is based north of Bolton, in the constituency of David Trippier, a DoE minister of state.
Leaked correspondence showed that the director of the DoE pollution inspectorate told the company in June 1990 that any further delay in compliance would be illegal.
This position was confirmed by Trippier in a subsequent letter.
Even so, the department then gave Belmont a year to introduce the "necessary improvements" .
In a related development, the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has announced its intention to prosecute the North West Water company for allowing the PCP discharges to continue.
The effluent from Belmont is treated by a sewage works which does not have the necessary filtering equipment to remove the chemical before it is discharged into a nearby river.
Internal NRA correspondence leaked to the Independent newspaper showed that the chief executive, John Bowman, had tried to stop the prosecution from going ahead after he had had a meeting with a senior official from the DoE pollution inspectorate.
Bowman resigned soon afterwards [see above], but contrary to initial press speculation his departure did not seem to be directly related to the Belmont affair.
Independent 29 June Times 1 July
Pollution: Water
Polluted river saved and polluted again
Ten years of work on the river Tamar on the Devon and Cornwall border were destroyed when 25,000 gallons of slurry escaped from a nearby dairy farm.
Careful restoration work had turned the once polluted waters of the river crystal clear, and created a thriving breeding ground for fish.
Thousands of tiny salmon and brown trout died as slurry robbed the stream of oxygen.
The National Rivers Authority bought in dozens of workers to pump sludge from the river and take it by tanker for spreading on nearby fields.
Others pumped air directly into the water.
6,000 fish were removed to clean water and nearly 4,000 died in what pollution officers described "the worst incident we have had in the region" .
The dead fish were collected for possible use as evidence should a prosecution result.
Times 24 June
Transport
Stricter European Community car exhaust standards
European Community environment ministers agreed formally on June 13-14 EC on stricter car exhaust emission standards, corresponding to those in force in the USA since 1983.
Agreement in principle on these standards was reached in December 1990.
To meet them, with current technology, manufacturers will need to instal three-way catalytic converters in petrol-driven vehicles.
New models will all have to comply from July 1, 1992, and all new cars must meet the standard after Dec. 31, 1992.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung June 13 and 14 EC Commission press release June 20 EC Council press release June 14-14
Transport
Dutch Transport Minister demands end to car addiction
The Netherlands Transport Minister, Hanja Maij-Weggen, has launched a campaign to reduce drastically the country's dependence on the car.
The campaign is based around a $1 million advertising campaign on the slogan: "Your car can survive a day without you: can you survive without your car?" 
Maij-Weggen is on record as arguing that too many people are dependent on their cars.
The advertising campaign backs up a strategy which includes the introduction of a toll system in built-up areas and substantial investment in public transport.
The Transport Ministry claims that traffic jams cost the country an estimated $2.8 billion each year.
One in three of the Netherlands population own a car, and more than 137 billion kilometres are driven every year.
Vehicle use is expected to grow by 70 per cent over the next 20 years.
European 7-9 June
Transport
Post Office to buy electric vehicles
The UK Post Office is to invest in a fleet of electrically-powered delivery vans, manufactured by a Newcastle-based company, HIL Electric.
The vans are powered by conventional lead acid batteries, recharged by plugging into mains electricity or parking over an induction loop overnight.
The vans have a range of 125 miles between charges, and a top speed of 70 mph.
With running costs at approximately 5.5 pence per mile, they are only half as expensive as standard petrol-driven vehicles.
The manufacturers are currently working on an alternative version which uses sodium acid batteries.
These could provide four times as much power as lead acid batteries.
HIL are working on the project with Volvo, which will provide all the running gear.
Evening Standard 25 June
Transport
 "Water-powered" car developed
A car powered by hydrogen derived from water is under development in the USA.
It is based on fuel cell technology, which, like conventional batteries, uses electrochemical reactions to generate power.
Unlike batteries, however, fuel cells are not dependent on recharging.
The newly-developed fuel cell will be powered by hydrogen, extracted from water.
The cell must be plugged into the mains overnight to extract the hydrogen.
According to Professor Ian Fells of Newcastle University, the technology has been available for a while.
 "It could have been done years ago, but nobody was really interested in it." 
Until recently, the prohibitive cost of hydrogen acted as a powerful deterrent.
Daily Telegraph 18 June
Transport
Bristol free bicycles scheme
Fifty bicycles have been donated to be used by anyone and to leave where they like in the city centre under the Green Bike Scheme launched in Bristol.
 "The optimism of the action is greater than the pessimism of the thought" is the motto of the scheme, which picks up a precedent tried in Amsterdam in the early 1970s.
Independent 28 June
Tropical Forests
Brazil agrees to regular debt-nature swaps
The Brazilian government has agreed that an annual $100 million of its foreign debt can be converted into funds for environmental protection under "debt for nature" swaps.
The decision came in the wake of a visit to Washington by President Fernando Collor, during which both the US Administration and environmental groups urged the Brazilian government to devote greater attention to combating the threats to the Amazon forests.
A government spokesman commented that: "we are starting in a very limited fashion, testing the ground to see if the effects are inflationary.
Later we may raise this considerably".
Among the beneficiaries of debt-for-nature swaps will be projects to survey and demarcate the boundaries of nature reserves and Indian lands, and to train guards.
, President Collor has issued a decree stipulating that government subsidies for agricultural development, including cattle ranching, will be withheld from any projects which involve deforestation.
The subsidies had been reintroduced in April [see ED no. 47].
Nature 4 July Independent 26 June Daily Telegraph 26 June Financial Times 26 June
Tropical Forests
Brazil Indian Agency head fired
Brazilian President Fernando Collor has fired the head of Funai, the controversial government agency charged with protecting the interests of its indigenous Indian population.
The reason behind the sacking of Cantidio Guerreiro Guimaraes was officially given as failure to demarcate the lands of the Yanomami Indians, at risk from gold miners and other threats, in the western state of Roraima.
Guerreiro had been widely criticized among environmentalists and Indian organizations for failing to take a sufficiently active role in defending native peoples' interests.
He will be succeeded by his deputy, Edivio Batistelli.
, A new gold rush is under way in Yanomami territory, according to Brazilian police, despite the widely-publicized expulsion of the miners last year.
The Police have estimated that at least 8,000 miners are now at work in the area.
Nature 26 June Guardian 24 June
Tropical Forests
Brazilian report on forest destruction
A Brazilian government report has made an assessment of the overall destruction of the country's tropical forests.
It has calculated that more than 160,000 square miles of Amazon jungle have been destroyed (an area nearly twice the size of Britain).
Furthermore, in recent years dozens of rivers have been contaminated by some 1,500 tons of mercury used by miners to extract gold.
Independent 25 June
Tropical Forests
Lord Cranbrook criticizes Sarawak over logging
The Earl of Cranbrook, the British conservationist who in 1989 led a mission to study the logging of tropical hardwoods in Sarawak, Malaysia, has criticized the Sarawak authorities for reneging on their pledge to cut production.
The mission, sponsored by the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), had recommended a reduction in timber production from 13 million cubic metres per year to 9 million.
At the time the recommendation had been welcomed by the Sarawak state government.
Earlier this year, however, the state minister for primary industries, Dr Kang Yaik, had been reported as saying that there had been a "phenomenal" increase in production and that there was no need to for reductions because "exploitation is carried out very properly on a sustainable yield basis" .
Timber production in Sarawak reached 18 million cubic metres in 1990.
In a letter to ITTO director Dr Freddy Freezailah, leaked at a meeting of the organization, Lord Cranbrook declared that the minister's quoted remarks "appear to show total disregard (if not disrespect) for the work of the ITTO mission" .
Cranbrook also implicitly criticized the ITTO for failing to act to protect Sarawak's forests.
Independent 10 June
Tropical Forests
British Gas admits exploitation of rainforest
After ten months of pressure from environmental groups, British Gas has released selected details of an internal report on its activities in the tropical rainforest of Ecuador.
At a meeting with environmental groups, the company provided general information on the contents of the report.
It was not, however, willing to discuss its assessment of the impact of its operations on the environment and on the local people.
Environmental groups have claimed that British Gas's operations have caused damage to crops and game animals.
They have also claimed that the company has refused to consult local people or their representatives or to compensate them.
Friends of the Earth 26 June
Tropical Forests
WWF study doubts "eco-labels" claims
A study conducted on behalf of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has concluded that many of the claims made by timber retailers regarding the supposed sustainability of their sources are misleading.
Numerous tropical hardwoods and hardwood products on sale in D-I-Y stores across Britain bear "eco labels" which claim that the wood comes from sustainable logging operations, or that the area in which they were felled is being reforested.
This is despite evidence that little more than 0.1 per cent of tropical forestry is in reality carried out on a sustainable basis.
The WWF assert that such claims are "at best poorly verified and at worst deceitful" .
The survey found that, of 81 companies asked to justify their sustainable claims, only 16 replied.
Only three of these made any serious attempt to deal with the questions raised.
The Timber Trade Federation has admitted that it is difficult to define and verify sustainability, and there are signs that several major retailers are planning to cease making such claims.
The B & Q chain has already decided to do so, and Texas Homecare is likely to follow suit.
Independent 11 June
Waste and Recycling
US encounters problems with nuclear-waste depository
The US government's efforts to create a long-term repository for nuclear waste have received a setback with the announcement that a deep underground salt chamber in New Mexico provisionally selected for this purpose may be close to collapse.
Experts have reported that rock falls have already begun, and that the ceiling of the chamber may collapse within two years.
The US Energy Department needs to find a site to store nuclear waste accumulated over a forty-year period which will remain dangerously radioactive for tens of thousands of years.
Despite the report of damage to the chamber, the department is planning to go ahead with an extensive research programme to test its adequacy as a storage site.
Washington Post 16 June
Waste and Recycling
Germany permits dumping in east
In a move that runs counter its commitment to clean up the environment in former East Germany, the German government has agreed to exempt a huge rubbish tip near Schonberg near the Baltic coast from its regulations for a five year period.
The tip, which has been called the biggest in Europe, receives more than a million tonnes of waste every year, nearly two thirds of it toxic.
The exemption has been granted to make it easier for eastern companies to adapt to the new standards.
But environmentalists have pointed out that it is already being used by western companies to dump toxic materials with impunity which they cannot dispose of legally in the west.
Green Magazine July
Waste and Recycling
Dutch packaging pact
The government and industry of the Netherlands have agreed on a scheme which will decrease the amount of packaging from 2.7 million tonnes to 1.9 million tonnes by the turn of the century.
By 2000, they aim to cut production of new packaging by 10 per cent and for 60 per cent of packaging to be re-usable.
Waste packaging is to be incinerated rather than buried in landfill.
Excessive packaging in supermarkets is being given particular attention.
The proposals are now part of civil law, and every year, the packaging industry will set out its plans and achievements for the previous year.
Environment Minister Hans Alders plans to introduce "life-cycle management" , wherein manufacturers will be responsible for their products at all stages, including transporting, sorting, recycling and remarketing.
New Scientist 29 June Guardian 8 June
Waste and Recycling
Chile recycles "poisonous" water into crops
A Chilean project has used waste water from copper mines to safely irrigate crops.
Water from the Andean El Teniente, the world's largest underground copper mine, has been used to transform the dry Caren Valley in central Chile into a series of orchards and vegetable plots.
The waste water, known as "tailings effluent" , contains high concentrations of sulphates, molybdenum and copper and was previously considered an ecological hazard.
Initially, crops were grown which were known to have a high tolerance for metals and sulphates such as alfalfa, wheat and corn.
Positive results prompted further trials and asparagus, green peppers, melons, onions, nectarines and pears were also grown.
All farm products and soil quality are closely monitored for metal concentration.
After four years of rigorous quality control, only beans and chilies have been found unfit to eat, copper and molybdenum tending to concentrate in leaves and stalks rather than fruits.
Codelco, the Chilean state copper corporation which devised the experiments is now testing for commercial production at a larger site in the valley.
Financial Times 16 June
Waste and Recycling
BMA calls for import ban on toxic waste
A report by the British Medical Association (BMA) has called on the government to ban the import of hazardous waste.
The report said that many of the chemicals in commercial use today had not been adequately tested for their toxicity.
There was no need for them to be imported to Britain since they mostly came from countries which were capable of developing their own waste-disposal programmes.
Guardian 26 June
Waste and Recycling
Waste tip plan "puts drinking water at risk" 
The proposed siting of a waste tip near the bank of the river Dee in north Wales will produce poisonous liquids which will threaten the drinking water supply of two million people, according to the local MP, Martyn Jones.
The proposal by the company Shanks and McEwan to create a tip next to what is a major source of drinking water has encountered widespread opposition.
It has been described as "insane" by Jones and "crazy" by the chair of the Countryside Council for Wales, Michael Griffith, and as "showing a disregard for common sense which beggars belief" by Andrew Lees, the campaigns director for Friends of the Earth.
It has been rejected by Clwyd council, together with ten other local authorities and four water companies.
Times 1 July
Waste and Recycling
UK toxic incineration plants may double
Britain's toxic waste incineration plants are set to increase in number from five to 12, according to a report from Greenpeace.
A representative of the National Association of Waste Disposal Contractors has said that 20 new plants, each with a capacity of 30,000 tonnes, would be needed to deal with clinical waste alone.
Further capacity would be required to deal with sewage sludge and industrial and chemical waste as new legislation tightened up on private plants.
The Greenpeace report, which studied the toxic waste incinerator plans of 18 countries, claimed incinerator technology to be unsafe and inefficient and to put communities at risk from dangerous waste products.
Times 11 June