

Agriculture and Food
US laboratory accused of "falsifying pesticide studies" 
An investigation is being conducted into the activities of a large American laboratory which is alleged to have falsified test results on pesticides.
The investigation has cast doubt on the safety of 28 pesticides widely sprayed on crops in Britain.
Craven is a large contracting laboratory which carries out tests for international chemical and pesticide firms.
The US Environmental Protection Agency began its investigation after evidence emerged that Craven may have "falsified residue and environmental fate studies" for firms hoping to get their pesticides approved.
The agency requires studies to show how much spray residue is left on crops after harvesting and if the pesticide breaks down safely in water.
In the 1970s, a similar inquiry resulted in the imprisonment of three executives of Industrial Bio Test, who had been found to have tampered with laboratory animals in order to obtain an improved safety result for drugs and pesticides.
Since the British Ministry of Agriculture learned of the investigation last March, it has written to 262 US pesticide companies demanding that they reveal any work conducted by Craven.
British companies have until November to reveal if they have used the laboratory.
Research by Friends of the Earth (FoE) shows that suspect pesticides include Dinocap, Alachlor and a group of fungicides known as EBDCs.
FoE wants all the US tested pesticides withdrawn until their safety is established.
Independent 14 October
Agriculture and Food
FAO switches to "green" tack
The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) has claimed as a major success its programme for integrated pest management in rice.
The announcement has been interpreted as a shift towards a more "green" approach from the organisation which has repeatedly been criticised by environmentalists.
FAO's pest control programme is aimed at educating farmers in the way rice grows so that they can sharply reduce the amount of pesticides applied, leaving natural predators to keep the crop healthy.
The project has enabled farmers to reduce environmental pollution whilst raising crop yields.
The programme has met with its biggest success in Indonesia, where the FAO has worked closely with the government.
Pesticide use was reduced by 65 per cent in the first year whilst crop yields increased.
Speaking at a FAO seminar in Rome, project coordinator Peter Kenmore said: "We are replacing chemical technology with management skills…we are replacing nineteenth century technology — chemistry — with twentieth century technology — information" .
The rice insecticide market for the nine main producer countries is $350 million.
In 1988 companies spent $55 million on advertising.
In contrast, the FAO's total annual field education budget is $2.5 million.
Many environmentalists remain highly sceptical of FAO's basic approach, however, arguing that the organization fails to address the basic needs of third world farmers, and concentrates too much on advocating the production of export crops.
Financial Times 18 October
Agriculture and Food
UK pesticide review "a shambles" says Labour
The UK's system for pesticide review has been described as "shambolic" by the Shadow Minister for Food and Agriculture, David Clark.
Despite the UK using more pesticides than most, a slow and cumbersome system for pesticide review means that 30-year-old chemicals remain in use despite having been superseded by safer alternatives, Clark argues.
Only three pesticides have been approved since 1990, although legislation was passed in 1985.
In comparison, Sweden's system calls for all pesticides to be reviewed every five years.
Since 1986, 700 pesticides have been reviewed from which 350 active ingredients have been banned.
Over the same period, pesticide use has decreased by 47 per cent.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has pledged more resources for the work, but these are likely to be diverted from other environmental imperatives.
The Food Magazine October/December
Agriculture and Food
Dutch environmentalists issue warning over bulb cultivation
Environmental organisations from the south of Holland have joined to launch a campaign informing the major bulb-importing countries about the damage to the environment caused by the bulb-growing industry.
The pressure groups are urging consumers to choose a less damaging bulb, and are hoping that their campaign will prompt bulb-traders to organise "green" bulb production which will need only minimal spraying.
South Holland Environmental Federation news release 25 October
Agriculture and Food
Pesticides in carrots "10 times permitted level" 
Government scientists have found pesticide residues in carrots at 10 times the maximum permitted level.
According to the Working Party on Pesticide Residues, the higher amounts are due to changes in farming practice which have led to more frequent spraying of crops.
In response, the Ministry of Agriculture has suggested that the current Maximum Residue Level (MRL) of triazophos pesticide — used to kill carrot fly — be raised 20 times its current level to two milligrams per kilogram of carrots.
It is claimed that the new levels of pesticide do not pose a risk to health.
The working party has claimed that it routinely alters MRLs for food.
In the case of triazophos, the pesticide was normally found only in the top centimetre of the carrot and would be destroyed by cooking.
Guardian 22 October Independent 22 October
Agriculture and Food
Goldsmith lambasts intensive agriculture
The global trend toward intensive farming could be taking the world on "an accelerating merry-go round to hell" according to Sir James Goldsmith in a lecture given to the Royal Society.
The former food magnate and international financier blamed the decline of genetic diversity on intensive farming and the rise in crop pests on the spread of monocultures.
He pointed out that, despite a tenfold increase in the use of insecticides in the US, annual crop losses to insects have nearly doubled.
Goldsmith was critical of the Codex Alimentarius, a committee of the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation, which under current plans for the liberalisation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), may soon have the exclusive right to set safety and quality standards in international food trade.
The committee was, he said, "biased in favour of intensive farming and its industrial and pharmaceutical suppliers" .
If the current GATT proposals for opening up world trade for agriculture were inaugurated, he said, they would force Third World farmers to industrialise their production or be "washed away as if by a catastrophic flood" .
New Scientist 19 October
Conservation: Land
Antarctic mining ban signed
The treaty banning mining of the Antarctic for at least 50 years has finally been signed, at a ceremony in Madrid, several months after it was originally agreed in April [see ED no. 46].
Under an amended agreement, any move to lift the ban must now be approved by 75 per cent of the 26 "voting nations" of the Antarctic Treaty body.
The campaign for the ban had been led by Greenpeace and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
In the wake of the agreement, Greenpeace is to withdraw its team from their base on Ross Island.
, In the same week as the treaty was signed, the British Antarctic Survey revealed that it was having to cut its scientific research programme because of a budgetary crisis.
The Survey carried out the work which first identified the threat to the ozone layer over the south polar region.
Guardian 5 October Independent 5, 7 October Financial Times 4 October
Conservation: Land
US wetlands plan under attack
President Bush's proposals for the future of US wetlands [see ED 49/50]have met further criticism from a group of environmental scientists, who complain that the plans open up millions of acres of previously-protected wetlands to development, counter to Bush's election promise that there would be "no net loss" of wetlands.
Joseph Larson, chairman of the National Wetlands Technical Council, claimed that new rules mean that much of the Florida Everglades, Virginia's Great Dismal Swamp and the prairie potholes in the Great Plains will no longer be officially recognized as wetlands.
The new rules limit protection to wetlands that provide environmental benefit — a contentious definition which has been denounced as a politically-motivated attempt to free large areas from protection.
According to a presidential spokesman, however, the rules are designed "to protect those areas that function in a traditional sense as wetlands; those that provide flood control, pollution filtration, provide habitat for wildlife and spawning grounds for fish" .
International Herald Tribune 9 October
Conservation: Land
Northwest US logging fate about to be decided
A special US committee has been convened to come to a final decision about the fate of the spotted owl and its habitat of old growth forests in south-west Oregon.
The seven-member committee — dubbed the "God Squad" because of its power to override the Endangered Species Act — will have about six months to decide whether to grant an exemption to the provisions of the Act and permit logging to resume on 4,750 acres in 44 tracts owned by the Bureau of Land Management.
The committee includes representatives from the Environmental Protection Agency, the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior and the representatives of the states affected by the ruling.
The debate over the owl, and the forests which are its home, has raged between the timber industry and environmentalists since the owl was listed as an endangered species in 1990 [see EDs passim].
New Scientist 12 October Guardian 11 October Washington Post 2 October
Conservation: Land
EC Commission demands halt to UK road projects
The European Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, has written to the UK Transport Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, demanding that work on three controversial road development schemes should halt, pending the result of legal action by the Commission against the government over the alleged failure to carry out detailed environmental impact assessments (EIAs), as required by EC law.
The government has two months to reply to the charges.
If it fails to provide a justification for its actions, proceedings will open in the European Court.
The three projects affected are the M3 extension at Twyford Down, near Winchester; the East London River Crossing, which will be driven through ancient woodland at Oxleas Wood; and the M11 link road through Leytonstone, east London.
Each has been the subject of strong protests by local people and environmental groups.
The Commission has also questioned whether adequate EIAs had been carried out on: i) the new Channel Tunnel terminal at King's Cross station; ii) a planned extension at BP's oil and gas separation plant near Grangemouth, Scotland; iii) a new Coca-Cola Schweppes plant at Northampton; and iv) a new incinerator at South Warwickshire hospital.
In each case, planning permission was sought before the relevant EC directive came into force in July 1988, but was granted afterwards.
The UK government argues that in such a case the provisions of the directive do not apply, but the Commission disagrees.
The government also claims that environmental impact assessment already carried out as part of the process of gaining planning permission met EC standards.
The Commissioner's request for a halt in work provoked angry reactions from the government.
In a letter to Ripa di Meana, Prime Minister John Major warned that the demand to halt work might jeopardize the chances of Britain agreeing to sign the treaty on political and monetary union at the Maastricht summit in December.
While the Environment Commissioner had also initiated proceedings against Spain, Portugal and the Netherlands, it was understood that the British case was the only one in which a request to halt work had been issued.
The government initially claimed that it had no prior notice of the Commission's intention to initiate proceedings, but it was later disclosed that this had been the subject of correspondence between the Commission and the Department of Transport.
Sir Gordon Slynn, the UK judge at the European Court, warned that the government would have to comply with any order to halt work, if confirmed by the Court.
Daily UK newspapers 19-23 October Guardian 4 November
Conservation: Land
Campaign against Rhine-Rhone link launched
France's Green Party (Les Verts) has launched a campaign against the proposed project for a canal linking the Rhine and Rhone rivers.
Under discussion for over 20 years, the project has recently been revitalized under the auspices of the Compagnie nationale du Rhone, with the backing of a number of members of the European Parliament.
The project's opponents have focused on the likely ecological damage to the Doubs Valley, site of a proposed 100 km section of the route, which will involve the effective replacement of the river by a canal.
The campaigners claim that this will threaten vulnerable species of fish, low-XXXX lying meadows, and even pose dangers to local supplies of drinking water.
The scheme's backers have offered to negotiate with the Greens' over the route "metre by metre" .
Le Monde 16, 24 October
Conservation: Land
English Nature names 18 new ESAs
English Nature, the government's adviser on nature conservation, has submitted 18 new areas to the Ministry of Agriculture for designation as Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs).
The organisation has three main aims for the new ESAs: i) encouraging the retention of flower rich meadows and pastures; ii) conserving heather; and iii) securing the habitats of wild birds.
The Lake District, Dartmoor and Exmoor have been selected as top-priority sites for conservation.
, The UK government's official adviser on the countryside has called for the establishment of a further 19 "environmentally sensitive areas" to protect vulnerable landscapes from the effects of intensive agriculture.
The Countryside Commission argues that, as a matter of priority, new ESAs should be established on Dartmoor, Exmoor, the Lake District, Peak District, Yorkshire Dales and Northumberland's moorland.
English Nature news release 31 October Financial Times 1 November
Conservation: Land
Peat survey shows dramatic losses
The UK's reserves of lowland peat bogs are far less than previously thought, according to a new survey by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC)— the scientific umbrella group for the government's three national conservation agencies in England, Scotland and Wales.
The survey revealed that 87,868 hectares of lowland peat soil remained in the UK, of which a mere 1,170 hectares are unaffected by development.
The survey's leader, Richard Lindsey, said: "The figures were much worse than expected.
We now have much less than our minimum protection threshold.
The position is desperate."
The bogs have been in the main part destroyed by forestry development and commercial peat cutting for horticulture.
The government is now reported to be planning measures to limit peat extraction through direct purchase of threatened sites, and management agreements to encourage landowners to switch from exploitation to restoration of peat bogs.
Other proposals under consideration include revoking permission for peat extraction (often operated under old "interim development orders" obtained before the current system of planning permission came into effect), and imposing a carbon tax on peat production (reflecting the fact that undeveloped peat bogs act as a carbon sink).
The Peat Producers' Association is discussing a peatlands strategy with English Nature, the government advisory body for England.
, English Nature has been strongly criticized by environmental groups for failing to go through with plans to designate a threatened peat bog as a site of special scientific interest (SSSI).
A 73-acre site at Black Snib, near Carlisle, had been provisionally designated because of its rare plants and wildlife.
Almost unprecedentedly, however, English Nature failed to confirm the designation.
The site's landowner has appealed for planning permission to extract the peat.
English Nature's chairman, Lord Cranbrook, has described the site as "marginal" , but the Peatlands Consortium, which groups together many of Britain's leading countryside groups, has said the failure to confirm will make it easier for landowners to destroy valuable bogs.
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation has now threatened to take English Nature to court under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act, which sets out the framework for SSSIs.
, The UK's most important site for invertebrates, Thorne Moors in South Yorkshire, is threatened by peat extraction, according to the Peatlands Consortium.
Pumping operations by Fisons plc, one of the main peat extraction companies, have recently been accelerated, to the extent that they are threatening to damage the site beyond repair.
Peatlands Consortium news release 12 October Observer 20 October Guardian 29 October Independent 29 October
Conservation: Land
Hedgerows loss recorded
A survey of hedgerows by the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology shows that more than 10 per cent of hedgerows have been lost in the period between 1984 and 1990.
Some 20,000 kilometres of new hedgerow have been planted in the same period.
The survey, commissioned by the Department of the Environment, also shows a decline in the health of some hedgerows caused by poor management.
Times 22 October
Conservation: Species
Southern African ivory marketing move
Botswana, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe have joined together to form an ivory marketing cartel.
The four southern African nations have combined forces in response to the international ban on the ivory trade imposed under the auspices of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
According to a senior official of the Zambian Department of Tourism, an ivory auction is to be held in Gaborone, the capital of Botswana.
South Africa and Namibia have been invited to join the cartel.
The four nations have also announced a ban on herring-fishing, claiming that the species is dangerously over-harvested, and are pressing for it to be registered under Appendix I of CITES (which bans all exploitation).
According to Simon Lyster of the World Wide Fund for Nature: "They are making a serious point.
They believe the Western world is always interfering with their natural resources and they are now telling us how to manage ours".
The proposal to conserve two types of herring, the North Atlantic and South Pacific, is being taken seriously by the CITES secretariat in Lausanne.
Observer 13 October BBC Summary of World Broadcasts (Radio South Africa) 7 October
Conservation: Species
World's frogs killed off by pesticides
The rapid decline in the world's frog population is due at least in part to pesticides, according to Adelaide Univeristy's frog expert Michael Tyler, in an address given to the Austrialia and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science (ANZAAS).
Frogs in tropical countries are being killed off by pesticides developed in cooler climates.
The chemicals dissolve more readily in warmer water, entering the frog's bodies which absorb water easily.
Even in concentrations as small as 25 parts per million, the pesticide DDT prevents frogs from regenerating damaged legs.
In Western Australia's Kunanurra, where DDT is commonly used, studies showed 97 per cent of frogs to be deformed.
In Australia, at least 30 species of frogs are diminishing.
Pesticides washed from farms and gardens into creeks and ponds are thought to be responsible.
In California's Sierra Nevada mountains, 39 lakes contained tadpoles and frogs ten years ago.
Now only one lake supports tadpoles.
Tyler recommended that pesticide tests be developed specially for hot countries.
New Scientist 12 October
Conservation: Species
Japanese organise pro-driftnet lobby
The Japanese Fisheries Association has launched a £36,000 campaign aimed at persuading the US government that driftnets are not as environmentally destructive as reported by its scientists.
The move comes as the UN General Assembly prepares to consider a worldwide ban on driftnets.
The Japanese Association denounced the claims of the anti-driftnet lobby as emotional and unscientific. 10,000 Japanese jobs could be at risk from a ban, it said.
Taiwan and Ireland are said to be preparing to halt the use of driftnets by June 30 next year.
Independent 4 October Guardian 11 October
Conservation: Species
Sea grass "deforestation" deathly for Mediterranean
The disappearance of sea grass from the Mediterranean is leading to underwater "deforestation" which may threaten the majority of marine life, according to a report form Greenpeace.
The report shows that heavy metals, oil spills, insecticides, fishing and tourism all contribute to the decline of the sea grass.
As well as housing thousands of species of algae, fish and molluscs, the sea grass generates oxygen and has been dubbed the "lungs of the sea" .
A square metre of grass generates about 10 litres of oxygen each day.
According to ecologist Javier Romero, who has studied the plant for 10 years, sea grass "is absolutely fundamental to the proper functioning of the Mediterranean ecosystem." 
Sea grass is vital to the fishing industry: 400 square metres of sea grass can support 2000 tonnes of fish a year.
The beds also help protect the shore from erosion.
France has already adopted legislation to protect the sea grass, after having found that half of the sea bed coverage had gone.
Spain is now drawing up similar plans.
New Scientist 5 October
Conservation: Species
Swedish government calls for international ban on bluefin tuna
The Swedish government has called for a ban on the international trade in the bluefin tuna.
The bluefin — a giant predatory fish that can live for 30 years and weigh up to 1,000 pounds — has declined in number by 90 per cent.
According to a 1990 study by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), the number of western Atlantic giant bluefin tuna has declined to 10 per cent of the 1971 figure.
The bluefin is heavily fished as it fetches high prices in Japan where it is sold for as much as $40 a pound.
Conservationists are concerned that fish of breeding age — those over eight years — are the most severely depleted.
Wildlife groups such as the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) have been pushing for a ban on fishing, but have been strongly opposed by the fishing industry.
The US Fish and Wildlife Service had been expected to reach a decision soon on whether to call for a ban or not.
The Swedish action means that member countries of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) will vote on whether to implement a ban at their next meeting next March in Kyoto.
Washington Post 4 October
Conservation: Species
Badgers Act becomes law
Badgers and their setts are now protected from human interference for the first time, with the introduction of the Badgers Act (1991) in October.
Licenses to disturb badgers and their setts will be granted in certain cases from English Nature.
The disturbance of setts will only be permitted at certain locations and for specific reasons.
These include: science or conservation, certain forms of land development, archaeological excavation and fox control.
English Nature press release 25 October
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
The whooping crane, one of North America's largest birds and an endangered species, suffered a record loss during its immigration this year.
Ornithologists have been fighting to save the bird from extinction for the last 50 years.
Thirty-one crocodiles illegally exported to the US have been returned to their indigenous Nigeria.
The return journey marks a victory for the nation's wildlife protection programme.
Rutland Water, a reservoir in Leicestershire which houses 20,000 waterfowl each winter, has been designated a special protection area under EC rules.
A colony of Britain's rarest and most important orchid — the chlorantha bee orchid — is to be replanted by experts when work starts on a building site in Harlow, Essex.
The South African environment department has refused permission to fishermen in Struisbaai to catch and barbecue a whale belonging to a species recognised as endangered.
Times 22 October New Scientist 26 October Washington Post 15 October Guardian 8, 19, 26 October Financial Times 5 October, 5 November
Energy
World Bank energy policies criticized
The World Bank's failure to provide significant funding for energy conservation has been criticized by environmental groups after a report revealed that only 1 per cent of the Bank's £1,800 million investment in third-world energy programmes was devoted to conservation.
The report, compiled by the Washington-based International Institute for Energy Conservation, says that a total of £1.2 trillion could be saved over the next 40 years if the Bank provided adequate support for energy efficiency in transport, industry, power stations and the domestic market.
The report points out that energy conservation measures in the US produce an annual saving of around £100 billion — equivalent to 14 million barrels of oil per day.
New Scientist 19 October
Energy
Solar cell breakthrough
Researchers in Switzerland have developed a solar cell which mimics the ways in which plants convert sunlight into energy.
It does so using comparatively inexpensive materials, and brings the prospect of obtaining cheap electricity from sunlight a step nearer.
Until now electricity from solar cells has been much more expensive than that from conventional sources because the cells are made from silicon and other expensive materials.
The cell developed at the Swiss Federation Institute of Technology in Lausanne superimposes a light-sensitive dye only one molecule thick on a thin layer of titanium dioxide, a commonly used industrial chemical.
The dye collects sunlight, as plants do by photosynthesis.
According to the researchers, the new cell actually works better under cloud cover than in full sunlight.
Independent 24 October Nature 24 October
Energy
Renewable energy programme oversubscribed
The British government's programme for the development of renewable energy has been massively oversubscribed, with developers submitting applications for projects which would generate electricity well in excess of the government's target.
In December 1990, the Energy Minister, John Wakeham, had said that he planned to approve renewable-energy projects amounting to between 150 and 200 megawatts of electricity output in 1991.
But the applications for 42 wind farms alone would produce around 115 megawatts, and one proposed waste-incineration scheme would generate 96 megawatts.
According to the energy campaigner of Friends of the Earth, Simon Roberts, "with this year's applications for wind power alone the government could meet a quarter of its total target for the year 2000" .
The Department of Energy has been under pressure to expand its efforts on renewable energy after a report by departmental advisers concluded that Britain could generate half its electricity from natural sources within 20 years, a point also made by several environmental groups.
Experts have also argued that Britain has the most favourable conditions in Europe for the exploitation of wind, wave and tidal power.
Observer 6 October
Energy
Orimulsion "not filthiest fuel" says supplier
The supplier of a new fuel, emerging as a competitor to coal in power stations, has refuted claims that it constitutes a new threat to the environment [see ED51].
Orimulsion, a bitumen-water mix developed in Venezuela, has been described by an energy spokesman of the Labour Party as the world's "filthiest fuel" .
According to BP Bitor, which markets the fuel in Europe, Orimulsion contains 20 per cent less carbon dioxide than coal and emits no more nitrogen oxide (a prime cause of acid rain) than natural gas.
The fuel does however contain high levels of dangerous metals such as nickel and vanadium, but the stations to which it is supplied would be expected to be fitted with filtering equipment.
Sales of Orimulsion are increasing.
Financial Times 3 October
Environmental Politics
GATT environment working group to meet
The environment working group of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is finally to meet for the first time — 20 years after it was first constituted.
However, none of its recommendations will be applied to the current series of GATT talks — the so-called "Uruguay round" .
The agreement to hold a meeting arose as a result of informal negotiations between countries of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)— led by Austria, and the ASEAN group.
Previously, ASEAN states had viewed with suspicion any effort to include environmental concerns in GATT on the grounds that they could be used as an excuse for a protectionist attitude by wealthy northern countries, and that, specifically, they could lead to a ban on the import of timber from south-east Asia.
Restrictions on imports on purely-environmental grounds currently run counter to GATT rules.
This issue surfaced recently when the US tried to ban imports of Mexican tuna [see ED no. 51].
According to Austrian negotiator Michael Reiterer, the working group will begin by looking at less controversial subjects such as existing national environmental regulations, packaging and labelling.
New Scientist 12 October
Environmental Politics
World Bank "quadruples" environmental loans
The World Bank claims to have quadrupled its funding of projects with "primarily environmental objectives" .
In a report entitled The World Bank and the Environment, it reveals that its financing of such projects increased from $404 million to $1,600 million in the fiscal year ending 30 June 1991.
It adds that "about 10 per cent of total bank staff time" had been spent on forestry or environment work during the year.
Nearly half its projects had a full or partial environmental impact assessment carried out prior to funding.
The report asserts that a free market is a precondition for a healthy environment, and points to the ecological catastrophes of eastern Europe as an example of the failure of state-XXXX controlled economies to protect the environment.
, In a paper on population pressure and the environment in sub-XXXX Saharan Africa, the Bank argues that "in environmentally delicate areas, the extraction of wood for timber or fuel must be eliminated altogether" .
The Bank has recently given notice of its intention to focus more on environmental concerns [see EDs 49/50; 51].
Financial Times 14 October West Africa 31 October
Environmental Politics
Albanian Green Party approved
An Albanian Green Party has been established under the name "Partia e Blerte Shqiptare" .
It has received formal approval from the Justice Ministry, which ruled that the Party's programme is acceptable under the recently-approved Law on Political parties.
A Russian Green Party was set up in May [see ED no. 47].
Albanian Radio 2 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Friends of the Earth director resigns
The director of Friends of the Earth, David Gee, has resigned after 18 months in the post to become an environmental consultant.
Gee, formerly an official with the GMB trade union, said that: "I want to spend less time on administration and more on direct issues which affect people and the planet." 
He denied that his departure had been prompted by disagreements with other senior staff.
[An FOE board member resigned in August in protest at the group's allegedly soft stance on the Gulf War — see ED. 49/50.]
Gee succeeded Jonathon Porritt, who served as director until 1990.
Guardian 17 October
Environmental Politics
 "Caring for the Earth" initiative launched
A new "strategy for sustainable living" , entitled Caring for the Earth, has been launched by the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.
It is a follow-up to the World Conservation Strategy of 1980, which has since formed the basis for all or part of 50 national strategies in 50.
Introduced simultaneously in 65 countries in advance of next year's UNCED summit in Rio, the Caring for the Earth calls on governments and individuals to set key targets for achieving genuine sustainable development across a range of issues.
The strategy is focused around nine general aims:, Respect and care for the community of life, Improve the quality of human life, Conserve the earth's vitality and diversity, Minimize the depletion of non-renewable resources, Keep within the Earth's carrying capacity, Change personal attitudes and practises, Enable communities to care for their own environments, Provide a national framework for integrating development and conservation, Create a global alliance.
Among its specific requests, it calls on governments to:, transfer resources from military expenditure to disaster relief, double family planning services, write-off official debts of low-income countries, reduce the use of fossil fuels, tighten safety standards in hazardous industries, create a market for forest products from sustainable sources.
Published in book form, it covers in detail questions of pollution, waste management, transport, education, food and fisheries, climate change, child mortality and sanitation.
Caring for the Earth was launched by Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh (WWF-UK's President), and endorsed by the Archbishop of York, John Habgood, Sir Crispin Tickell (the UK's former Ambassador to the UN).
The WWF also launched a Caring for the Earth Campaign for Change, seeking pledges from individuals to make personal contributions to the strategy's goals over the next year by using energy-efficient light bulbs, cutting car mileage by 25 per cent, planting 10 trees and helping to organize recycling initiatives at their workplace.
WWF news release 21 October Caring for the Earth launch 21 October
Environmental Politics
Greenpeace team arrested in Iran
A visit to Iran by a team from Greenpeace ended after its members had been sporadically detained and their equipment temporarily confiscated.
The team, who were due to monitor environmental damage caused by the Gulf War, had been invited by the Iranian government.
However, they ran into trouble with local officials, apparently due to misunderstandings between central and regional authorities.
The organization's ship, the MV Greenpeace, was eventually able to carry out a limited monitoring of oil slicks, with Iranian scientists and military personnel on board.
Greenpeace expedition leader, Paul Horsman, said that he did not blame the Iranians since "misunderstandings were bound to occur" , but that few people seemed willing to believe that Greenpeace was an organization wholly independent of Western governments.
He added that "officials waxed lyrical in Tehran about raising the environmental awareness of the people but have no idea of how to do it" .
Guardian 5 October
Environmental Politics
 "Lack of resources" may undermine UK government programme
Some of the UK government's key environmental policies are likely to be undermined by a lack of resources, according to an internal Environment Department report which was leaked to the press.
The report, which was leaked to Environment Business magazine, was written for Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine by John Hobson, head of the department's pollution control and waste directorate.
In it, he warns that a lack of staff and money may delay action to combat global warming, ozone depletion, the reduction of industrial waste and sewage discharges, and the construction of a nuclear waste depository.
Hobson says that his section failed to meet 25 per cent of its targets last year, and added that "unless substantial additional resources can be made available over the next three years, something will have to give — either substantial slippage on the Environment Protection Act timetable (which the Director does not recommend) or opting out of policy development issues (not easy where there are public commitments or international pressures)" .
Financial Times 21 October Guardian 10 October
Global Warming
Top companies in energy-saving initiative
A committee of leading business people has recommended a set of wide-ranging environmental policies to counter global warming for implementation by the government, local authorities and industry.
The proposals, put forward by the Advisory Committee on Business and the Environment, include increasing the duty on petrol, increasing vehicle excise duty in line with engine size, reducing value-added tax on fuel-saving equipment, setting minimum standards for energy efficiency of household appliances, obliging car manufacturers to improve the efficiency of engines, and encouraging the development of combined heat and power generating stations.
The committee also called on the government to formulate long-term fuel-pricing objectives in order to encourage industry to invest in energy-saving measures and thereby to reduce emissions.
The proposals were welcomed by the Secretaries of State for the Environment and Trade and Industry, Michael Heseltine and Peter Lilley.
They said that they had asked the Treasury to give "careful consideration" to the various fiscal measures recommended by the committee.
The Advisory Committee on Business and Environment comprises 25 senior executives from some of Britain's largest companies and is chaired by John Collins, the chair of Shell UK.
It was set up by the government to advise it on environmental policy.
, In a policy document on transport, the Green Party has called for a rise in the price of petrol to £6 a gallon (a 170 per cent increase), a halt to new road building, a speed limit of 50 mph on motorways, and heavy investment in public transport.
Independent 5 November Financial Times 5 November
Global Warming
Energy-saving campaign aimed at householders
The British government has launched an advertising campaign to persuade householders to use less electricity and heating fuel as their contribution to reducing global warming.
According to the government, many households could cut their fuel bills by 20 per cent or more by adopting a few "straightforward and inexpensive" measures.
The suggestions put forward in the first three leaflets of the three-year campaign range from turning down the thermostat and turning off unnecessary lights to installing double glazing.
According to official estimates, one quarter of Britain's emissions of carbon dioxide are the result of electricity and gas use in the home, mainly for heating, lighting and cooking.
Such domestic emissions, it is argued, can be reduced fairly painlessly.
The Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine, said that research had shown that many people did not make a connection between environmental problems in general and their own wasteful use of energy at home.
 "Saving energy makes sense to all of us financially and environmentally" , he said.
Independent 5 November
Global Warming
EC nearer to acceptance of energy tax
European Community environment ministers have agreed in principle to introduce an energy tax to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and combat global warming.
The agreement, reached at an informal conference in Amsterdam, was described by the EC Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, as a "turning point in environment policy, a shift from command-and-control methods to taking the environment into the market place" .
The formal directive still needs to be approved at subsequent meetings by the EC energy, environment and finance ministers.
Under the Commission's proposals, member countries would introduce a tax of $3 on every barrel of oil in 1993, rising to $10 by the end of the century.
Half the new tax would be on the carbon content of fossil fuel and half on the energy content.
The tax should be fiscally neutral, that is, offset by tax cuts in other areas.
Financial Times 14 October International Herald Tribune 14 October
Nuclear Power
IAEA to monitor clandestine nuclear activities
The director of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Hans Blix, has proposed the creation of an intelligence section within the agency to monitor evidence on clandestine nuclear programmes around the world.
Speaking at the UN, he also said that the agency is developing procedures to carry out surprise inspections at nuclear plants which are thought to be engaged in illicit research.
Blix also said that the IAEA's effectiveness would be much increased if member countries were to make available to the agency relevant information gathered by spy satellites.
The proposals are due to be considered by the IAEA board in December.
New Scientist 26 October
Nuclear Power
Oldest nuclear plant in US shut down
The oldest nuclear power plant in the United States, located near Rowe, Massachusetts, has been closed down by its operators after experts from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) recommended that it be taken out of service immediately because of doubts about its safety.
The NRC stressed that no accident had occurred at the plant.
It was concerned, however, that in the unlikely event of an accident, the 31-year-old steel drum which encloses the reactor core might rupture, leading to a release of radiation and possible meltdown.
, The NRC ordered the indefinite shutdown of the Sequoyah Fuels plant in Gore, Oklahoma, after uranium was found to be leaking into the ground.
Washington Post 2, 5 October
Nuclear Power
Ukrainians to close Chernobyl
Responding to growing public pressure, the Ukrainian parliament has voted to close the Chernobyl nuclear reactor, the site of the world's worst nuclear accident in 1986, two years ahead of schedule.
The decision was prompted by a fire at one of its four reactors two weeks earlier.
A resolution passed overwhelmingly empowers the republican government — which has effectively taken charge since the disintegration of Soviet central authority after the failed coup in August — to close the second reactor immediately and to bring forward the closure of the whole complex from 1995 to 1993.
The Ukrainian authorities have appealed to the UN and national governments for assistance not only to dismantle the Chernobyl plant but to wind down the republic's whole nuclear programme.
The fire in the second reactor occurred on 11 October.
According to the Soviet agency Tass, it was brought under control within two hours and there were no casualties and no radiation escaped.
The cause was a faulty automatic switch.
, The Swiss-Swedish engineering group Asea Brown Boveri (ABB) has made proposals to the Ukrainian authorities for the conversion of nuclear plants to "combined cycle" plants which rely on natural gas or coal.
(Combined cycle plants use the exhaust gases from a combustion turbine to power a second steam turbine, thereby improving efficiency and reducing emissions.)
Times 30 October Independent 30 October Guardian 30 October Tass 12 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Nature 24 October Financial Times 18 October
Nuclear Power
German minister comments on Soviet reactors
The German Environment Minister, Klaus Toepfer, has described the condition of nuclear plants in the Soviet Union as "giving cause for concern" .
Speaking after a visit to the Soviet Union, he said that the state of the Chernobyl plant was "shocking" , and he called for the closure of the three reactors still operational [see Chernobyl article in this issue].
He offered the Soviet republics — which are in the process of taking over the nuclear facilities previously administered by the central authorities — German help to organize their nuclear-energy programmes and build up their own inspectorates.
Deutsche Presse-Agentur (DPA) 21 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Financial Times 18 October
Nuclear Power
Contaminated ship towed to Arctic
A torpedo boat used for years by the Soviet military authorities as a "dustbin" for nuclear waste has been secretly towed from Lake Ladoga through the Baltic and along the Norwegian coast to Novaya Zemlya in the Arctic.
The boat, the Kit, was used for nuclear testing by the Soviet navy until 1961, when it was sealed and sunk in the lake.
The disclosure last year of its existence and location raised a storm of protest from Nordic governments and from local people in the St Petersburg (Leningrad) area, who draw their drinking water from Lake Ladoga.
The transfer of the Kit to Novaya Zemlya, a major nuclear testing ground, was carried out in secret.
It appears that water in the boat was decontaminated and pumped back into the lake, cracks were welded shut, and the whole was encased in a plastic shell before it began its journey.
European 1 November
Nuclear Power
Dounreay deal signed on Euro waste
AEA Technology, the company which runs the Dounreay nuclear power plant, has signed a deal with a consortium of German, Dutch and Belgian electricity companies to receive nuclear fuel from the Kalkar plant in western Germany, which was closed down earlier this year.
Under the contract the fuel will be stored in Dounreay until 1996 and then returned to Germany.
But AEA Technology hopes that the government will allow the fuel to be used in its prototype fast reactor at Dounreay.
Because of funding cuts in nuclear research this is currently due to close in 1994; with the German fuel it could operate for another three years.
New Scientist 5, 19 October
Ozone Layer
UNEP review calls for tighter Montreal Protocol
A report by a UN Environment Programme review team has warned that the provisions of the Montreal Protocol [see ED no. 35/36]are inadequate to prevent further, dangerous depletion of the ozone layer.
It concludes that the loading of chlorine in the atmosphere will peak at 4.1 parts per billion by volume (ppbv) at the turn of the century, and not return to "safe" levels of 2 ppvb until 2060.
This estimate is based on the assumption that the Protocol will be rigorously obeyed — a presumption which has been called into question by India's recent refusal to sign [see ED no. 52].
The Protocol is due to be reviewed in october 1992.
, The UNEP report is also seen as calling into question the US policy on global warming.
According to the report, CFCs can have both a warming and a cooling effect (through ozone depletion) on the atmosphere.
Thus, the US Administration's contention that its planned reductions in CFCs will compensate for a failure to set emission targets for the main greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, now appears less defensible.
Nature 24, 31 October
Ozone Layer
Arctic ozone depletion programme launched
The depletion of the ozone layer over the northern hemisphere is to be the subject of a newly-launched European Arctic Stratosphere Experiment (EASOE), involving 250 scientists from 17 countries over a five month period starting in November.
Under the co-ordination of Dr John Pyle of Cambridge University, the project will include measurements on the ground, from aircraft, and from rockets and balloons in the ozone layer itself.
Speaking at the launch, the discoverer of the Antarctic hole, Joe Farman, warned that ozone depletions of between 20 and 30 per cent by the end of the century were "not unlikely" .
Guardian 17 October
Ozone Layer
Ozone layer "more depleted than ever" 
The levels of protective ozone over the Antarctic have reached their lowest ever recorded level, according to measurements taken by a NASA satellite.
The on-board "Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer" measured levels at 110-120 Dobson units, compared with 500 units in normal conditions.
, Levels of ultra-violet rays reaching the surface of Antarctica in late 1990 were the highest ever recorded, according to measurements at the US Antarctic Scientific Program's Palmer Station, on the Antarctic Peninsula.
On the worst days, the radiation was twice as bad as any measured since the programme began in 1988, and scientists speculate that it may be the highest ever experienced since the ozone shield developed one billion years ago.
Nature 17 October Geophysical Research Letters October
Ozone Layer
Fridge CFC recycling programme "a failure" 
A government-backed scheme to recycle chlorofluorocarbons from old refrigerators and air-conditioning systems has been branded a failure after two years of operation.
Both Friends of the Earth and former CFC manufacturers, ICI, have acknowledged that the scheme has failed to collect more than a small proportion of CFCs from old appliances.
The remainder have escaped into the atmosphere to cause further depletion of the ozone layer.
Virtually all the coolant which contains CFCs can potentially be recovered, purified and resold.
However, an FOE survey showed that only 13 per cent of coolant from domestic refrigerators was being recovered by local councils; many authorities had no collection scheme in operation.
ICI, which had set itself a target of recovering 10 per cent of the CFCs it manufactured for use in cooling systems, has blamed lack of co-operation from local councils, industry and commerce for its failure to recover more than 1 per cent.
The FOE study has called on the government to make CFC recycling compulsory.
Independent 31 October Guardian 31 October Daily Telegraph 31 October
Pollution: Air
Canada embarks on acid rain control programme
Canada is funding its acid rain control programme to the tune of $30 million, in an effort to place a permanent cap on the nation's sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions.
The federal government will work with the provinces towards the implementation of a national acid rain control plan, to include a national ceiling of 3.2 million tonnes of S02 emissions.
The money will also be used to determine the rate and extent of recovery of lakes and rivers and their associated fauna from acid rain damage, and its role in causing forest decline.
The effects of acid rain on wildlife and human health will also be studied.
Both Canada and the US are committed to the reduction and permanent capping of SO2 emissions under the Canada/US air quality agreement, which was signed last March by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and President George Bush.
Newscan from The Canadian High Commission 25 October
Pollution: Air
Tundra polluter offered aid by Scandinavian consortium
Toxic emissions from a huge nickel-smelting plant in the far north of Russia may be reduced to a negligible amount if cleanup proposals from a Scandinavian group of companies are accepted by the plant's owner.
The governments of Finland, Sweden and Norway will finance the project, which is estimated to cost £600 million.
The plant is situated on the Kola Peninsula — formerly a military zone.
Discussion of the plant's problems was impossible whilst the area was a military zone.
Although no official statistics exist, local doctors estimate that 90 per cent of the population of the town of Nikel have suffered serious damage to both nervous and respiratory systems.
A recent report on (Soviet) All-Union Radio claimed that a "dead zone" surrounded Nikel, where "every living thing has perished…forests, fish, grass, mushrooms, berries and insects" .
Reindeer moss, the staple diet of the deer herds, was also said to have disappeared completely.
The Norwegian Ministry of the Environment, given permission to set up monitoring stations on the peninsula in 1989, refused to comment on the radio report but confirmed that "life expectancy on the Kola Peninsula is approximately 42 years" .
New Scientist 5 October
Pollution: Air
New ozone pollution safety limits proposed
Under the terms of an EC draft directive, European countries will be compelled to adopt World Health Organization (WHO) thresholds for reporting low-level ozone pollution incidents.
The move has been welcomed by pollution campaigners in Britain, who have criticized the Department of Environment for its alleged failure to issue sufficient pollution warnings.
At present, the DoE circulates health warnings only when levels have exceeded the upper limit prescribed by the WHO — 100 parts per billion (ppb) for an exposure of one hour.
Some local authorities have responded to concern by setting lower thresholds: consequently, the same quality of air is currently described as "poor" in Sheffield, "moderate" in Bristol, and "good" by the DoE.
The proposed EC directive would set warning levels at the middle of the WHO guidelines: 87.5 ppb for a one hour period, and 55 ppb for eight hours.
, A survey by Friends of the Earth has revealed that few people are aware when air quality warnings have been issued.
A total of 87 per cent of those surveyed had not seen or heard any information on recent warnings across the country.
Independent 27 October
Pollution: Air
Romans and Greeks combat city pollution
Greece took emergency action on two consecutive days in October as air pollution soared above safety levels.
All traffic was banned from the city centre and the number of taxis in the city was cut by half.
If the pollution fails to disperse, the bans which take place from 6am to 8pm may become a permanent feature.
Athens is surrounded by mountains which trap pollution.
Rome has also closed its city centre to private vehicles for two months as part of a plan to ease congestion and air pollution.
Approximately 100,000 cars clog the narrow streets each day and exhaust gases are eroding the city's ancient monuments.
Environmentalists fear that many citizens will simply forge documents in order to gain access to the city centre.
Guardian 17 October European 18-20 October, 25-27 October International Herald Tribune 26-27 October Le Monde 3 October
Pollution: Air
Pollution inspectorate anticipates increase in prosecutions
The annual report of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution has predicted a sharp rise in the number of prosecutions made against polluters over the next year.
The Inspectorate had made two prosecutions since April this year, and has another 10 prosecutions "in the pipeline" , the report claimed.
In recent years, the Inspectorate has been seen as understaffed and underfunded and has allegedly suffered from low morale.
Only one prosecution was made in 1990, and only nine have been made in total since the Inspectorate was set up in 1987.
Speaking at the launch of the report, the Inspectorate's director and chief inspector, David Slater, said that recruitment had improved and that 300 new inspectors were expected to be in their posts by early next year.
Under government plans for a new Environment Agency, the Inspectorate is expected to amalgamate with sections of the National Rivers Authority.
The two bodies would occupy a central position, being responsible for the monitoring of water and air, the setting of standards and the regulation of emissions and discharges.
Environmentalists, who have long campaigned for a single agency, have expressed their concern that the plans for the reform of the Inspectorate amount to little more than political opportunism and will have little real impact.
Independent 3 October
Pollution: Air
UK firms fail to apply for pollution permits
More than half of all companies required to apply for pollution licences have failed to do so by the deadline of the end of September, according to reports submitted to the conference of the National Society for Clean Air.
Under the Environmental Protection Act, specific categories of companies are obliged to notify local authorities about activities causing pollution, obtain licences to continue them, and give indications how they intend to reduce their effluents.
Speakers at the conference also criticized the Department of the Environment for not providing local authorities with funds to enable them to track down offenders.
Guardian 22 October
Pollution: Air
Edinburgh suffers from chronic air pollution
A year-long survey of Edinburgh has shown much of the city to be suffering from severe air pollution.
The survey is the most comprehensive ever undertaken in a British city, and the first of its kind in Scotland.
Nitrogen dioxide levels were found to be above the guideline limits set by the EC at 13 out of 14 sites.
At three sites the levels were above the EC "action" limit at which steps to improve air quality must be taken.
Some of the samples taken over the year showed levels of nitrogen dioxide at levels five times greater than the EC guidelines.
City of Edinburgh District Council news release 1 November
Pollution: Water
High lead levels found in Australian children
Lead mines in Broken Hill, New South Wales, are being blamed for high levels of lead found in the city's young children.
Tests carried out by the state health department showed that 28 per cent of children aged between one and four years have concentrations of lead in the blood above Australian safety limits.
Although other sources could not be ruled out, the department said that the most likely sources of contamination are open-cut and underground lead mines located on the city's outskirts.
New Scientist 26 October
Pollution: Water
British sweet company sours Indonesian waters
PT Tebor, a local subsidiary of the British confectionery manufacturer Cadbury Schweppes, has failed to meet an Indonesian government deadline for stopping discharges of industrial waste into Jakarta's Ciliwung river.
The company admitted that there had been a delay in installing new screening equipment at the plant, which produces boiled sweets.
The Indonesian Environment Minister, Emil Salim, has accused PT Tebor of being responsible for 80 per cent of all the waste from factories along the river.
Independent on Sunday 3 November
Pollution: Water
Surfers sue Pacific paper mills
The Surfrider foundation, a 15,000-member group of surfers based in California, has brought a successful suit against two paper mills for polluting the sea.
As part of a settlement worked out with the help of the US Environment Protection Agency, the two mills will pay $5.8 million in fines and spend more than $50 million on reducing the levels of dioxins and other toxic compounds they discharge into the Pacific Ocean.
The companies also undertake to ensure the protection of four marine species: kelp, abalone, sand dollars and sea urchins.
The foundation brought the case after it had examined government records showing that the companies had exceeded pollution limits consistently since 1984.
It countered claims by the companies that local marine life was not endangered by proving that 25 local species could not survive in the polluted water.
New Scientist 12 October
Pollution: Water
UK in dispute with EC over water standards
The European Community's environment commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, has threatened to take the British government to court for failing to comply with the EC's drinking water directive, which sets limits on levels of toxic and microbiological pollution.
In a letter to the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, he points out that there have been 4,636 infringements of the directive and speaks of a "disturbing lack of stringency in enforcing compliance with the directive" on the part of the government.
The Commission is also taking legal action against most other member countries over water quality.
The letter caused a furore in Britain for political reasons, being used by Conservatives opposed to further European integration as an example of EC interference in British affairs.
, The chair of the Water Service Association, John Bellak, has told a conference in London that British water companies are in danger of being forced to over-invest in environmental clean-up operations to counter "alarmist fears" about the quality of drinking water.
Quality tests showed that 99 per cent of samples met existing standards, he claimed.
Financial Times 24 October Independent 24 October
Pollution: Water
Chemical company fined twice for polluting of Irish Sea
The chemical company Albright and Wilson has been fined £1,000 for polluting the Irish Sea near its works in Whitehaven, Cumbria, six weeks after it was fined £2,000 for another pollution offence.
The second prosecution was brought by the National Rivers Authority after a mistake had caused chemicals to overflow from a storage tank, leading to a concentration of copper in the works discharge pipe of more than 17 times the legal limit.
The initial prosecution was brought by Greenpeace, and was the first successful private prosecution of a company under the 1989 Water Act.
Times 10 October
Pollution: Water
Rapid expansion of fish farming threatens Scottish marine life
The rapid expansion of fish farming, which has taken place predominately in Scottish waters, presents serious risks for the marine environment unless it is brought under strict control by the government, according to a report from the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Thousands of tonnes of nutrients and uncontrolled quantities of toxic chemicals used to treat fish disease are pumped into lochs each year.
At present, there is virtually no regulation of these practices nor any monitoring of their effect on marine life.
The fish farming industry has grown from a few hundred tonnes of fish in 1980 to 33,000 tonnes per annum in 1990.
In some parts of the Highlands, the industry employs one in four of the workforce.
The report advocates the following amendments: i) a national policy for fish farming; ii) the extension of planning control to marine fish farms; iii) the adoption of a "duty of care for the environment" by fish farmers; iv) the introduction of a system for monitoring the effects of fish farming; v) the introduction of mandatory environmental assessments for all fish farming applications; and vi) the application of statutory status to Marine Conservation Areas to protect sensitive zones from the worst effects of fish farming.
Lynda Warren, author of the report, said: "This industry has grown at an alarming rate, in a complete policy vacuum.
The role of the Crown Estate Commissioners in the management of fish farming cannot be expected to fill the gap of a national policy which would properly regulate the industry".
[The Commissioners have authority over the tidal zones where much fish-farming takes place.]
WWF news release 15 October
Pollution: Water
Excessive PCB levels detected in Wales
Higher than normal levels of polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs — a toxic insulating material formerly used in transformers), have been found in the air, soil, grass and duck eggs in the vicinity of the Rechem toxic waste incineration plant in Wales.
Contamina-XXXX tion is highest in areas closest to the plant.
An interim report by scientists says that more work is needed to verify the findings and assess the effect of the pollution on local people.
The report was commissioned by the Welsh Office following growing public concern about possible harmful emissions from the plant.
Guardian 15 October
Pollution: Water
Wildlife disappears from British rivers
Many of Britain's best rivers have been devastated by pollution since 1985, according to a leaked report from the government watchdog, the National Rivers Authority (NRA).
The survey found that water quality has seriously declined along 6,323 kilometres of rivers, canals and estuaries in England and Wales.
15 per cent of the rivers monitored feed into public water supply and support a wide variety of plant, bird and fish life.
The pollution had been caused by agriculture and industry, both illegally and legally.
Other factors include two years of drought, acid rain, run-off from contaminated land and reduced governmental expenditure on sewage treatment.
The report warms that many rivers "have been long abused" and calls for more stringent standards.
The health of Britain's rivers improved between 1958 and 1980 but since then has undergone a rapid deterioration.
The 1990 survey reveals a deterioration of 6 per cent in the last decade.
Major rivers that have suffered include the Thames, the Thame, the Avon, the Derwent and the Wear.
According to Andrew Lees, Campaigns Director of Friends of the Earth, the decline in clear rivers was potentially disastrous.
"When a top quality river becomes polluted, its wildlife is immediately and severely affected.
Even if action is taken to improve the water quality, it will take years to restore the river's ecology"he said.
The report, leaked to Friends of the Earth (FoE), contradicts the claim made in the government White Paper on the environment released last year that a great deal had been done "to maintain and improve the quality of our rivers" .
, A report from the Royal Society for Nature Conservation (RSNC) has described how wildlife is disappearing from many British rivers and chalk streams.
The RSNC is using the report to renew demands on Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine for urgent action to curb the over-exploitation of rivers.
The report highlights the decline of plants like the water crowfoot, insects like caddis flies and mayflies, and the salmon, trout and freshwater shrimps that feed on them.
River animals such as kingfishers, water shrews, voles and otters are also disappearing as is plantlife such as the orchid and sedge.
Exacerbated by drought, water abstraction has increased by 70 per cent over the past three years to satisfy consumer demand.
The biggest growth has been in the south and east.
The NRA is redrawing its plans to revive 20 high priority rivers.
It will do this by lining them, piping water underground and, in extreme cases, revoking abstraction licences.
Conservationists however, claim that many licenses must be immediately revoked to avoid irreversible damage.
There have also been calls for the government to reverse its post-war land drainage policy, which has severely reduced the number of wetlands that replenish underground water tables.
, The NRA has announced a "disturbing" rise in prosecutions of companies and individuals for polluting water over the last two years.
Companies fined by the authority include British Rail, Imperial Chemical Industries, British Steel, Shell, British Coal, Bernard Matthews Ltd, the BBC, and the 10 privatised water companies of England and Wales.
Now in the second year of its operations, the NRA has conducted 574 prosecutions.
In its report, the authority has warned that it is "a watchdog with razor-sharp teeth" and will penalise offenders heavily.
Observer 13, 27 October Independent 2 November Financial Times 28 October
Pollution: Water
Plans to remove pesticides from drinking water
Eight water companies are to install a total of 79 treatment plants to remove pesticides from drinking water in England and Wales, in order to conform to European Community standards by 1995.
Friends of the Earth, which has been campaigning for a clean-up programme, welcomed the announcement but said it did not go far enough.
It criticized the fact that the compliance date is still 10 years behind the original EC deadline initially agreed by the government.
It is also concerned that the costs of the scheme (£450 million) are to be borne by consumers rather than the pesticide manufacturers and users.
FoE reiterated its call for an immediate ban on the use of two herbicides most often found in water, atrazine and simazine.
FoE is taking the government to court over the delays in the clean-up programme.
Friends of the Earth news release 4 October Guardian 5 October
Tropical Forests
Amazon burnings "worst ever" 
The annual burning of the Amazon Forest is likely to be the worst ever, according to data based on air and satellite surveys released by Friends of the Earth.
The group claim that between 50,000 and 88,000 fires have been started during September.
The Brazilian space institute, INPE, estimates that the fires have released between 6 and 12 million tonnes of ash into the atmosphere.
Effects have included widespread respiratory illnesses and the closure of airports due to poor visibility.
The most seriously affected areas include the north-east of Mato Grosso state, south-east Para, southern Maranhao, Rondonia and the Tocantins.
The new figures exceed those recorded in the previous record "burning seasons" in 1987 and 1989.
Friends of the Earth news release 16 October
Tropical Forests
Indonesian forest ablaze
Forest fires have broken out across Indonesia, causing widespread air pollution and disruption of air and sea transport.
The fires, which are concentrated on the islands of Sumatra and Borneo, have been blamed on a combination of four months of low rainfall and the after-effects of widespread logging, which have left large swathes of comparatively parched land on which fires can take hold easily and spread to secondary forest growth.
This is drier than the original primary growth and hence more susceptible to fire.
Indonesia's dwindling reserves of virgin rainforest appear to be largely unaffected.
The fires are believed to have been triggered by the annual practice among peasant farmers of burning off land prior to the wet season.
Ecologists had been warning of the possibility of such a conflagration for some time.
The first reports of the fires emerged in mid-August from remote parts of Kalimantan, in the Indonesian part of Borneo.
Around 500,000 hectares of forest are said to have been destroyed, and fires have also been reported in western Java and south Sulawesi.
At the core of the fires, temperatures are believed to have reached 600 degrees centigrade — enough to kill off all the soil organisms.
These fires are the worst since 1983, when at least 11,000 square miles of forest was destroyed in eastern Kalimantan.
In areas of shallow coal seams and dried out peat deposits, fires can smoulder below ground level for years.
The locations of the recent Kalimantan outbreaks suggest that some may have been rekindled from underground smoulderings dating from at least the mid-80s.
Both the Indonesian and Malaysian governments have criticized Western countries for failing to provide assistance to tackle the fires, and have accused the West of demonstrating hypocrisy in attacking forestry policy in the region while failing to respond to the crisis.
There was some confusion, however, as to whether any formal requests for aid had been received.
Some forestry experts also suggested that there was little practical help that could be offered.
Donations of fire-fighting equipment and technical advice began to arrive in late October, but observers commented that these were likely to be largely of symbolic political value only.
The fires caused widespread smogs, limiting visibility and forcing the closure of airports and shipping lanes.
Scientists were unsure however whether they were also to blame for severe fogs reported in parts of Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Thailand.
Far Eastern Economic Review 31 October Financial Times 11 October Le Monde 19 October International Herald Tribune 12-13 October Independent 12, 13, 19 October Guardian 13 October
Tropical Forests
Thais campaign for protection of western forests
A group of Thai scientists and environmental activists are campaigning to have the Huai Kha Khaeng wildlife sanctuary, in western Thailand, given World Heritage status by UNESCO.
The group is also demanding that a strip of virgin forest along the Burmese border be included in the designation.
The group argues that the area is the only remaining block of forest large enough to support the country's full range of animal and plant life in its natural habitat.
The campaign began after the suicide of Sueb Makasthien, the sanctuary's former director, who is believed to have taken his life because his efforts to ensure protection for the area were continually frustrated by corrupt officials.
Thailand has suffered acutely from hunting and deforestation. 40 out of 282 species of mammals are now classified as rare or endangered.
190 out of 916 species of birds and 37 reptiles and amphibians are in danger.
It is expected that the group will argue its case for the protection of Thailand's western forests at the global convention on biodiversity to be held at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development next June.
Independent 7 October
Tropical Forests
Rainforest dammed for European satellite
An area of 310 sq km of pristine French Guianan rainforest is to be flooded by a dam designed to supply hydroelectricity to the European Space Agency's rocket construction and launch site at Kourou.
The dam, at Petit-Saut on the Sinnamary River, will provide between 87 and 116 megawatts, meeting both the needs of the Kourou site and the colony's tiny capital, Cayenne.
No attempt is to be made to harvest the timber in the area to be flooded.
Instead, it will be allowed to rot.
According to an engineer involved in the project, the resulting rotting vegetation will "not only generate methane, but also hydrogen sulphide, ammonia and carbon dioxide" .
New Scientist 19 October
Tropical Forests
Timber labelling scheme launched
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has reached an outline agreement with the Timber Trade Federation and the industry's Forests Forever campaign on a tropical timber labelling scheme, which would identify wood from sustainable sources.
The five-point agreement provides for: i) standards for good forest management; ii) independent monitoring to verify that these standards are met; iii) a tracing mechanism to check that timber does indeed originate from the source specified by the agents; iv) certification by an independent organization; and v) labelling for the consumer.
The agreement follows surveys which suggest that a significant proportion of people would be prepared to pay a price premium of between 14 and 25 per cent for sustainably-harvested timber.
Financial Times 30 October
Tropical Forests
UK pulls out of CAR road scheme
The UK government has deferred funding support for a major road scheme through the rainforests of the Central African Republic, and is calling instead for a thorough environmental impact assessment.
The project involved the construction or upgrading of a 230 mile road between M'baiki and Berberati, in the south-west of the CAR, together with expansion of cash crop production, water supplies and health services.
Britain's Overseas Development Administration (ODA) was to have contributed a £7.8 million loan, via the African Development Bank, towards the scheme.
The project had however been strongly criticized by environmental organizations, including Friends of the Earth and Survival International.
They had pointed out that a road in this area would open up the rainforest to clearance by settlers, with the consequent loss of habitat for gorillas, elephants and other threatened animal species, and the disruption of the livelihoods of traditional tribal peoples in the area.
The road would have passed through the vicinity of the Dzanga-Ndoki national park and the Dzanga-Sangha forest reserve, which is being conserved by a £14.3 million World Bank project.
An ODA official claimed that the department was unaware that the project was "as environmentally sensitive as now seems to be the case" .
West Africa 7 October
Waste and Recycling
EPA revamps cleanup policy
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced plans to cut payments to private contractors for the management of toxic waste.
The Agency has also pledged to triple the number of cleanups of contaminated sites conducted under the Superfund programme by 1993.
The change in policy comes after an EPA task force criticised management and produced evidence of questionable charges from private cleanup contractors.
The Washington Post reported in June that $62 million of the $200 million paid to 45 contractors since 1988 had not been used to clean up anything, but had been spent on an overhead named "programme management" .
This included unproductive items such as $2,730 for rental of office plants and start-up funds for companies with no projects.
The new plan limits programme management costs to 20 per cent.
Clean-up contracts will be more stringently managed and terminated if they fail to produce results.
The EPA also plans to speed up the selection of clean-up strategies and to standardise methods for eliminating toxic waste.
Washington Post 3 October
Waste and Recycling
US clean-up programme "unscientific" 
A report from the conservative US Academy of Sciences has announced that the government has failed to conduct studies that would provide a sound, scientific basis for its environmental clean-up programme.
The government may be wasting millions of dollars as a result.
A federal plan to finance the cleaning up of toxic waste — known as Superfund — was begun ten years ago with 1,200 out of the US's 40,000 sites being designated as the most dangerous.
The Agency, however, has challenged the basis of the designations and the ensuing allocation of resources.
According to the report "despite congressional efforts to redirect the programme, substantial public health concerns remain, and critical information on the distribution of exposure and health effects associated with hazardous-waste sites is still lacking." 
The report goes on to say that clean-up policy has been made on political rather than scientific grounds and that "less than 1 percent of the $4,200 million spent each year on hazardous-waste sites in the US has been used to evaluate health risks at listed Superfund sites." 
Nature 31 October New Scientist 26 October
Waste and Recycling
Waste-to-energy plant for Portsmouth
A plant to generate energy from waste is to be built near Portsmouth.
The £105 million plant is the joint project of Babcock Energy, an engineering company, and Scottish Power, which has recently been privatised.
The plant will generate up to 38 million megawatts a year from burning 400,000 tonnes of household waste.
It will be one of the largest plants of its kind in the UK and will provide enough energy to service about half of Portsmouth (100,000 people).
The Chairman of Scottish Power, Sir Donald Miller, said the market for waste incineration was expected to grow substantially in the coming years, "in the light of increased environmental concerns and the regulation of traditional dumping techniques" .
There are already about 10 waste-to-energy plants in the UK.
, Inhabitants of the Dutch town of Hoofddorp are being issued with new dustbins implanted with a measuring device aimed at encouraging them to throw away less rubbish.
Financial Times 28 October