

Agriculture and Food
US campaigners challenge safety of genetically-altered foods
The Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), a leading US pressure group, is calling for all genetically-modified foods to be subjected to the same safety tests currently required for chemical food additives — the strictest under Food and Drug Administration (FDA) rules.
At present, the FDA has no firm criteria for judging genetically-altered foods, which are becoming increasingly common in the US.
Over a third of American cheese includes a genetically-engineered milk-clotting enzyme, chymosin, while a range of plants with built-in pesticides are poised for introduction.
Although there is little firm evidence on the safety implications of genetic modification, the EDF is concerned that without stringent safety checks, unsafe foods could find their way onto the market.
It is particularly disturbed by the imminent introduction of fish which have been fed with mammalian growth hormones.
The EDF claim that transferring hormones from mammals into fish has "obvious potential to harm humans" .
The EDF's plan is opposed by the Industrial Biotechnology Association, which argues instead that genetic engineering should be subject to the same safety standards as plant breeding.
It claims that the stringent tests applied to chemical additives would lead to unacceptable delays in the introduction of genetically-altered foods.
New Scientist 20 November
Agriculture and Food
Europe's fishing fleet "must be cut by 40 per cent" 
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) is calling for a 40 per cent cut in North Sea fishing fleets in order to conserve fish stocks, particularly those of cod and haddock, which it warns could disappear from the area within five years if present catch rates continue.
It has appealed to the Council of Ministers to agree a range of conservation measures, including:, a 40 per cent cut in fishing capacity;, the introduction of licenses for every fishing vessel;, the establishment of financial and retraining incentives to encourage fishermen to leave the industry.
The WWF is also appealing to consumers to switch to less threatened species, such as coley, huss and herring, to help alleviate the pressure on cod and haddock.
WWF news release 17 December
Agriculture and Food
Pesticides data to be opened up
The UK Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) has agreed to make its information on pesticide safety more widely available.
The decision follows a five year campaign by environmentalists.
MAFF is to allow scientists proposed by consumer groups to sit on its Advisory Committee on Pesticides.
It has also agreed to declassify information on pesticides approved for use before 1986.
At present, data is available only on those approved since that date.
New Scientist 20 November
Agriculture and Food
FoE launches "green plan" for farming
Tight limits on the use of nitrogen fertilizer and pesticides, combined with incentives for farmers to practice environment-sensitive agriculture, have been recommended by Friends of the Earth in a new blueprint entitled Off the Treadmill.
The report is aimed at cutting farm surpluses, reducing pollution, and protecting the countryside, while still allowing farmers to stay in business.
It argues for compulsory quotas on nitrogen use, with strict limits in sensitive water catchment areas, and tax incentives to reduce pesticide applications.
Intensive livestock production would be discouraged, and battery farming phased out, in favour of more open-air livestock farming.
Farmers would be required to produce farm management plans, and those who moved towards more extensive systems would be rewarded.
Financial Times 12 November
Agriculture and Food
SAFE Alliance launched
A new campaigning organization, Sustainable Agriculture, Food and Environment (the SAFE alliance) has been launched in the UK.
It is founded on the premise that"agriculture is at a crossroads.
One way leads to further intensification, to environmental damage, to surpluses of unhealthy food, threats to public health and the destruction of rural communities.
The other leads to sustainable agriculture, which is beneficial to the environment, sensitive to consumer demand and produces safe and healthy food in a manner that is supportive of rural life and culture".
Backed by financier Sir James Goldsmith, the SAFE alliance includes groups such as Compassion in World Farming, the Genetics Forum, the Henry Doubleday Research Association, Parents for Safe Food, and the Soil Association, as well as the Women's Environmental Network, the Catholic Institute for International Relations and The Ecologist magazine.
It advocates the establishment of a "whole farm management scheme" , with incentives for environment-friendly farming which would be in line with the Alliance's principal objectives.
These include:, an end to unconditional price support schemes and the production of unnecessary agricultural surpluses;, a shift away from high-input farming, dependent on large amounts of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals, towards more extensive, low-input and organic agriculture;, strengthened protection for wildlife habitats;, the improvement of farm animal welfare standards;, a ban on the patenting of genetic material.
The alliance has a sister organization in France, and similar groups forming in Austria and Germany.
SAFE Alliance news release 18 November
Conservation: Land
Mining project threatens W. African rainforest
Details have emerged of a major open-cast iron ore strip-mining project which threatens one of the world's richest areas of biodiversity, the tropical rainforest of Mount Nimba in the West African state of Guinea.
The mine is due to open in 1993.
The project is being planned by the Nimba International Mining Company (NIMCO), a consortium of French, Japanese and US companies.
It reportedly plans to extract 9 million tonnes of ore a year by the end of 1993, in order to secure a contract from the European steel industry.
The company itself admits that the activity will cause "residual pollution" and will drive away from the area large animals such as chimpanzees, leopards and pygmy hippopotamuses.
Environmentalists contend that the effects on the fragile forest habitat could be disastrous, with numerous rare species of plants and amphibians unique to the area being pushed close to extinction.
Many are already threatened by poachers, mostly refugees from the civil war over the border in neighbouring Liberia.
The Mount Nimba range, which straddles Guinea, Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire, comprises some of Africa's richest rainforest.
Part of it was designated as a nature reserve in 1944, and its central area, which includes NIMCO's proposed mining operation, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site — which designation in theory prohibits any development whatsoever.
The Guinean government, which supports the project in return for royalties from the ore sales, is seeking to redraw the Heritage Site boundaries so as to exclude the mine area.
Meanwhile, NIMCO is planning to start operations before the completion of an environmental impact assessment commissioned by the World Bank.
New Scientist 30 November Friends of the Earth news release 27 November
Conservation: Land
Agreement over EC habitat conservation legislation
After years of debate, EC environment ministers have reached agreement on legislation to conserve natural habitats.
Under the plans, governments are obliged to designate, within the next two years, areas rich in wildlife and protected species and to file plans for their protection.
The agreement became possible when Spain lifted its veto after agreement had been reached on setting up a fund to help the Community's poorer members to pay for environmental protection measures.
Guardian 13 December New Scientist 21 December
Conservation: Land
More UK Ramsar and SPA sites announced
The government has announced the designation of two new sites under the "Ramsar" Convention on Wetlands of International Importance: Esthwaite Water, in Cumbria and Walmore Common, in Gloucestershire.
The latter has also been designated a Special Protection Area under the EC's Wild Birds directive, along with Abberton Reservoir, Essex, which became a Ramsar site in July 1991.
English Nature has identified 92 sites in England which merit SPA or Ramsar status.
Environmental groups have criticized the government for failing to designate Ramsar sites quickly enough.
English Nature news release 5 December
Conservation: Land
 "Wildlife Enhancement Scheme" launched
English Nature, the UK government's official conservation agency, has launched a new pilot scheme aimed at persuading occupiers and owners of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) to adopt conservationist practises in return for annual payments.
The "Wildlife Enhancement Scheme" , which is to be trialled in the Culm Measures of Devon and the Pevensey Levels of Sussex, will offer annual management payments in return for agreement from landowners/occupiers to manage the land for conservation, on the basis of a plan drawn up with the local English Nature officer.
, English Nature's grant-in-aid from the government for 1992-93 has been increased by £4.177 million to £36.588 million.
English Nature news releases 14, 28 November
Conservation: Land
Peat loss "has reached crisis level" 
The continued depletion of Britain's peat reserves has reached crisis point, according to English Nature, the government's official watchdog on nature conservation.
Of the original 34,500 hectares, only 500 hectares of pristine peat bog now remain.
Much of this is threatened, principally by peat extraction for use as compost in gardening and horticulture.
English Nature have responded by drawing up a lowland peatland policy, which includes commitments:, to oppose new planning applications for peat extraction on Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI);, to seek protection for SSSI sites which already have planning permission — by purchasing or leasing the site, providing grant aid for conservation management, or liaising with extractors to minimize damage;, to support the development of alternatives to peat.
According to Chief Executive Derek Langslow, the use of peat contributes to "the loss of some of the last remnants of Britain's primeval landscape, and to the destruction of a habitat which required thousands of years to develop" .
English Nature news release 18 November
Conservation: Species
Thailand's Wildlife Protection Bill
Thailand has passed new legislation aimed at bringing wildlife protection measures into line with international standards.
The new Bill covers introduced as well as native species and will allow ministers to decide which animals may be commercially bred.
Thailand has been criticised as having one of the world's worst records in the illegal wildlife trade.
Conservation organisations have claimed that increasing quantities of rare wildlife have been hunted and sold as exotic pets, food and medicine both in Thailand and abroad.
Earlier this year, the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) urged the 110 signatory countries of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) treaty to boycott all Thai wildlife products, threatening the country's highly profitable trade in legal wildlife products such as orchids and crocodile skins.
Speaking earlier at the Asian Institute of Technology, WWF President Prince Philip said: "Thailand ratified the Convention in 1963, but I'm sorry to have to say that no enabling legislation has so far been enacted" .
The new bill includes a second ban on the trading of sea turtles and rare coral.
An earlier ban failed to halt their destruction.
Bangkok Post 15, 22 November
Conservation: Species
CCMLR meeting — new fishing regulations for South Atlantic
New regulations aimed at preserving wildlife and natural resources have been imposed on the fishing industry in the South Atlantic.
The controls were voted in at the annual meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCMLR).
The 21-member organisation is responsible for reviewing scientific data and regulating the industry.
The new measures agreed are as follows:, Fishing boats in the South Atlantic must attach streamers to their nets in order to scare off sea birds.
The birds, in particular albatrosses, are attracted to the baited hooks which are used for long-line fishing, and become caught in the nets and killed;, Further restrictions are to be imposed on the establishment up of new fisheries in the area.
In the past, fisheries have been able to start up without adequate information about either the target stock or its role in ocean ecology.
Such plans will henceforth be subject to approval from CCMLR;, A limit of 1.5 million tonnes has been set on the amount of krill that can be caught.
In the past, the countries with the largest krill-catching fleets (the Soviet Union and Japan) have resisted any such restrictions.
New Scientist 16 November
Conservation: Species
Japanese agree to drift net ban
The Japanese government has unexpectedly agreed to a ban on drift net fishing.
Only in October, the Japanese were organizing a pro-drift net lobby [see ED 52].
It has announced its intention to co-sponsor with the USA a UN resolution imposing an indefinite moratorium on the use of drift nets from the end of 1992.
Japan had previously been the largest single user of the nets, which have been criticized as "walls of death" which caused widespread unintentional deaths of dolphins, whales and other sea creatures.
Its move follows prolonged pressure from the US Administration, which announced a ban on the import of drift-netted fish in September 1991 [see ED 51].
Drift nets up to 50 kilometres long are used primarily for catching tuna, squid and pink salmon.
But in 1990, it was estimated that Japan's drift net fishery was responsible for the deaths of 41 million sea creatures other than those it was seeking to catch.
These included 700,000 sharks, 270,000 seabirds, 26,000 marine mammals, such as whales and dolphins, and 406 sea turtles, which are an endangered species.
, EC fisheries ministers have agreed on a ban on the use of drift nets in the North Sea, in order to conserve dwindling fish stocks [see Agriculture and Food section].
Independent 27 November Financial Times 27 November Economist 30 November European 1-3 November
Conservation: Species
Norway and Japan continue "scientific" whale hunt
Norway and Japan have announced their intention to continue whaling for "scientific research" purposes.
Environment groups have claimed that the programmes are a cover-up for the continuation of commercial whaling [see ED 47].
Norway has announced that it intends to catch 382 minke whales over the next three years.
Japan, defying international condemnation for the fourth year running, has announced it's intention to kill 300 minke whales.
The North Norwegian Minke Whalers Association said that the government's move could be a first step towards resuming full commercial hunting.
The Association's president, Steinar Bastesen, said: "I believe we'll start commercial whaling…maybe in 1993" .
Last May, the International Whaling Commission (IWC) voted to uphold a ban on commercial whaling for one year.
Norway has no immediate plans to leave the IWC which last year rejected plans from Iceland and Japan to catch a limited number of whales.
Iceland later withdrew from the commission.
Norway's project will be assessed by the IWC and its scientific committee at the next annual meeting in Scotland in June.
Norway's foreign minister, Thorvald Stoltenberg, has refused to say whether Norway would go ahead with the hunt should its proposals be turned down.
Guardian 16 November, 3 December
Conservation: Species
US sockeye salmon designation may alter fate of Pacific Northwest rivers
The designation of the US Snake River sockeye salmon as an endangered species has given the National Marine Fisheries Service the power to overrule local industry and government in deciding the fate of the Columbia River system.
Although it has come too late to preserve the Snake River salmon in the wild, the ruling could save other salmon species in the same river system, and have far-reaching consequences for the agricultural and industrial economy of the Pacific Northwest.
Since the introduction of a series of hydroelectric dams in the 1930s, total numbers of fish in the rivers have declined from about 18 million to 2.5 million.
The dams have provided people and industry in the Pacific Northwest with clean, abundant power at only 40 per cent of the cost of electricity in most other US states.
However, as a result the young salmon or "smolts" now take six weeks to reach the Pacific, instead of the normal one week, by which time most of them die.
Last year, only four Snake River sockeye salmon reached their breeding grounds.
Fish stocks have continued to decrease despite expenditure of over $1 billion during the last decade in building fish ladders, screens over turbine intakes and hatcheries.
Habitat destruction and overfishing have also taken their toll.
Most experts agree that restoring the balance would entail a massive engineering project drawing down the levels of the reservoirs to below that of the dams to enable young fish to reach the sea quicker.
The new designation will enable the Fisheries Service to overrule opposition to drawing down the reservoirs that is expected from the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bonneville Power Administration, who control both the dams and the electricity they produce.
Washington Post 15 November
Conservation: Species
EC fur import ban
The EC has banned the use of leghold traps, and prohibited the import of the skins of certain species of wild animal which originate in countries which use the traps or similarly inhumane trapping methods.
The Community has agreed on a broad definition of the trap as: "a device designed to restrain or capture an animal by means of jaws which close tightly upon one or more of the animal's limbs" .
The legislation will be in force from 1995, but does not cover the fox, squirrel, bear, mink, polecat, wolverine and wildcat amongst others.
Concerned organisations are continuing their lobbying activities to have these animals included in the legislation.
Beauty Without Cruelty news release 15 November
Conservation: Species
WWF campaign to save Europe's most endangered mammal
The Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has launched a campaign to save Europe's most endangered mammal — the Saimaa ringed seal.
The organisation's plans conflict with those of the Finnish government, however, who also want to save the seal.
Only 180 Saimaa seals remain in their habitat in the Saimaa Canal, along Finland's south-eastern border with Russia.
Illegal hunting and industrial pollution from both sides of the canal are responsible for the demise of the colony, which numbered 15,000 in the 1960s.
The WWF and the University of Joensuu wants to set up a dozen seal reservations in the area, organising volunteers to hand-feed seals with protein-rich food to ensure that they reach breeding age.
They are seeking government assistance in the banning of hunting and limitation of pollution from local paper factories and ships.
The Finnish Ministry of Environment has rejected the WWF's proposal for a ban on the building of holiday homes in the area.
Such a ban would make the government liable to massive compensation to the 20,000 speculators who have already lodged planning applications.
Government representatives have claimed that the WWF "want to extend the conservation too far" claiming that its own plan is "more realistic" .
Tero Sipila, secretary of the Saimaa ringed seal committee, supports the scheme however: "The WWF plan will save the Saimaa seal.
We will continue to lobby for a ban on holiday cottages".
European 8-10 November
Conservation: Species
Scottish wildcat "hunted despite protection" 
The Scottish wildcat is still being hunted despite having been a protected species since 1988, according to a report from the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland.
The survey found that numbers of Britain's only native cat, Felix silvestris, have declined throughout Scotland, but most importantly in the north and west, where the cat is genetically purer than any other in Europe.
Interbreeding with feral cats is probably the biggest threat to the wildcat.
In a survey conducted between 1983 and 1987, the Independent Wildcat Working Group found that out of a group of 42 "wildcats" , only eight were genetically distinct from the domestic cat.
A third of wildcat populations had declined in recent years, and only 8 per cent were increasing.
According to the study, cats were shot, poisoned and snared by people who look after game birds.
It suggested that they might be unaware of the difference between feral and wildcats, or unaware of the law.
New Scientist 23 November
Conservation: Species
Red squirrel "faces extinction" in some areas
The red squirrel faces possible extinction in central and southern England and Wales, and a further decline in the north of England and Scotland, unless conservation measures are taken in the next 10-20 years, according to a survey by the Forestry Commission.
It concludes that the red squirrel is in decline because it is far less efficient at using woodland food than its rival — the North American grey squirrel.
The study claims that red squirrels have survived alongside grey squirrels for decades in forests in Norfolk and Staffordshire.
These have large areas of conifers and broadleaves which form seeds which the reds can exploit but the greys cannot.
Suggested methods of preserving the red squirrel include the replacement of trees with large nuts such as oak, beech and sweet chestnut with smaller seed species such as birch, rowan, willow, aspen and seed producing conifers such as larch and Scots pine.
Another method would be to make some of the 10 new forests planned for "de-commissioned" English farmland into reserves for the red squirrel.
Forestry Commission news release 5 November Independent 8 November
Conservation: Species
Farmed salmon threatens wild variety
Scotland's wild salmon population is in danger of being overwhelmed by the farmed variety, according to the findings of a study conducted by the Atlantic Salmon Trust.
Farmed salmon has been discovered in 13 out of 16 rivers on the west coast of Scotland, while salmon fishermen have reported that 40 per cent of their coastal and estuary catch contains farm-type salmon.
There are significant genetic and behaviourial differences between wild and farmed salmon, and the Trust fears that the farmed variety may replace the native fish.
Farmed salmon have much larger appetites, and may eventually deplete traditional salmon rivers of the resources on which the wild variety depend.
BBC Wildlife, January
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
Internationally-important wildlife sites in Spain are threatened by plans to dam the Monteagudo river in order to supply irrigation water to the tobacco growing industry.
The dam would flood one of the last remaining strongholds of the European lynx and the Spanish imperial eagle, and disrupt the habitat of black storks and wintering cranes.
The dam has been supported by EC funds.
The quagga, a sub-species of zebra distinctive for its lack of hindquarter stripes, is set for reintroduction into South Africa a century after it died out.
A four-year breeding programme at the Vrolijkheid Breeding Centre, aimed at "retrieving" the quagga by selection from weakly-striped zebras, has produced a foal which is very close to preserved quagga specimens.
Originally thought to be a separate species, the quagga was hunted to extinction last century, but its genes appear to have survived, dispersed among plains zebra.
Eleven European nations have concluded an Agreement on the Conservation of Bats, which includes provision for habitat conservation, the control of pesticides, and protection from killing.
Indonesian conservationists have reported that at least 1,000 orang-utangs have been smuggled from the country's forests via Singapore to Taiwan, where they are popular as pets before they grow to adult size.
Forty-four of the world's 53 subspecies of Asian hornbills are vulnerable to, or directly facing, extinction because of the loss of their forest habitat, principally due to logging, according to findings presented to a conference in Singapore.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has established a new nature reserve for the corncrake on the Scottish Hebridean island of Coll.
The reserve will be farmed in a way which benefits the bird, whose UK population has been reduced to 500 pairs, largely as a result of habitat destruction due to agricultural intensification.
Birds Magazine, Winter 1991 New Scientist 30 November BBC Wildlife, January (bats and hornbills) Independent 9 November RSPB News 5 November
Energy
Developing nations become main buyers of solar power technology
According to a report from the US Solar Energy Industries Association, sales of solar energy equipment have grown by more than 30 percent over the last two years, the vast majority being bought by developing countries.
A quarter of the sales went to Mexico alone.
Guatemala's Minister of Energy and Mines has announced a plan to set up a series of solar generating stations in rural areas currently without electricity, and similar initiatives are being considered by the governments of El Salvador and Panama.
Solar power is often easier to install in remote villages than power lines.
Remote solar installations can also be used to power telecommunications systems, water pumping stations and refrigerators to keep medical supplies cold.
Much of the expansion in solar energy has been funded with loans from international lending institutions.
New Scientist 9 November
Energy
Government gives boost to renewable energy
The government is to inject a record £130 million into renewable energy projects, including wind farms and recycling schemes, according to an announcement made to the House of Commons by junior energy minister, Colin Moynihan.
The combined projects could produce a total of 457MW by the end of 1998, and will more than triple the amount of renewable energy financed through the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation levy.
Moynihan said that the government is to reassess its target of 1000MW of renewable energy by the year 2000, as set out in the White Paper on the Environment.
Financial Times 6 November Guardian 6 November
Energy
Friends of the Earth attacks government gas plans
A report by Friends of the Earth (FoE) has attacked government plans for the expansion of the gas industry over the next five years.
The organisation accuses the government of failing to adopt a rigorous energy policy which would reduce wastage of natural resources and protect the environment.
According to the report, the government is set to increase power-station capacity in England and Wales by 39 percent and demand by 50 per cent by 1997.
Of 32 planned gas-fired power stations, three-quarters are badly designed and likely to waste more than half the gas they use.
The report was published at the same time as the opening of a public inquiry into National Power's plans to build a new 1,500 Mw combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT) station at Didcot, Oxfordshire.
CCGTs are more energy efficient than existing gas-fired stations, but still have an efficiency rating of only 50 per cent.
Only a quarter of the planned CCGTs have combined heat and power systems which capture waste energy in steam and use that to provide heat.
According to FoE energy campaigner Simon Roberts: "The government is standing back while a massive, unplanned and uncontrolled reconstruction of the electricity production system in the UK takes place within the next five years" .
Guardian 3 December
Energy
Orimulsion "unsuitable" 
Orimulsion, the new low-cost fuel imported from Venezuela [see EDs 51 and 52], is unsuitable for burning in power stations because of its unacceptably-toxic emissions and potential for increasing acid pollution, according to a report prepared for British Coal.
The two electricity-generating companies, National Power and PowerGen, are planning to substitute orimulsion for other fuels at two or more power stations.
The report, written by consultant David White, argues that the companies are ignoring several serious environmental issues, such as the likely emissions of vanadium and nickel compounds.
Dust of these heavy metal compounds can form toxic and/or carcinogenic substances, White warns, and while there may be ways in which the they can be combusted safely, substantially more study will have to be carried out.
 "The apparent suppression of the issue of toxicity is disturbing" , the report says.
The power companies deny that orimulsion is environmentally damaging and claim that it is possible to clean the heavy metals from flue gases, and that the sulphur content of orimulsion is lower than in some British coal.
Independent 27 December
Energy
Counties "fail to benefit from renewables" 
Friends of the Earth has criticized county councils for not taking renewable energy sources seriously.
It has published a survey showing that for Dyfed council in Wales, for instance, energy equivalent to the authority's annual electricity requirements could be generated locally from renewable sources, and that by the year 2000 Cornwall could meet one fifth of its energy needs locally, mainly from renewable sources.
A partial switch to renewable energy would reduce the production of carbon dioxide, create new jobs and generate considerable revenue.
, Britain's first commercial wind farm, based in Delabole in Cornwall, has been connected to the national electricity grid.
The £3.4 million project uses 10 turbines, each 132 feet tall.
, The UK government is reviewing its support for renewable energy projects.
The Department of Energy has recognized that its current termination date for subsidizing such projects, 1998, is too tight and that many projects will be unable to raise the necessary finance beyond that date and might have to be abandoned.
Independent 9 December Daily Telegraph 9 December Independent 30 December
Energy
World's first energy-saving hospital
In what is believed to be the first development of its kind, a new hospital under construction in north-eastern England is being fitted with a range of energy-saving features which may reduce annual energy bills by as much as 60 per cent.
Much of the energy saving at Wansbeck General Hospital will be achieved through novel applications of tried and tested methods, such as high standards of double glazing and insulation.
In addition, the hospital will rely on a high-wind turbine to provide around a fifth of its power; it will be enveloped in a plastic membrane to prevent heat loss; a computer programme will enable it to make the most efficient use of power from various sources (gas, oil, electricity, wind) depending on fluctuations in cost and availability; and heat exchangers and an on-site incinerator will recycle heat.
If they prove effective, some or all of these and other measures are likely to be "applied in other hospitals or other parts of the public and private sectors" , according to Frank Ward, the commissioning manager.
The hospital is due to open in 1993.
Independent 2 January
Environmental Politics
World Bank environmental reports on Africa and Asia
Twenty African countries have initiated or are considering initiating National Environmental Actions Plans (NEAPs), according to the latest World Bank report on the environment in Africa.
The NEAP process involves:(i) the identification of a country's environmental conditions and specific problems;(ii) preparation of proposals to overcome the problems; and (iii) formulation of a plan of action to deal with them over a specific period of time.
Lesotho, Madagascar and Mauritius are in the process of implementing schemes; Burkina Faso, Ghana, Rwanda and the Seychelles are about to.
Nigeria, home to a quarter of the population of sub-saharan Africa, is initiating NEAPs at federal and state level.
The World Bank has also published a preliminary report on the state of the environment in Asia.
The report speaks of extensive environmental degradation caused by high population growth, rapid urbanization and fast industrialization.
Among the "litany of environmental problems" it lists soil degradation, groundwater pollution, low quality of drinking water, deteriorating air quality and deforestation.
A major study of the Asian environment is due to be completed by mid-1992.
West Africa 4 November Far Eastern Economic Review 21 November
Environmental Politics
EC to aid poorer countries to meet environmental standards
European Community governments have agreed on the establishment of a "cohesion fund" to help poorer member states to meet their obligations under EC environmental directives.
The new fund will give financial support to Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland.
Hitherto member states were expected to pay for all environmental measures themselves.
Following the agreement, Spain withdrew its veto on a major initiative on the conservation of natural habitats [see under Conservation: Land].
New Scientist 21 December
Environmental Politics
EC green label agreed
Environment ministers of the European Community have agreed to introduce an "eco-label" aimed at enabling consumers to identify products which do least damage to the environment.
The label — showing a four-leaf daisy, the twelve stars symbolizing the EC, countries, and the letter "E" — is intended to harmonize standards across the Community and take the place of proliferating national labels and sometimes questionable environmental advertising.
The eco-label scheme, which is voluntary, will be run by a combination of national and EC-wide committees of experts which will set standards and also consider submissions from consumer groups, environmental lobbies, industry and commerce.
Product groups covered by separate legislation, such as food, pharmaceuticals and hazardous chemicals, are not covered by the scheme.
, The UK government is considering introducing a reduced rate of value-added tax (VAT) on environmentally friendly goods.
Officials in the Department of the Environment, which have been advocating such a move for some time against the opposition of the Treasury, have indicated that the introduction of differential rates is still some way off, however.
European Commission press release 19 December European 3 January Independent 23 December
Environmental Politics
Heseltine: "British industry missing out on environmental opportunities" 
According to the Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine, British industry risks losing out on the business opportunities opened up by the need for new equipment to assess and control environmental problems.
Speaking at the annual conference of the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), he quoted a recent study which indicated that the ratio of exports to imports of environmental technology had fallen from 8:1 to 1:1 in the 1980s.
He said that the message that "environment means business" had only been understood by few companies, and that small and medium-sized ones in particular had been slow to recognize the opportunities.
, A survey has shown that the number of major companies which have adopted corporate environmental policies rose from 41 per cent to 66 per cent in 1991.
Conducted by Environmental Policy Consultants, the survey also found that 74 per cent of companies wanted the government to enforce regulations more effectively.
It also showed that many companies remained ignorant of relevant environmental legislation at national and EC level.
Independent 6 November Guardian 6 November Environmental Policy Consultants press release 2 December
Environmental Politics
Greenpeace to gain Glastonbury funds from CND
The organizers of the Glastonbury Festival, Europe's largest pop concert, have decided to switch its annual donation from the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) to Greenpeace.
They made the transition because after ten years with CND, it was thought "important for the festival to move to the issues which will dominate the 1990s and the consciousness of young people" .
Guardian 11 November
Global Warming
Ozone depletion "delaying global warming" 
The depletion of the ozone layer may be delaying or limiting global warming, according to Dr Tony Cox, of the Natural Environment Research Council.
Ozone is itself a form of greenhouse gas — helping to retain the sun's reflected heat in the atmosphere -, and its destruction may be allowing more heat to escape than was hitherto thought, compensating for the increased heat retention caused by the build up of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases" .
(These include chlorofluorocarbons — CFCs — which are ironically also the prime cause of ozone depletion).
Current plans to limit damage to the ozone layer, while helping to prevent skin cancer and damage to crops from ultra-violet rays, might inadvertently help to accelerate global warming.
Some estimates suggest that CFCs direct contribution to the greenhouse effect might be more or less offset by their indirect effect of countering it by depleting ozone.
Satellite measurements show that ozone loss worldwide has amounted to 2.9 per cent over the past 10 years.
Existing models of global warming have not taken this into account, according to Cox.
He added that the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is currently reappraising its stance on global warming in the light of this.
, Leakages of natural gas from distribution mains and service pipes could form a significant part of the UK's contribition to global warming.
Some estimates suggest that up to 11 per cent of total gas supply in Britain is being lost.
With methane a more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, this could be contributing as much to global warming as is caused by the CO2 emitted from gas-fired power stations.
Nature 12 December (gas), 2 January Independent 20 December
Global Warming
US industrialists attack climate predictions
The Climate Council, a lobbying organization representing the US energy industry, has written to the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) warning that its projections — due to be included in a revised report on climate change to be published in the run-up to the UNCED in Rio de Janeiro — might be interpreted by outsiders as forecasts rather than as "scenarios" , as intended by the IPCC.
The IPCC is preparing a range of projections on emissions of carbon dioxide and global warming over the next 100 years on the basis of estimates of worldwide economic growth, energy use and technological change.
Many observers regard the letter by the Climate Council as an initial salvo in an effort to discredit the IPCC's projections, which put great emphasis on fossil fuels as a cause of global warming.
New Scientist 2 November
Global Warming
Snowless Alps within 100 years?
On present trends there will be little ice or snow left in the Alps by the year 2100, and lack of snow could eliminate winter sports from many mountain regions within 30 thirty years.
This claim is made by two scientists, David Pitt and Sten Nilsson, in Mountain World in Danger: Climate Change in the Forests and Mountains of Europe.
The authors also predict an increase in violent storms, fires, landslides and avalanches in the Alpine region as well as widespread deforestation.
They claim that their report is the first to outline the impact of global warming on snow and ice-covered regions.
Independent 12 November New Scientist 16 November
Nuclear Power
UKAEA report warns of radioactive waste left in Gulf
A secret report by the UK Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) has warned that the UN Coalition left at least 40 tonnes of depleted uranium on the Gulf War battlefield in Kuwait and southern Iraq.
The uranium was contained in tens of thousands of armour-piercing rounds fired at Iraqi vehicles from aircraft and tanks in early 1991.
This toxic and radioactive waste threatens the long-term health of thousands of Kuwaitis, according to the AEA, whose report was leaked to The Independent on Sunday.
Although the amounts could cause the deaths of up to 500,000 people, the conditions for this to occur were not present.
The real danger, according to the AEA report, comes from uranium dust produced on impact with targets.
The inhalation of airborne uranium particles could lead to "unacceptable body burdens" .
There was also a danger that particles would enter the food chain or water.
On the basis of its assessment of the size of the problem, the AEA offered to devise a clean-up plan in April 1991.
But as yet no action has been taken by British government departments.
The AEA believes that some of the waste could still be properly and safely cleared if a decision to this effect was taken soon.
The report was prepared by decommissioning and decontamination experts working for AEA Technology, the authority's commercial arm.
Independent on Sunday 10 November
Nuclear Power
US Energy Department admits to radioactive emissions
The US Energy Department has acknowledged that, since the 1950s, substantial amounts of radioactive tritium gas have been emitted into the air and water from its nuclear weapons plant in Savannah River, South Carolina.
In a 133-page report, the department blamed "human error" for the emissions.
It said that human exposure to the gases were below government limits and there was no evidence that anyone had been harmed by them.
In response to its publication, the Energy Secretary, James D. Watkins, ordered his officials to prepare a detailed action plan to control emissions of tritium (a radioactive isotope of hydrogen used to enhance the explosive power of nuclear warheads).
Local people and organizations have been complaining for years about high levels of tritium found in groundwater, drinking water and in milk from local dairies.
The report stated, while radioactive material in local milk was within permissible levels, airborne radioactive emissions from the plant were "well above the average" of commercial nuclear reactors.
Washington Post 9 November
Nuclear Power
Soviets contravened dumping agreement
Allegations made in Moscow suggest that, in contravention of the 1983 London Dumping Convention, Soviet authorities secretly continued to dump thousands of tons of radioactive waste in the sea off the northern coast until 1986.
The Soviet Union was one of the convention's initial signatories.
The practices were revealed in a report by Andrei Zolotkov, a chemical engineer and Supreme Soviet deputy, at a press conference called to coincide with the annual follow-up meeting of the member countries.
, According to US sources, Soviet nuclear scientists have set up a private company, CHETEK, to carry out the incineration of toxic chemicals and decommissioned nuclear reactors in underground nuclear plants.
This is seen as the first sign that Soviet nuclear scientists, who are threatened by redundancy following the disintegration of the union, will seek to sell their skills to the highest bidders.
Guardian 26 November New Scientist 16 November
Nuclear Power
Taiwan denies plans to dump waste in South China Sea
The Taiwan Atomic Energy Council has denied a report in the Hongkong Standard that it is planning to co-operate with its mainland counterpart to dump nuclear waste off the coast of Guangdong province in southern China.
Taiwan, which has three nuclear power plants, currently stores radioactive waste on a small island off the southeastern coast.
This dump is expected to be full within eight years.
The 1983 London Dumping convention strictly prohibits the dumping of nuclear waste into the sea.
Central News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 28 November
Nuclear Power
German research centre shut down because of contamination
The German environmental authorities have closed down the Central Institute for Isotope and Radiation Research, a nuclear research centre based in East Berlin after officials discovered massive contamination of the soil on the premises during routine tests.
Readings showed levels of 56,000 becquerels per kilogram in vegetation and soil samples.
The German safety limit is 20 becquerels per kilogram.
Officials said that the contamination probably began in the 1950s.
According to the head of Berlin's Radiation Measurement Office, Udo Morfeld, the pollution has not created as big a problem as it could have because the clay soil has slowed down the seepage of radioactive material into the groundwater.
New Scientist 23 November
Nuclear Power
Nirex unveils plans for underground depository
Nirex, the UK nuclear industry's waste disposal company, has announced its plans for the storage of Britain's nuclear waste in an underground repository near Sellafield in Cumbria.
The project, which will involve digging of two sloping tunnels, excavating disposal chambers deep in the basement rock and constructing a rack-and-pinion railway, will cost around £1.25 billion.
It is due to be completed by 2005.
Only intermediate- and low-level radiation will be stored in the repository.
High-level waste will remain stored at the surface for at least 90 years.
New Scientist 14 December Independent 12 December
Nuclear Power
BNFL plant polluting river, says FoE
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has claimed that radioactive waste from the Springfields nuclear plant is contaminating parts of the River Ribble in Lancashire.
It says that the discharges from the plant, which is run by British Nuclear Fuels (BNFL), are carried upstream to Preston on the incoming tide and deposited in mudflats used by children to play.
While FoE is not arguing that children are exposed to radiation levels above legal limits, it is criticizing BNFL for not doing enough to fulfil its legal obligation to reduce the radioactivity of its discharges to the minimum.
In confidential papers presented to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, BNFL argued that it would not be commercially viable to reduce discharges from the Springfields plant.
Guardian 18 November
Ozone Layer
Plans to reduce ozone damage by ships
The International Maritime Organization (IMO), the UN organization responsible for the regulation of commercial shipping worldwide, has agreed a series of measures to reduce pollution from ships.
They include new specifications to reduce pollutants in the exhaust gases from ships' engines and bans on the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in refrigeration and air-conditioning systems and on halons in new fire extinguishing equipment.
The latter in particular is expected to lead to a significant cut in overall emissions of halons, which are less common than CFCs but more damaging to the ozone layer.
The measures will take effect from January 1992 and are to be incorporated into the Convention on Marine Pollution (MARPOL).
New Scientist 16 November Guardian 8 November
Ozone Layer
Cancer fear in ozone study
The thinning of the ozone layer presents a major threat to human health, according to a report prepared by the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) and leaked to Greenpeace.
The UNEP report calculates that a 10 per cent decrease in the ozone layer could cause 300,000 cases of skin cancer a year worldwide (an increase of 26 per cent) and up to 1.75 million cases of eye cataracts (an increase of 8 per cent ), and would affect people's immune systems, leading to an increase in the incidence of infectious and other diseases.
Financial Times 2 December
Ozone Layer
Ozone layer "could be repaired" 
Three US scientists have suggested a way in which the hole in the ozone layer might be repaired.
Writing in Science, Ralph Cicerone, Scott Elliott and Richard Turco propose the injection of ethane or propane into the stratosphere to react with chlorine to form hydrogen chloride.
This would remove chlorine from the chain of reactions which destroys ozone.
The authors stress that their proposal, based on computer simulations, remains "sensitive to many assumptions" , that "serious uncertainties remain" , and that many practical difficulties would have to be overcome.
They note that: "Before any actual injection experiment is undertaken, there are many scientific, technical, legal and ethical questions to be faced, not the least of which is the issue of unintended side effects" .
The authors hold out the hope that at a future date, when the processes involved are better understood, the damage done to the ozone layer may be reversed.
New Scientist 30 November
Ozone Layer
Ozone research station in Arctic
A European centre for ozone research has been opened in Kiruna, in northern Sweden.
The aim of the new centre, Arena Arctica, is to collect and process date from space brought down with balloons or specially equipped aircraft from altitudes of 35 kilometres.
The "European Stratospheric Ozone Experiment" is sponsored by the European Space Research Station (Esrange).
Swedish International Press (SIP) digest, 12 December
Pollution: Air
UN accord to cut vehicle emissions
Thirty European and N. American countries have approved a UN-brokered accord to cut emissions of volatile organic compounds by 30 per cent by the year 2000.
The compounds are a major cause of low-level ozone pollution and photo-chemical smog, which has been blamed for damaging human health and contributing to "acid rain" attacks on plants, forests and crops.
The compounds are found in petrol, paints, glues, inks and other solvents.
They are largely removed from motor vehicles by catalytic converters.
Independent 20 November Financial Times 20 November International Herald Tribune 19 November
Pollution: Air
California introduces cleaner petrol regulations
The State of California's Air Resources Board has announced new regulations for petrol, providing for a 30 per cent cut in emissions of air pollutants.
The change must take effect by March 1996.
It is expected to reduce the state's total emissions of air pollutants by about 5 per cent, or 1,435 tonnes per day.
As a first step, the sale of leaded petrol will be banned from January 1992.
International Herald Tribune 25 November
Pollution: Air
Thai government raises environment profile
the Thai government has announced for the creation of a new "sub-cabinet" , to be chaired by the Prime Minister, with the task of setting and co-ordinating environmental policy.
It would supervize the work of three new agencies within the Science Ministry, concerned respectively with pollution control, environmental protection, and planning and policy.
Provincial authorities and local government will be empowered to take action against infringements of environmental law, with the government reserving the right to intervene if the law is not properly enforced.
In another move, environmental groups will be allowed to apply for legal status and funds to "assist" the authorities to enforce the law.
The government is also planning to establish an environment fund, out of which payments will be made to assist industry to cut emissions of pollutants.
, The tax on polyisobutane — a "low-smoke" motorcycle lubricant — has been cut from 40 per cent to 5 per cent, to encourage riders to switch to it from conventional, dirtier oils.
Motorcycle emissions are one of the chief causes of Bangkok's mounting air pollution problem.
, The Thailand Bicycle Association has launched a campaign for more cycleways in the capital.
Bangkok Post 22, 29 November
Pollution: Air
Mexico announces new anti-pollution programme
The Mexican government has announced new measures designed to combat the capital's growing air pollution problem [see ED's passim].
Industries will be banned from using high-sulphur content fuels, the use of government cars in winter will be cut by 30 per cent, and production at the city's two electricity plants reduced by the same amount.
Emission standards for cars will be tightened, forcing older models off the road altogether.
A series of other steps will be triggered by particularly high levels of low-level ozone pollution.
When this reaches 200-350 points on the standard Imeca air quality scale, industrial activity must be cut by 30-40 per cent; when the Imeca points rise to 350-400, industrial activity must be reduced by 50-75 per cent .
Ozone levels in October reached 340 points — four times the World Health Organization's maximum recommended exposure levels.
Each month during 1991 saw average ozone levels reach new highs.
Environmentalists have criticized the new measures as insufficient.
 "We had been hoping for something more dramatic" , one said.
Guardian 23 November Financial Times 26 November
Pollution: Air
Kuwait's last oil fire capped
The last of the oil fires in Kuwait, which had been started when retreating Iraqi forces ignited well heads, has been capped.
The fires had burned for approximately eight months, consuming about two million barrels of oil at a cost to Kuwait of US$100 billion.
The 732 fires were extinguished by 27 fire-fighting teams including that of the Texan, Red Adair.
Initial estimates that it would take at least two years to kill all the fires proved pessimistic as the teams rapidly gained experience in the task.
The teams included ones from Iran, China, the Soviet Union, Hungary, Romania, France and the UK, in addition to the US and Kuwait.
Of Kuwait's total of 935 oil wells, 749 were damaged as a result of Iraq's occupation and the ensuing war.
Daily newspapers, 7, 8 November
Pollution: Air
Germany estimates cost of cleaning up the east
A government-commissioned report has calculated the cost of cleaning up the severely polluted industrial areas of the former East Germany at 17.8 billion deutschmarks.
The study specifically examined the chemical and energy industries in the central region around Leipzig, Halle and Bitterfeld.
It reported that the intolerably high pollution levels, at up to 100 times those permissible in the west, continued despite the closing of many ageing plants.
Industries in the area were discharging as much sulphur dioxide as all of west Germany put together, and two-thirds of water from factories and residual sewage were discharged untreated.
International Herald Tribune 13 December
Pollution: Air
Pollution's costs for European forestry
Losses of European forests due to air pollution are running at US$29 billion per year, according to the first study ever to attempt such an estimate of pollution's financial impact on tree reserves.
In its report, Future Forest Resources of Western and Eastern Europe, the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis warns that the losses will continue at the same rate over the next 100 years unless urgent steps are taken to reverse them.
The study covers the whole of Europe, including the western area of the former Soviet Union.
The financial cost is calculated on the basis of both direct losses — as a result of reduced earnings for the timber and wood processing industries — and indirect ones in the form of the loss of the forests' environmental and social benefits, such as their protection of soil and water resources and their tourism and amenity value.
Up to 16 per cent of the total potential timber harvest is being lost due to the death or damage to trees by "acid rain" -type emissions of sulphur and nitrogen gases.
The situation is such that by 2010, timber supplies might not be able to keep up with demand.
The most severe losses are in Poland, Czechoslovakia and eastern Germany.
If the impact on human health, buildings and infrastructure is included, the report estimates that air pollution is costing Europe between $160 billion and $260 billion per year.
Financial Times 29 November
Pollution: Air
Alpine forests devastated by acid rain
According to a study sponsored by the Swiss government, two thirds of the country's trees have more than 10 per cent damage to leaves and needles due to acid rain, and a fifth of the total are seriously ill.
The Sanasilva report noted that the condition of the oak, spruce and Scots pine, the main species in the Alps, is the worst on record since the phenomenon of dying forests was first documented in the region in 1985.
European 6 December
Pollution: Air
First UK air pollution warning
Air pollution in Britain's major cities reached the highest levels since records began in 1976 during a spell of cold and still weather in mid-December which prevented the usual dispersal of pollutants such as nitrogen dioxide from traffic fumes and sulphur dioxide from power stations.
As indicators showed that the quality of air fell to "very poor" in some areas, the government issued a health warning and urged people in London and other cities not to use their cars unless absolutely necessary, asthmatics and people with chest complaints to stay indoors, and those taking exercise outdoors to stop doing so until conditions changed.
It was the first time that such appeals have been made.
Experts declared that the main cause of the pollution was nitrogen dioxide (unlike the smogs in London during the 1950s, which were mainly caused by sulphur dioxide) and warned that this form of pollution would become more prevalent as road traffic increases.
Guardian 12, 14 December Financial Times, 21 December
Pollution: Air
Incinerator closure "sets precedent" 
The UK government has ordered the closure for modifications of a Derbyshire incinerator which was emitting dioxins, after milk from three nearby farms was found to contain the chemical at densities above the permitted level.
Water samples taken from the River Dee below the Coalite Chemicals incinerator have shown levels of dioxin at up to 1,000 times normal background readings.
The incinerator is not thought to be exclusively responsible for the high local levels of dioxin.
However, its closure, ordered under new legislation which insists that the best available technology be used to combat pollution, may set a precedent for hundreds of other incinerators across the country.
Many which currently emit dioxins within permitted levels may still be compelled to close until they have been modified to cut emissions further.
The farms affected, which currently have to throw away their milk, will be compensated under the "polluter pays" principle, once the source of the contamination has been conclusively established.
Guardian 8 November
Pollution: Air
Heseltine refuses permission for toxic waste plant
The Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine, has refused an application for the construction of a toxic waste incinerator near Doncaster in South Yorkshire, because of the threat it poses to water supplies.
The decision was based primarily on the risk of contamination to the South Yorkshire aquifer, which has no shield of impermeable clay.
It was also influenced by the possible effect on landscape, health and food quality in the area.
The decision was welcomed by Greenpeace and other environmentalist groups, which are also opposed to six other similar proposals.
They criticize them as a blueprint for turning Britain into Europe's toxic dump.
Guardian 13 November
Pollution: Water
Algae catastrophe in New South Wales
The authorities in the Australian state of New South Wales have formed a task force to combat a disastrous algae outbreak on the Darling river system, which is killing large numbers of fish and livestock and disrupting drinking water supplies.
It is the worst outbreak ever recorded in the country, and possibly the world.
The Darling system covers 10 per cent of Australia's land surface and is essential for one of the country's main agricultural areas.
The algal bloom stretches for over 600 miles from Mungindi on the Queensland border to Wilcannia, New South Wales, and is spreading southwards towards the Murray river.
Its principal cause is a prolonged drought in eastern Australia, which has reduced the river's flow and sediment levels, and allowed sunlight to penetrate its depths, precipitating algal growth.
This has been encouraged by a build-up of phosphate levels as a result of fertilizer run-off from the intensively farmed areas in the river basin.
The outbreak is killing off large numbers of fish, which die for lack of oxygen, and many sheep and cattle, which die of thirst due to the absence of drinkable water.
The head of the task force, hydrologist John Verhoeven, warned that "there is nothing to fight it over such a vast range." 
The area affected is too large for control by chemical spraying.
Independent 30 November
Pollution: Water
South Korea, Japan, China and Soviet Union in marine life pact
South Korea, Japan, China and the Soviet Union have agreed to form a regional environmental co-operation committee aimed at limiting waste disposal, preventing accidents, and preserving marine life.
The main areas for attention are to be the Yellow Sea and the Sea of Japan.
Each of the four countries is to submit a report based on national surveys in March 1992.
A second meeting will take place in October in either Beijing or Tokyo.
Yonhap News Agency, Seoul (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 4 November
Pollution: Water
EPA steps up water-pollution controls
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced plans to impose limits on discharges of toxic chemicals into waterways on the 18 states and the District of Columbia which have thus far failed to adopt EPA-approved standards.
Under the nationwide plan to control water pollution adopted by Congress and worked out by the EPA, the states were obliged to adopt standards for 105 pollutants by February 1990.
Five states did so by the deadline, and 26 others did so by November 1991.
The remaining 18 have, in the eyes of the EPA, failed to regulate enough pollutants or failed to set sufficiently strict limits.
Washington Post 7 November
Pollution: Water
Gulf states criticized over pollution
A Saudi official, Nasser Othman al-Saleh, general manager of the Saudi Fisheries Company, has strongly criticized the six member countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) for neglecting pollution in the Gulf region.
 "Pollution of the Gulf is no longer a passing phase but has become a persistent and permanent feature of the region's life" , he declared in a research paper presented to a GCC conference in Dubai.
The major sources of pollution were oil spills, discharges from refineries and natural seepage from oil-bearing strata.
Other sources were land reclamation (which damages fish and shrimp nurseries) and sewage disposal (which contaminates seafood supplies).
The problems were exacerbated by the slow circulation of water in the shallow and semi-enclosed Gulf, the evaporation of water in the summer (which concentrates pollutants) and the decline in the supply of fresh water flowing into the waterway (because of use of the waters of the Euphrates and Tigris for irrigation and electricity generation).
 "It is imperative that the GCC countries establish a dynamic institutional machinery to monitor data on oil spills and enforce a sense of environmental discipline" , al-Saleh said.
Middle East Times 19 November
Pollution: Water
Pacific land reclamation may devastate marine life
Australian soil scientists claim that draining wetlands in the Pacific region triggers the release of lethal quantities of sulphuric acid and aluminium hydroxide into coastal rivers and estuaries, threatening fish and other marine life.
The release of these chemicals following drainage has been recognized for some time, but researchers at the Australian national research organization (CSIRO) now offer an explanation of the cause and also point to the great risks involved in large-scale land reclamation projects.
The soils underneath the wetlands contain high levels of iron pyrites, the end product of the decomposition of organic matter trapped under the water since the rise of sea levels at the end of the last ice age.
When the wetlands are drained the iron pyrites in the soil are exposed to air and form sulphur acid.
This in turn strips aluminium from clay in the soil to form aluminium hydroxide.
The scientists warn that the deposits of pyrites are too large to neutralize by liming.
Draining the wetlands — carried out mainly as a response to agricultural pressures — would create deathtraps for marine life and, ironically, also destroy the productivity of the soil.
 "Some areas just shouldn't be developed" , according to Ian White of CSIRO.
New Scientist 30 November
Pollution: Water
Organophosphates to be phased out from Mediterranean
All countries bordering the Mediterranean except Albania have agreed to phase out the use of organophosphate pesticides, which are hazardous to human health and the environment, by the year 2005.
The countries have also committed themselves to (i) promoting integrated pest management in agriculture and (ii) providing financial and technical support to farmers to help them introduce non-chemical methods of controlling pests.
Pesticide News December
Pollution: Water
Seaweed "spreads like cancer" on Riviera
Tropical seaweed is spreading rapidly along the French riviera in the vicinity of Monaco and Toulon, threatening to disrupt the coastal ecosystem.
The weed, caulerpa taxifolia, is believed to have established itself in 1984, when tropical fish aquariums in a Monaco museum were emptied into the sea.
It is concentrated in dense masses around Cap Martin, but has been sighted over 130 kilometres away near Toulon.
According to Professor Charles Boudouresque of Marseilles University, "the Mediterranean faces an ecological disaster if the seaweed continues to proliferate at its present rate" .
Experts are calling on the French Navy to assist in cleaning out the weed.
European 20-22 December
Pollution: Water
A fifth of Sweden's lakes poisoned
Environmental authorities have reported that 14,000 of Sweden's 80,000 lakes have been poisoned by acid rain.
They warn that the number of lakes affected may double within a few decades unless air pollution in Europe is halved.
Independent 15 November Guardian 14 November
Pollution: Water
Bulgaria halts production at lead plant
The Bulgarian government has decided to suspend production at the country's biggest lead plant for several months because it is causing severe pollution to nearby agricultural land.
Concern for the plant's impact on the environment had already led to a cut in production earlier in the year to the minimum necessary to keep the plant's systems in operation.
Financial Times 31 December
Pollution: Water
NRA reveals decline in water quality, proposes tighter rules
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has confirmed that there has been a "real and significant deterioration" in the quality of some waterways in England and Wales between 1985 and 1990 [see also ED 52].
Over the five-year period the quality, of 4 per cent of rivers, 8 per cent of canals and 2 per cent of estuaries had been downgraded.
The survey did find, however, that 89 per cent of rivers, 90 per cent of canals and 90 per cent estuaries were of either "good" or "fair" quality.
According to the report, the overall net downgrading can be explained in part by the increased monitoring effort of the NRA and by the hot and dry summers of 1989 and 1990, which in many areas reduced the amount of water available to dilute the inputs of contaminating waste.
Of greater concern was the decline in quality resulting from the increased inputs of pollutants by sewage works and industrial plants.
At the same as it released its survey of the quality of waterways, the NRA published a major consultation paper on a new framework for setting statutory water quality objectives for all rivers, lakes, canals, estuaries and underground and coastal waters.
This calls for the adoption of much stricter and legally binding standards.
The implications would be widespread.
In some areas the cost of improving water quality could be substantial, the paper says, and it is likely to have an impact on investment, employment and on prices paid by consumers.
The paper notes specifically that companies would have to invest more in pollution prevention and farmers would have to introduce measures to prevent water being polluted by run-offs from their land.
, The NRA has put what it describes as "tough" limits on emissions from a chemical plant operated by the ICI company at Wilton, Teeside.
The required reductions in discharges are to be phased in over four years.
ICI welcomed the new limits, saying that they were in line with its own aim of cutting discharges by half by 1995.
National Rivers Authority 11 December Financial Times 12 December, 3 January Guardian 12 December
Pollution: Water
MPs call for tougher measures on sea pollution
The all-party Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons has called for stricter regulations to prevent pollution by oil and chemical spills at sea.
In a report on sea pollution, the committee declared that existing legal sanctions against discharges were "virtually ineffective" and did not act as a deterrent.
It also criticized the Department of Transport (DTp) for not applying them vigorously and called on the department to widen the scope of inspections and review methods of enforcement.
The report also noted that levels of cover under insurance and compensation arrangements are well short of the costs arising from a major pollution incident.
The committee calls for international agreements on improved tanker design and insurance cover, and calls on the DTp to issue strict guidelines on tanker routes.
Although the committee accepts the DTp's contention that individual pollution accidents had hitherto had little effect, it believes that the rise in incidents in the crowded North Sea and English Channel is a serious "cause for concern" .
Financial Times 8 November Guardian 8 November Independent 8 November
Pollution: Water
Britain's beaches "dirtier than ever" 
Twenty-four per cent of British bathing beaches failed to meet minimum EC safety standards for water quality in 1991 — an increase of one per cent on the previous year.
A total of 109 out of 453 designated bathing beaches failed to meet the standards, compared to 103 out of 446 in 1990.
Announcing the figures, Environment Minister David Trippier claimed that heavy rains were in part to blame for overloading coastal sewage treatment systems, while the preceding drought meant that a higher density of sewage bacteria had been carried in rivers.
 "Many more schemes are due to be completed in the next few years, so that by 1995 virtually all our bathing waters will be up to the required standard" , Trippier claimed.
Britain had originally affirmed its intention to meet EC bathing water standards by 1985.
The question of coastal water quality and sewage treatment was one of the main issues raised at the time of water privatization in 1989.
Independent 13 November Guardian 13 November
Transport
US car industry fights "green" proposals
The US car industry has formed a new alliance to challenge a bill which would compel car makers to increase fuel efficiency by 40 per cent over the next decade.
The "Coalition for Vehicle Choice" argues that this could only be achieved by the production of smaller and lighter cars, which it claims can be less safe in crashes than bigger ones.
To this end, it has produced advertisements suggesting that more lives could be at risk if people switched to smaller cars.
Supporters of the legislation point out however that the number of car accident deaths is continuing to decline, even though the proportion of small cars on America's roads is increasing.
New Scientist 16 November
Transport
Car pooling scheme gains ground
The founders of a German car pooling scheme are planning to extend it to other European countries.
Over the last three years, the Stattauto ( "car alternative" ) scheme has involved 1,800 German families, banding together in groups of up to 30 people each to buy a car, which is then rented out among the group at the rate of US$2 per hour — substantially cheaper than commercial rates.
The Stattauto scheme is now to be expanded into Sweden, Austria and the Netherlands.
European 13-15 December
Transport
 "Better" catalytic converters
Dutch scientists have developed catalytic converters which they claim are both cheaper and more environment-friendly than conventional ones.
The new "cats" are made out of copper and chromium (as opposed to the normal platinum, rhodium and palladium), and reportedly work as effectively as normal ones while avoiding the production of by-products such as nitrous oxide and hydrogen sulphide.
Converters made of chromite and copper oxide were considered as long ago as the 1970s, but ruled out because they proved less effective than those containing the more precious metals.
The new model, developed by the University of Amsterdam with funding from the Dutch government and the Peugeot car company, is planned to come into production by 1993 — the EC deadline by which all new cars must contain catalytic converters.
New Scientist 16 November
Tropical Forests
Brazil rainforest rescue plan launched
Brazil is to receive US$250 million worth of international aid to help conserve the Amazon forest.
The programme has been agreed between the EC, Group of Seven and the World Bank, which will approve all projects through a newly-formed "Rainforest Trust" .
The programme lays much emphasis on scientific research, with over $100 million earmarked for academic work.
It will also help fund the establishment of new national parks, tribal homelands and extractive reserves for activities such as rubber tapping and Brazil nut gathering.
New Scientist 21-28 December
Tropical Forests
Mosquito Coast forest at risk from development deal
The fragile ecology of Honduras's Mosquito Coast is threatened by an agreement between Chicago-based multinational, the Stone Container Corporation, and the Honduran government.
Under the agreement, Stone is entitled to exploit 340,000 hectares of pinewoods in the area.
Although Stone is committed to replanting the woods, and is expressly forbidden to exploit neighbouring hardwood forests, ecologists and local Indian communities fear that the whole Mosquito Coast will be vulnerable from "spin-off" development resulting from the construction of roads into the area.
These are expected to attract waves of settlers and slash and burn farmers into the area, leading to widespread forest destruction and the consequent impoverishment of the soil seen elsewhere in Latin America.
The region's wetlands, mangrove swamps and coral reefs are also seen as under threat.
Other companies are preparing plans for the disposal of oil and toxic waste.
The area is home to the Tawahka Indians — one of the last hunter-gathering tribes left in Central America.
The agreement goes to the Honduran Congress for approval in January.
Independent 16 November
Tropical Forests
Panama "will lose forests in 25 years" 
New studies have revealed that Panama's remaining tropical forests will disappear within 25 years unless urgent conservation measures were taken.
According to reports by the Institute of Renewable Natural Resources and other non-governmental organizations, the annual deforestation rate has reached 80,000 hectares, threatening economic disaster, with rivers losing their depth and the sedimentation capacity of the Panama Canal severely reduced.
Local press reports suggest that forest reserves are currently being exploited four times faster than the law allows.
Caribbean Times 3 December
Tropical Forests
Fall in Brazil nut price threatens Amazon forest
The recent collapse in the producer price of Brazil nuts has threatening implications for swathes of the Amazon forest, since local people whose livelihoods depend on gathering the nuts may be forced to resort to slash-and-burn agriculture.
The Brazil nut tree cannot be cultivated, and grows only in unspoiled rainforest.
The combination of a poor harvest last year, and declining demand in the West due to recession, has forced the castanheiros, as the nut gatherers are known, to explore alternative ways of making a living, by expanding their crop-growing or cattle-rearing activities.
New Scientist 21 December
Tropical Forests
Campaign against tropical timber intensifies
Friends of the Earth has called for a boycott of all timber products from Britain's leading "do-it-yourself" chain stores, on the grounds that their import of tropical hardwoods is contributing to rainforest destruction.
According to FoE, most of the tropical hardwood imported into the UK comes from "unsustainable" sources.
Britain's principal suppliers are Indonesia, Malaysia, Brazil, Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana.
In 1990, it imported over 900,000 cubic metres of tropical timber, and nearly eight million finished tropical timber products.
One of the stores targeted by FoE, the B&Q chain, has announced it intends to phase out all imports of unsustainably-produced tropical timber by 1995 — the target date set by the World Wide Fund for Nature.
Conservation News Update (WWF) 29 October Friends of the Earth news release 8 November
Tropical Forests
ITTO meeting "inconclusive" 
The latest meeting of the International Tropical Timber organization (ITTO), which groups together leading producer and consumer countries, produced little firm conclusions, leaving many members predicting that the organization would soon wither away.
ITTO had intended to build up a consensus towards achieving full sustainability in tropical forestry by the year 2000.
But it emerged at the meeting, held in Yokohama, Japan, that only seven of its 47 member governments had prepared strategies for meeting this target.
The only firm suggestion to emerge from the meeting was a commitment by the Malaysian state of Sarawak to cut logging by 1.5 million cubic metres a year over the next two years.
An ITTO mission to Sarawak in 1990, led by the Earl of Cranbrook, had concluded that the state could sustain a harvest of 9.2 million cubic metres a year, if it undertook widespread conservation measures [see ED 41/42].
Since then, Sarawak's logging activity has increased: official figures suggest it is taking at least 18 million cubic metres, with a possible further illegal cut of seven million cubic metres.
At present rates, the state will be logged out by 1997.
ITTO's failure to control the Sarawak situation has been strongly criticized by environmentalists, who claim that the state's latest proposal to reduce logging is too little, too late.
Guardian 27 November New Scientist 14 December
Tropical Forests
Malaysian campaign against Western environmentalists
The Malaysia government is to launch a campaign to counter "the lies" told by Western environmentalists arguing against the logging of the country's remaining rainforests.
Primary Industries Minister Lim Keng Yaik said the campaign would include the production of videos and pamphlets to defend the country's forestry practises.
Lim said that he had a "lingering suspicion" that the campaign against Malaysian logging was being financed by Western softwood timber producers — an allegation made earlier by the Timber Exporters Association of Malaysia.
Bernama News Agency, Kuala Lumpur, 16 December (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Tropical Forests
Brazilian President declares Yanomami reserve
In a surprise move, Brazilian President Fernando Collor de Mellor has issued a decree establishing a reserve for the Yanomami people on their traditional lands in north-eastern Brazil.
The Yanomami Park will cover 9,400 million hectares on the border with Venezuela.
Some 9,000 Yanomami live in the area, with a further 12,000 in Venezuela.
The declaration of the reserve followed a long-running campaign by environmental groups, led by Survival International, which had threatened to organize a boycott of next year's UNCED conference in protest at the Brazilian government's repeated failure to honour promises to recognize Yanomami land rights.
In recent years, the tribe has been badly affected by malaria, measles and other diseases brought in by prospecting miners, and by inroads into their traditional forest lands.
Survival International news releases Daily newspapers Nov. 17-18
Waste and Recycling
US scientists plan research on deep-sea dumping
Scientists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in the USA have asked Congress to amend an existing ban on dumping toxic waste at sea, to allow them to dump sewage sludge on the ocean floor in the Atlantic for research purposes.
The scientists believe, contrary to many colleagues and environmentalists, that the ocean environment is not as fragile as previously thought and will be able to process and absorb sewage sludge (the residue from sewage-treatment plants), thus providing a safer and cheaper method of dealing with it than landfill dumping or burning.
International Herald Tribune 3 December
Waste and Recycling
Australian project turns bottles into pipes
A company in South Australia, Rib Loc, has developed a technique for turning plastic bottles into pipes.
The pipe-making process was first developed by Bill Menzel, but has become economically competitive since recycled plastic has been used.
The plastic pipes, strengthened on the outside by thin bands of steel, provide a cheaper alternative to concrete pipes used as flood drains, sewers and irrigation canals.
New Scientist 16 November
Waste and Recycling
Increasing flow of waste from west to east in Germany
Toxic waste from western Germany is increasingly being dumped illegally in the east, according to Rudiger Rosenthal of Greenpeace.
He cited the following reasons for the phenomenon: the absence of an experienced environmental police in the east, the fact that it is around ten times cheaper to dump in the east than in the west, and the overall regulatory disorganization in the eastern states, which have yet to pass environmental legislation similar to that obtaining in the west.
According to Rosenthal, more than 100,000 tonnes of waste, ranging from household rubbish to industrial waste, have been dumped illegally in eastern Germany in 1991.
New Scientist 30 November
Waste and Recycling
Government fails to heed advice on radioactive waste
The British government has ignored the advice of its own experts on the disposal of radioactive waste generated by hospitals and research institutes.
As a result, the waste is in danger of continuing to be stored in what are widely regarded as inadequate facilities.
In early 1991 the Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee (RWMAC) had urged the government to set up an independent consultative service for the "small users" of radioactive material, since H.M. Inspectorate of Pollution was not able to provide the support required for such a service.
This proposal has been rejected by Environment Minister David Trippier, who said in a letter to the RWMAC: "We firmly believe that it is the responsibility of the originator of the wastes to find the means of disposal" .
New Scientist 23 November
Waste and Recycling
Rubbish-as-fuel plan receives government backing
As part of the government's support for renewable energy schemes, refuse-derived fuel (RDF) will be used in a new power station in Slough which also relies on a circulating fluidized bed, a form of clean coal technology.
The plan will need clearance from the Inspectorate of Pollution.
New Scientist 16 November