

Conservation: Land
Coastal forests for Vietnam
The World Food Programme (WFP) and the Government of Vietnam have reached agreement over a project to reforest the country's coastal areas.
The WFP is to contribute $20.3 million and the Vietnamese government $8.9 million to assist the populations of 13 coastal provinces in planting 125,000 hectares of forest.
The plan is intended to protect the environment and reduce damage from natural disasters.
Vietnam News Agency, Hanoi, 10 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Land
NGOs criticise English Nature agreement over peat bogs
English Nature has signed an agreement with Fisons plc, under which key areas of lowland peat bogs are to be saved from peat extraction in return for allowing the company to continue its operations in other areas.
The deal has angered environmentalists, who want a complete ban on peat extraction.
Fisons, which owns 40 per cent of the UK market in peat, is handing over 8,000 acres comprising parts of Thorne and Hatfield moors on the borders of South Yorkshire (Britain's largest and second largest bogs) as well as bogs in the Somerset Levels and in Cumbria.
The company is concerned to halt a growing environmental campaign to boycott peat sales from garden centres and superstores around the country.
Fisons is to continue taking peat from the remaining bogs over which it has extraction rights for thirty years, leaving only a two foot layer of peat.
According to botanist David Bellamy, the bogs constitute "a relic of Britain's ancient landscape" .
The Peat Consortium, representing Britain's leading voluntary wildlife conservation bodies including the Worldwide Fund for Nature, Friends of the Earth and the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, has campaigned for two years to halt extraction from the bogs.
The consortium described the agreement as "a back-handed deal" which did nothing to secure the future of the 2 per cent of lowland bogs which survive in England in a semi-natural state with rare plants and animals.
Most of the bogs are designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs).
The consortium said that the agreement "made a mockery" of official SSSI designations.
English Nature has been opposed to peat extraction but has been powerless to prevent it.
Sainsbury Homebase and B&Q are now refusing to sell peat taken from bogs designated as SSSIs [see EDs 46, 49/50, 52, 53/54].
Independent 30, 31 January English Nature news release 30 January Friends of the Earth news release 30 January
Conservation: Land
New Forest gains National Park status
A government report on the future of Britain's National Parks has resulted in the designation of the New Forest as a National Park.
The change in status means that control of the ancient woodlands is to be taken out of the hands of the Forestry Commission, who were opposed to the move, and a new governing body is to be set up along the lines of the Norfolk Broads Authority.
Controls against tree felling, tourism, urban development and major road and oil exploration schemes are to be increased.
The report's key recommendation — the establishment of independent National Park Authorities — has already been accepted by the government.
At present only two of the UK's 11 National Parks are under independent control.
The report also recommends that the government enforce a "duty to further National Parks" in all of its departments.
This would act as a barrier against damaging developments such as road-building schemes, as individual departments would find it more difficult to override conservation interests.
Conservation organisations are hoping that the New Forest decision will set a precedent for similarly sensitive areas such as the South Downs, the North Pennines and the Cambrian Mountains.
Plans for the New Forest are expected to be announced in full as part of the government's response to the report.
Observer 19 January
Conservation: Species
World's ancient breeds threatened by Western livestock
The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) has drawn up a five-year conservation programme aimed at preserving livestock breeds which are in danger of extinction as a result of the spread of Western farming practices.
The organisation has warned that "competitive pressure from imported livestock" and "inroads of Western technology" are threatening the genetic diversity of livestock in the developing world.
The FAO fears a mass extinction of native breeds which survive better in harsh conditions, and the loss of crucial disease-resistant genes.
Demand for Western technology and high-yield livestock is on the increase in Asian and Africa, as farmers shift away from subsistence to cash farming.
Aid programmes which aim to increase production in developing nations have contributed to the problem.
In the West, techniques such as artificial insemination have played a crucial role in the drive for greater productivity such as higher milk-yields, leaner meat and bigger litters.
The FAO itself flies out 100,000 doses of cattle semen to developing countries each year.
Breeds which are already under threat include the Sahiwal cattle of the Indian subcontinent, where farmers are trying to adapt Europe's dairy cow — the Holstein — to a tropical climate.
Egypt's Fayoumi chicken, a prodigious egg-layer, has also been abandoned in favour of the European battery chicken which fares badly in the heat.
The Taihu pig of China which is short, fat and fertile, is also under threat.
The FAO plan to encourage the rearing of endangered breeds in their native lands, and to establish banks of frozen sperm and embryos.
It will also use DNA technology to explore the genetic traits of endangered livestock.
In doing so, the organisation aims to draw up guidelines which will protect the developing world against commercial exploitation of its genetic resources.
New Scientist 1 February
Conservation: Species
US upholds tuna-ban
A US federal court has ordered a secondary ban on tuna imports from countries that buy the fish from Mexico and Venezuela, which have been under a US embargo since 1990 because they kill more dolphins than allowed by US law [see ED no. 51].
The ruling is expected to block 53 per cent of tuna imported into the US.
The main "tuna-laundering" countries are: Japan, Italy, Spain, France, Costa Rica, Panama and Columbia.
Independent 29 January Financial Times 15, 29, 30 January
Conservation: Species
Rhino de-horning experiment spreads to Zimbabwe
Zimbabwean conservationists have successfully completed a programme of rhino de-horning, a technique first developed in an effort to reduce rhino poaching in neighbouring Namibia.
Last year, poachers killed 82 black and 29 white rhinos in Zimbabwe.
(The horns fetch tens of thousands of dollars in the Far East, where they are used in fever-reducing medicines — not as aphrodisiacs, as is commonly supposed.)
A total of 59 white rhinos — the most vulnerable population — were de-horned in the programme, which was focused on the Hwange and Kazuma Pan national parks.
These areas are particularly badly affected by poachers crossing from neighbouring Botswana.
In the de-horning operation, the horns are sawn off with a chainsaw after the rhino has been located by trackers on the ground and darted with tranquillizing drugs from a helicopter.
The animal then has bright numbers painted on its back, both to aid further identification and demonstrate its worthlessness to poachers.
The Namibian experiment has demonstrated that, eventually, the horns grow back, at the rate of around 9 cm per year.
No de-horned Namibian rhinos have yet been poached.
The horns from the Zimbabwean project are kept in storage by the National Parks Department, in the hope that present international bans on rhino trading may be lifted, allowing them to sell the horns to raise money for conservation.
According to Parks official, Dr Mike Kock, the 24 kg of horn cut during the operation could raise $500,000, sufficient to pay for 650 game scouts for a year.
Zimbabwe's support for re-opened trade is echoed by other southern African states, which take a similar view of the ivory ban [see elephant article in this issue].
Major conservation organizations such as the World Wide Fund for Nature, which helped finance the Namibian de-horning, are opposed to the move, on the grounds that a legal market will only encourage poaching elsewhere in Africa and Asia.
BBC Wildlife, January
Conservation: Species
Taiwan's fishing industry "ignores driftnet ban" 
Despite Taiwan's agreement to comply with a UN resolution which bans the use of driftnets from the high seas [see ED 51], the ban is being ignored by the country's fishing industry.
The ruling requires that driftnet fishing be reduced by half by July this year, and cease altogether by December.
Of the major driftnetting fleets, which include Japan and South Korea, Taiwan's is the most loosely regulated.
Experts have forecast that even a partial ban will be a blow to Taiwan's fishing companies, which are already facing recession and rely on driftnetting as the most profitable method.
In an effort to enforce the ban, Taiwan's Council on Agriculture, responsible for regulating the industry, is chartering three fishing boats this year in co-operation with the US, which is also monitoring the area.
Critics, however, say that the boats go no faster than those they are trying to catch.
Independent observers report that the number of boats capable of supporting driftnets in Taiwan is several hundred times greater than shown by official statistics.
Central news Agency, Taipei, 14 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Far Eastern Economic Review 23 January
Conservation: Species
African states call for aid to save elephant
Thirty African countries have agreed to co-operate in efforts to save the elephant, whose population in Africa has fallen to around 600,000, compared with over one million a decade ago.
The wildlife departments of the governments concerned are to appeal for funds at the March meeting of the UN Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
They will ask Western governments for £150 million to help improve anti-XXXX poaching activities, protect national parks, and promote development projects which allow local people to benefit from conservation.
Some countries are also planning an expansion of "eco-tourism" , including trophy hunting.
The countries are hopeful that a commitment of substantial financial aid will take the heat out of demands by six southern African states for the resumption of controlled ivory trading, the profits of which, the southern Africans claim, would help to fund further conservation measures.
They have threatened to form a breakaway ivory trading bloc if CITES refuses to sanction a return to trade.
Observer 29 December
Conservation: Species
Alaskan natives plan to preserve sea mammals
Native peoples from the US state of Alaska have formed a coalition aimed at persuading the scientific establishment to draw on their traditional methods of observing and understanding nature.
They are deeply concerned about the scientists' inability to explain the dramatic changes they see in nature.
Their concern centres around the Bering Sea, where more than a dozen species are in decline including fur seals, Steller sea lions, cod, pollock and numerous sea birds.
Seal pelts are thin to the point of transparency and seabird chicks are too weak to stand.
Scientific opinion is divided over the cause of the decline of species in the Bering sea, with explanations ranging from over-fishing, to food shortages or natural population fluctuations.
Scientists in the area have welcomed Native participation but maintain that traditional knowledge is also limited.
Hans Hartmann, oceanographer with the Aquatic resources Conservation Group in Seattle, however, said that scientific studies had been misdirected insofar as they had concentrated on how much of a commercial species can be taken out of the sea, rather than understanding of how the sea itself works.
Washington Post 5 January
Conservation: Species
Florida's coral reefs "dying out" 
More evidence of the worldwide decline of coral has emerged from Florida, where researchers who have been monitoring the health of the reefs since 1976 report that they are dying at a rapid rate.
In the space of 15 years, species had been lost from each of six sites monitored off the Florida Keys; at all but one of the sites, the total amount of coral present had shrunk.
At one site, the amount of coral had been halved in just three years.
Much of the damage took the form of "bleaching" , which occurs when the water becomes abnormally warm, or "black band disease" , due to an infestation of blue-green algae, which is triggered by an excess of nutrients.
These are believed to result, at least in part, from sewage pollution, although there is some evidence that nutrients are also coming in from the open sea.
The bleaching phenomenon has also been observed in the Pacific and elsewhere.
Some scientists believe it may be an early indicator of global warming [see ED no. 48].
New Scientist 11 January
Conservation: Species
Mystery dolphin epidemic continues — threatens Monk seals
Hundreds of dead and dying dolphins have been washed up on beaches in Greece and Turkey.
The deaths are the latest in an epidemic which was first identified in Ireland and has swept through the eastern Mediterranean [see EDs 49/50, 51].
The virus last struck in 1990, where approximately 1,000 dead dolphins were washed ashore off Spain, France and Italy.
The virus destroys the cetaceans' immune system, allowing other diseases to take hold.
Some scientists believe that it is caused by water pollution.
UN specialists say that the regulations, plans and treaties agreed on by the Mediterranean countries have not significantly curbed the outpouring of sewage and industrial effluent from the 360 million people who live around the Mediterranean basin.
Biologists are concerned about the sole surviving colony of Monk seals, of which only 300 survive.
Five monk seals have been found dead.
Guardian 3 February
Conservation: Species
 "Mystery disease" hits UK oaks
Large numbers of oak trees in Britain are suffering from "die-XXXX back" symptoms, which causes them to lose their branches and leaves, and eventually die.
The condition, which is relatively common in continental Europe, has not been seen on this scale in the UK since the 1920s.
Trees in the west Midlands, including Gloucestershire, Shropshire, and Hereford and Worcester, have been particularly badly affected.
The exact cause of "die-back" is not known.
Forestry experts suggest that it could be due to a cocktail of factors, including drought and climate change, "acid rain" -type pollution, and insects attacking the trees.
According to Forestry Commission pathologist, Brian Greig: "Different sites involve different factors in the mix that eventually spells the end for the trees.
There doesn't appear to be one single explanation."
The progression of the disease starts with a yellowing of leaves, which gradually fall off, followed by twigs and small branches.
Most of the trees affected die within two to three years, while a small proportion recover.
Independent 14 January
Conservation: Species
 "Mass extinctions" of fungi reported
Surveys in various parts of the world have revealed that many species of fungi, including mushrooms, are dying out, possibly as a result of acid pollution.
In the Netherlands, nearly a third of the local fungi species are extinct or shortly to become so.
Similar reports have emerged from Germany, Czechoslovakia and the UK, where once-common mushroom species such as the cep have disappeared from all but the more remote regions.
John Jaenike, an ecologist at the University of Rochester, was reported by Science magazine as saying that the problem was now one of "mass extinctions" .
The cause of the decline is not certain, but researchers believe that pollution by nitrogen and sulphur oxides has acidified the soil to the extent where it can no longer support the fungi, and that this problem has been compounded by poisoning by metals such as aluminium, which have leached into the soil.
Among the more well known varieties to be threatened are the cep, the chanterelle and the wood blewits, all of which are prized as culinary delights.
But the decline in fungi has more serious implications for ancient woodlands, which, according to Philip Mason of the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology,"may not survive without fungi.
They live in symbiotic relationships with trees and provide water and minerals in exchange for carbohydrates.
If they die, then so will trees."
Observer 29 December
Economics and Industry
US environmentalists lobby against GATT
A coalition of 28 US environment and consumer groups have launched a campaign against the harmonization of key environmental standards proposed under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
The contentious sanitary and phytosanitary standards are included in the draft agreement drawn up by GATT director-general Arthur Dunkel, as part of the proposed reforms under discussion in the present "Uruguay round" of the talks.
The coalition warns that federal and state regulations on environment, health and safety may be put at risk if the draft is agreed.
Around 50 congressmen have supported a resolution by House of Representatives majority leader, the Democrat Richard Gephardt, which warns that under the Dunkel plan, "national sovereignty to set domestic environmental, health, safety and labour standards will be given away to foreign countries" .
In a move which further alarmed environmentalists, Dunkel suggested in a recent speech that international environmental agreements [such as the Montreal Protocol]could be challenged by GATT if they were deemed to interfere with free trade accords.
He added, however, that environmental concerns could be recognized as "possible" justification for regulatory standards.
The issue had been brought into focus last September, when GATT condemned a US ban on the import from Mexico of drift-netted tuna, imposed on the grounds that it was leading to the deaths of dolphins and other marine mammals.
A GATT committee ruled that this constituted an infringement of free trade [see ED no. 51].
Environmentalists have also strongly criticized the "closed-XXXX door" style of GATT negotiations.
Lori Wallach of the Public Citizen Organization commented: "We see GATT as fundamentally flawed.
It looks only at the side of business interests who think only of trade liberalization.
We represent other values, but we don't even get to see what the US is doing."
Financial Times 30 January
Economics and Industry
US military environmental programme stalls
A programme by which the US military was to have contributed to environmental research has stalled in the face of congressional scepticism, but efforts are now under way to revive it.
The Strategic Environmental Research and Development Program was proposed by veteran Georgian Senator Sam Nunn in September 1990.
Nunn stated at the time that the Defense Department, with its large budget for research and development, would be well suited to respond "to a new and different threat to our national security — the destruction of our environment" .
Congress duly approved funding of $200 million, but subsequently objected to the Defense Department's initial proposals for projects which could be supported by it.
Too many, Congress decided, were concerned primarily with developing new weapons systems.
One such project was to have focused on reducing the toxic waste produced when making the plutonium core of nuclear missiles.
The Pentagon is currently drawing up a new list of project proposals, to be evaluated by a scientific advisory committee.
It already has $150 million of the total allocated, but if this is not spent by the end of the fiscal year on 30 September, the money will revert to the Treasury.
New Scientist 1 February
Economics and Industry
CIS faces "catastrophic pollution" 
The former Soviet Union faces "near catastrophic" pollution problems as a result of decades of neglect under Communist rule, according to a report by Andrei Yablokov, the Russian government's official environmental adviser.
Pollution was directly to blame for a decline in life expectancy from 70.4 years in 1964 to 69.3 years in 1990, Yablokov claimed, adding that in some particularly polluted areas it had fallen to as low as 44 years.
Among particularly serious instances of pollution picked out in the report were the following:, Heavy use of pesticides polluting rivers across the crop growing areas of the Russian republic;, Untreated industrial effluent from the Volga slowly killing off the marine life of the Caspian Sea;, High levels of dioxin in mothers' milk in Moscow;, The continuing consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear accident, rendering much of the countryside of the Ukraine and Belorussia uncultivatable;, Waste from aluminium factories in Uzbekistan, poisoning the land for miles around.
Yablokov also warned of potential long term disasters caused by ruptures of oil and water pipelines.
Underground flooding was threatening to undermine Moscow, while inadequate storage of radioactive waste could lead to a catastrophe exceeding the scale of Chernobyl if it leaked into the Caspian Sea.
Russia's environmental legislation needed urgent overhaul, concluded Yablokov.
Independent 24 January
Economics and Industry
Eastern Europe "less polluted than thought" 
The former communist states of eastern Europe are not suffering as badly from pollution as is widely believed, according to a study by Professor Gordon Hughes of Edinburgh University.
In the Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Hughes suggests that the much-XXXX reported cases of severe pollution in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Eastern Germany obscure a general picture not very different from western Europe.
Acid rain damage to forests is no worse in Poland or Czechoslovakia than it is in western Germany or Sweden, while average concentrations of particulates in Budapest and Warsaw are within EC safety standards.
Levels of mercury in the Danube are below those in the Thames.
Hughes argues that part of the reason why the former communist bloc is portrayed as highly polluted is the unrealistic safety standards set by the governments of the states themselves, which are far more stringent than those of the EC and USA.
The health problems attributed to air pollution may in part be due to heavy smoking, Hughes adds.
, Contrary to its image as an environmental disaster area, Eastern Europe could benefit from an expansion of eco-tourism, according to Duncan Fisher, director of the East-West environmental programme at the Ecological Studies Institute in London.
Attractive aspects for tourists include large populations of wildlife such as bears and eagles, Europe's largest wetland in north-eastern Poland, and tracts of ancient forest in Bohemia.
Economist 1 February
Economics and Industry
Netherlands metal industry agrees environmental covenant
The 31 leading firms in the Netherlands metal industry have agreed a voluntary covenant to control pollution in line with the government's National Environment Plan (NEP).
This sets strict limits on emissions in an effort to reduce the country's contribution to global warming and acid rain.
Environment Minister Hans Alders is seeking similar agreements from the country's main industrial sectors.
Stringent regulations are likely to be imposed if voluntary agreement is not forthcoming.
The Dutch metal industry includes the Hoogovens company, the fourth biggest steel producer in Europe, which is one of the country's leading polluters.
Guardian 21 January
Economics and Industry
UK banks review lending policy to avoid EC environmental laws
Britain's main clearing banks are reviewing their lending policies in the light of a draft EC directive which would make them liable for the clean-up costs of their industrial clients, should the latter go into liquidation.
Some banks are already reported to be refusing to repossess land that is polluted or contaminated, on the grounds that they might be obliged to pay the costs of cleaning up the property.
Times 14 January
Economics and Industry
Government launches "duty of care" campaign
The Department of the Environment has launched a campaign to make industry aware of its responsibilities under the new "duty of care" for waste, which comes into operation on 1 April.
The duty of care, provided under Section 34 of the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, makes all businesses responsible for ensuring that their waste is disposed of properly, by passing it on to authorized waste collectors.
They have to give a written description of the waste to the collectors, and sign a transfer note for it.
The new law lays down penalties ranging from a £2,000 fine to five years imprisonment, with the heaviest penalties for those who actually cause pollution.
Department of Environment news release 10 January
Economics and Industry
Adam Smith Institute report
The Adam Smith Institute, a right-wing economic think tank, has published a report entitled The Market in the Environment advocating a range of market-based solutions to environmental problems.
It argues that vehicle tax should be levied in proportion to the pollution caused.
This, it argues, "would put systematic financial pressure on motorists to buy cleaner vehicles and keep them tuned to peak efficiency" .
The report also suggest private ownership of endangered species such as the elephant and whale.
Financial Times 27 January
Economics and Industry
 "Green Con" awards announced
Friends of the Earth (FoE) have announced their 1991 "Green Con" awards, designed to expose organizations making spurious environmental claims.
The winner was Fisons plc, the compost company, which had claimed in an advertisement that "buying British peat-based compost in no way endangers our remaining wetlands of conservation value" .
Numerous environmental campaigners have alleged that Fisons's peat-cutting operations are causing irreparable damage to the fragile habitat of lowland peat-bogs.
Ninety per cent of its operations are carried out on sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs).
The runner-up was ICI, whose Indian subsidiary is involved in the marketing of Halon 1211 (a potent ozone-destroying chemical) for use in fire-extinguishers in developing countries.
This contrasts with ICI's claim that it is"firmly committed to the protection of the environment, and fully supports the Montreal Protocol [on the protection of the ozone layer — see ED no. 52].
 "Pied Piper" awards for "telling tales" to children were allocated to organizations which had included dubious environ-XXXX mental claims in educational packs.
These included the British Aerosol Manufacturers Association, for suggesting that all domestic aerosols were now "ozone-friendly" (despite the fact that some still contain ozone-damaging chemicals); NIREX, the nuclear waste agency, for producing an over-simplified version of the problem of nuclear waste disposal; and the Young Telegraph newspaper, for running a promotion sponsored by the BASF chemical conglomerate, which included copy presenting what FoE claim is an over-flattering account of BASF's safety record.
The "Green Con" judges also expressed concern over the number of products which carried "official-looking" environmental logos.
Surveys had shown that many consumers mistakenly believed that these had been officially approved.
Such unofficial green logos only confused "an increasingly sceptical public" , said FoE, citing a reent survey in which 63 per cent of those questioned were "confused" about green claims.
Friends of the Earth information release 19 December
Energy
Chinese institute becomes Africa's solar training centre
China's Gansu Institute for Natural Energy, the only institute permitted by Chinese authorities to design solar energy equipment, is establishing itself as a training centre for solar energy technicians from African countries.
The institute already exports equipment such as indoor solar energy stoves and picnic stoves to 18 African countries.
In a UN-funded project in 1981, the Institute built a demonstration base of solar energy technology to which heads of state, government officials and experts were invited.
In 1989, Gansu's"Solar Energy Applied Symposium for Developing Countries' was attended by participants from 23 countries and international organisations.
The first training class was held in September 1991 and was attended by officials from 11 African states.
Now Uganda, Tanzania and Gambia have expressed an interest in collaborating with Gansu in the joint production of solar equipment.
The countries hope to set up similar institutes on their own ground, with an exchange of technicians.
Caribbean Times 14 January
Energy
Swedish energy taxes under threat
The Swedish government is contemplating reducing or abolishing the energy taxes which were imposed on industry in an effort to cut pollution.
The move follows a government-commissioned report, which warns that the taxes are having an adverse effect on industrial production.
The principal taxes are: 30 Swedish krone (£3) on every kilogram of sulphur in coal; 0.25 krone per kilogram on carbon dioxide emitted in fossil fuels; and, as from January 1992, 40 krone on every kilogram of nitrogen oxides emitted from electricity and gas turbines used to generate heat and power.
The report of the commission, chaired by Professor Lennart Hjalmarsson, concluded that the abolition of industrial energy taxes would increase production to the value of 20 billion krone, and create 10,000 jobs.
At present, the commission warned, energy taxes had a particularly severe impact on traditional export industries such as pulp and paper, mines and quarrying.
The total energy tax bill for industry in 1990 totalled 6 billion krone.
The commission recommended an immediate 80 per cent cut in industrial energy taxes, with the revenue shortfall made up by across-the-board increases in taxes on heating oil and electricity use.
Environmentalists have strongly opposed the commission's findings, and the Environment Minister in the centre-right coalition government, Olof Johansson, has threatened to resign over the issue.
Those in favour of maintaining the taxes argue that they are vital to encourage new, cleaner and more efficient industries, to promote the use of biomass fuel from the burning of wood shavings, and to underscore Sweden's image as an environmentally-aware nation.
Industrialists argue that, since the vast majority of Sweden's pollution problems originate abroad (notably Poland, eastern Germany, Russia and the Baltic states), it is illogical for the country to have one of the most draconian energy tax systems in Europe.
The government should instead aim to harmonize the tax levels with those currently being planned by the EC, in advance of Sweden's anticipated accession to that body, the industrialists argue.
Financial Times 5 February
Energy
Low-emission, high-efficiency coal power plant planned
A new coal-fired power station, combining a fluidized bed system with new "topping cycle" technology, is under development by a British consortium.
With the benefit of the latest steam-XXXX turbines, the new plant is planned to achieve thermal efficiency of 52 per cent— a 20 per cent increase over that of normal coal power stations, and 12 per cent higher than the best performance of nuclear plants.
It also contributes significantly less acid rain pollution than normal methods.
The fluidized bed system involves burning a mixture of coal and limestone in a fluid form mobilized by hot air: the heat generated boils water which drives the steam turbines.
The process leaves residues of unburnt coal and ash, which are separated out from the flue gas and put back into the furnace.
It produces less sulphur dioxide — because the sulphur in the coal reacts with the limestone during combustion — and less nitrogen oxides, due to the lower than normal combustion temperature.
The topping cycle involves converting part of the coal fuel into a gas, which is fed directly into a gas turbine generator.
The coal char remaining is fed into the fluidized bed system, while the exhaust from the gas turbine can be used to help drive the fluidized bed.
The higher thermal efficiency resulting from the topping cycle reduces the amount of carbon dioxide produced per unit of power generated.
The new plant is being researched by a consortium of British Coal, the PowerGen electricity generating company, and the GEC Alsthom engineering company.
The consortium warns however that at present it lacks the finances to shift the project into a full-scale development phase.
New Scientist 1 February
Environmental Politics
Launch of California's Green Party
The first meeting of the Californian Green Party took place in Sacramento on January 24.
Like its European counterparts, the California Greens are to eschew leadership, to be based on feminist principles and to promote universal health care.
The party won its right to a place on the ballot after it had gathered 96,000 signatures on a petition.
Regina Eddrizzi, a Party "co-facilitator" , said a large proportion of those registering for the party felt that their interests were unrepresented in mainstream politics.
A Sierra Club survey has shown three quarters of Californians to be environmentalists, and most of these vote Democrat.
A new Green Party, therefore, could potentially split the liberal vote and prove a boon to the Republicans.
California joins Alaska which already has a Green Party, and Hawaii and Arizona may soon follow suit.
 "Lavender-Green" parties have already been established by homosexuals in Berkeley and San Francisco.
Economist 1 February
Environmental Politics
Poland and Lithuania reach environmental accord
Poland and Lithuania have signed an agreement aimed at protecting their natural environment.
The agreement covers the conservation of border water resources, establishes monitoring procedures, and addresses legal and economic aspects "linked to the protection of the natural environment" .
Poland is to give Lithuania a donation of $10,000 and will provide technical training for Lithuanian experts.
PAP (Polish news agency) in English 24 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Green Party "relaunch" for elections
The Green Party has announced its intention of forcing environmental issues into the mainstream political agenda during the election campaign by attempting to affect the outcome of key marginal seats.
At its official relaunch, the new party leadership promised to field at least 250 candidates, and to concentrate on "politically interesting" seats, although it admitted that it could not win any.
 "Even if you are not winning the seat, you are affecting the outcome in [key marginals]like Dulwich and York" said Dr Richard Lawson, one of the Greens' two principle speakers.
The election of the speakers was agreed in September by an overwhelming majority, and concluded many years of heated internal debate as to whether or not the Green Party should have leaders.
The Party's choice of one man and one woman (London school teacher Jean Lambert) is intended to reflect a commitment to equality.
Party spokesperson Sara Parkin said that the growth of the Green Party had been slow in Britain because of the absence of proportional representation and some form of public funding.
The Greens were unable to win a seat at the Strasbourg parliament, although a place was subsequently given to Jean Lambert by European colleagues.
Green party annual income is about £250,000 a year, and membership is currently rising.
Guardian 16 January Independent 16 January Green Magazine January
Global Warming
IPCC confirms global warming under way— with variations
Reviewing the latest research on the greenhouse effect, the science working group of the UN Intergovernmental Committee on Climate Change (IPCC) has declared itself more certain than ever that global warming is under way— but agreed that its full impact may be delayed by other human factors, including a limited cooling effect produced by sulphur pollution and ozone depletion.
It confirmed its previous conclusions that average global temperatures would rise by between 0.2 and 0.5 degrees centigrade per decade, but decided that its previous "best guess" of a 0.3 degree rise might be a little too high, and that it could take until 2030, rather than 2025, for temperatures to rise by a full degree.
It will, however, be a faster rate of increase than any recorded over the past 10,000 years.
Meeting in Canton, China, the working group reviewed the progress made on research into global warming since its first report was published in June 1990 [see ED no. 35/36].
It agreed a new report which recorded widespread evidence that the world's temperature was increasing.
These included less ice in the Arctic, reduced snowfalls in the northern hemisphere, the shrinkage of glaciers in Switzerland, and increased tree growth in the southern hemisphere.
The years 1990 and 1991 had emerged as the warmest ever recorded, outstripping the 1980s, which had been the warmest decade to date.
The most striking finding, however, is that the warming effect caused by greenhouse gases may be being slowed both by the effects of sulphur dioxide pollution, and also by the depletion of the ozone layer.
The report suggested that sulphur dioxide emissions, mainly from industry and power stations, but also volcanoes, most notably Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, were leading to the formation of a thin film of sulphate particles in the atmosphere, which were reflecting some sunlight.
The loss of the ozone layer is also believed to be having a cooling effect.
The working group stresses, however, that these factors are not sufficient to offset the warming resulting from the greenhouse effect.
The combined cooling effect is estimated as being only about one-fifth as powerful as the overall warming caused by greenhouse gases.
The working group warn instead that, as measures to control sulphur emissions (in an effort to cut "acid rain" pollution) and to limit ozone depletion take effect, global warming will accelerate sharply, with unpredictable and violent consequences.
As one member commented, "it will be like a curtain being drawn back to let in the sunlight" .
At present, another member commented, "we have been driving with the accelerator full down and the brake on at the same time" .
The new report also casts doubt on the importance of methane, usually cited as the second most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide.
It found that the build-up of methane in the atmosphere had slowed down, and suggested that emissions of methane from rice paddies were less than had been previously estimated.
In underscoring the leading role of carbon dioxide in global warming, the report has major implications for government policies to combat global warming.
It effectively removes chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) from the list of active greenhouse gases, since their effect in destroying the ozone layer offsets their contribution to global warming.
This calls into question US policy in particular, which had argued that its commitment to phase out CFCs would reduce its contribution to global warming by 20 per cent , and which placed a much lower emphasis on the need for CO2 cuts.
Financial Times 13, 18 January Independent 18 January Guardian 13 January New Scientist 25 January
Global Warming
Global "humidity index" reveals African climate change
A global "humidity index" has revealed a long-term trend of expansion of Africa's deserts and drylands.
The index is being prepared by scientists from the Climate Research Centre of the University of East Anglia, and the Chilworth Research Centre in Southampton, under a commission from the UN Environment Programme.
It is calculated using rainfall averages and monthly mean surface and air temperatures.
The scientists estimate that nearly two-thirds of the African continent has become drier over the past 60 years.
Rainfall in the Sahel has decreased by around 30 per cent.
Overall, arid areas have increased by around 54 million hectares, and humid areas reduced by 26 million hectares.
Large parts of northern and central areas have also become cooler, largely it is believed as a result of desertification, with average temperatures dropping by between 0.5 and 1 degree centigrade.
The causes of the African climate change are not clear.
Among possible factors are human activities (notably grazing and deforestation), which promote desertification and may lead to local climate change, and changes in sea surface temperatures in the southern hemisphere, which may themselves be linked to global warming and/or the increasing incidence of ocean current changes such as the El Niño effect.
Elsewhere, the index reports that western Australia, western Europe and the southern USA are getting wetter, while it is becoming drier in western South America and large areas of south-XXXX east Asia.
New Scientist 18 January
Global Warming
Desertification "a factor in global warming" 
Desertification, caused by over-grazing and deforestation, may be partly to explain for the rise in global temperatures, according to a study by Roger Balling of the Office of Climatology in Arizona State University.
Analysis of long-term temperature records from 120 sites in the northern hemisphere found that desertified areas had warmed by an average of 1.23 degrees centigrade.
The average temperature rise over all areas was 0.59 degrees.
The calculation was based on UN desertification maps.
Balling claims that the overall contribution from desertification caused by human activity is around 0.013 degrees per year, but admits that it can only be a significant factor for about 15 per cent of the Earth's surface.
 "The results suggest, however, that a significant part of warming in the last century is not greenhouse-related" , he commented.
Critics of Balling's work have suggested that, rather than showing that deserts account for some of the world temperature rise, the results may simply be demonstrating the fact that different types of land — notably desert — respond varyingly to the greenhouse effect.
They also point out that some UN desertification maps are widely inaccurate.
New Scientist
Global Warming
 "Environmental Change Network" established in the UK
An"Environmental Change Network is being established to co-XXXX ordinate long-term monitoring of climate change and its effects in the UK.
Among its initial nine sponsor organizations are the Department of Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Forestry Commission, the Natural Environment Research Council, the National Rivers Authority and English Nature.
The scheme is backed by the Department of the Environment.
David Trippier, the Environment Minister, announced that it would eventually comprise 24 terrestrial research centres and 24 marine and aquatic centres.
It will initially concentrate on analyzing results from eight sites, selected for their existing research strengths and the range of habitats they cover.
, Global warming may already be having a destabilizing impact on British fauna and flora, according to a series of recent studies.
Among the findings are:, Insects migrating to higher, cooler altitudes are threatening alpine plants, which are not adapted to cope with them.
The small rush moth has been found at sites 200 metres higher than the limit of its habitat recorded in 1954 — the equivalent of an increase in average annual temperatures of one degree.
, Small birds, including great tits and bluetits, are unable to rear so many young because the caterpillars on which they depend are developing faster in the warmer summers.
Natural Environment Research Council news release 17 January Independent 23 January
Global Warming
UK faces fourth consecutive year of drought
Exceptionally low rainfall, particularly across southern Britain, has made a fourth consecutive year of drought very likely, according to the National Rivers Authority (NRA) and water supply companies.
Over the past five months, rainfall has been well below average: the month of January was the driest London has experienced for 154 years.
Groundwater levels in southern and eastern England are at near record lows, with the meagre winter rains failing to produce any significant replenishment of aquifers from which most of the region's water supplies are drawn.
At several sites, the last six months have been the driest for over a century.
The Water Services Association, which represents the 10 regional water companies, has warned that, barring unusually heavy rain, hosepipe bans and more severe restrictions are likely to be introduced in many areas in the coming summer.
Independent 1 February
Nuclear Power
Lithuanian, St Petersbourg plants "in worrying condition" 
A Swedish examination of two former Soviet nuclear power stations has concluded that they are in a dangerously unsafe condition.
Both stations are composed of RBMK reactors — the same type as those in Chernobyl.
The examination was carried out after fears that the stations, Ignalina in Lithuania, and Sosnovy-Bor, near St Petersbourg, could pose a threat to nearby Sweden and Finland.
The Swedish report concluded that, if Western safety standards were followed, the plants should be closed immediately.
It acknowledged that this was not possible in these cases, since they each supplied about half of the total energy needs of their respective regions.
It did, however, recommend the immediate closure of the two oldest of Sosnovy-Bor's four reactors, and suggested that nearby Western states should make up the energy shortfall to enable this to take place.
The report expressed grave concern over the lack of training and the low salaries of the technicians at the plants, and of the failure to make adequate safety improvements after the Chernobyl disaster.
The implications of the report are to be discussed at a meeting of representatives from the nuclear industries of Sweden, Finland, Germany, France, Italy and the UK.
Le Monde 22 January
Nuclear Power
Dounreay "breaking nuclear waste regulations" 
The nuclear power plant at Dounreay, Scotland, is breaking regulations on the storage and disposal of radioactive waste, according to a former nuclear waste manager and head of British Nuclear Fuels' environment protection group, Bob Burton.
His allegations centre on the manner in which solid, low-level radioactive waste, such as gloves, overalls and small pieces of equipment, is buried inside steel drums in on-site pits.
Groundwater which collects in the pits becomes radioactive.
At present it is simply pumped into storage tanks for monitoring, and subsequently discharged into the open sea.
Burton claims that in doing so, the plant's operator, AEA Technology, is in breach of regulations which demand that radioactive emissions are kept "as low as reasonably possible" .
His proposed solution — lowering the water table in the vicinity of the pits to prevent them flooding — was rejected by the company.
It claims to have its own solution, although this has not been made public.
AEA Technology insist that their operations are safe, and that discharges into the sea are well within permitted limits.
It is shortly to apply for planning permission to extend the pits.
Guardian 21 January
Ozone Layer
Ozone destroyers in northern hemisphere "at record high" 
The depletion of the ozone layer over Europe and North America is set to reach a dangerous level in the forthcoming months, according to the results of separate atmospheric surveys by Nasa and the European Stratospheric Ozone Experiment.
Levels of ozone-destroying chlorine monoxide (ClO) are the highest ever observed.
As of mid-January, there was 50 per cent more over the northern hemisphere than Antarctica — hitherto seen as the focus of ozone depletion.
(ClO is the product of reactions between the chlorine in compounds such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other atmospheric gases.)
The situation is compounded by the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines.
This released a cocktail of dust and chemicals into the atmosphere, destroying the nitrous oxides which under normal conditions help protect the ozone layer itself from destruction.
 "Our conclusion is that the immune system of the atmosphere — its nitrogen-mediated ability to fight ozone-destroying chemicals — is weaker than we suspected" , said Nasa scientist Professor James Anderson, adding that "none of the news is good" .
Overall, Nasa suggest that this spring could see a reduction of between 30-40 per cent in the ozone layer over the northern hemisphere.
The problem is such that some scientists are warning of increased skin cancers and eye cataracts in Europe and America as a result, as well as damage to crops.
There have been urgent calls for action to end all production of ozone-depleters such as CFCs well ahead of the 2000 deadline set by the Montreal Protocol [see EDs passim].
Recent studies suggest that ozone depletion is to blame for widespread blindness among sheep in southern Chile, on the edge of the Antarctic ozone hole.
Independent 4 February Financial Times 4 February Guardian 4, 5 February
Ozone Layer
China looks for overseas backing for CFC plans
China is hoping to find overseas financial and technological backing for environmental projects, including the development of government policy on the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and the search by Chinese scientists for a replacement chemical.
The country is reported to be strengthening its relations with America, Germany and Canada in preparation for the UNCED summit to be held this June.
According to Professor Qu Geping, Director of the State Administration of Environment, China also aims to sign an agreement on environmental cooperation with Japan on the 20th anniversary of the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
Xinhua News Agency, Peking, 15 January [BBC Summary of World Broadcasts]
Pollution: Air
North-East Asia's joint environment programme
Four north-east Asian countries — China, Mongolia and the two Koreas — have agreed to establish an environmental consultative organization and co-operate on two environmental projects backed by the UN Development Programme (UNDP).
The first project covers efforts to limit air pollution through measures such as fluid bed coal combustion and other clean coal technology, together with research into trans-boundary air pollution.
The second project focuses on renewable energy research, and covers such topics as solar, biogas, mini-hydro and geothermal energy.
The UNDP subsequently agreed to provide US$3.7 million in support of the air pollution programme, and $1.5 million for the renewable energy programme.
The region as a whole suffers from significant air pollution from ageing heavy industrial plants.
Yonhap News Agency, South Korea, 20, 27 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Mexico sets up commission to tackle air pollution
Mexico City's long-running air pollution problems [see ED 53/54 and passim]are to be addressed by a special committee set up by President Carlos Salinas.
The commission, to be chaired by the capital's mayor, Manuel Camacho, will include five Cabinet ministers, the governor of Mexico State, the director of Pemex (the state oil conglomerate), and local environmentalists.
It is to have a launch budget of £91 million, half of which is financed by funding from the World Bank and the Japanese government.
The commission is designed to overcome the problem of inter-XXXX ministerial rivalry which was seen as delaying the implementation of the anti-pollution programme announced recently.
On all but 11 days last year, the capital suffered air pollution in excess of EC and World Health Organization safe levels.
The pollution is worst during winter, when thermal inversions trap the warmer polluted air above the city.
Over the past two months, the General Hospital has reported increases of 62 per cent in respiratory complaints and a 97 per cent rise in pneumonia cases.
Financial Times 10 January Independent 28 January
Pollution: Air
Los Angeles air pollution improves
Efforts to counter local air pollution problems in Los Angeles appear to be working, with low-level ozone densities in 1991 the lowest reported since records began in 1976.
Even so, there were 129 days during the year when ozone exceeded the federal safety standards, and on 100 of those days public health warnings were issued.
A total of 169 days merited health warnings in 1989.
The state of California recently announced stringent new regulations designed to cut vehicle emissions [see ED no. 49/50].
Nine eastern states, from Maine in the north to Virginia in the south, have now announced that they plan to introduce similar restrictions.
Washington Post 1 January
Pollution: Air
UK to increase pollution monitoring stations
The government has opened a further six air pollution monitoring stations, bringing the total to 16.
The new stations will be located in London, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast, Birmingham and Newcastle-on-Tyne.
They will monitor concentrations of nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide and low-level ozone, as well as airborne fine dust and hydrocarbons such as benzene.
Friends of the Earth claimed however that the number of monitoring stations remained "pitifully small" .
A spokesman pointed out that there were over 200 stations in Germany monitoring nitrogen oxides.
Guardian 24 January Financial Times 24 January
Pollution: Air
Environment Protection Agency plans announced
The Scottish Office has announced plans for a new independent agency — the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.
Announcing the move, Scottish Office Minister Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said that the new agency would combine the environmental powers of river purification boards, local authorities, the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate and Her Majesty's Industrial Pollution Inspectorate.
It would improve the quality of Scottish air, land and water, the Minister claimed.
The agency will also have powers to charge private companies for "permits to pollute" , and to carry out such environmental monitoring work as is required by law.
The Scotsman 21 January
Pollution: Air
Institute of Directors pollution proposal
The Institute of Directors has published proposals for pollution control which favour voluntary action by business, as opposed to compulsory regulations imposed by the government or the EC.
In a report entitled Stewards of the Earth, the Institute claims that the fossil fuel tax plans under consideration by the EC would distort the world energy market and place European business at a disadvantage compared to its competitors.
Proposed UK regulations covering integrated pollution control over air, land and water could put many companies out of business, according to the Institute.
Government regulation should only be used as a last resort, and even then operated with "a light touch" , the Institute argues.
It suggests instead that pollution management could be handled by private enterprise, "as in MOT testing" .
Financial Times 23 January
Pollution: Air
Air quality in British towns "breaching EC limits" 
A survey by the environmental group Friends of the Earth has revealed that air quality in four British towns is breaching safety levels set by the EC.
The survey revealed that concentrations of nitrogen dioxide in London, Birmingham, Edinburgh and Cardiff exceeded the EC safety levels of 40 parts per billion.
Levels in a further five towns — Bradford, Bristol, Farnham, Glasgow and Sheffield — fell within the EC band "needing careful scrutiny" .
The survey was conducted in 20 centres across the country.
Responding to the survey, Environment Minister David Trippier said he shared FoE's concern about air pollution, but believed that government and EC initiatives would eventually solve the problem.
Guardian 24 January
Pollution: Water
Amoco Cadiz award upheld
A US federal appeals court has upheld a $155 million award of damages against the Amoco Corporation over the 1978 oil spill from the Amoco Cadiz oil tanker off the coast of Brittany in France.
The money will be paid to the French government and to the villages affected by the spill.
Amoco had appealed against the original decision, handed down by a lower court in 1990, arguing that the plaintiffs had failed to prove Amoco's negligence.
But the new ruling upheld the conviction, and increased the damages by $640,000 to cover clean-XXXX up costs.
International Herald Tribune 25-26 January
Pollution: Water
Greenpeace report on Gulf War
The environmental group Greenpeace has published a report on the Gulf War in which it warns that funds for clean-up operations are running out, with much work remaining to be done.
It is particularly critical of the US Administration for failing to contribute to the clean-up fund organized by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), which raised $8.5 million.
Remaining problems include lakes of spilt oil in the Kuwaiti desert, which Greenpeace warn may prove a health risk as they evaporate.
According to Greenpeace co-ordinator Paul Horsman: "It is difficult to put into words the extent of damage that has been done.
Sand is glued up with oil.
Trees and grass are covered with thick layers of tar."
Minefield clearances had led to the destruction of vegetation and topsoil, and up to 200 million litres of untreated sewage had been left in sand pits.
Middle East Economic Digest 24 January
Pollution: Water
EC advocate general's ruling on UK water pollution
The advocate general of the European Court of Justice has ruled that Britain has failed to enforce EC standards on nitrate levels in drinking water.
The ruling makes it all but certain that Britain will be found guilty on charges relating to these matters when the case comes before the European Court later this year.
The European Commission brought the charges following a complaint by Friends of the Earth.
The advocate general found the British government lacking on two counts: failure adequately to enshrine in UK law the 1980 EC directive on drinking water, and the presence of excessive levels of nitrates in drinking water in 21 supply zones in East Anglia, and seven zones in the Severn Trent region.
In a separate conclusion, the advocate general, Karl Otto Lenz, decided that the Commission had not proved its allegations in respect of complaints of unsafe levels of lead in Scottish water.
A government spokesman commented that substantial resources were being allocated to improve water quality, and that East Anglian water would meet the EC safety threshold of 50 milligrams of nitrates per litre by 1995.
Concern over nitrates is principally related to their association with methaemoglobinaemia, or "blue baby syndrome" .
They have also been linked inconclusively with stomach cancer.
Some scientists believe that the danger to health has been exaggerated, and that the estimated £1.8 billion required over the next five years to bring nitrate levels down would be better spent on other health problems.
Friends of the Earth's Campaigns Director, Andrew Lees, claimed that the advocate general's opinion "points to the government's failure to bring in controls over the use of artificial fertilizers, the root cause of this illegal problem" .
, The EC Commission has also warned the Italian government that it may face legal action in the Court of Justice unless it takes steps to improve drinking water standards in the provinces of Lombardy, Piedmont, Veneto and Emilia Romagna.
Daily Telegraph 23 January Independent 22 January Guardian 22 January EC Commission news release 30 January (Italy)
Pollution: Water
Major pollution incident in Cornwall
Stretches of the River Fal and its estuary in southern Cornwall have been polluted by approximately 12 million gallons of water containing heavy metals from a flooded, disused tin mine.
The water, containing zinc, arsenic, mercury, copper, nickel and cadmium, poured from the Wheal Jane mine after it became flooded as a result of the ending of pumping operations earlier in the year.
People who draw water from private wells in the area have been advised to switch to bottled water.
No public water supplies are drawn from the Fal.
Although it is too early to assess the full effects, some of the rich shellfish and oyster beds offshore are thought to be in some danger.
The National Rivers Authority (NRA), which had repeatedly warned of the dangers of the situation ever since the pumping had been stopped, is to ask the government for emergency funds to run a treatment programme for the water remaining in the mine.
Speaking after the disaster, however, junior Environment Minister Tony Baldry claimed that: "a discharge on such a large scale could not have been planned for" .
The owners of the mine, Carnon Consolidated, had closed it down in February after the Department of Trade and Industry withdrew financial support.
They sold off the mine's equipment, including the water pumps that had kept the 1,500 foot shafts dry.
The NRA is now considering prosecuting Carnon, but the issue is politically-sensitive, since the company runs the last functioning tin mine in Cornwall, at South Crofty.
A successful prosecution would bankrupt it, leading to large-scale redundancies in an area of high unemployment.
Guardian 17 January Independent 18 January Financial Times 24 January
Pollution: Water
Reported pollution incidents "at record high" 
A record number of water pollution incidents were reported in England and Wales last year, according to the National Rivers Authority.
Of the total 28,143 incidents, 658 were classified as "major" — on a scale which may result in widespread fish deaths or the closure of a public water supply intake.
Oil and sewage sources accounted for 20 per cent of the total; agricultural and industrial sources for a further 10 per cent each.
Between 1981 and 1990, the number of reported incidents doubled, with particularly sharp increases in the last few years.
In the worst-affected NRA region, Northumbria, reported incidents increased by 57 per cent in the three years 1988-90.
The NRA account for the overall rise largely in terms of growing public awareness of water pollution, and the presence of the NRA as an agency actively concerned with it.
Commenting on an earlier, leaked draft version of the report, a Friends of the Earth spokesman said it gave the lie to government claims that water quality was improving.
He criticized cutbacks made in NRA funding, which would make action against polluters more difficult.
After a 12 per cent cut this year, the government had pledged to make a further 15 per cent cut next year.
NRA news release 27 January Guardian 17 January Financial Times 17 January
Pollution: Water
28,000 pollution incidents reported
A total of 28,143 water pollution incidents were reported to the National Rivers Authority (NRA) in 1990, of which 658 (2.3 per cent) were deemed as sufficiently serious to merit legal action.
Of these, 272 led to convictions.
Agricultural pollution accounted for more than 10 per cent of total incidents, and for a third of the major ones.
The remainder were largely due to sewage, industrial pollution or oil spillages.
Commenting on the low proportion of incidents resulting in court cases, the NRA's Chief Scientist, Jan Pentreath, said: "Expensive formal samples are needed as evidence for a prosecution, but the results of these are only available after lengthy laboratory analysis.
If the initial samples do not provide adequate evidence, it is often too late to collect further samples for testing, as the pollution may have disappeared and with it the evidence."
Measures were under way to improve pollution monitoring, including the use of automated on-site equipment and portable monitors for inspectors.
Independent 28 January
Pollution: Water
NRA survey identifies farmers as water polluters
Evidence from inspections carried out by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has suggested that in some areas up to 42 per cent of Britain's farms could be polluting rivers and groundwater.
Between 1979 and 1990, the number of reported pollution incidents from farm waste more than doubled.
The prime culprit is organic farm waste, such as cattle slurry and silage, and even milk.
This accounts for 90 per cent of reported pollution incidents.
The absence of affordable treatment systems forces farmers to spread the manure on the fields, from where it runs off into river catchments.
In many cases, the NRA claim, inadequate or poorly-maintained storage systems, coupled with bad management, were to blame.
The NRA's Chief Scientist, Dr Jan Pentreath, stressed that, compared to livestock slurry, raw human sewage was far less polluting.
Nevertheless, it was treated at considerable cost before being allowed to enter the water system, whilst slurry was allowed to enter rivers untreated.
Water pollution is also caused by the wide variety of pesticides and other agrochemicals, the NRA says.
The problem has been compounded by other factors, including increased water abstraction and land drainage.
The NRA has issued a proposal for reducing water pollution from agricultural sources, centred around individual farm waste management plans.
These would detail the quantity and type of effluents produced and their preferred method of disposal to minimize pollution, together with contingency plans for action in the event of pollution incidents.
Government grants to farmers to minimize pollution should only be made where such waste management strategies were in place, the NRA argues.
The plan was welcomed by the National Farmers' Union, which declared its willingness to co-operate in setting up a waste management scheme.
The Agriculture Minister, John Gummer, said that the government would carry out a pilot study into pollution control methods.
NRA news release 21 January Independent 22 January Guardian 22 January Financial Times 22 January
Pollution: Water
Water company fined
The North-West Water company has been fined £9,000, with £4,815 costs, after being found guilty of releasing illegally high levels of a pesticide, pentachlorophenol (PCP) into the Eagley Brook, near Blackburn, Lancashire.
The PCP originated in cotton being treated by a bleaching and dyeing company nearby.
Measurements carried out by the National Rivers Authority revealed 10 times the permitted level of 6 micrograms per litre in the brook, where waste water from the sewage works is discharged after being treated.
Independent 30 January
Pollution: Water
Sewage disinfectants withdrawn
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has announced strict curbs on the widespread use of chemical disinfectants in sewage treatment plants.
Ecologists have questioned their value, pointing out that, while they kill off coliform bacteria (a common cause of diarrhoea), they are ineffective against salmonella and other viruses, which are believed to be behind many of the mild stomach upsets and other illnesses suffered by bathers.
In addition, the disinfectants themselves may react with the cocktail of chemicals already present in sewage to produce other, potentially dangerous compounds such as chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Under the NRA's new restrictions, water companies will only be allowed to use disinfectants which are both effective against salmonella and viruses but harmless to plants and animals, and which do not accumulate in the bodies of marine organisms.
The NRA's decision has been welcomed as an example of the precautionary principle being put into practice.
Guy Linley-XXXX Adams, pollution officer of the Marine Conservation Society, commented that: "We are pleased that the onus of proof is now on the makers and users to show that the disinfectants are safe, rather than on us to demonstrate that they might be harmful." 
New Scientist 25 January
Pollution: Water
Quicklime "cannot destroy PCBs" 
Widely publicized claims that quicklime can destroy the highly toxic pollutants, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are false, according to the results of experiments carried out by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Quicklime (calcium oxide) is commonly employed to concretize oil sludge containing PCBs.
An EPA contractor reported last year that the resulting blocks of concrete no longer contained PCBs, leading to speculation that the lime was reacting to neutralize the toxin.
Subsequent tests demonstrated that this was not the case and that significant amounts of PCBs remain after treatment with quicklime.
The discrepancy was believed to be due to the fact that a proportion of the PCBs evaporate naturally when exposed to air as part of the treatment process.
New Scientist 18 January
Pollution: Water
New "Seaside Award" introduced
A new award scheme to complement EC guidelines on bathing water quality has been established by the Tidy Britain Group.
In order to qualify for a "Seaside Award" , beach resorts must meet the guideline standards, together with a range of other criteria on amenities and cleanliness.
As from this year, the criteria for the Europe-wide Blue Flag award, which recognizes beaches with clean bathing water, have been tightened.
It will in future be awarded only to those beaches which meet EC guideline standards for water quality, which are considerably tougher than the mandatory standards.
They stipulate a maximum level of 500 coliform bacteria per 100 millilitres of water; the mandatory standards allow a level of 10,000 coliforms per 100 ml.
Tidy Britain Group news release 28 January
Transport
EC Commissioner reaffirms roads decision
The EC Environment Commissioner has reaffirmed his intention to pursue objections to UK road building projects which allegedly infringe EC environmental directives [see ED no. 52].
The two projects most directly involved are the East London river crossing approach through Oxleas Wood, and the M3 extension on Twyford Down.
Carlo Ripa di Meana insisted that Britain had not been "singled out" for attention to the exclusion of other member states.
Alone among other EC governments, however, its reaction had been the fiercest.
He added that "it seems to me likely that it will fall to be resolved by the Court of Justice at the end of the day" .
Independent 10 January
Transport
 "Car pooling" scheme starts
in UK The first nationally-organized car pooling scheme has been set up in the UK.
Established by a commercial company, Freewheeling, the scheme seeks to match prospective travellers making the same journey in different cars, with a view to encouraging them to share vehicles.
There is to be no membership charge for the scheme, which will raise its revenue through premium telephone lines.
It follows the launch of similar, but smaller-scale, networks in continental Europe, and the first ever group car purchasing plan, set up in Germany [see ED no. 53/54].
Green Magazine, February
Tropical Forests
Australia's forests to be logged
The Australian government has announced that it intends to allow logging in all of the country's forests except those already protected as reserves or national parks.
The new legislation — which will in effect make over 88 per cent of Australia's native forests available to large scale-logging and pulping concerns — is likely to be introduced in March.
Under the new ruling, forests will be open for exploitation to companies offering A$100 million of investment and aiming to increase exports or replace imports.
These are likely to be the same Japanese companies that are already exploiting the forests of other Far Eastern countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand.
The policy of "resource security of major new industrial wood processing projects" was introduced under Prime Minister Bob Hawke in 1991, in what was seen as a response to pressure from the timber industry and an impending general election.
Under "resource security" , unprotected forests will become "permanent production zones" .
If, in the future, any forests gain protection, compensation will be paid to the timber industry.
Australian environmentalists have dubbed the legislation "resource robbery" .
Under intense pressure to revitalise the severely-depressed Australian economy, Hawke's successor, Prime Minister Paul Keating, has repealed existing conservation laws.
The environment is no longer believed to be the vote-getter it was in 1983, when the Labour government came to power.
A report by the Resource Assessment Commission (RAC) set up by Hawke in 1983 to examine all natural resources disputes, is due to be published just after the "resource security" legislation is enacted.
A draft report states that: "The inquiry can find no instance…where large areas of forest have been managed on a sustained yield" .
Guardian 17 January BBC Wildlife February
Tropical Forests
World Bank "to fund Congo logging projects" 
The World Bank is planning to fund logging projects in the West African state of the Congo, contrary to previous assurances on funding policy, according to an internal memorandum leaked to Friends of the Earth.
The Congolese rainforest forms part of a swathe of jungle in West Africa, much of which remains relatively untouched, although under increasing pressure from logging, settlement and mineral exploitation.
The planned funding takes the form of a US$23 million loan to a Natural Resource Management Project, which, according to the memo, would help the Congo with "rational use of (its) main renewable resource, namely its dense tropical forest" .
The project would "bring forestry exploitation back to life" by helping "to free up" transport links and timber marketing operations.
The loan scheme is conditional on the creation of six national forest reserves, to be financed out of the new Global Environment Facility which is jointly administered by the Bank and the UN Development Programme.
Last year, the Bank pledged not to support any further logging projects in rainforests [see ED no. 49/50].
Observer 26 January
Tropical Forests
France under pressure to protect Guianan rainforest
The Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has launched a campaign for French Guiana to be run as a "European Tropical Park" by the European Commission, with strict controls on hunting, forestry and road building.
The campaign adds to mounting pressure on the French government to ensure environmental protection for its territory on the Atlantic coast of South America.
France has no environmental policy for French Guiana, despite all of its major national research institutes having bases in the country, from which long-standing research has been conducted.
According to Jean-Marc Thiollay, ornithologist and government adviser on the environment,"French Guiana is unique in that it is the most densely wooded country in the world, the country with the smallest population and the only country of its kind with absolutely no protected zones.
The French government leaves all the responsibility to the local politicians, who have no environmental awareness and see the forest as a sign of under-development".
French forestry officials argue that only 100,000 cubic metres of timber are felled each year, but agree that roads opened up by loggers should be closed to the public.
According to WWF's Jean-Francois Terrasses: "The number of hunters is small but their impact on species which reproduce slowly is enormous.
You can kill and destroy whatever you like.
It is the Wild West".
In addition, Electricite de France, has plans to flood tracts of rainforest in order to build four hydroelectric dams in the territory.
According to Thiollay: "There have been no environmental impact studies.
This [energy]is only for export.
It is totally unacceptable".
At last September's World Forestry Congress, held in Paris, the Vice President of WWF, Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, called on France to "set up a biosphere reserve in Guiana and practise what it preached" .
The French pressure group "Nature Environment" lobbied congress with the same demand.
A senior official from the Forestry Office has acknowledged that "official decisions are needed now to address the problems that will emerge in 20 years" .
New Scientist 25 January
Waste and Recycling
Argentina bans toxic waste imports
The Argentine government has announced a ban on all imports of toxic waste from abroad.
The move follows three months of protest actions by environmental groups after repeated reports that large consignments of potentially-dangerous wastes were planned to be exported to the country for disposal from France and the United States.
The decision comes against a background of growing concern, in Latin America and elsewhere in the developing world, that poorer countries are being used as a dumping ground by companies keen to avoid the more stringent regulations governing toxic waste in force in industrialized states.
Guardian 31 January
Waste and Recycling
France unveils draft recycling regulations
The French Cabinet has adopted wide-ranging proposals designed to minimize waste and encourage recycling, based around a tax-XXXX incentive system.
The scheme, drawn up by Environment Minister Brice Lalonde, will now be submitted for approval to parliament.
It is similar to Germany's stringent recycling laws announced last year [see ED no. 49/50].
The core of the scheme is a tax of 20 French francs per tonne on the dumping of all non-toxic household and industrial waste, which currently amounts to approximately 70 million tonnes per year.
The tax is planned to raise between FFr350 million and FFr500 million each year.
This would be sufficient to allow the government to open 160 new waste treatment plants over the next decade, and to close down all the existing 6,700 public tips.
In effect, it would end the practise of disposing of waste by dumping it.
Under the new system, producers of packaged goods would pay a three centimes levy for each package.
If the new regulations gain parliamentary approval, producers or importers of consumer goods will be obliged to recover packaging, either themselves or through a hired contractor, by the start of next year.
Under the Lalonde scheme, any company producing toxic waste would have to reach an agreement with the state environment agency to ensure it was adequately treated.
The timing of the proposals is seen by some observers as reflecting the growing strength of the French Green Party in the run-up to regional elections in March.
As with the German scheme, the reaction of industry has been largely hostile.
The European Recovery and Recycling Association has stated its preference for schemes which are commercially-XXXX driven, rather than imposed by regulations, while the Industrial Council for Packaging and the Environment (Incpen) has criticized its lack of flexibility.
 "If the French go the German route, it would be disastrous" , said an Incpen representative.
, Incpen has lodged an official complaint against the new German recycling laws with the European Commission, on the basis that they interfere with the free movement of products across borders.
In common with other industrial groups, it fears that the German system may be adopted as a model for an EC-wide one.
Reports from Germany suggest however that the new system is not yet working smoothly, largely due to the lack of suitable recycling facilities.
, The latest proposals on recycling being considered by the European Commission call for 90 per cent of all Europe's packaging to be reused, recycled, or burnt in energy-generating plants, within 10 years.
This is less stringent than the German standards, but represents a toughening of earlier suggestions, which envisaged targets of only 60 per cent recovery, and 40 per cent recycling, although within a shorter time-frame of five years.
Financial Times 24 January
Waste and Recycling
UK lags behind in recycling
Industry's failure to invest in recycled materials and new recycling plant has led to the UK lagging behind other European countries, according to a new study by Dr Chris Coggins and Robert Brown of Luton College of Higher Education.
The government's stated aim that 25 per cent of domestic waste should be recycled by the year 2000 was unambitious when compared with targets set by Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands.
Coggins and Brown warned that, without government support in the form of investment allowances or tax incentives, or grants for research into new uses of materials, industry would be neither be able to provide a big enough market for recycled goods, nor invest in the plant required to carry out the recycling.
With regard to the location of recycling plants, the study reported that environmentalists were increasingly questioning the logic behind transporting recovered materials large distances — with all the resulting energy and pollution costs entailed — to be recycled.
At present, however, with the lack of plant available, there was no alternative.
Independent 8 January
Waste and Recycling
New waste recycling plan
A new report has argued that Britain could recycle up to 80 per cent of its household waste by a combination of recycling banks and composting.
The WARM (Waste As Raw Material) report was commissioned by the Gateway supermarket chain and carried out by the Land Bank consultancy.
To some extent, it broke new ground by placing emphasis on organic wastes, such as food scraps and garden litter, which make up over half of all household waste.
These could be used as raw material for a new compost, produced by a decontaminating process known as WMC.
Research has shown that such a compost has similar properties to that of horticultural peat.
In contrast to other proposals, the WARM study comes down against kerbside collection schemes, arguing instead for an intensive network of recycling banks: one for every 400 households for plastics, metals and glass, one for every 2,000 for newspapers and textiles.
According to Land Bank's head, former Greenpeace chairman Bryn Jones: "it does not make commercial sense to use more energy collecting the stuff [through kerbside schemes]than can be gained from recycling it" .
The WARM report criticizes the new German recycling system — which is rapidly being seen as a benchmark for materials recovery schemes throughout Europe — on the grounds that it unnecessarily duplicates existing waste collection networks.
The far-reaching extent of the German scheme [see ED no. 49/50]has caused widespread concern among industrialists.
Financial Times 8 January
Waste and Recycling
Householders fail to recycle
The majority of UK householders fail to recycle any of their domestic waste — despite widespread belief in the virtue of recycling.
That is the conclusion to emerge from a public opinion survey entitled Recycling: Public Attitudes and Market Reality 1992, carried out by the Mintel research group.
Ninety-four per cent of those surveyed thought recycling was important, but only 36 per cent did any themselves: 64 per cent said that they put all their household waste straight into the bin.
As to the leading reasons why they did not recycle, 37 per cent blamed a lack of collection points; 25 per cent said they did not have enough space to store materials awaiting recycling; 10 per cent found it too much trouble to separate out different categories of waste; and 8 per cent cited shortage of time.
Those most in favour of recycling were in the 15-19 and 35-54 age groups, and tended to come from higher income earners in southern England.
Regarding incentives for recycling, 54 per cent of those questioned favoured "money-back" schemes for recyclable materials, and 40 per cent supported a deposit system on reusable containers.
Most people were opposed to any legislation to make domestic recycling compulsory.
At present, 90 per cent of all household waste is disposed of by burial in landfill sites.
Mintel reported that few local authorities were planning to improve the provision of recycling facilities, as required in the 1990 Environment Protection Act, mainly due to lack of money.
Independent 21 January Guardian 21 January