

Agriculture & Food
US policy on biotechnology
The Bush administration has issued long-awaited guidelines for the government agencies that regulate the release of biotechnology products into the environment, primarily the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA).
The new guidelines, which closely follow those proposed by the National Research Council (NRC) in 1989, stress that there is no conceptual distinction between genetic modification of plants and microorganisms by traditional methods or molecular techniques, and that all products, whether genetically modified or not, must be treated in the same way.
This means that the regulatory agencies must base the need for regulation on the risk a product poses to the environment without taking into account its method of production.
They cannot therefore assume that all genetically engineered products are dangerous unless proven otherwise.
While it is as yet unclear what the new guidelines will mean in practice, experts have noted that biotechnology in the United States will be less regulated than in Europe.
New Scientist 7 March
Agriculture & Food
Gene transfer breakthrough
Researchers from the Agriculture and Forestry University of Vienna, Austria, have successfully transferred a beneficial gene into tree cells.
If, as is hoped, the transplanted gene will protect the saplings against disease, the technique could have major consequences in terms of eradicating specific diseases in crops and plants.
The team, led by Margit Laimer, injected a gene into apricot tree cells which earlier work had shown to provide resistance to the plum pox virus which causes Sharka disease affecting, among others, apricots, peaches and plums.
The gene was transferred by splicing it into the DNA of a bacterium which naturally infects plant cells.
The genetically modified saplings will in due course be infected with the virus to test their resistance.
New Scientist 14 March
Agriculture & Food
Seed bank joint strategy
Europe's leading seed banks and official research institutes have joined forces with the pressure group Genetic Resources Action International (GRAIN) to work out a strategy for preserving genetic diversity in crop plants.
The strategy proposes the use of all available means to preserve threatened crop varieties, greater exchange of information and material between plant scientists, and emergency rescue schemes for seed collections under threat.
The strategy was drawn up by Jaap Hardon of the Dutch seed bank, Pierre Perret of the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources and Renee Vellve of GRAIN.
New Scientist 14 March
Agriculture & Food
Crop genes to run wild?
Foreign genes introduced into crops pollinated by insects may quickly spread to related wild varieties, US biologists have concluded.
This poses the danger of weeds crossbreeding with genetically engineered crops, which will allow them to inherit traits that will make them better able to survive drought, frost or pests.
A team from the University of California at Riverside led by Norman Ellstrand tracked the spread of genetic material from a plot of cultivated radishes to the wild variety at several sites.
A particular marked gene was found in some seeds of the wild variety up to a kilometre away.
The team concluded that "distances from engineered crops to compatible weeds must be at least several kilometres for spatial isolation to prevent the escape of engineered genes" .
Ellstrand estimated that up to a third of all crop varieties are pollinated by insects.
One possible solution, he suggested, would be to modify engineered plants so that they are male-sterile and produce either no pollen or pollen that is inactive.
New Scientist 14 March
Agriculture & Food
Chicken deformities
Between 50 and 80 per cent of broiler chickens (selected for fast growth and meat) raised under intensive conditions have leg and bone defects, according to the Agricultural and Food Research Council.
Around 30 per cent of laying chickens (kept as egg producers) also suffer from one or more broken bones, The council's director-general, Professor Tom Blundell, commented that"skeletal abnormalities are a serious animal welfare problem.
The way we raise poultry is abnormal in their environment and we get bone and cartilage problems."
But he rejected suggestions that the best way forward is to discontinue intensive battery farming methods.
Instead, the council's research project will examine the genetics of modern hens with the long-term possibility of developing new breeds with sturdier legs.
Researchers also noted that broken bones and other skeletal problem were not entirely absent in free-range poultry farming, but there was as yet insufficient data to draw firm conclusions.
Guardian 13 March Independent 13 March
Agriculture & Food
WHO calls for pesticide restrictions
A committee of the World Health Organization (WHO) has called for urgent action to reduce the incidence of acute pesticide poisoning in developing countries.
Its recommendations focus on dangers posed by the public's exposure to pesticides and their use by untrained people.
Although there is a lack of reliable data on acute pesticide poisoning, the committee said that it was clear that approximately two thirds of all poisonings were suicide attempts and that a quarter were accidental.
In view of this, the committee stressed the need to restrict the availability of highly hazardous pesticides.
Pesticide News, March
Agriculture & Food
Indian pesticide studies show dangers
Two as yet unpublished studies from India have highlighted the serious direct and indirect hazards of the use of pesticides to human health, the environment and wildlife.
Interviews with local people in the state of Tamil Nadu revealed increased incidences of unconsciousness, vomiting and other physical symptoms among people using pesticides; a decrease in soil fertility and numbers of earthworms and insects; and the prevalence of a range of unsafe practices in the use of pesticides (such as mixing them with bare hands or using old containers for food storage).
Pesticides News, March
Agriculture & Food
Marmosets die of "mad cow" disease
Two marmosets at a research centre in Harrow, London, have died of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)— "mad cow disease" , a fatal degenerative disease of the nervous system.
The marmosets were injected with tissue from the brain of a diseased cow in 1988 as part of a series of experiments to test whether the agent that causes the various forms of spongiform encephalopathy "such as BSE in cows and scrapie in sheep" can be transferred across species.
New Scientist 14 March
Conservation: Land
National Parks' environment deteriorating
The environmental quality of national parks in England and Wales has deteriorated over the last two decades, according to the first-ever national survey carried out for the Countryside Commission.
However, changes have been relatively slight.
The survey was based on aerial photographs taken in the late 1980s, and the extent of change was assessed by making comparisons with earlier data produced by the Ordnance Survey in the 1970s.
Coniferous forest increased by 11 per cent, cultivated land by 13 per cent , and improved pasture by 2 per cent , with the most pronounced changes recorded in Snowdonia and Northumberland.
The changes were largely at the expense of moorland, heath and rough pasture.
The area of mixed and broadleaved woodland remained roughly the same, but much suffers from a lack of appropriate management and over-grazing.
Tree News, February
Conservation: Land
Forestry Commission spending plans announced
The Forestry Commission has announced its spending plans for the three years 1992/93 — 1994/95.
It plans an increase in total woodland cover of 71,000 hectares, of which 60,000 will be planted by the private sector.
The majority of new woodland will be in Scotland.
The proportion of broadleaved trees, which currently account for 46 per cent of new plantings, is planned to increase, partly as a result of financial incentives for the private sector under the woodland grant scheme.
A new management grant programme will make £7.5 million available to owners for carrying out improvements to the environmental and social aspects of their woods.
Scottish Environment News, February
Conservation: Land
Largest-ever UK nature reserve planned
Plans to create the UK's largest nature reserve have been announced by Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine.
The £11 million reserve will cover 2,500 acres near Teesmouth, Cleveland.
Its creation is part of the Teesside Development Corporation's strategy to "green" the semi-derelict former industrial land around the Tees Estuary.
The reserve will feature a range of habitats including lakes, reed beds, saltmarshes and woodland.
Marshy pools remaining from old industrial workings are attracting migrant birds, and the National Rivers Authority plans to restock the Tees with salmon — the first in the river for 50 years.
Times 10 March
Conservation: Land
Peat extraction agreement condemned
An agreement by which peat will continue to be extracted from a site of special scientific interest (SSSI) has been strongly criticized by environmentalists.
The agreement was reached between Fisons, the main British peat-extracting company, and English Nature, the government's adviser on nature conservation.
Under the agreement, Fisons has given English Nature 8,000 acres of lowland peat bog on Thorne and Hatfield Moors, in Yorkshire, but with the reservation that it will continue to extract peat from the site for a further 30 years.
Friends of the Earth in particular has strongly criticized English Nature for entering into the agreement, although it acknowledges that, since Fisons has extractions rights which pre-date existing conservation laws, the company cannot be compelled to stop work.
Four of the country's main peat retailers have all undertaken to stop supplying peat from SSSIs.
Earth Matters, Spring 1992
Conservation: Land
Twyford Down work begins
Work has commenced on the construction of the M3 extension over Twyford Down, Wiltshire, in the face of sustained local protest.
The route crosses two sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs)— the chalk downland itself, and water meadows at the hill's foot.
The area is officially designated as one of outstanding natural beauty (AONB).
The government's decision to press ahead with the work, allegedly without carrying out an adequate environmental impact assessment, led to a threat of legal action from the European Commission [see ED no. 52].
Among the protestors were members of the US radical environmentalist group, Earth First!, currently establishing itself in Britain.
Arrests were made as Earth First! members adopted the group's traditional tactics of direct action by chaining themselves to bulldozers.
* The Department of Transport has rejected recommendations by its Standing Committee on Trunk Road Assessment (SCATRA) calling for more thorough assessments of the environmental impact of new roads.
Guardian 14 March Independent 18 March New Scientist 14 March
Conservation: Land
New logging threat to US old-growth forests
The old-growth forests of Oregon and Washington are again under threat from logging, following a ruling by the US Supreme Court.
The court confirmed a 1989 federal ruling disallowing legal action against the logging brought on environmental grounds.
This ruling was itself overturned in 1990, after which environmentalists won court orders halting the logging on the basis of its threat to the habitat of endangered species, notably the spotted owl [see ED 52].
The immediate effect of the latest decision will be to allow sales of timber already cut.
Meanwhile, the Bush Administration has promised new plans on protecting the owl, although it is unclear at present as to how much logging will be permitted under them.
Financial Times 26 March
Conservation: Land
Middle Eastern dry lands "need urgent action" 
The dry lands of the Middle East and North Africa are under acute pressure from short-term economic development, according to a seminar co-sponsored by the World Bank held in Aleppo, Syria.
Reserves of water, forests, rangelands and soil were all under threat, in part due to their being accorded too low an economic value.
Several speakers at the seminar argued for a monetary value to be placed on resources such as irrigation water.
Its current availability at low, or nil, cost, encouraged misuse, leading to salination or even waterlogging.
The seminar also called on governments to support small farmers, in order to help reduce the drift to the cities.
Middle East Economic Digest, 20 March
Conservation: Species
Population growth threatens genetic diversity
Human population expansion is threatening to lead to unprecedented extinctions of plants and animals over the next 50 years, according to a new report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
The report estimates that up to 40,000 plants could die out by the middle of next century, if the population expands from 5,000 million to 8,000 million by 2020, as currently predicted.
It warns that ever more land will be needed for crop production, while the land surface is shrinking as a result of rising sea levels caused by global warming.
In the long term, the loss of genetic diversity will reduce the gene pool available for agricultural crops.
According to FAO director-general, Edouard Saouma: "New breeds of plants and animals will be needed to adapt to climatic and technological changes.
This calls for intensified efforts to conserve and utilize genetic resources."
The report recommends the establishment of global gene banks, together with increased aid to southern countries to help them protect their genetic resources.
An "early warning" system is planned to allow time to rescue individual species threatened with extinction.
Observer 22 March
Conservation: Species
British birds decline during 1991
The breeding activity of Britain's main bird species fell significantly during 1991, according to the results of surveys by the British Trust for Ornithology.
The birds suffered from a snowbound February and a cooler than average spring and wet, cold June.
Among the more dramatic decreases were those of the wren (54 per cent reduction), whitethroat (44 per cent down), robin and blackcap (32 per cent), blackbird (29 per cent ) and song thrush (27 per cent ).
The only species to record an increase was the chaffinch, which was thought to have benefited from a heavy crop of beech mast.
Breeding numbers of the tawny owl were at their lowest since surveying began in 1963.
Its population mirrors that of its prey species — mice, voles and other small mammals.
Around 50,000 pairs of tawny owls remain in Britain, compared to just 5,000 barn owls.
In an effort to improve prospects for the latter, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has drawn up a four-year plan.
Its priority is to promote farming practices which favour the owl's traditional habitats, particularly on land "set aside" from agriculture.
British Trust for Ornithology information, 23 March Tree News, February
Conservation: Species
Mouse-eared bat extinct
The UK population of mouse-eared bat (myotis myotis) has become extinct with the death of the last individual late last year.
It represents the first extinction of a British mammal since the wolf was hunted out in the mid-18th century.
Earth Matters, Spring 1992
Conservation: Species
Britain's tree health declines
The health of Britain's trees declined significantly during 1991, according to the Forestry Commission's annual survey.
The decline is believed to be due to a combination of excessively dry summers in 1989 and 1990, strong winds in late 1990 and a late frost in spring 1991.
Air pollution may also be a contributory factor.
The study was based on a sample of 9,000 trees across the country.
The proportion in the healthiest category fell from 15 per cent in 1990 to 6 per cent in 1991.
Five species were surveyed: oak, beech, Scots pine, Sitka spruce and Norway spruce.
The density of tree crowns and the proportion of dead shoots both indicated a worse state of health, except for beech, which showed small signs of improvement.
According to the director of the survey, Dr John Innes: "The results provide an indication of what may happen if summers in Britain become warmer because of the greenhouse effect.
Here is some firm evidence that climate plays an important part in determining the condition of our forests."
Tree News, February
Conservation: Species
Drive to save Siberian cranes
The Indian population of the Siberian crane is on the verge of extinction due to hunting.
Large numbers of the birds are believed to have been shot down as they crossed Afghanistan and Pakistan en route to their summer breeding grounds along the River Ob, in eastern Russia.
Only four Siberian cranes wintered in India in 1991-92, compared to over a hundred 20 years ago.
In an effort to renew the population, Russian conservationists are releasing 11 captive-bred chicks along the Ob.
Some will be fitted with satellite collars, in an effort to trace their migratory route.
Transmitters are also being fitted to Common cranes in India, in order to locate their Siberian breeding grounds.
If the Indian population of the Siberian crane does become extinct, then captive-bred Siberian birds will be released into the Common crane's breeding grounds, in the hope that they will be guided back to India when the Common cranes migrate.
BBC Wildlife Magazine, April
Conservation: Species
Aga Khan urges action to save monk seal
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan has launched an appeal for a centre to rescue orphaned and injured Mediterranean monk seals, whose numbers have collapsed in recent years to the point where they are, according to the Prince, "one of the most forgotten creatures on earth" .
Once common, the seal is believed to number only around 300, most of which live in small, scattered colonies, thereby weakening their chances of survival.
The population is declining at the rate of 7 per cent a year.
Many seals are shot or killed with dynamite after being trapped in fishing nets.
They have also suffered disease believed to have been exacerbated by water pollution.
According to the Prince, their disappearance "is one of the strongest indicators of the marine ecosystem of the Mediterranean" .
Guardian 12 March
Conservation: Species
 "Dramatic rise" in dolphin deaths
Large numbers of drowned dolphins are being washed up on the south-western coasts of England, apparently as a result of being caught in fishing nets.
A total of 65 common dolphins have been beached on Cornish shores so far in 1992, three times the normal annual figure.
Some conservationists believe that the deaths result from unusually high numbers of dolphins present in coastal areas, where monofilament nets are in use.
A Greenpeace spokesman claimed that the deaths were symbolic of "an approaching marine meltdown" caused by factors ranging from over-fishing to pollution and global warming.
A scheme by which fishing captains report dolphins trapped in nets was introduced earlier this year.
It is too early to judge its results.
Independent 16, 17 March
Conservation: Species
Canadian cod stocks "dangerously low" 
The Canadian government has drastically reduced catch quotas for cod after admitting that stocks of the fish on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland are dangerously low.
But the reason for the cod's decline is fiercely debated, with the Canadian and European fishing industry's blaming each other, and some arguing that the end of the seal hunt has contributed to the problem.
The crisis occurs against a background of rapid declines in cod stocks in European waters [see ED 51, 53].
The quota for this year has been set at 120,000 tonnes (compared with 235,000 in 1989), with a proviso that only 25,000 tonnes can be caught before July, at which point the report of a new study may trigger further cuts.
Only 780,000 tonnes of cod are ready to spawn this year, compared with 1.1 million tonnes in 1991.
The Newfoundland cod population has crashed before, in the 1970s, but recovered somewhat under a quota system during the 1980s.
However, the quota limits, determined largely by commercial considerations, are now believed to have been set too high.
Canadian Fisheries Minister John Crosbie blames the shortage on over-fishing by European vessels — notably Spanish and Portuguese —taking cod in the Grand Banks area outside Canada's 200-mile limit.
Catch quotas in the open seas are set by the North Atlantic Fisheries Organization, but the EC set its own, higher, quotas in 1986 in response to pressure from the depressed Iberian fishing industry.
The two sides now dispute the amount of cod taken by European ships.
Crosbie also claims that the end of the harp seal hunt in 1987, brought about as a result of pressure from some conservationists, has contributed to the cod's decline as a result of the seals preying on it and on its main food fish, the capelin.
But according to a Greenpeace scientist, the amount of cod and capelin taken by the seals is insufficient to account for any significant decline in cod numbers.
New Scientist 7 March
Conservation: Species
Finland's native species face extinction as forests felled
The extent of forest felling underway in Finland is threatening many of its wild animal and plant species with extinction, according to a government report.
This concludes that 217 of Finland's 1,692 endangered officially-species are "in immediate and serious danger" , and will probably die out by 2005 unless urgent measures are taken to protect their forest habitat.
Among those threatened are the arctic fox, lynx, wolf, northern brown bear, oak mouse, European otter and ringed seal, together with a number of insects, birds and plants.
Since the previous such survey, in 1985, around 138 species have become extinct, including the European beaver and the black rat.
A report containing proposals for forest preservation is due later in the year.
At present, only 2 per cent of the country's forests enjoy any protected status.
Many of the remainder are subject to logging operations.
The World Wide Fund for Nature estimates that between 15 and 20 species are dying out every year.
It believes that the government report may be underestimating the speed and extent of extinctions.
European 26 March/1 April
Conservation: Species
Rare pets "killed to avoid prosecutions" 
Owners of rare pets in Thailand are believed to be killing them off in order to escape prosecution under new legislation which forbids the collection of endangered species.
The Wildlife Protection Law was passed after sustained lobbying from environmental groups [see ED no. 53/54].
It brings Thai legislation into line with the Convention on Trade in International Species (CITES).
Among the newly-illegal pets are tigers, Asiatic black bears, crocodiles, simbar and many bird species.
Thai campaigners have also criticized poor standards in the centres set up by the police to hold animals seized during raids.
According to Pat Corrigan of Wildlife Fund Thailand: "The animals cannot be reintroduced into the wild because animals raised by humans lack basic survival skills and are often infected with diseases you don't find among wild populations" .
New Scientist 7 March
Conservation: Species
Koala listed among Australian endangered species
The Australian state of New South Wales has produced a list of 239 species which are "threatened, vulnerable and rare" .
The list includes half the state's native mammals, notably the koala, whose native habitat is being destroyed for housing and agriculture.
Around 10,000 are thought to remain.
Other animals featuring on the list are wallaby, bandicoot and potoroo, and 12 species of animals and birds which are feared to be already extinct.
New Scientist 14 March
Energy
Hungary cancels Gabcikovo treaty
The controversy between Hungary and Czechoslovakia over the proposed dam on the Danube at Gabcikovo [see ED 56]has intensified, with Hungary abrogating the 1977 treaty between the two countries under which the dam was originally planned.
The abrogation is to take effect unless the Czechoslovak government halts work on the project by the end of April.
The EC has offered to mediate in the dispute, which has soured relations between the two countries.
Environmentalists fear that, if completed, the hydro-electric dam will severely disrupt the Danube ecosystem.
Hungarian Radio 24 March CSTK (Czechoslovak news agency) 26 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Energy
New York won't buy James Bay electricity
The future of the controversial James Bay hydro-electric project in northern Quebec [see ED 56]has been put in doubt after the state of New York cancelled a US$12,500 million contract to purchase 1 million kilowatts of electricity from the plant.
The decision, made on economic grounds, puts in doubt plans by the Hydro-Quebec company to proceed with the construction work.
The contract, originally signed in 1989, was to have run from 1995 to 2016.
The news of its abrogation was welcomed by environmental activists and native American leaders.
A spokesman of the New York Public Interest Research Group said that the cancellation would "protect the entire region from an environmental disaster" .
Financial Times 28/29 March Le Monde 31 March
Energy
1 
Mexico halts dam plan
The Mexican government has postponed plans to construct a hydro-electric dam on the Rio Usumancinta, near the border with Guatemala.
The federal commissioner for electricity has announced that the dam will not be built during the present Administration, which comes to an end in late 1994, although he left open the possibility of the project being revived after that date.
The plans had been strongly opposed by environmentalists, who warned that the project would damage the richly-diverse Lacandona rainforest, and that nearby Mayan archaeological sites might be flooded.
Parts of the Lacandona forest were designated as a biological reserve earlier this year [see ED 56].
Financial Times 21/22 March
Energy
UK's biggest wind farm receives go-ahead
Planning permission has been granted for the UK's biggest wind farm.
Developers Ecogen will build 103 turbines on 600 hectares of moorland at Llandinam, 15 miles from Newtown in mid-Wales.
The plant will generate around 30 megawatts of electricity, which will be fed into the national grid.
New Scientist 7 March
Energy
New London power stations "will worsen air quality" 
Six new power stations planned for eastern London will result in poorer air quality in parts of the capital, according to consultants' reports.
The plants include two gas-fired ones (at Barking and Greenwich); two generating power from burning rubbish (at Lewisham and Bexley) and two from burning sewage sludge (at Newham and Woolwich).
Of the six, the sewage sludge ones are likely to be the least polluting.
The principal problem is identified as nitrogen dioxide (NO2) emissions, most notably from the gas-fired plants.
London's total output may increase by 7 per cent, placing it in danger of breaching the EC legal standard.
The bulk of NO2 emissions in the capital come from motor vehicles, however, and some observers argue that the introduction of catalytic converters will shortly lead to large reductions in emissions overall.
* National Power, the UK's largest generator, is facing opposition from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) over plans to convert an old power station in Pembroke to burn orimulsion (the controversial, high-polluting bitumen-based fuel imported from Venezuela — see ED 56).
HMIP is expected to order National Power to fit costly sulphur-removing equipment to the plant, in order to meet EC regulations on sulphur emissions from fossil fuel power stations.
National Power claim that the £300 million cost of such an operation will make the project unviable.
Independent 28, 30 March
Energy
Netherlands to encourage wind farming
The Dutch government is offering farmers subsidies to persuade them to switch from dairy to energy farming.
The subsidies will cover up to 40 per cent of installation costs of new windmills.
The government hopes that wind power will meet around a tenth of total electricity demand by the year 2000.
In doing so, it aims to reduce emissions of both carbon dioxide (from fossil fuel plants) and methane (from dairy cows).
Guardian 16 March
Economics & Industry
Pollution trading to start in California
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD), a powerful independent regulatory body in the US State of California, has devised what it describes as a "revolutionary programme" for reducing air pollution in the Los Angeles area, which has one of the lowest air qualities in the industrialized world.
Under the scheme, known as the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (Reclaim), the AQMD sets an annual target for reducing emissions of hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide.
The main industrial polluters will then be allocated quotas or "credits" for emissions which they can legally emit.
These credits will be reduced year by year, thus encouraging companies to cut emissions or, as an alternative, to buy credits from other companies who no longer need them.
Trading in the credits is expected to start in 1994.
The scheme is backed by a number of major companies based in the region.
The AQMD says that the scheme will give industry a much greater incentive to tackle pollution, will save jobs, will cut the bureaucracy required to enforce statutory regulations, and will be cheaper than regulation, but just as effective.
Several environmental groups have expressed doubts.
The scheme covers only some pollutants, and the AQMD has only a limited monitoring capacity.
The oil company Arco, the state's third largest company, has said that the scheme will devastate manufacturing.
Independent 16 March
Economics & Industry
ICI's first annual environmental audit
The chemicals corporation ICI has published its first environmental report as part of a stated commitment to greater openness about its environmental performance.
Among its main points were: * the total emissions from ICI plants of pollutants to land, air and water fell from 8.6 million tonnes in 1990 to 8.3 million tons in 1991 (down 3.7 per cent); * the company had been prosecuted 36 times in 1990 and 26 times in 1991 for environmental offences, with the number of prosecutions falling in every country of operation with the exception of Britain; * production of hazardous waste fell from 678 tonnes in 1990 to 476 tonnes in 1991 (down 29.8 per cent ); * the amounts of "non-hazardous" waste dumped in landfills and in the North Sea increased, from 3,509 tons to 3,565 tons and from 150 to 170 tons respectively; * overall energy consumption fell by 6 per cent in 1991 (partly due to the sale of 20 subsidiaries and falling product sales); * the company's expenditure on environment-related projects reached £300 million in 1991.
ICI's chairman, Sir Denys Henderson, commented: "We recognize the need to do better…
Nevertheless, we have made real progress."
The company also confirmed that it would start informing employees and local communities about the performance of individual plants.
* Norsk Hydro, a Norwegian manufacturing group, and British Airways have won awards from the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants for environmental reports.
The award was introduced to encourage companies to formalize environmental reporting and link it to annual financial reports.
Financial Times 18 March Guardian 18 March
Economics & Industry
EC environmental levy angers banks
A proposed EC directive which would make financial institutions partly liable for damage caused by companies in which they have invested has been sharply criticized by several banking organizations.
The aim of the directive on "civil liability for damage caused by waste" , which is still at an early stage of discussion, is to force banks to take greater interest in the environmentally damaging activities of their business customers.
The strongest reaction thus far has come from the French Association of Banks (AFB), which has declared: "We will do everything within our means to prevent [this directive]from being adopted" .
Guardian 14 March
Economics & Industry
French business association launched
The Association of French Businesses for the Environment has been formed by 15 companies, chaired by president of Rhone-Poulenc, Jean-Rene Fourtou.
The new association has four main aims: to encourage business to get more involved in helping to address environmental problems, to promote the exchange of experience, to establish action plans, and to defend the business point of view relating to environmental issues.
The third aim could include projects such as financing the decontamination of abandoned industrial sites.
Le Monde 22/23 March
Environmental Politics
Brazilian environment minister sacked
Brazilian President Fernando Collor has sacked the controversial Environment Secretary, Jose Lutzenberger, just two months before Brazil is due to host the UNCED conference.
The move came after Lutzenberger embarrassed the government by publicly accusing Ibama, the federal agency responsible for protecting the Amazon forest, of corruption and misuse of foreign funds.
An official statement said that the dismissal was intended to "ensure there is only one line of thinking and action in environmental policy" .
Speaking in New York at a preparatory meeting for the UN summit, Lutzenberger had said that Ibama was "a nest of thieves and corruption" and a "mere subsidiary of the logging companies" .
An outspoken environmentalist prior to his appointment in 1990, "Lutz" had continued to criticize the government's failure to curtail forest destruction from within the Cabinet.
Financial Times 23 March Guardian 23 March International Herald Tribune 23 March
Environmental Politics
EC's Fifth Environmental Programme
The European Commission has approved plans for a "radical change" in the EC's environment policies.
Carlo Ripa di Meana, the EC environment commissioner, promised that the Commission would consult industry and consumers on its anti-pollution plans to a greater extent.
Presenting the EC's fifth environmental programme, setting general policy goals up to the year 2000, Ripa di Meana conceded that the Commission had been criticised in the past for "handing down bans from on high" .
He proposed a "general consultative forum" on which the Commission would systematically seek the views of all interest groups before finalising its proposals.
The Commissioner said that he detected signs of a "more responsible" attitude by industry to the environment.
He contrasted the "long rearguard action" that EC car makers fought a few years ago against tougher emission controls with the "very encouraging" willingness by industrial producers and users of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) to phase these substances out on a largely voluntary basis.
The "action programme" includes a catalogue of growing environmental problems.
Energy use in the EC is expected to rise by 25 per cent by 2001, it claims, and carbon dioxide emissions by 20 per cent.
Sharp increases are also expected during the 1990s in Europe's use of motor vehicles, fertilisers and water.
Recycling programmmes have failed to prevent Europe's cities from increasing by 13 per cent the volume of waste discarded over the past five years.
It is becoming increasingly clear, the programme claimed, that the EC will not be able to meet its commitment to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 without introducing a tax on fossil fuels and other forms of energy.
Several member states had maintained that their own energy-saving and anti-global warming measures could meet the EC target without a tax.
But to date only three of the 12 member states — Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands — have submitted a programme of "complementary measures" to cut CO2 output.
The UK, which has promised to stabilise emissions only by 2005, has submitted its white paper on the environment, This Common Inheritance, which lacks detailed timetables on emissions.
Independent 19 March Financial Times 19, 24 March
Environmental Politics
Environmentalists win support in French regional elections
The two environmentalist parties in France have both scored successes in regional elections.
Generation Ecologie, the more recently formed and more "pragmatic" of the two, was led by Environment Minister Brice Lalonde and polled 7.1 per cent of the vote, while the more radical Les Verts, led by Antoine Waechter, polled 6.8 per cent.
Their success appeared to be at the expense of the traditional parties, notably the ruling Socialists.
Paradoxically, the other major beneficiary from apparent disillusion with the established parties was the far right Front national.
Waechter declared himself "a little disappointed" that Les Verts, who did best in Alsace where they won 12.57 per cent of the vote, had not performed better.
Generation Ecologie's strongest performance was in the Ile de France region where they won 10.69 per cent of the vote.
Lalonde, who favoured a merger of the two parties, declared the result to be "a most significant encouragement for responsible and realistic ecology" .
The two parties won a total of 209 seats on the 22 regional councils in metropolitan France as compared with only four for environmentalists at the 1986 regional elections.
Les Verts member Marie-Christine Blandin was subsequently elected president of the regional council in Nord-Pas-de-Calais (long a socialist stronghold) after the party Les Verts (which controlled only eight of the 113 seats in the regional council) refused to support the Socialist candidate.
Blandin was both the first woman and the first Green president of a regional council and at 39 was the youngest to be elected.
Le Monde 17, 19, 21, 24-27, 29, 31 March, 1 April Financial Times 24 March International Herald Tribune 24 March Guardian 12 March Neue Zuercher Zeitung 13, 31 March
Environmental Politics
UK political parties' environmental manifestos
Each of the major political parties included detailed commitments in their manifestos for the general election held in Britain on 9 April.
The Conservative manifesto called for:(i) the creation of an environmental agency with a statutory duty to publish an annual report on the state of the environment;(ii) possible stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions before the target date of 2005;(iii) expansion of the Countryside Stewardship Scheme to include conservation of historic landscapes; and (iv) the creation of a Wildlife Enhancement Scheme.
The main points of the Labour manifesto were:(i) a commitment to meet international obligations to reduce emissions of pollutants;(ii) environmentally friendly transport policies;(iii) the reversal of the Conservative government's opt-out on European Community environmental measures;(iv) additional national parks;(v) greater investment in clean fossil-fuel burning technologies; and (vi) an end to investment in nuclear power.
The Liberal Democrat manifesto promised:(i) support for the European Community's planned energy tax, the revenue from which would be used to fund environmental and other measures;(ii) a 30 per cent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2005;(iii) the creation of a Department of Natural Resources and an independent Environmental Protection Agency;(iv) grants for recycling schemes, home insulation and similar measures;(v) the introduction of pollution licences for factories, with upper limits on the amount of pollutants they could produce; and (vi) the phasing out of nuclear power stations.
The Green Party — which put up candidates in 250 of 651 constituencies — called for a major shift from income taxes to "green" taxes aimed at reducing the use of raw materials and non-renewable energy sources.
It would tax packaging materials, increase duties on petrol and diesel, and introduce a luxury rate of value-added tax (VAT) on goods and services that damage the environment, with a zero rate on those that contribute to sustainable development.
Among a range of other measures, it called for a cut in carbon dioxide emissions of between 60 and 80 per cent by 2005 and a shift from the use of private cars to public transport and bicycles.
The party's chair, Sara Parkin, said: "Unlike the other political parties, this manifesto faces up to the real issues" .
* The animal rights group, Lynx, has reported that it is on the verge of financial collapse because of the costs of defending a long-running libel action by a fur farm and a decline in contributions due to the recession in Britain.
Independent 17, 19 March Financial Times 20 March Guardian 9 March
Environmental Politics
Serbian environment ministry sets up ecology police
The Yugoslav republic of Serbia has set up an environmental inspectorate with wide-ranging powers.
A statement by the Serbian Environment Minister, Pavle Todorovic, said that the Serbian government has also decided to set aside 1 per cent from every investment in "dirty" technology in an environmental protection fund.
This policy has been carried out for some time by the OECD countries, Todorovic claimed, except that there the figure is between 4 and 6 per cent.
The Minister added that the Serbian government had drafted its first integral environmental protection plan.
Tanjug (Yugoslav news agency) 2 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Peru's environmental programme
President Alberto Fujimori of Peru has claimed that his government is committed to "sustainable development and the protection of ecosystems" and is aiming to revert environmental damage through reforestation, decontamination of water supplies, ecologically justifiable exploitation of natural resources, and protection of wild flora and fauna.
 "The government has planned an ecological and social strategy to reach those objectives" , Fujimori asserted.
Delivering a lecture at the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew, London, Fujimori specifically highlighted the need for protecting the country's tropical forests.
He said that deforestation had increased by 75 per cent between 1985 and 1989 and that around 350,000 hectares of tropical forest were lost in Peru every year.
 "The government has plans to reverse the process by reforestation and investment in projects of sustained development." 
Peru has the seventh largest tropical forest mass in the world.
Inka Courier, February
Environmental Politics
New Iraqi Green Party established
An "Iraqi Greens Party" has been established in Baghdad, under the provisions of last September's Political Parties Law.
The new party's leader, journalist Mazhar Arif, said that it would ensure Iraq's compliance with the 1972 Stockholm Declaration on environment and with "all principles for protecting the environment on both Arab and international levels" .
The party will also attempt to establish a legal framework for the protection of the environment.
Iraqi News Agency 18 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Global Warming
Coastal cities face twin drowning threat
Some of the world's most important coastal cities face the prospect of disastrous flooding from a mixture of sea level rise due to global warming, and subsidence due to excessive development and groundwater drainage.
The predictions are made in a study co-ordinated for the University of Maryland.
According to Dr John Topping, of Washington's Climate Institute, subsidence could more than double the local sea level rise expected as a result of thermal expansion due to the greenhouse effect.
Large third-world cities are particularly at risk, as the depletion of groundwater reserves is likely to accelerate in order to meet the needs of a rapidly expanding population.
Among the cities most in danger around the world are: * Bangkok, which faces a sea level rise of six feet by 2010; * Shanghai, also threatened by a six feet rise, coupled with the danger that salt water would advance 40 miles up the Yangtze River, causing severe drinking water shortages; * Hong Kong, where seas may engulf newly-reclaimed coastal land, and an increased frequency of typhoons, due to climate disruption, threaten the whole territory; * Alexandria — the whole city "may disappear" unless major defence works are undertaken; * Tokyo, which will need £40 billion of flood defences in order to protect new suburbs; * Rio de Janeiro, whose tourist beaches and nearby coastal villages are in danger; * London, where there is concern that the existing Thames flood barrier may prove insufficient.
Dr Topping commented that: "So far we have largely been engaged in a scientific exercise to see how the world as a whole will be affected by global warming.
But the crunch will come in the world's cities, and governments must now start addressing the impact it will have."
Observer 29 March
Global Warming
Glacier melting increases
The high mountain glaciers of South America and Asia are melting at a "drastic and accelerating pace" , according to new research carried out by the Byrd Polar Research Centre of Ohio State University.
Scientists had predicted that glaciers in the central latitudes would provide an early indicator of global warming, and the latest studies appear to bear this out.
According to Lonnie Thompson, a glaciologist at the Centre, temperatures in the Gregoriev Ice Cap in Kirghizistan have risen by 4 degrees centigrade since 1962.
The margin of the Quelccaya Ice Cap in the Peruvian Andes is melting at the rate of 45 feet a year, compared to around 15 feet per year in the period 1963-78.
The tropical and sub-tropical ice caps are now melting at such a rate that they will soon be gone, says Thompson: "Consequently, the climatic and environmental records from these regions, which may contain key information for understanding our climate systems, will be lost permanently." 
Washington Post 2 March
Global Warming
US refuses to set carbon emissions target
The US Administration has again warned that it will refuse to sign any international treaty on cutting carbon emissions.
The statement was made at the fifth session of the negotiating committee of the UN Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change, meeting in New York.
Administration scientists continue to insist that there is no proven link between C02 emissions and global warming.
US estimates suggest that a cut of 20 per cent in C02 would lead to an annual loss of $95 billion.
The US delegate to the committee did, however, announce a grant of $75 million to help third world countries limit their own greenhouse gas emissions.
Of this, $50 million would be channelled through a World Bank fund.
The reaction of US environmentalists was mixed.
A Sierra Club spokesman suggested that it was a sign that "the Administration is finally getting serious" about global warming.
But Michael Oppenheimer, chief scientist for the Environmental Defense Fund, described it as "mere window-dressing — an attempt to buy off the developing world" .
Within the US, however, some individual states are taking steps to cut C02 emissions, with Oregon adopting a law to reduce emissions by 20 per cent of 1988 levels by the year 2005, and similar proposals under consideration in California, Maryland and New York.
New Scientist 7 March
Global Warming
China Sea levels rising
The water levels of the China Sea are rising at the rate of approximately 1-2 mm per year, according to the National Natural Science Foundation of Beijing.
The rise is attributed to a combination of thermal expansion due to global warming, and the sinking of coastal land as a result of the rapid depletion of groundwater reserves by expanding urban areas.
Xinhua News Agency, Beijing 4 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Global Warming
El Niño threatens catastrophic Brazilian drought
The latest El Niño climate current, which has already resulted in serious droughts in southern Africa, Indonesia and Australia, now threatens to bring a potentially-disastrous drought to Brazil.
 "El Niño" is the name given to a reversal of Pacific winds and ocean currents, which occurs every four to five years.
It typically leads to unusually dry weather in the western Pacific Tropics and heavy rains on the desert coasts of western America, but it can have wider effects.
In recent months, it has been blamed for freak storms in Pacific islands and on the Californian coast, and flooding in Peru.
However, its most serious effect for Brazil is likely to be the role it plays in delaying a southerly weather front which many regions of north-eastern Brazil rely on for rain.
Severe drought is already in place in the Rio Grande do Norte state, where water supplies are becoming exhausted, and there is now the danger of a famine across vulnerable areas of the north-east.
This year's El Niño is the most serious for nearly a decade.
New Scientist 21 March
Nuclear Power
Russian reactor fire
A fire broke out at the Balakovo nuclear reactor in southern Russia on March 4, but no radiation was released, according to officials.
The fire, apparently caused by a short circuit, triggered an automatic safety system that shut down the plant.
The fire was extinguished in about 40 minutes.
The Balakovo reactors are regulated by a pressurized water system and are considered much safer than the older type of reactor installed at Chernobyl, the site of the world's worst nuclear accident in 1986.
Channel One Television, Moscow 4 and 5 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Washington Post 5 March
Nuclear Power
Russian nuclear incidents
A radiation leak has occurred at the Russian nuclear power station at Sosnovy Bor, 60 miles west of St Petersburg.
The incident rated two on the seven-point scale of nuclear accidents used by the International Atomic Energy Agency, and resulted in slight increases in radiation in the surrounding area, including parts of Finland, but not sufficient to threaten human health, according to Russian and Finnish experts.
The leak took the form of steam escaping from a fuel channel in the core of reactor number three at the plant, probably as a result of a ruptured seal.
The reactor was of the RBMK type — the same as the one which exploded at Chernobyl in 1986.
In a formal protest to the Russian government, the Estonian government called for Sosnovy Bor's immediate closure.
In a separate incident, an electrical fire forced the temporary shut-down of the third power unit at the Balakovo nuclear power station, 600 miles south-east of Moscow, on March 4.
The fire was reported to have been caused by a wiring short circuit.
No radiation was released as a result.
* Of the five nuclear accidents to have taken place since January 1991, all but one have involved RBMK reactors.
These account for around half the former Soviet Union's nuclear capacity, providing 6 per cent of its total electricity needs.
During 1991, there were a total of 270 unplanned stoppages at nuclear plants.
ITAR-TASS 24 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Helsinki radio 24 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Izvsetiya 11 March Economist 28 March Independent 25 March Guardian 25 March International Herald Tribune 27 March
Nuclear Power
Mutant animals at Chernobyl
Farm animals in the area contaminated by radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986 have been giving birth to offspring with major birth defects.
According to Vladimir Tikhii, an adviser to the Ukrainian Environment Ministry, the incidence of mutations such as six-legged piglets and two-headed calves increased sharply after the accident.
While Tikhii said that the effect of radiation on animals was not necessarily an indication of the likely effects on humans, he claimed that the results warranted detailed investigation.
* The Ukrainian government has decided to hold an international contest to work out a method of converting the fourth reactor at Chernobyl into an environmentally safe system.
Guardian 12 March UKrainian Radio, Kiev, 4 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Call for closure of Soviet reactors
Following the latest nuclear incidents in the former Soviet Union [see above], calls have increased for the closure of the more dangerous plants.
Klaus Toepfer, Germany's Environment Minister, has demanded that all RBMK-type reactors (the same as the one which exploded at Chernobyl) be closed.
The Economics Minister, Juergen Moelleman, has called for Western states to provide urgent aid to make ex-Soviet plants safe, with the priority being to shut down the RBMKs.
The aim should be to help the Commonwealth of Independent States increase oil and gas production as a means of compensation for the loss of nuclear generation.
The only aid agreed up to now is 50 million ecu pledged by the EC.
Friends of the Earth has criticized the aid thus far given as being "directed to patching up and bolting on gismos, rather than developing alternative systems" .
It has reiterated demands for the closure of all ex-Soviet nuclear facilities.
But the British Nuclear Forum warns that thousands of Russians would die of hypothermia if the country's nuclear capacity, which provides 15 per cent of total electricity needs, were to belost.
Some observers suggest that the Western nuclear industry is hoping to win major contracts to improve Eastern bloc plants, at a time when nuclear power is becoming less fashionable in the West as a whole.
* Greenpeace has announced a plan by which the 16 RBMK reactors could be shut down without the loss of net electricity capacity.
The £5,000 million programme is centred around energy efficiency and renewable power sources.
It includes schemes to increase the amount of electricity generated through combined heat and power (CHP — already in operation in some Soviet cities), reduce methane leakage from the gas supply network, boost energy efficiency, primarily through improved insulation, and build 1,500 megawatts worth of small power stations based on biomass, wind and hydro-electric generators.
Greenpeace claim that alternatives involving the upgrading of the RBMK reactors, or their replacement by other nuclear plants, would be a substantially more expensive course of action.
Financial Times 25 March Independent 25, 27 March Guardian 31 March [Greenpeace plan]
Nuclear Power
Mururoa atoll protestors arrested
A team of Greenpeace activists protesting against French nuclear testing in the Pacific have been arrested by the French navy after entering the 12-mile exclusion zone around the Pacific atoll of Mururoa, where the tests take place.
Among the 20 or so protestors were seven foreigners, including the former Soviet Environment Minister, Nikolai Vorontsov.
They had moved into the area on board five rubber dinghies launched from the Greenpeace vessel, Rainbow Warrior II, and were planning to establish a "peace camp" on the atoll.
Le Monde 27 March Independent 26, 27 March International Herald Tribune 27, 28/29 March
Ozone layer
GPs ask for guidance on ozone depletion
More than 4,000 doctors in Britain have asked Greenpeace for information on the effects of ozone depletion, including the increased risk of skin cancer, eye disorders and malfunctioning of the immune system.
The environmental organization had written to all the country's general practitioners in January offering a health education poster and booklet.
It also called on doctors to boycott drugs produced by ICI, one of the world's major producers of ozone-destroying chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
Guardian 18 March
Ozone layer
Multinationals in Thailand agree CFC phase-out
Forty-one Japanese and US companies operating in Thailand have agreed to reduce drastically the amount of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) they use.
They agreed to phase them out on the same timetable applying in their own countries, and faster than required by the Montreal Protocol (the international agreement on protecting the ozone layer — see ED 52].
The Protocol gave developing countries until 2010 to phase out CFCs and other ozone-depleting chemicals,— 10 years longer than industrialized countries.
The agreement is being cited as a model for other companies working in Third World countries.
New Scientist 14 March
Pollution: Air
Mexico City pollution reaches new high
Low-level ozone pollution in Mexico City [see EDs passim]reached record levels in mid-March, prompting the city authorities to adopt stringent anti-pollution measures, including cuts of 75 per cent in activity of polluting industries and a 50 per cent reduction in the use of government vehicles.
School classes were temporarily closed.
New regulations were imposed banning vehicles from the road two days per week, on a rotation basis, with the ban extending to weekends for some vehicles.
This was planned to reduce traffic volume by 40 per cent.
A new report shows that ozone levels in the capital reached 200 points on the World Health Organization scale — over twice the "safe" level — on 192 days last year.
Pollution is worst during winter months, when cold air over the city produces a "thermal inversion" effect, trapping the warmer, polluted air close to the surface.
The Mayor's office has agreed to fund a pilot study into a plan to use 100 giant industrial fans to suck polluted air from the city.
Proponents of the scheme believe the fans would form artificial tornadoes of polluted air, which would be propelled up through the thermal inversion "cap" .
The plan has been dismissed by ecologists as both gimmicky and technically unviable.
Independent 18 March Le Monde 18 March International Herald Tribune 27 March
Pollution: Air
Bangkok faces serious pollution
Air pollution in the Thai capital of Bangkok has reached the point where it is "a serious threat to public health" , killing 1,400 per year, according to a new report for the US Agency for International Development (USAID), Ranking Environmental Health Risks in Bangkok.
Airborne dust and lead are identified as the most serious problems.
The Thai government itself admits that the lowest reported blood lead levels are three times higher than those in the West.
Traffic levels in the city are growing rapidly, with 500 additional vehicles coming on to the streets every day.
There are indications, however, that the government is beginning to tackle the problem.
Unleaded petrol was introduced last year, and new regulations now compel refineries to cut the proportion of lead in conventional petrol, and produce lighter, less smoky diesel fuel.
Special low-smoke lubricants are also compulsory for all two-stroke engines — used on the capital's many motor-cycles.
Financial Times 25 March
Pollution: Air
Polish lead pollution revealed
The Polish government has published figures on lead emissions for the first time.
Total emissions are estimated at 2,100 tonnes a year.
In Warsaw and Cracow, the ratio is 20kg for every 1,000 square metres of road, of which 98 per cent comes from vehicles.
Children in southern Poland have been diagnosed as suffering from damaged circulatory systems as a result of lead absorption.
Vegetables grown near city centres, particularly lettuce, cabbage, spinach and parsley, contain dangerously high levels of lead.
A study of vegetables from Warsaw's Ochota district showed they contained 16 mg of lead per kg — eight times higher than the maximum safety level permitted by the World Health Organization.
Polish TV 12 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
UK faces severe drought
The south and east of Britain faces a severe water shortage, due to persistently low rainfall and rising levels of water consumption.
The worst hit area is East Anglia, but the deficit affects much of the country.
Since March 1990, rainfall across England and Wales has been the lowest since 1767.
This has meant that underground aquifers, which supply much of the water requirements of the south-east, have shrunk to the lowest level on record.
The aquifers, which store water in the pores of chalk, limestone or sandstone rock, are normally replenished during the winter period November-May.
But the abnormally dry soil means that it is not until late January that the ground becomes saturated enough for the rainfall to start percolating through to the aquifers.
This winter, average aquifer replenishment has been no more than 15 per cent of normal.
In some areas, such as the Three Valleys water company region north of London, aquifers have not been replenished at all.
Unless there are heavy rains by the beginning of May, many boreholes may run dry by the end of the summer.
The problem has been compounded by the hot summers of 1989-90 which increased the rate of soil evaporation, thereby further reducing the amount of water which penetrated through to the aquifers.
Springs which draw their supplies from aquifers are drying up, leading to record low levels in rivers.
Large numbers of lakes and ponds in Norfolk and Suffolk are already dry.
Low river flow worsens pollution, since there is less water to dilute sewage and other outflows.
Many water companies are now considering the introduction of controls on use, including the application of Drought Orders, under which a range of "inessential" uses can be banned.
Independent on Sunday 22 March Guardian 23 March
Pollution: Water
NRA report on water strategy
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has set out its proposals for the development of water resources in Britain over the next 30 years.
In Water Resources Development Strategy, the NRA stresses the need to save water by means of reducing wastage due to leaks (currently running at up to a quarter of total supplies) and introducing metering in areas of low supply.
The report also contains major proposals for using the river and canal system to transfer supplies from water-rich areas in the west and north to the increasingly dry south and east.
It notes that even without taking into account the current drought in the region and the effects of global warming, demand there will continue to exceed local supplies.
The report ruled out, primarily on grounds of cost, other suggestions such as the construction of a national grid of pipes or desalination plants, or transporting icebergs from Arctic waters.
A policy document with firm proposals is due to be published in 1993.
Guardian 12 March
Pollution: Water
Eutrophication "damages 102 SSSIs" 
A total of 102 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in England are being damaged by eutrophication — the artificial enrichment of water caused mainly by the run-off of nutrients from farm waste, fertilizers and sewage farms.
Eutrophication promotes the rapid growth of algae, which starves the water of oxygen, killing off plant and animal life and, in some cases, producing dangerous toxins.
The claim has been made by English Nature, the government's official adviser on nature conservation, which warns that some of the country's best-known beauty spots, including the Lake District, Norfolk Broads, Somerset Levels and Hampshire's River Test, are being damaged.
It recommends fitting phosphate-stripping equipment to sewage farms upstream of SSSIs.
Sewage effluent is the cause of the problem at 61 sites, it says.
English Nature's analysis is sharply at variance with the view of the Department of the Environment, which has identified only nine SSSIs at risk.
Its assessment is based on a much higher "acceptable" level of nutrients.
Guardian 31 March
Pollution: Water
Alien seaweed spreading in Mediterranean
A species of tropical algae not native to the Mediterranean, Caulerpa taxifolia, is spreading rapidly in the waters of the French and Italian Rivieras.
It is now threatening to overwhelm the beds of a native seagrass which are important breeding grounds for fish.
Like other members of its family, the weed contains a powerful toxin, caelerphenyn, but scientists do not yet know if it poses a danger to human health.
Most marine biologists think the weed "escaped" from the Oceanographic Museum of Monaco in 1984.
The French government has launched a research programme to map the spread of the algae and to find ways of destroying them [see ED 56].
New Scientist 7 March
Pollution: Water
11 
Toxic leak makes fish unsafe to eat
The Ministry of Agriculture has issued a warning against eating fish caught in the River Mersey, because of contamination fears following the long-running leakage of dangerous chemicals from an old waste tip at Widnes, Cheshire.
The chemicals, which include pentachlorophenol and polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs) have been linked with cancer and suppressed immune systems.
The Hutchinson Dock Company tip, which is bordered by water on three sides, was first identified as a source of pollution in 1978.
It was closed in 1986.
Friends of the Earth has described the situation as scandalous, and called on the National Rivers Authority to prevent further seepage.
But the NRA insist that the responsibility lies with the local Cheshire County Council.
This body in turn cannot compel the tip's owners to clean up the area until regulations provided for in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act have come into force, which may not be until at least 1993.
Guardian 25 March
Pollution: Water
Study questions harmful effect of heavy metals
Scientists investigating mining areas and waste tips in Britain hundreds of years old have found no evidence that the high levels of heavy metals "lead, zinc, arsenic, cadmium and other" have a damaging effect on human health.
The sites investigated by Prof. Iain Thornton of Imperial College in London showed very high concentration of metals, in some cases more than 1 per cent of the total soil.
But in all cases he found that local people's blood showed concentrations only marginally higher than national averages, and locally grown vegetables had concentrations within safety limits.
Thornton said that the findings would have major implications for the study of the effects of metal pollutants produced by modern industry.
 "Sometimes the irresponsible idea has been put about that land contaminated with mining wastes is related to human disease" , he said.
 "So far, we have no proof of any type of causal relationship." 
Observer 8 March
Pollution: Water
Register of contaminated land delayed
The British government has delayed indefinitely the preparation of a register of contaminated land, much of it on inner-city sites with a history of industrial use, because of the effect it would have on land values.
David Trippier, a Minister of State at the Department of the Environment, said that the government was "concerned about suggestions that land values might be blighted because of perception of the registers" and that this might hamper its inner-city regeneration programme.
The move was strongly criticized by environmental groups, who argued that not compiling the register would not make the problem of soil pollution go away.
The National Rivers Authority (NRA), which blames leaching from the sites for much of the pollution of waterways, commented that meeting statutory requirements on water quality would now be "much more difficult" .
Guardian 12 March
Pollution: Water
Beaches court case delayed
A case concerning Britain's polluted beaches due to be heard in March at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg was delayed until July (after the April general election) at the request of the British government.
The case is being brought by the European Commission because the beaches at Blackpool and Southport, two of the country's main seaside resorts, do not meet EC standards.
Independent 11 March
Pollution: Water
Survey of water polluters
The Ethical Investment Research Service (EIRIS) has published a report listing the major UK companies which have exceeded their pollution consents or committed water pollution offences during the year to August 1991.
Water Pollution: A Briefing for the Ethical Investor describes eight types of pollution criteria and gives details of how many of the 590 companies listed on the FTA All-Share Index fall into each category.
In addition, a listing is given of the companies in the top 50 of the Index which have offended in each category.
For example, of the 590 companies in the Index, 75 have been "convicted following a prosecution by the National Rivers Authority or by a River Purification Board" .
Those in the top 50 include Allied Lyons, BTR, British Telecom, General Electric, Grand Metropolitan, Hanson, ICI, P & O, Shell Transport and Trading, and Unilever.
Greenpeace Business, April
Pollution: Water
EC report on Gulf damage
A team of experts from the European Community has concluded that the environment of the Gulf polluted by the war in the region in early 1991 can be saved but will never fully recover.
Among the effects of the war cited by the team were the decline of the stocks of Gulf prawns and the disappearance of some species of birds from the region.
It also said that it could take up to 15 years to clean up oil pollution along the Saudi Arabian coast.
Middle East Economic Digest 13 March
Pollution: Water
Japan questions Malacca strait levy
The Japanese government has criticized a plan proposed by Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia to levy a toll on ships passing through the Malacca strait in order to pay for pollution of the seaway [see ED 56].
It has demanded that such a scheme should be discussed multilaterally and internationally.
Japan's vital oil supplies from the Middle East are shipped through the strait.
Kyodo News Service, 17 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Transport
Amsterdam votes to ban cars
In the first ever referendum of its kind, voters in Amsterdam have supported a proposal to ban cars from the city centre.
Of the 28 per cent of the electorate who voted in the referendum, 53 per cent supported the ban.
Under the car-free plan only invalids, the police, fire and emergency workers could drive into the city centre.
Subsidised water taxis and cargo barges would return to the city's web of waterways, which are now mainly a tourist attraction.
A less radical option, entailing the maintenance of current traffic levels by the year 2000, was rejected.
However, city officials warned that they might ignore the vote because of the low turnout.
The city council will be debating the result in April, but says the limited response has reduced pressure to ban cars immediately.
Amsterdam has substantial parking problems and suffers chronic congestion and pollution.
The 82,000 cars in the capital emit levels of exhaust fumes which, in congested areas, are 70 per cent above those permitted by the Netherlands' national environment plan.
Strong measures against car owners are an increasing trend in the Netherlands.
Dutch police have the power to confiscate a vehicle found speeding at 70 kilometres per hour more than the legal level.
More than 100 vehicles have been confiscated since the introduction of the scheme last June.
European 19-25 March Observer 22 March Independent 26 March Guardian 26 March Financial Times 25, 27 March International Herald Tribune 27 March
Transport
Bush retreats on vapour traps
President Bush has reversed an Administration pledge which would have compelled vehicle manufacturers to fit special canisters to trap petrol vapour during refuelling.
He made the announcement while campaigning in Michigan — the USA's leading car-making state.
Manufacturers had complained that the new regulation would cause a substantial rise in their costs.
As a compromise, the Administration is expected to insist that vapour traps are installed directly onto petrol pumps.
Financial Times 14 March
Transport
New UK speed laws introduced
Under the new Traffic Calming Act, local authorities have been granted the right to introduce wide-ranging restrictions on urban roads, including speed limits of 20 mph (as opposed to the present standard minimum of 30 mph).
Other measures can include chicanes, pavement extensions and road narrowings.
The bill was initially suggested by Friends of the Earth, and introduced as a private member's motion by Conservative MP Keith Mans. * Motor traffic in the UK grew by 3 per cent overall during 1991.
Cars increased by 4 per cent, but light vans fell by 2 per cent , and heavy goods vehicles decreased by 3 per cent .
Guardian 16 March Independent 13 March (traffic growth)
Tropical Forests
Philippines power plant threatens tribal forest
The Philippines government has given approval to the construction of a vast geothermal power plant on Mount Apo, in Mindanao island, threatening to disrupt both an internationally-recognized site of rich biodiversity and the way of life of the Lumad tribal peoples.
Mount Apo, on the southern island of Mindanao, was declared a National Park in 1936.
It is the source of 28 of Mindanao's rivers.
The project is being undertaken by the Philippines National Oil Company.
It had originally been refused permission by the government on the grounds that commercial exploitation of natural resources in a National Park is illegal.
However, Environment Secretary Fulgencio Factoran has now given the project the go-ahead, on the grounds of the island's alleged energy demand.
Roads built to service the project are expected to attract slash-and-burn settlers and, possibly, illegal loggers.
The Lumad peoples, for whom the mountain is their pre-eminent sacred site, are organizing protest demonstrations, with the backing of some church and congressional leaders.
The government has responded by increasing the military presence in the area, while the "Mindanao Defenders" , an irregular civilian paramilitary force of a type common in the Philippines, is beginning to intimidate the protestors.
* Philippines timber is continuing to be sold in Britain, despite a ban on exports of raw logs, according to a report in The Observer.
It quotes timber industry insiders as claiming that the Wickes DIY store is stocking lauan mahogany, despite an insistence on the part of the store that all its timber products come from "sustainable sources" .
The timber had been granted export certificates in the Philippines, in an apparent contravention of the export ban.
Survival International information, April Observer 29 March
Tropical Forests
Vietnam bans timber exports
The Vietnamese Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet, has announced a ban on the export of all raw and sawn timber in an effort to conserve forests.
Existing export permits are to be revoked.
Provincial authorities have been ordered to urge the use of coal instead of wood and charcoal, particularly in brick and pottery works.
Voice of Vietnam radio 26 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Tropical Forests
1 
Papua New Guinea tightens logging rules
The government of Papua New Guinea has announced that timber companies have until the end of April to submit environmental plans to the government, or face having their concessions withdrawn.
The statement follows in the wake of a study by the Australian based Rainforest information Centre (RIC) revealing that submissions had been received from only 22 of the 316 logging operations underway in the country.
A moratorium on logging was announced by the government in March 1990, but a series of subsequent exceptions has effectively rendered it meaningless.
According to the RIC, timber companies are continuing to flout environmental laws, resorting to bribery where necessary.
The lack of resources allocated by the government — one man is responsible for overseeing timber operations across the country — has meant that it is unable to enforce the regulations.
The Department of Environment and Conservation is due to receive a grant of US$5 million from the World Bank's Global Environment Facility for biodiversity conservation.
Some observers suggest that this may prove inadequate, with 17 new logging projects, covering 8,000 square miles, due to commence in the next two years.
Tribal communities — who have ownership rights over 97 per cent of the country's land — are becoming more reluctant to sign agreements with the logging companies, the RIC says, while developments such as the "walkabout" sawmill are allowing them to operate their own small-scale logging operations in a more or less sustainable manner.
BBC Wildlife Magazine, April
Tropical Forests
Malaysia PR on "green lies" 
The Malaysian government has announced plans to set up a special task force in Europe to carry out counter-propaganda work against environmentalist criticism of its logging operations in Sarawak and its treatment of the Penan people.
The task force, funded by the Malaysian Timber Industries Development Council, is planning to use European public relations firms to present "Malaysia's side of the story" .
The announcement was made by Primary Industries Minister Lim Keng, who will visit Europe in May to discuss the issue with government members and environmental NGOs.
Radio Malaysia 31 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Tropical Forests
Guyana forest conservation
A World Bank-backed forest conservation programme has been launched in Guyana, but its effectiveness may be threatened by a new road and the government's recent granting of logging rights to a Malay-Korean consortium.
The five-year Programme for Sustainable Tropical Forestry will be supported by the Bank's Global Environment Facility.
It is to include research into the techniques of sustainable timber extraction and the pharmaceutical and genetic potential of the South American country's forest resources, centred on a newly-established scientific reserve of 3,400 square kilometres, close to the Brazilian border.
This is believed to be one of the world's richest areas of rainforest biodiversity.
However, a new road, currently under construction, linking Brazil with the Guyana coast, is threatening to bring gold miners and slash-and-burn settlers into the reserve from Brazil.
The UN Development Programme (UNDP), which is also backing the forestry project, is demanding checkpoints on the road and improved security to protect the reserve.
Together with the Commonwealth Secretariat, it has also called on the Guyanese government to grant local Indian tribes legal rights to hunt and gather in the reserve, as well as intellectual property rights over genetic materials found in the forest.
New Scientist 21 March
Tropical Forests
Honduras abandons logging scheme
The government of the Central American state of Honduras has pulled out of talks which would have led to the granting of a huge logging concession in the pine forests of the Mosquito coast.
The agreement between the Honduran government and the US pulp and paper conglomerate, the Stone Corporation, was reached at the end of last year [see ED 53/54], but, after opposition within the country [see ED 56], it was rejected by the Honduran Congress.
Stone had belatedly launched a publicity campaign at the end of January, claiming that it would adopt "environmentally-sound" , labour intensive logging techniques, and reforest areas which have been cleared by slash-and-burn farmers.
The Honduran newspaper, La Tribuna, reported that people opposed to the project had been receiving threatening phone calls.
Financial Times 3 March Central America Report 6 March
Tropical Forests
Amazon destruction slows
The rate of destruction of the Amazon rainforest slowed during 1991 for the third year running, according to satellite evidence.
Based on photos taken by the US satellite, Landsat 5, it was estimated that the total area cleared in 1991 was 11,132 square kilometres, equivalent to 0.3 per cent of the Amazon land area.
This represented a 20 per cent decline on 1990's destruction.
The total area of forest felled to date is 8.7 per cent.
Washington Post 30 March
Tropical Forests
Chico Mendes murder retrial
A Brazilian Amazon appeal court has quashed a 19-year jail sentence for the cattle rancher accused of planning the murder of rainforest defender Chico Mendes.
The rancher, Darli Alves da Silva will now face a retrial.
Brazilian environmentalists have expresssed outrage at the ruling, which has also been strongly criticised by the prosecution lawyer.
Chico Mendes became famous when he organised his fellow rubber tappers in a form of peaceful resistance to defend the rainforest, on which their livelihoods depended.
Observer 1 March El Pais 1, 2 March Independent 2 March
Tropical Forests
Forest Stewardship Council
Environmental groups and small timber traders from around the world have set up a Forest Stewardship Council, charged with deciding what constitutes "sustainable" tropical forestry.
Key objectives include preserving forest biodiversity and providing benefit to forest peoples.
The long term aim is to agree on a set of standards by which an "eco-label" could be awarded to timber products which come from genuinely sustainable sources.
Among the organizations attending were Friends of the Earth and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), which had differing views on the timber trade.
The WWF is seeking to persuade major timber retailers to sign a pledge that all their supplies will come from sustainable sources by 1995.
FOE, however, argue for an immediate ban on all logging in virgin rainforest, with the exception of small-scale operations involving forest people.
They are opposed to any implicit encouragement of companies who currently import non-sustainable supplies, and have called for a boycott of leading UK "D-I-Y" stores [see ED 53/54].
In support of this stance, FOE published the results of a survey in which 83 per cent of those questioned agreed that shops should stop selling products which contribute to rainforest destruction.
The WWF approach was also criticized by some small timber importers for allegedly failing to place enough emphasis on biodiversity.
Independent 16 March Friends of the Earth information, 28 March
UNCED
North-South tension in Rio summit preparations
Fears are being expressed from various quarters that the Earth Summit to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June may be dominated by confrontations between the industrialized countries of the North and the developing countries of the South.
According to UN officials, submissions by 121 governments to the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) preparatory committee show that while environmental awareness has increased over the years, problems are also increasingly seen in North-South terms.
One UN official said that much of the debate of the preparatory meetings was confrontational.
 "The language emphasizes more and more the need for a new international economic order" , she said.
Many developing nations argue that since the industrialized countries are the world's main polluters, they should pay for improvements in the global environment; and since they are rich, they should pay for the transfers of technology necessary for the developing countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, stop deforestation and carry out other changes.
* The Women's Environment and Development Organization, based in New York, has accused the governments of India, Kenya and Malaysia of human-rights violations against environmentalists Wangari Maathai (the founder of the Kenyan Green Belt Movement), members of the Indian Chipko movement, and Andy Mutang (a member of the Sarawak Indigenous People's Alliance), respectively.
International Herald Tribune 18 March New Scientist 14 March
Waste & Recycling
 "Duty of care" laws in force
Under a series of waste disposal laws which came into force on April 1, companies are responsible for ensuring that any waste they produce or handle is not "treated, kept or disposed of…in a manner likely to cause pollution of the environment or harm to human health" .
The regulations were provided for in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act.
Infringements of the new law can attract fines of up to £20,000, or a prison sentence of up to five years.
The law requires all businesses which create waste to register with the local waste disposal authority (either a county or metropolitan council).
Whenever waste changes hands, both parties must sign a form registering the transfer.
The rule applies to all businesses.
Critics of the new law warn that the level of bureaucracy involved might encourage some organizations, particularly small businesses, to resort to illegal fly-tippers, thereby avoiding the need for registration.
Friends of the Earth is urging local authorities to use the new laws as a means of prosecuting polluting dump sites.
Independent 25, 30 March Friends of the Earth information 1 April
Waste & Recycling
UK toxic waste imports increase
The import of hazardous waste into the UK increased by around one-third to 44,000 tonnes in 1991, according to government figures.
Of this, 4,000 consisted of the highly toxic polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs), mostly from Spain and Italy.
Of the total waste, 13,550 tonnes came from Switzerland, 9,229 tonnes from Belgium.
Ireland, the Netherlands and Italy each sent over 3,500 tonnes.
About 30 per cent of the total was incinerated, the remainder treated at specialist facilities.
Only 135 tonnes were buried in landfill sites.
* The proportion of glass manufactured from recycled supplies rose from 9 to 21 per cent, and that of paper from 26 to 31 per cent .
Independent 21 March