

Agriculture & Food
Soils spoilt by farming and industry
More than a tenth of the world's soils have lost a substantial amount of their natural fertiliser in the past 45 years, according to the first results of a 15-year Global Assessment of Soil Degradation, funded by the UN Environment Programme.
Some of the worst losses are in Europe, where 17 per cent of soils have been seriously damaged by human activity, including mechanised farming and the fallout of acid rain.
The findings, published for the first time in the latest volume of World Resources by the World Resources Institute, were described by the book's Editor Allen Hammond, as "far more shocking than the loss of rainforests" .
They are based on assessments by more than 250 specialists around the world.
Other high figures come from Central America and Mexico, where 24 per cent of soils are seriously degraded, and Africa, with 14 per cent soil loss, much of it from wind erosion from overgrazed pastures in arid areas such as the Sahel and much of South Africa.
The report defines seriously degraded soils as those which either cannot be restored to their former productivity, or can be restored only with major construction efforts, such as drainage projects or soil conservation terraces and banks, that are beyond the ability of individual farmers.
New Scientist 16 May
Agriculture & Food
Ecuadorian campaign against shrimp farming
In an attempt to prevent any further loss of the country's mangroves, Ecuadorian environmentalists are calling for strict control over the expansion of shrimp farming, a key export industry which earns Ecuador half a billion dollars a year in foreign exchange.
The country has lost a fifth of its mangrove swamps, and many that used to line estuaries are now confined to narrow stretches separating hectares of dyked shrimp ponds.
The disaster may prove to be cyclical, since the shrimp population, already at risk from heavy fishing, is believed to need the mangroves to reproduce.
The shrimp industry, however, contends that the shortages in the supply of larvae during the past decade are due to fluctuations in population.
BBC Wildlife Magazine, June 1992
Agriculture & Food
Gene-altered wheat developed
US scientists have successfully produced the first gene-altered wheat, opening up the possibility of the development of high-protein strains and ones resistant to drought and disease.
The scientists added the genes by firing tiny bullets coated with genes directly into the wheat's cells.
The work was carried out by a joint team from Florida University and the chemicals company, Monsanto, which has first rights to the work.
Independent 17 June
Agriculture & Food
Industrial fishing "should be banned" 
Fishing for purposes other than human consumption should be banned in order to conserve fish stocks, according to a report by Greenpeace.
At present, so-called "industrial fishing" accounts for 50 per cent of the North Sea catch.
The fish are processed into fish oil for pig and poultry feed, and the manufacture of such commodities as paint and shoe polish.
Industrial fishing concentrates on smaller species such as sandeels, which are an important food for larger fish, seabirds and marine mammals.
Greenpeace UK information Financial Times 23 June
Agriculture & Food
Indonesia's integrated pest management a success
In the largest experiment ever undertaken using the methods of integrated pest management (IPM), scientists with the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) have demonstrated that cutting back on the applications of pesticide can result in increased crop yields.
A national programme of IPM was adopted in 1986 by the Indonesian government.
The programme is based on evidence that chemicals are often sprayed when pests are not vulnerable and that the chemicals used can wipe out the natural enemies of the pest species.
Pesticide use for all of Indonesia has dropped to about half what it was when the programme started, saving the government $120 million in insecticide subsidies to farmers.
Washington Post 11 May
Agriculture & Food
Vegetarians at risk from nitrates
Vegetarians who rely on large quantities of leafy vegetables may be consuming unsafe levels of nitrates, according to a new analysis by Friends of the Earth, based on government studies.
Nitrate residues in British vegetables are often higher than those produced elsewhere, with celery and lettuce among those particularly rich in nitrates.
People who eat large quantities of such foods, and who also live in regions where nitrate levels in water are high — such as East Anglia — are most likely to be taking in nitrates above EC safety levels.
Guardian 5 June
Agriculture & Food
Somali pesticide spill
The water supplies of Hargeisa, Somalia's second city, are at risk from a massive spillage of pesticides from the unoccupied operations base of the Desert Locust Control Organization for East Africa.
The base was abandoned in May 1988 due to the outbreak of Somalia's civil war.
Local people subsequently entered the site in order to loot the metal containers holding the pesticides, and simply poured the contents away.
These included dieldrin, malathion, BHC and diazinon.
The liquids ran into a dried-up river bed, from where, with the onset of the rainy season, they leached into the wells supplying Hargeisa's drinking water.
Local authorities have appealed for international help.
Pesticides News, June 1992
Agriculture & Food
Irradiation for US poultry?
The US Agriculture Department has proposed the use of irradiation to kill salmonella and other bacteria in raw poultry, some 40 per cent of which is believed to be contaminated with salmonella.
Its use for this purpose has already been sanctioned by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Opponents to the technique claim that it can be dangerous, and poultry industry representatives are themselves cautious of adopting it.
A spokesman for the National Turkey Federation commented that, while the trade was broadly in favour, "if it should create negative publicity and spotlight one company, it could undermine years of hard work." 
Food irradiation was approved in the US for some uses as long ago as 1963.
It is permitted to be used for controlling insects in wheat and flour, prevent sprouting in potatoes, and extending ripening periods and control insects in fruits and vegetables, and to combat disease-causing organisms in pork.
it has only been applied, however, on a very limited scale.
During irradiation, food is exposed to gamma rays from sources such as cobalt 60 or cesium 137.
Irradiated food must carry labels acknowledging the fact.
Washington Post, 7 May
Agriculture & Food
BSE, sheep dipping concerns
Latest UK government figures for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or "mad cow disease" ) report an incidence of 10,729 cases in the first four months of 1992.
More than 600 new cases are emerging every week, compared with 437 a week last year.
Sheep dipping in the UK is no longer to be compulsory, in the light of evidence that the organophosphorous pesticides used in the annual dip may be a health hazard.
Dipping has been compulsory for over 20 years in an effort to eradicate fungal scab and tick infestations.
Guardian 2, 6 June
Conservation: Land
UK's ancient forest loss
The UK has lost 45 per cent of its ancient forest in the last 50 years, and only 1.5 per cent of the original forest cover remains, according to figures published by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
The figures are based on an unreleased survey from English Nature, the government's conservation advisers.
The survey reveals that 7 per cent of ancient woodland has been clear felled, mostly for agriculture, and that a further 38 per cent has been replanted with conifers.
In seven areas — Scottish Borders, Dumfries and Galloway, Tyne and Wear, Northamptonshire, Shropshire, Gwent and Gloucestershire — the losses amount to around 60 per cent.
Of the remaining ancient woodland, over 80 per cent consists of small copses of less than 50 acres.
Commenting on the report, WWF-UK's forest conservation officer, Jean-Paul Jenrenaud, said: "We have spent too long pointing the finger at the tropical countries for cutting down their forests, without examining what is happening in our own backyard." 
* The WWF has published a report arguing that economic analysis of forestry should include consideration of the social and environmental costs and benefits.
Trees and the treasury: Valuing Forests for Society argues that a history of subsidised conifer plantations has left timber growers with a surplus of mature trees which cost more to fell and process than they earn as timber.
* The government has announced that an environmental committee is to be set up to advise the Forestry Commission.
Observer 17 May Independent 18 May Financial Times 20 May
Conservation: Land
Cairngorms purchase in doubt
Plans by a consortium of British nature bodies to buy the heart of the Cairngorm range in Scotland have been placed in doubt by the government's failure to meet a promise to cover the running costs.
The 77,000 acre Mar Lodge Estate, which contains remnants of the ancient Caledonian forest, had been put up for sale by its American owner, John Kluge, at an asking price of £10 million.
The World Wide Fund for Nature and the Royal Society of Birds, with support from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, had put together a bid of £8.5 million.
However, they were relying on a promise by the chairman of government-funded Scottish Natural Heritage (the successor body to the Nature Conservancy Council) of £450,000 a year for running costs.
It has now transpired that this money cannot be guaranteed, and the estate may be sold instead to a private buyer.
* The Save the Cairngorms Campaign, a coalition of environmental groups, has criticized a Scottish Office report which argues for a voluntary approach to the environmental management of the mountains.
The report paves the way for the government to propose that the area be designated by UNESCO as a "World Heritage Site of Natural Importance" .
The Campaign describes the report as "deeply flawed" , with a bias towards the needs of landowners rather than those of local people or the environment.
It claims that the report "offers no serious mechanism to reduce the threats" posed by over-grazing by sheep and deer, and the growth of tourism, including ski-ing.
Guardian 1 June Independent 30 May
Conservation: Land
Tasmanian old-growth forests blockaded
Protestors against the logging of the Picton Forests in south-west Tasmania have staged blockades in an effort to delay the timber cutting, resulting in a number of violent clashes with loggers and several arrests.
The forests, which consist mainly of old-growth eucalyptus and rainforest, were originally part of the Hartz Mountain National Park, but were de-gazetted in 1979, in exchange for more inaccessible woodland in the Precipitous Bluff region.
The majority of the clear-felling and cable logging is being carried out to feed the woodchip industry, under the auspices of the North Broken Hill Company.
Environmentalists opposed to the operation claim that existing and planned plantations could supply 95 per cent of the woodchip industry's needs.
Friends of the Earth (Australia) information, May 1992
Conservation: Land
British hedgerows neglected
Britain's hedgerows — one of the most important wildlife habitats in England — are continuing to deteriorate, according to researchers from the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology.
A total of 9.4 per cent, equivalent to 33,000 miles, were destroyed during the period 1984-90, some of them dating back to Anglo-Saxon times.
New hedgerows planted totalled 16,500 miles, but these mostly lacked the species diversity of the older ones.
The Institute pointed out that nearly half the wild species in lowland arable regions of England depend on "linear features" such as roadsides and hedges.
Ecologists have been critical of the government's failure to introduce planned legislation to make farmers seek approval from local authorities before grubbing out a hedge.
Independent 7 May
Conservation: Land
UK's coastal defences "need urgent repair" 
A report by the government's National Audit Office has concluded that much of Britain's network of sea defences is inadequate, with some stretches in urgent of repair.
Coastal Defences in England recommends establishing a record of flooding incidents and erosion to give a complete picture of the state of defences.
Areas requiring significant amounts of immediate repair include Humberside, East Anglia, and parts of Kent and Sussex.
The Humber estuary and the coastline around Spurn Head is the weakest area, with 40 per cent of defences in need of urgent repair, and 72 per cent requiring replacement within five years.
The report criticizes a lack of co-ordination on sea defences.
The Ministry of Agriculture has overall responsibility, but operational control lies with the National Rivers Authority and district councils.
Independent 13 May Guardian 13 May
Conservation: Land
Okavango drainage project cancelled
A major dredging programme, which would have risked drying out much of Botswana's Okavango Delta, has been cancelled.
The government had planned to dredge and embank stretches of the Delta's main river, the Boro, to make more water available for the town of Maun, for irrigation and other development projects, and a diamond mine downstream at Orapa.
However, the calculations of the amount of water already available were flawed, underestimating the flow into the Delta from Angola and Namibia by about 20 per cent.
The International Union for the Conservation of Nature had strongly urged cancellation of the project, which it feared threatened the integrity of one of the world's most important wetlands.
Local people, who depend on the swamps for fishing and other uses, had also protested against the programme.
Washington Post 18 June
Conservation: Land
Climbers "should be barred from Himalayas" 
An international mountaineering conference in Katmandu, Nepal, has heard demands for climbers to be periodically barred from much of the Himalayas in an effort to limit their impact on the fragile mountain environment.
According to Maj.-Gen.
Ali Mirza, of the Pakistan Mountaineering Association, there has been a build-up of waste, some of it toxic, on the lower slopes of the most popular peaks, including unburied bodies of fallen climbers.
The practice of cutting wood for cooking fires has led to substantial deforestation and resultant soil erosion.
The Nepalese government, which derives significant amounts of revenue from Everest expeditions in particular, is opposed to restrictions, arguing instead that the management of expeditions needs to be improved.
There are currently 17 expeditions on Everest — the most there has ever been at one time.
The Katmandu meeting has called on expeditions to reduce the amount of supplies they bring in, make more use of local produce, carry out their own waste, and be more efficient in their use of fuel.
Guardian 11 May
Conservation: Land
Suffolk coast site designated SPA
The government has announced the designation of the Minsmere-Walberswick area in Suffolk as a Special Protection Area (SPA), under the provisions of the EC's Wild Birds Directive.
In so doing, it has committed itself to protect the area and prevent deterioration to its habitats.
These include fresh- and salt-water lagoons, mudflats, woodlands and heaths.
The new SPA totals 2,004 hectares, and includes nature reserves managed by English Nature, the National Trust and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
Part of the area is a Ramsar site.
RSPB information, 18 May
Conservation: Land
Brazil's national park
President Collor of Brazil has announced the establishment of a new national park, the Serra Gera, between the Rio Grande do Sul and the Santa Catarina rivers.
Five new reserves have also been created: three in Maranhao state; one in Tocantins state; and one marine reserve in Santa Catarina.
The measures form part of a new package of environmental laws announced in the run-up to the UNCED summit in Rio de Janeiro.
It also provides for increased penalties for dumping oil at sea, and for fortnightly satellite monitoring of deforestation.
Globo TV, Rio de Janeiro 20 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Land
US approves Oregon old-growth logging
The way has been cleared for renewed logging of old-growth forest in Oregon, after a Bush administration committee voted to override the provisions of the Endangered Species Act on 13 tracts of federal land covering 1,700 acres in the Coos and Douglas counties of western Oregon.
Under the terms of the Act, the land was protected because of its importance for the northern spotted owl.
The committee's decision is conditional on the Administration developing a long-term recovery programme for the owl across its full range from northern California to Washington state.
The dispute over the bird has been at the centre of a long-running debate over the fate of the US's last remaining ancient forests, which has included acrimonious exchanges between environmentalists and the timber industry.
Environmentalists have used the Endangered Species Act to block logging through the courts.
The committee — popularly referred to as the "God Squad" — was appointed in October 1991 [see ED no. 52].
Its final decision was seen as a compromise, since it had been asked to rule on a total of 44 logging sites, covering over 4,000 acres in all.
However, both environmentalists and the timber industry denounced the decision as inadequate.
Following the ruling, the Administration announced its own alternative plans for protecting the owl.
The "full recovery plan" would set aside 5.4 million acres, at a cost of 32,000 jobs in the timber industry: an alternative drawn up on the instructions of Interior Secretary Manual Lujan would protect 2.8 million acres but result in the loss of 15,000 logging jobs.
Washington Post 15 May International Herald Tribune 15 May
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwe de-horns rhinos, kills elephants
Faced with a massive upsurge in poaching, Zimbabwe has embarked on a crash programme of de-horning its remaining black rhino population, in an effort to make the animals worthless to the poachers.
De-horning was first carried out, largely successfully, in semi-desert areas of Namibia in 1990, and Zimbabwe embarked on the practice with some of its white rhinos in 1991.
The programme is thought to be less successful in Zimbabwe, since the denser vegetation means that poachers may not be able to see that the animal has no horn until they have already shot it.
The recent upsurge in poaching has been dramatic.
A survey of black rhinos in the Matusadona park found only 15, compared to an estimated population of 150.
Wildlife officials fear that the black rhino in Zimbabwe may not survive this latest onslaught.
A spokesman said that the poachers were "redoubling their efforts to kill as many horned rhino in as short a time as possible" .
Under the present programme, 300 rhinos are to have their horns sawn off.
Initial studies suggest that the de-horning has no ill-effects on the animals.
In time the horn, which is composed of compacted hair, grows back.
Zimbabwe, which favours the legalization of trade in rhino and elephant products, is to store the horns in the hope of being able to sell them legally in due course.
Poachers took over 100 Zimbabwean rhinos last year, bringing the total to 1,000 over the past seven years.
Meanwhile, the World Wide Fund for Nature is urgently appealing for funds to stage a campaign in the Far East aimed at closing down the markets for rhino horn.
* Zimbabwe is to cull 2,000 elephants, 1,500 buffalo and large numbers of impala in the drought-ravaged Gonarezhou National Park.
Much of the vegetation on which the animals depend has been wiped out by the drought.
Meat from the cull will be distributed to local villagers, who have been reduced to eating nuts and worms as a result of crop failures.
A government spokesman said: "Giving food to the people should also improve the relationship between the people and the park and should reduce illegal poaching." 
The park's hippo population has been catastrophically affected, with up to 80 per cent dying as river dried up.
Over 1,000 elephant, together with several species of buck, zebra and crocodile, are to be herded onto private game ranches in areas not affected by the drought.
New Scientist 6 June Independent 19 June BBC Radio 4, 3 July Independent 13 June (elephant)
Conservation: Species
Italy relaxes bird-hunting laws
The Italian parliament has finally approved a new law governing hunting.
Originally intended to restrict hunting in the wake of the 1990 referendum [see ED nos. 35/36; 47], the law as passed has been criticized by environmentalists as likely to encourage it.
Although it restricts the hunting season to three months (ending on 31 January, not 10 March as before), it allows regional governments to alter the deadline.
The hunting of migrant birds — a practice which attracts particularly strong criticism — is now allowed to take place five days a week.
Regions are also allowed to change the boundaries of protected areas, thereby allowing hunting in areas where it was previously banned.
The practice of bird netting, long banned by the European Community [see ED no. 49/50], has been outlawed, however.
RSPB information, Summer 1992
Conservation: Species
No natural habitat for captive-bred monkeys
The success of a programme of captive-breeding for Brazilian capuchin monkeys has been diluted by the fact that hardly any of the primate's natural habitat remains.
The capuchins, Brazil's most threatened primate, are native only to the Atlantic forest in the far south of Bahia State.
This has been destroyed to the point where only isolated pockets remain.
Around 800 capuchins are left in the wild.
Their diet of fruit, insects and small mammals make them unsuitable for release elsewhere, says a spokesman for the Rio primate centre: "You could save one species but wipe out 40 others." 
The centre is currently attempting to find appropriate sites overseas.
New Scientist 30 May
Conservation: Species
Atlantic dolphin deaths rise
Unusually large numbers of marine mammals, notably seals and dolphins, are being washed up dead on the eastern seaboard of the USA and in the Gulf of Mexico.
Many appear to be infected by the phocine distemper virus, which was blamed for the epidemic which afflicted dolphins in the North Sea in 1988.
Why the animals have contracted the disease remains unclear.
These latest reports follow a series of other cases of widespread dolphin deaths, including an epidemic under way in the Mediterranean [see ED nos. 55, 51, 49].
BBC Wildlife, June 1992
Conservation: Species
Arctic duck "threatened" 
The US Fish and Wildlife Service has proposed official "threatened species" designation under the 1973 Endangered Species Act for the spectacled eider duck, whose population has declined by 94 per cent since 1971, from over 50,000 pairs to just 3,000 pairs.
The ducks nest on the coastal tundra of western Alaska, in its North Slope region — site of the country's largest oil-fields — and in Siberia.
Their wintering grounds are unknown.
The reasons for their decline are similarly unclear.
Washington Post 10 May
Conservation: Species
Botswana's beef industry threatens wildlife
Botswana's wildlife is disappearing in the face of the rapid expansion of the country's cattle industry, primarily aimed at providing beef for export to Europe.
A study by an independent team of scientists carried out at the government's request, has concluded that vast areas of natural habitats have been degraded, while the construction of 3,000 km of cattle fences has interfered with essential wildlife migration routes between protected areas such as the Kalahari, Okavango swamplands and northern grasslands.
World Bank and EC assistance has encouraged the expansion of ranching into areas which are unsuitable and easily degraded, the study found.
It recommends a switch away from cattle towards wildlife "harvesting" and tourism.
New Scientist 23 May
Conservation: Species
Iceland leaves Whaling Commission
In advance of the annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC), the Icelandic government has announced that it is leaving the organization, having given the requisite six months notice.
Its decision reflects its determination to resume the hunting of the relatively numerous minke whales, which it claims are now present in quantities which can be sustainably harvested.
A moratorium is at present in force on all commercial whaling.
[Editor's note: A full report of the IWC meeting, which concluded in early July, will appear in the July edition of the Digest.]
Independent 29 June
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
The last of the wild Hawaiian crows, or"alala, are likely to die out within two decades, according to the US National Research Council.
Only 11 remain, all on private property, making management schemes difficult…
The Chinese government has announced a $55 million plan to increase the number of panda reserves from 13 to 27.
Villages and timber plants are to be relocated away from the pandas' habitat…
Over a thousand butterflies which died suddenly at a special reserve in Fraddam, Cornwall, are believed to have been the victims of wind-borne pesticide drift…
Przewalski's Horse has been reintroduced to its native plains near the Mongolian capital of Ulan Bator, after 50 years absence…
Two people have been arrested in Scotland under a clause of the Wildlife and Countryside Act which forbids the deliberate killing of the freshwater pearl mussel…
Swan numbers in the UK have increased by 25 per cent in the five years since anglers stopped using lead weights, according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
Guardian 11 June Observer 7 June Guardian 26 May (twice) New Scientist 16 May BBC Wildlife, June 1992
Economics & Industry
World Bank reportacknowledges errors
In its latest World Development Report, the World Bank acknowledges that some of its past policies have led to environmental degradation, but insists that it is now geared toward promoting sustainable development and, in particular, the alleviation of third world poverty.
 "It is now clear that numerous public investments, often supported by development agencies including the World Bank, have caused damage by failing to take environmental considerations into account or to judge the magnitude of the impacts" , the report says, citing some large dam projects as particularly damaging.
 "Some problems are associated with the lack of economic development, but many others are exacerbated by the growth of economic activity" .
Among them are problems of air and water quality and waste in rapidly expanding third world cities.
The report identifies key tasks as the provision of clean water and sanitation to the poorest, and emphasizes the need for education for women to help combat poverty and curb population growth.
It report points out that, in many developing countries, women are primarily responsible for subsistence farming.
It calls for the granting of property rights to poor farmers to encourage them to have a stake in the land's long term health and invest in soil conservation.
The lack of clarity in property rights over forest and pastureland, in particular, has led it to be over-exploited, the report claims.
The Bank argues that "the key is not to produce less, but to produce differently" .
It calls for the removal of those subsidies which encourage profligate use of energy, water and pesticides, with environmentally-damaging consequences, and those which promote unsustainable economic activities — such as cattle ranching on deforested land in Brazil.
The report rejects, however, the contention that economic growth in itself is unsustainable, insisting that it leads to the development of cleaner, more efficient technologies which cut pollution.
Market manipulation, including energy taxes and trading in "permits to pollute" , should be used to limit the environmentally-damaging consequences of economic growth.
The report acknowledges that industrialized countries bear much of the responsibility for existing environmental problems, and hence should bear the brunt of the cost of tackling them.
This should be seen as "payments for services rendered" rather than aid.
It points out that, if "rights" to carbon emissions were based on population density, then the North would already have exceeded its "quota" , and would be in debt to the South.
The report concludes that: "Industrialists, farmers, loggers and fishermen fiercely defend their rights to pollute or exploit resources.
Those who are hurt when the environment is degraded, and who stand to gain the most from sound policies, are often the poor and the weak.
They may be less potent politically than the polluters whom governments must challenge."
Environmental groups welcomed the Bank's admission of past errors, but criticized the report's faith in current models of economic growth.
Friends of the Earth described the document as "complacent" .
Financial Times 18 May Guardian 18 May International Herald Tribune 18 May Independent 18 May World Development Report, 1992
Economics & Industry
Zambian mining company to pay for environmental damage
The Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines, ZCCM, will be asked to pay for the environmental damage it has allegedly caused for the last 24 years, under the terms of the recently-approved Environment and Pollution Act.
This stipulates that a polluter should pay for the repair of environmental damage.
Zambian National Broadcasting Corporation, Lusaka, 6 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Economics & Industry
Commercial banks agree environmental priorities
A total of 31 commercial banks from 23 countries have agreed to pursue common principles of environmental protection.
Foremost is a commitment to follow "the best practices in environmental management, including energy efficiency, recycling and waste minimization" .
The agreement is under the auspices of the UN Environment Programme.
Among the participating banks were the National Westminster and Royal Bank of Scotland (UK); Commerzbank, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank (Germany); Crédit Suisse and Swiss Bank Corp (Switzerland); Westpac (Australia); the Royal Bank of Canada and the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
No Japanese or US banks were involved Financial Times 7 May
Economics & Industry
Pollution prevention pays for chemical companies
US chemical companies are saving money by undertaking programmes which aim to eliminate pollution, according to a report by New York-based environmental research group, Inform.
Compared with a survey carried out in 1985, Inform found that many companies had switched their emphasis from cleaning up polluting waste to cutting it out at source.
Those that did so recovered their costs within six months.
Two plants — Aristech's Haverhill, Ohio, facility, and Du Pont at Deepwater, New Jersey — reported annual savings of $3.8 million.
* The (US) Chemical Manufacturer's Association has published a survey claiming that the release of toxic pollutants to the environment from the chemical industry was reduced by 35 per cent in the four-year period ending 1990.
Washington Post 17 June
Energy
EC Commission approves energy tax plan
The European Commission on May 13 approved an energy tax designed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
The tax would not come into force until approved by member governments, however, and the Commission also made it conditional on other industrialized countries, notably the USA, agreeing to similar measures.
The tax will be levied at the rate of $3 per barrel of oil equivalent in 1993, rising by $1 a year to a maximum of $10 per barrel in 2000 — the EC target date for the stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels.
The Commission estimated that the tax would result in price rises of 6 per cent in petrol, 11 per cent in diesel, 14 per cent in domestic natural gas and 16 per cent in light fuel oil.
The plan was criticized by industrialists, who warned that it could reduce Europe's competitiveness in international markets, and by oil producing countries including Saudi Arabia and Iran.
Energy
Low-energy lightbulb
A small US company claims to have developed a low-energy lightbulb with a lifetime of up to 14 years.
Intersource Technologies, of California, claim that the bulb uses only a quarter as much energy as conventional bulbs.
It works on the basis of a magnetic coil, which generates a high frequency radio signal, converting mercury gas inside the bulb into a "plasma" , emitting ultra-violet light which strikes the bulb's phosphorous coating and makes it glow.
Its cost is estimated at £6-£12, compared to compact fluorescent bulbs, which cost around £13-£16, but last less than half the time.
Larger companies, including Philips and GE Thorn, are surprised that Intersource have apparently succeeded in overcoming technical problems with the design.
Independent 3 June International Herald Tribune 3 June
Energy
Hungary cancels dam treaty
The Hungarian government has formally abrogated the 1977 treaty with Czechoslovakia governing the construction of the Nagymaros-Gabcikovo dam on the Danube frontier between the two countries.
The move followed Czechoslovakia's failure to halt work on the dam [see ED no. 58].
The Czechoslovak government responded by insisting that the treaty was still valid, and called on Hungary to attend mediation talks held under EC auspices.
European 7, 14 May Financial Times 20 May Radio Budapest 19 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Radio Czechoslovakia 26 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Energy
Body Shop, BT plan wind power
Body Shop, the "green" cosmetics retail chain, is planning a wind farm to provide all its power needs at its Sussex headquarters.
The ultimate aim is to generate as much electricity as it consumes at all its sites, including shops, across the UK. * British Telecom is testing a pair of wind-powered telephone boxes, with electricity generated by a small windmill attached to the top of the box being used to charge a battery that can power a light in the box.
When fully charged, the battery can continue to provide power for 15 windless days.
Financial Times 28 May New Scientist 6 June
Energy
Electricity-from-biomass study
The Netherlands environmental group, Novem, has published a study suggesting that power plants using biomass fuels could provide more electricity, more cleanly, than conventional fossil fuel plants.
It claims that 5 per cent of national energy requirements could be met by converting 500,000 hectares of agricultural land to produce biomass fuel sources like straw, elephant grass and poplar wood.
With waste and refuse material included, the proportion could rise to 12 per cent.
New Scientist 6 June
Energy
Energy Savings Trust
A new Energy Savings Trust, to be funded initially by British Gas, has been set up to support energy conservation efforts.
Its first schemes include measures to encourage low-income households to switch to more energy-efficient gas boilers, and to stimulate investment in small combined heat-and-power plants.
Eleven regional electricity companies have also announced their support for the scheme, which may eventually be part funded by small surcharges on customers' bills.
Independent 14 May
Environmental Politics
South Africa outlines environmental problems
The South African government has compiled a report outlining the country's environmental problems, citing air pollution, poor water quality, and mounting waste problems as the most serious.
On air pollution, the report said that the country was responsible for 1.6 per cent of global emissions of carbon dioxide, twice the per capita average.
It warned that "the likely implications of global warming and ozone depletion for South Africa are poorly understood" .
Around 428 million tonnes of waste were being generated annually.
Only half the industrial waste was disposed of in official sites.
Much of the waste was generated by the country's mining industry.
On water, the report said that two-thirds of the country received annual rainfall of less than 500mm — the minimum required for successful dryland farming.
It suffered increasingly from water run-off, leading to a growing soil erosion problem: around 300-400 million tonnes of soil was being lost to erosion every year.
Linked to this has been mounting rates of forest loss.
30 per cent of South Africa's native woodlands have been felled in the last 15-20 years.
The problem is particularly acute in poor rural areas such as Kwazulu and the Transkei, where fuelwood needs are leading to rapid depletion.
Around four million hectares of grassland are suffering from the invasion of scrubland.
Fisheries are being depleted rapidly, with three important species — pilchard, hake and kingklip — suffering severe decline in recent years.
Oil spills from the nearby tanker routes, coupled with stormwater run-off, are the main causes of a growing marine pollution problem.
A total of 134 native species of plants, fish reptiles and mammals are officially endangered.
* Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress, has said that neither the South African government nor people are sufficiently aware of environmental priorities.
He warned that population growth, urbanization, lack of clean water and "an uncompromising political mood" were militating against finding a balance between environmental security and economic development.
South African Press Agency, 3 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Radio South Africa, 4 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Tibet environment "best in China" 
Tibet is free from radioactive contamination, acid rain and other forms of environmental pollution, according to a report published by the region's Environmental Protection Bureau.
The air over the region is clean, as is the water in its rivers (with one exception).
The report, the first of its kind, concludes that "the air, water and soil environment in Tibet is the best in China" .
A senior official, Cheng Xianshun, stressed however that "although Tibet now has the bluest sky and cleanest water in the world, we should not be smug and must pay full attention to all environmental problems which will arise in the course of economic development" .
In recent years, however, natural disasters and overgrazing have caused serious degeneration of grassland.
Xinhua news agency, 28 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
FoE's plot sale scheme blocked
The High Court has dismissed as "frivolous and vexatious" the sale of tiny plots of land in an effort to frustrate compulsory purchase plans.
The technique was by Friends of the Earth in an attempt to halt the Wymondham by-pass road scheme in Norfolk.
FoE's local branch had paid £2,000 for a stretch of disused railway land, which it then sold on in square-metre plots to 1,700 supporters.
The Department of Transport failed in its legal duty to locate each individual owner in order to serve compulsory purchase orders.
When it attempted to go-ahead with the purchase, Friends of the Earth launched a legal challenge, claiming that due notice had not been served on some of the owners.
The challenge was dismissed by the Court.
FoE has previously used the technique in an effort to divert the route of the M40 from two sites in Oxfordshire.
In the event, neither route was chosen.
Guardian 20 June Independent 20 June
Environmental Politics
Poll shows lack of concern about environment
The people of Britain are less concerned about environmental problems than those in many developing countries, according to an international Gallup poll survey conducted in 22 countries.
When asked to comment on important issues, only two per cent of the British sample nominated environmental problems ahead of unemployment, economic concerns, the recession, and poor health care.
However, 70 per cent said that they are willing to pay higher prices for environmentally safe goods and services.
Three quarters of those questioned claimed to have used "environmentally-friendly" products in preference to others.
Gallup news release 27 May
Environmental Politics
S. Korean environmental programme announced
The South Korean government has announced its environmental programme for the period 1992-2001.
The programme is divided into three phases: in 1992-94, it will focus on developing substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs); in 1995-97, it will concentrate on cleaning up sewage and industrial waste water, and cleaning up sulphur emissions from power stations; in the final phase, 1998-2001, waste incineration and cutbacks on carbon dioxide emissions have priority.
* The water quality in Pusan, South Korea's major industrial city, is deteriorating due primarily to industrial effluent.
The city's canals are used as a dumping ground for a range of toxic pollutants.
Drinking water supplies are believed to be contaminated; the sale of bottled water to Koreans is prohibited by law (foreigners are exempt), although this is increasingly flouted as concern over water safety grows.
* The North Korean government has announced that there is no "serious pollution" in the country, due to the fact that all its industry is equipped with pollution control systems.
Observers have treated the assertion with some scepticism.
Yonhap news agency, Seoul 21 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Far Eastern Economic Review 25 June Yonhap news agency, Seoul 4 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Mozambique creates environment commission
President Chissano of Mozambique has issued a decree creating a National Environment Commission, with Mineral Resources Minister John Kachamila as chairman.
The commission is charged with "promoting a rational management, preservation and utilization of the country's natural resources, as well as to encourage efforts to educate the public on environmental affairs" .
Radio Mozambique, 3 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Absence of environmental issues in Queen's speech
Environmentalists have expressed disappointment at the lack of green measures in the Queen's Speech to the opening of Parliament — the traditional means of outlining the new government's legislative programme.
Most notable by its absence was any commitment to set up an environmental protection agency — the centrepiece of the environmental section of the Conservative Party election manifesto.
The Department of the Environment is soon to reveal the structure of such an agency however.
Ministers have decided that the National Rivers Authority will not be split up in the process of creating the new body but will be incorporated into it.
The agency will also include Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution and the waste regulation departments of local councils in England and Wales.
Independent 7 May
Global Warming
Volcano brings temporary cooling
The eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines in June 1991 may lead to a temporary cooling of global temperature, counteracting the greenhouse effect, according to a new study by the American Geophysical Union.
It suggests that a fine aerosol mist of sulphuric acid, produced by the combination of sulphur gases emitted by the volcano with atmospheric water vapour, is reducing by around 2 per cent the amount of sunlight reaching the earth.
The sulphuric acid is producing a sort of "reverse greenhouse effect" by reflecting sunlight back into space.
It should cause a fall of around 0.5 degrees Centigrade, taking average temperatures back to those of the 1950s and 60s.
The study predicts that the cooling effect will last for between two and four years, by which time the acid will have been dispersed as rain.
* The latest estimates of global warming from the Climate Research Unit, at the University of East Anglia, predict an average warming of 0.2 degrees per decade, with an accompanying rise in sea levels of around 4cm.
Sulphur dioxide emissions from vehicles and industry are apparently counteracting the greenhouse effect by blocking the sun's rays, particularly in the northern hemisphere.
Washington Post 19 May Guardian 28 May
Global Warming
Climate change "could lead to starvation" 
A study commissioned by the US Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that between 60 and 360 million people could go hungry as a direct result of the effects of climate change on wheat, rice, maize and soybean yields.
Although yields might be increased in certain high-latitude regions, notably Canada and Russia, this would be more than offset by decreases in the tropics.
The predictions are based on computer models of global warming and world food production.
The study suggests that world cereal production in 2060 will be between 1 and 7 per cent lower than today's levels.
Guardian 20 May Independent 20 May
Global Warming
Tasman Sea warming recorded
The Tasman Sea (which lies between Tasmania and Australia) is warming up, according to research carried out by Australian research institute CSIRO.
Over the period 1967-89, average temperatures in the sea increased by between 0.03 and 0.04 degrees centigrade.
The increase had caused the waters to expand, resulting in a rise of between two and three cm in the sea level.
Temperatures were measured down to a depth of 5 kilometres, where seasonal fluctuations have no effect.
The researchers, whose findings are published in Nature, say that the findings are consistent with those to be expected as a result of the greenhouse effect, but warn that they cannot be sure "whether this is part of an overall climate change trend, or the normal variability of this section of the Tasman Sea" .
International Herald Tribune 15 May New Scientist 16 May
Global Warming
Longer hay fever seasons
The hay fever season in Britain will lengthen as a result of global warming, according to a study by Dr Timothy Rich, a plants and vegetation consultant.
A rise in average temperature of around 0.5 degrees centigrade — as predicted in current climate models — could result in the hay fever season lasting from March until September by the year 2050, when southern Britain's climate is likely to be akin to that prevailing presently in south-west France.
A combination of new wild plants — such as ragweed — and alien crops, such as vines and olives, will be to blame.
Independent 21 May
Global Warming
UK carbon reduction plan attacked
The UK government's strategy for reducing carbon emissions has been attacked by environmentalists, who argue that it places too much reliance on voluntary action by industry and the presumed effect of market forces, and that it pays scant attention to the need for research into energy efficiency.
The government has committed itself to reducing carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
However, investment in energy efficiency has fallen by 28 per cent over the last two years.
Simon Roberts, Friends of the Earth's energy campaigner, described the government approach as "a big carbon con" which lacked any new initiatives.
Guardian 16 May
Global Warming
China's carbon emissions on the rise
China's emissions of carbon dioxide, principally from its burgeoning coal industry, are increasing to the point where it is expected to become the largest single contributor of greenhouse gases within a few decades.
Around 75 per cent of China's energy comes from coal — either via power stations, or burned for domestic heating.
The government plans to double coal production from its present annual total of 1 billion tonnes to 2 billion by the year 2020.
In 1989 China produced 9.1 per cent of all greenhouse gas emissions — after the USA, with 17.8 per cent, and the Soviet Union (13.6 per cent ), according to Worldwatch Institute estimates.
By 2020, China could be emitting up to three times the US total (although its per capita figure will probably stay below the US).
Its reliance on coal is defended by Bai Xianhong of the State Science and Technology Commission, who argued: "China must develop [and]we can't make it without energy.
You can't say that, for the sake of lowering carbon dioxide emissions, China shouldn't burn coal anymore.
That is impossible."
International Herald Tribune 26 May
Nuclear Power
Sellafield dump delayed
UK Nirex, the nuclear waste consortium, has announced a one-year delay in the submission of its planning application for an underground repository for radioactive waste, the first of its kind in Britain.
The delay was due to the fact that four test boreholes in the Sellafield area, the preferred site, did not provide sufficient information on the hydro-geology of the area.
The company has applied for permission to drill two more holes in the nearby Lake District National Park, but this drilling permission has thus far not been granted.
Under the revised plans Nirex now aims to submit its application by the autumn of 1993.
The repository would begin operating in 2006.
Critics, including Cumbria County Council and Friends of the Earth, welcomed the delay.
FoE urged Nirex to admit that it had the wrong design in the wrong place and called on the company to abandon the scheme.
Financial Times 3 June Guardian 3 June
Nuclear Power
Proposal for new plant at Sizewell
Nuclear Electric, the state-owned British operator, has proposed the construction of a new nuclear power station next to the Sizewell B site in Suffolk.
It would be twice as large as any yet built in Britain.
According to John Collier, the chair of Nuclear Electric, the new station would capitalize on Sizewell B (due to start operating in 1994) and could produce electricity at less than 3p per unit, compared to just over 4p for Sizewell B and between 6p and 8p for the older stations.
Echoing doubts over whether the requisite private financing could be raised.
Friends of the Earth said it proved Nuclear Electric "lives in never-never land" .
Financial Times 24 June
Nuclear Power
Radioactive seaweed found near Sellafield pipeline
Radioactive seaweed has been washed up on beaches near Sellafield's outlet pipeline.
British Nuclear Fuels (BNFL), which operates the Sellafield plant, found 65 fragments of grass-like material at the tide-line over a two-mile stretch of beach during routine monitoring operations in March and April.
Some pieces showed a radioactivity reading of 1.5 millisieverts — compared with the dose limit of 50.
BNFL admitted it did not know where the waste originated.
The best guess appears to be that the debris are fragments of hydroids — an aquatic plant which resembles grass in appearance and which grows on rocks and inside open pipes.
It denied that it represented a danger to the public, insisting that it would have to pressed to the skin for 30 hours before the dose limit was reached.
The radioactive elements are mainly ruthenium and zirconium, which are the products of nuclear fission in uranium and form part of the wastes released during reprocessing.
Sellafield routinely discharges liquid radioactive effluent down the waste pipeline into the Irish Sea, subject to the terms of an authorisation agreement granted by the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food and by HM Inspectorate of Pollution.
Although the reprocessing plant itself has been shut for annual maintenance since February, discharges have been continuing at a reduced volume.
Analysis of the radioactivity within the seaweed indicates that it had been discharged from Sellafield within the past 12 months or so.
Independent 14 May Guardian 14 May
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl shut-down under way Preparation is underway for the closure of the Chernobyl power plant in the Ukraine.
Specialists have estimated that the first decade of dismantling will cost 2.5 billion roubles.
* French television has broadcast a film taken by a Russian reactor inspector showing radioactive leaks in the sarcophagus built over the remains of the damaged reactor.
ITAR-TASS World Service in Russian 24 April Radio Moscow in English 29 April
Nuclear Power
Nuclear reactor leaks in Bulgaria
A radioactive leak has been found in the newest reactor of Bulgaria's troubled Kozloduy nuclear power station.
The water leak was discovered in Kozloduy's sixth reactor after it was shut down for repairs and modifications [see ED 56].
Plant Director, Ivan Ivanov, said there was no release of radiation outside the plant from the 1,000-megawatt reactor.
Wall Street Journal 2 May
Nuclear Power
Cracks in Swedish reactor
Cracks have been discovered at the Ringhals pressurized water reactor in Sweden.
They were noticed during routine maintenance checks.
According to the Swedish authorities they did not pose a risk to the safety of the plant.
Le Monde 20 May
Ozone layer
Antarctic ozone hole bigger than ever
According to Japan's Environment Agency, the hole in the ozone layer above the Antarctic reached a record level in 1991.
The amount of the layer destroyed was 4.3 times larger in 1991 than in 1981, and the total area affected was 13 times larger and twice as deep.
An agency spokesman said that with the exception of the tropical zones, depletion of the ozone layer has been occurring at a "significant" rate throughout the world.
International Herald Tribune 26 June Independent 26 June
Ozone layer
Pond bacteria found to destroy ozone damaging chemicals
Bacteria found in pond, marsh and swamp sediment have been discovered to "eat" chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), according to a scientist at the US Geological Survey, Derek Lovley.
A mixture of the bacteria were grown in oxygen-free conditions in the presence of CFCs at densities commonly-occurring in the atmosphere.
Some of the chemicals were destroyed, apparently by the bacteria.
Lovley reported that it has not been determined how the bacteria break down the chemicals, but he speculated that they are converted into carbon dioxide and chloride or fluoride salts.
Washington Post 2 May
Ozone layer
Halons "necessary for fire fighting" 
There is no easy substitute for halons in fire fighting, according to ICI's Technical Service Manager, Jan Haeck.
Halons are non-conducting, have low toxicity and put out fires fast, but production will effectively end in 18 months because of the damage they do to the ozone layer.
ICI has been trying to develop substitutes for halons 1211 and 1301, but as yet none of the agents under trial match their performance.
The impending end of halon production is forcing the fire protection industry to consider recycling the halons already in use.
The Dutch government has helped to set up a national halons "bank" to ensure the most effective use of the chemicals.
Britain is considering following suit.
New Scientist 6 June
Ozone layer
ICI to stop making halon
The chemical multinational ICI has announced that it will close the last of its plants producing halon, a firefighting chemical which has been identified as a major cause of ozone depletion.
The plant, in Runcorn in northwest England, will be closed by the end of 1993.
A company spokesman said that the closure was part of ICI's policy of "getting out of potentially ozone-harming chemicals" .
International Herald Tribune 20-21 June
Ozone layer
Link between ozone depletion and crop damage
Australian scientists have established a link between the depletion of the ozone layer, the increase in ultraviolet B radiation (caused by the depletion) and damage to crops.
In tests at the Australian National University in Canberra, soya beans, rice and peas were given repeated low-level bursts of uv-B over a six- to eight-week period.
Growth was reduced in all cases, in some by up to 70 percent.
According to Malcolm Whitecross, a botanist,"What we're seeing is damage to the reproductive apparatus of the plants.
I don't think there is any doubt [that]it is damage at the molecular level.
Guardian 12 June
Ozone layer
Japanese CFC disposal method
The Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry has claimed to have developed a method for breaking down large amounts of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
This method is the first of its kind, and the ministry is considering developing it for commercial application.
Under the new scheme, CFCs and water are mixed in a reaction furnace and heated with a high-frequency electric current to about 10,000 degrees Centigrade, at which point electrons are stripped from the atoms to form a plasma.
The resulting chemical reaction gives off fluorine compounds and hydrochloric acid, which are then neutralized with sodium hydroxide to produce harmless substances such as fluorspar (calcium fluoride), salt and sodium bicarbonate.
The main advantage of the new method is that it requires only water.
Moreover, it can break down some 50 kilograms of CFCs per hour, compared to 0.8 kilograms under current methods.
The process was developed in co-operation with a consortium including Tokyo University, Tokyo Electric Power Company, Nippon Steel Corporation and Jeol Limited.
Kyodo News Service 27 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Hong Kong's CFC producers move to mainland China
Much of the reduction in chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) usage made by manufacturers in Hong Kong has been achieved by switching polluting activities across the border into southern China.
The majority of the colony's 60-80 manufacturers of printed circuit boards for computers, which use large quantities of CFC-13 as a cleaning agent, have moved operations to Guangdong, southern China, during the last couple of years, according to Charles Chapman, executive director of the Hong Kong Electronics Association.
Cheap, plentiful labour is an additional factor in luring companies across the border.
Yet the export of polluting industries — even as a by-product of broader economic forces — has highlighted the lack of coordination between Hong Kong officials and Guangdong authorities.
Hong Kong began controlling CFC consumption in 1989, when Britain signed the Montreal Protocol.
Far Eastern Economic Review 14 May
Ozone layer
Russia's ozone protection call
The Russian government has called on its counterparts in all the former Soviet republics to explore jointly the means of fulfilling commitments pledged under the Vienna Convention on the protection of the ozone layer and the Montreal Protocol.
The government has also announced the setting up of a special commission to coordinate the activities of Russian ministries and organizations in protecting the ozone layer.
This will be chaired by Viktor Danilyan, the minister of ecology and natural resources.
ITAR-TASS World Service 5 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
India to accede to Montreal Protocol
The Indian environment minister, Kamal Nath, has announced that India will accede to the Montreal Protocol on controlling emissions of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The actual phasing out of CFCs would begin in the year 2006, and under the terms of the protocol India would have to be compensated by some 35 billion rupees for doing so.
[India had originally expressed reluctance to sign — see ED 51].
Press Trust of India 29 May
Ozone layer
Amendments to Montreal Protocol come into force
Amendments to the Montreal Protocol on protecting the ozone layer that were agreed in London in 1990 have finally been ratified by the required 20 countries and will come into force in August.
The original Montreal Protocol, passed in 1986, called for halving the production of eight substances suspected of harming the ozone layer by the year 2000.
The London amendment adds another 11 chemicals to the list; most of them to be banned outright by the year 2000 [see ED 35/36].
New Scientist 30 May
Ozone layer
CFC substitutes damaging?
Two US scientists have warned that some chemicals offered as safe substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) may cause serious damage to the ozone layer in the short term.
In an article in Nature, Susan Solomon and Daniel Albritton of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminstration argue that policy makers may have been using too long a time scale to measure the destructive potential of CFCs, halons and their substitutes.
Solomon compared the potential destructiveness of CFC-11 — to be banned under the Montreal Protocol — and a so-called "safe" substitute, known as HCFC-141B.
Over 100 years, the substitute would have only 11 per cent the damage potential of the CFC.
But for the first 10 years, HCFC-141B is about half as damaging to the ozone layer as the CFC.
Guardian 7 May
Pollution: Air
US Administration U-turns on Clean Air
President Bush has made a major concession to industry over the implementation of the new Clean Air Act, overturning a decision by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The ruling concerns cases in which industrial plants increase the emission of pollutants.
(Under the Act, each plant has a registered limit on emissions.)
The EPA had ruled that any plant operator wishing to do so must first notify the public, allowing them an opportunity to challenge the change.
Industry argued that such a requirement would stymie its competitiveness, and that, in any case, changes in emissions from existing plants would only ever be small-scale.
The Presidential ruling allows plants to exceed their existing emissions limit without prior public notification.
White House officials said that President Bush was loath to impose burdens on industry as the country began to emerge from recession.
Washington Post 17, 18 May
Pollution: Air
UK air quality worsens as heat, traffic, rise
The air quality over much of Britain deteriorated during hot weather in May, with a build up of photochemical smog in some areas.
Low-level ozone, produced by the reaction of sunlight on nitrogen oxide (Nox) emissions from vehicle exhausts, was blamed for an increase in breathing problems and allergic, hayfever-type reactions.
The problem coincided with the release of statistics from the government's Warren Springs Laboratory, showing that nitrogen oxide levels had increased by 33 per cent in the period 1986-91, roughly in line with the increase in road traffic.
Some 19 million people are being exposed to air whose quality is on the verge of falling below recommended EC safety levels.
Worst affected is Sheffield, where Nox concentrations reached 47.7 parts per billion.
The EC guideline is 26 ppb. * Greater use of catalytic converters in the Netherlands has led to the first ever recorded drop in Nox concentrations.
Independent 15, 16, 27 May Observer 16 May
Pollution: Air
Pollution trading starts in US
The first transaction involving a "permit to pollute" has been concluded in the USA.
The deal involved two power-generating companies: Wisconsin Light and Power sold the right to emit 10,000 tonnes of sulphur dioxide to the Tennessee Valley Authority for $3 million.
The principle of pollution trading was established in the Clean Air Act [see ED no. 47], and a pollution futures market is scheduled to be opened in Chicago in 1993 [see ED no. 51].
New York Times 13 May Guardian 13 May
Pollution: Air
Price for Czechoslovak clean-up
The World Bank estimates that Czechoslovakia requires more than US$50 billion to reduce pollution levels and to bring environmental standards to acceptable international levels.
According to the bank, Czechoslovakia "has become one of the world's most polluted countries" .
It would take "decades before the country's main environmental problems are solved" .
Power plants are the country's largest polluter, "generating tons of sulphur dioxide and dust" .
The World Bank has extended a $246 million loan to Czechoslovakia to improve the efficiency of its power plants.
International Herald Tribune 30-31 May
Pollution: Water
Drought conditions in UK and Europe
A prolonged period of low rainfall has led to drought conditions in much of the south and east of the UK, with the problem compounded by increasing abstraction from rivers and groundwater for domestic and industrial uses [see ED no. 57].
The country has had 41 months of below average rainfall.
Heavy rains at the beginning of June alleviated the problem only partly, since much of the water evaporates or is used by plants before it can seep through to replenish aquifers.
In some parts of the south-east, groundwater levels are lower than at any time since records began 200 years ago, with some boreholes in the Chiltern Hills drying up for the first time since they were sunk last century.
The problem is compounded by increased water consumption — up by 70 per cent per head compared to 30 years ago — and leakage in the supply system, which is estimated to be running at around 20 per cent.
* Consumption of water in 50,000 homes on the Isle of Wight has fallen by 10 per cent since water meters were introduced last year.
* A report by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation and the Wildlife Trusts partnership has warned that over-abstraction and excessive land drainage schemes have combined with the drought to lead to widespread local extinctions of otters, water fowl, fish and insect life.
The report says that 40 British rivers are suffering from low water levels as a result of human action.
* Drought conditions are also prevailing over much of western France and Spain, where large areas have received between 10 and 50 per cent of normal rainfall.
Domestic consumption in France is estimated to have risen by 20 per cent in the last two decades.
The French government has launched a 35 billion franc programme aimed at conserving water.
Fines for discharging pollutants into water supplies are to be increased.
Meteorologists in both France and the UK have described the drought as exceptional, but denied that it provides conclusive evidence of any long-term climate change.
Independent 27, 28 May Guardian 27 May
Pollution: Water
Acid rain damage in UK
The extent of the damage to wildlife caused by the acidification of Britain's lakes and rivers has been documented in a report prepared by English Nature.
The report shows that almost a quarter of land protected as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), home to much of the country's wildlife, are suffering acidification damage.
In the most severely affected region, North Wales, 57 per cent of the SSSI area is degraded.
As a result, many plants and animals are in decline or have already disappeared.
Among them are powan and arctic char, two rare fish species; salmon, trout and minnows; frogs; otters; birds such as dippers, which rely on healthy populations of water-living insects; and lichens and mosses which cover peat bogs.
The acidification problem is exacerbated by geological and soil conditions.
The upland moors in Britain generally lie on naturally acidic rocks and soils.
These are poor in nutrients and their peaty soils have little capacity to absorb any more acid without deleterious effects.
Acidification is less of a problem on the richer lowland soils because rainwater acids are quickly neutralized.
The report, written by Carrie Rimes, relies on water chemistry records, research data from records of microscopic algae known as diatoms, records of aquatic plant species, recorded changes in fish populations and other specific information.
Independent 8 June
Pollution: Water
 "Sustained improvement" in bathing water quality, says NRA
A report published by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) says there is an underlying trend of real and sustained improvement in the quality of coastal bathing waters, which appears to be the result of the extensive capital schemes for sewage treatment currently being undertaken by the water companies.
The report, Bathing Water Quality in England and Wales 1991, outlines 414 EC-identified areas of bathing water in England and Wales — a rise of seven since 1990 — and explains the trend in compliance with the EC Bathing Water Directive between 1990 and 1991.
There was a slight decline of 2.7 per cent in compliance nationally between 1990 and 1991.
Some of the decline in compliance, says the report, is likely to have been caused by the cooler, wetter conditions of 1991, resulting in a lower rate of "die-off" of bacteria, and an increase in the frequency in operation of storm overflows, which generally do not have any treatment to reduce bacterial numbers.
* Blue Flag results.
This year only 17 British beaches have gained the Blue Flag, the European Commission's award for cleanliness, compared to 35 in 1991.
Various reasons have been adduced for the fall.
Some analysts argue that the result is deceptive because only successful beaches applied this year, while others claim that the number of winners has fallen because beaches had to meet a much stricter test on bacteria in the water.
Guardian 5 June Financial Times 5 June NRA information 4 June European Blue Flag information 5 June
Pollution: Water
Underground tanks leaking in Washington region
Thousands of ageing underground tanks are leaking gasoline, heating oil and other chemicals into the Washington region, forcing residents to find new water supplies and costing tens of millions of dollars in clean-up bills.
Across the region regulators have said they are overwhelmed by the scale of the problem, the situation being compounded by a steady stream of newly found leaks.
Tank owners are required to have leak detection equipment installed by December 1993.
Washington Post 10 May
Pollution: Water
Mercury poisoning in South Africa
Occupational safety officials in South Africa have set up a public inquiry to investigate mercury poisoning of at least three employees of a British-owned toxic waste reprocessing plant at Cato Ridge in Natal.
(The three staff have been admitted to hospital in a semi-comatose state and have little hope of recovery.)
A recent report by an expert on occupational health, Tony Davies, found that mercury levels in the air at the plant were consistently above the maximum allowed; there was evidence that skin contamination, including burns, were frequent; contamination of work clothes was also common; and staff were inadequately trained.
Moreover, the Umgeni River near the plant, which is used for drinking water and bathing by local people, is alleged to be dangerously polluted with mercury.
Operated by Thor Chemicals and reputedly the largest of its kind in the world, the Cato Ridge plant reclaims mercury from toxic waste imported from the northern hemisphere.
(South Africa has not signed international treaties banning trade in toxic waste.)
The plant has been shut down by the government pending investigations.
Guardian 4 June
Pollution: Water
Island damaged by copper mining
The rebel government effectively in charge of the Pacific island of Bougainville has claimed that the island has been seriously polluted by the huge Panguna copper mine.
In particular, the rebels assert that waste from the open-cast mine, including mercury, has caused extensive damage to the island's forests and has widened and silted up streams in the Jaba River system.
Sediment from the tailings has increased the area of the river delta from 65 to 900 hectares.
The mine's operator, an Australian firm called CRA Minerals, denies most of these claims.
Disputes over the impact of the mine, and the distribution ofits profits, provoked the uprising in 1988, leading to the present state of de facto independence from Papua New Guinea.
New Scientist 30 May
Pollution: Water
Weedkiller ban follows breach of drinking water limit
The UK government has announced a ban on the non-agricultural use of the pesticides atrazine and simizine, commonly used to clear weeds from roadside verges, railway lines and footpaths.
The decision follows concern that concentrations in water supplies are exceeding EC permitted levels.
All non-farm uses of the two pesticides will be revoked from August 31.
More than 200 tonnes of the chemicals have been sprayed annually on non-crop land by British Rail and local authorities.
Aerial spraying on farms will also be banned, and other farming uses restricted.
Guardian 13 May
Pollution: Water
NRA move to protect rivers
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has announced that it may resort to abstraction bans to prevent 40 rivers in England and Wales from drying up because of what it called "gross over-abstractions" by water companies for the public water supply.
The threat follows frustration at the lack of success of voluntary agreements to curb abstractions from the rivers.
As a first step, the NRA has given one of the companies, Thames Water, until September to reduce abstraction from the Darent River in Kent, one of the areas worst affected by the combined pressures of increased demand and the four-year drought in the region.
The river has completely dried up in parts.
The water companies have reacted critically to the tougher stance taken by the NRA.
They argue that they have a strong commitment to the environment and are making major investments to improve efficiency of water consumption, but that at the same time they also have a commitment to their customers.
Friends of the Earth welcomed the NRA's action.
It also called on the government to protect the authority from financial difficulties if, as seems likely, the water companies will seek compensation for loss of supplies.
Independent 16 June Financial Times 16 June
Pollution: Water
Elbe clean-up plan
The European Community and the German and Czechoslovak governments have agreed on a plan to reduce pollution of the Elbe river (which flows through the Czech Republic and eastern Germany).
The plan provides for the construction over the next three years of municipal effluent treatment plants in all towns along the river with a population of over 20,000, the beginning of construction of such plants for cities of more than 50,000, and the elimination of industrial sources of pollution.
The financing of the plan is not fully agreed.
The Czechoslovak Environment Minister, Ivan Dejmal, said it would need substantial aid from the European Community and other foreign sources.
Radio Czechoslovakia 2 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
Plastic waste affects marine life
Plastic rubbish floating along the shores of the Antarctic peninsular is causing serious environmental damage to animals, plants and marine life.
Penguins and seals have been found entangled in lengths of fishing net, some of them dead and many others badly hurt.
Seabirds, including the Antarctic petrel, feed their young with plastic objects they mistake for food.
Most of the waste is believed to come from fishing fleets in the Southern Ocean, in waters outside the Antarctic Treaty zone.
A team of scientists from the Chilean Antarctic Institute have collected more than 50lb of plastic rubbish on the beaches of Cape Shirreff on Livingstone Island.
Under the terms of the Antarctic Treaty, signatory nations are committed to protecting wildlife, and removing any waste to the country of origin.
Independent 16 May
Pollution: Water
Solvent pollution in groundwater
Investigations have revealed unacceptably high levels of industrial solvents in groundwater under Birmingham, Coventry, Luton and East Anglia.
According to Channel 4 TV's Dispatches, contamination has been found in private groundwater supplies used by food and drink manufacturers.
A study conducted by the Water Research Centre, to be published this summer, revealed high levels of chlorinated solvents in the water table beneath Luton and Dunstable.
David Lerner, a Hydro-geologist at Birmingham University, believes most urban area groundwater is polluted: "Virtually all industrial sites pollute the soil and groundwater through careless handling of chemicals" , he claimed.
Once underground aquifers are polluted, contaminants can remain for hundreds of years.
*Aluminium levels in some brands of "fresh" and "reconstituted" whole orange juices are up to 10 times higher than levels in local tap water, researchers in Bristol have found.
Chronic exposure to aluminium has been linked to nerve damage, and an EC Directive sets a limit for the permissable amount in drinking water.
However, orange juices are regarded as "foodstuffs" by the EC, and thereby fall outside the terms of the directive.
A team from the Department of Renal Medicine at Southmead General Hospital found aluminium levels ranging from 2.1 to 5.3 micromoles per litre in the juice, compared with 0.5 micromoles in tap water.
Independent 13, 15 May
Pollution: Water
France announces water restrictions
The French environment minister, Ségolène Royal, has announced a series of measures to conserve water in the light of increasing demand and four consecutive years of relative drought.
The new measures are a combination of exhortations and penalties.
Farmers, the country's biggest water consumers, will be obliged to water crops at dusk or dawn only to reduce evaporation.
Watering gardens, washing cars and filling swimming pools are subject to bans under departmental decrees.
(Thus far, sixteen out of 96 departments have introduced water restrictions.)
Maximum fines for the wastage or pollution of water supplies have been raised from 250 francs to 6,000 francs, and repeat offenders may be fined up to 1 million francs.
* Tens of thousands of fish were poisoned on 31 May after rainstorms flooded the Paris sewage system, causing spillage of toxic substances into the River Seine.
Le Monde 19 May Guardian 1 June
Pollution: Water
Report of decline in UK freshwater quality
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution has declared that the improvement in the quality of water in rivers and lakes in the 1960s and 70s has been followed by a decade of "small but real" deterioration.
It proposes tough penalties for industries which cause water pollution to help reverse the decline.
Among its findings on freshwater quality the report mentioned:(i) high levels of phosphates in rivers, lakes and reservoirs in most of central and southern England, which cause excessive growth of surface plants such as algae which in turn damage wildlife;(ii) acidification of rivers and lakes in some parts of Scotland, northern England and Wales to such levels that they are almost devoid of fish;(iii) one in eight sewage plants still not operating within discharge limits;(iv) periodic high levels of pesticide pollution in drinking water; and (v) a high proportion of freshwater sites used for recreational purposes failing to meet the standards set by the European Community directive on bathing water.
A key recommendation of the report is that polluters, such as sewage treatment plants, industry and farmers, should be charged according to the volume and polluting characteristics of their discharges.
This would offer them an incentive to reduce pollution.
(In present schemes, under the auspices of the National Rivers Authority, polluters merely contribute to the cost of monitoring discharge levels and pay penalties for breaching them.)
Among the report's 108 recommendations are:(i) the establishment of a national monitoring programme to measure chemical and biological pollution of rivers, lakes and groundwater;(ii) the setting up of a "blue flag" scheme to indicate freshwater areas safe for sports and leisure use;(iii) the licensing of intensive livestock and fish farms to control pollution caused by them;(iv) the working out of a national strategy to reduce the use of pesticides; and (v) the adoption of stronger measures to reduce acid rain pollution of waterways.
Friends of the Earth described the report as a "litany of government neglect and mismanagement of Britain's lakes and rivers" .
Financial Times 11 June Guardian 11 June Independent 11 June
Pollution: Water
Toxic metal poisoning from industrial waste in Austria
A study commissioned by the Ministry of the Environment has found that the soil in the village of Arnoldstein, in Austrian Carinthia, is heavily poisoned by toxic metals from local industrial waste.
It is not an isolated case and the ministry has ordered an investigation into other major industrial sites, conceding that there could be 3,300 where contamination has reached dangerous levels.
European 21 May
Transport
EC to encourage restrictions on cars in cities
Cities and towns are to be encouraged to reduce the use of cars or ban them within defined areas under a European Commission plan to tackle exhaust emissions and improve air quality.
Proposals have been drafted for a "club" of cities across the Community willing to exchange information on anti-pollution measures.
The Commission's scheme, Cities Without Cars, is to be launched this summer.
DG-11, the EC's Environment Directorate, has been monitoring the development of a number of schemes by cities such as Amsterdam and Strasbourg to curb city centre driving.
It is taking a particular interest in proposals in Britain, such as a pilot road-charging scheme in Cambridge which could be introduced in 1994, a similar but smaller scheme underway in the London Borough of Richmond, and a highway-pricing plan for Edinburgh.
York and Exeter have been mentioned as areas where traffic-calming schemes have reduced speeding and deterred motorists from coming into the city centres.
Guardian 15 May
Transport
Roads "good for the environment" — Transport Secretary
UK Transport Secretary John MacGregor has provoked environmentalists' anger by asserting that new roads were often "good news for the environment" .
Referring in particular to by-passes, MacGregor said that they could result in "huge improvements" to the environment of villages and towns, and added: "There are some who argue that the expansion of the road network will be devastating for the environment.
They are wrong."
The Secretary also insisted that environmental factors were taken into account when planning new road schemes, and praised tree-planting and other "environmental improvements" , such as tunnels for wildlife, carried out during road-building.
The Transport Department planted more broadleaf trees than the Forestry Commission, he claimed.
Environmentalists said that Mr MacGregor had been ill-advised, and pointed out that the Department's environmental assessment policies had been criticized by both the EC [which has threatened the UK with legal action over the matter — see ED no. 52]and the government's Standing Committee on Trunk Road Assessment.
* The government is planning a national campaign to urge people to use public transport, along the lines of previous campaigns on drink-driving and smoking.
Roger Freeman, junior Transport minister, gave the first indications of this when he launched Birmingham City Council's "Don't Choke the City" Campaign, which seeks to persuade people to leave their cars at home at least once a week and switch to public transport, share lifts, walk or cycle to work.
Independent 30 May Guardian 1 June
Transport
Rate of vehicle increase slows
The number of motor vehicles in the UK is still increasing, but at a slower rate than in recent years, according to a report by the Society Of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
Overall vehicle numbers in 1991 were up by 0.6 per cent, compared to 2.6 per cent in 1990.
Cars increased by 0.96 per cent to 22.74 million, but buses and coaches fell by 1.6 per cent, heavy commercial vehicles by 9.4 per cent , and motorcycles by 6.4 per cent .
The average age of cars was 6.4 years.
Independent 11 June
Transport
Checks implemented on exhaust emissions in Moscow
The Moscow authorities have announced that checks are to be conducted on private and commercial vehicles for excessive exhaust emissions.
A private citizen could be fined between one and ten times the average monthly wage if it was found that a car was emitting excessive levels.
Mayak radio, Moscow 17 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Transport
 "Cat" foils suicide
The first case has been recorded in Britain of a suicide attempt foiled by a catalytic converter.
A man has been admitted to hospital after sitting in his Saab for five hours with the motor running and a hose connected to the exhaust.
The converter had worked so effectively that he suffered only mild carbon monoxide poisoning.
Independent 22 May
Tropical Forests
Loggers move on Cambodian forests
Cambodia's remaining forests have become the target of intense logging operations, now that relative peace has come to the country after 20 years of war.
According to the UN Development Programme, the rate of forest destruction across the country is threatening environmental catastrophe.
The UN Transitional Authority, which is monitoring the progress of last October's peace treaty, has warned the rival factions who control different parts of the country of the dangers that uncontrolled logging is posing to Cambodia's development prospects.
According to the Cambodian government's own Forestry Department, the country's forest cover has shrunk from 73 per cent 20 years ago to around 40 per cent today.
Up to 1.2 million cubic metres are expected to be cut this year — three or four times as much as in 1991.
The government, which controls around 85 per cent of the country, has turned to logging as a way of making up the shortfall in revenue resulting from the end of Soviet aid, and its loss of the Palinn gem mines in western Cambodia to Khmer Rouge forces.
The three main opposition factions (including the Khmer Rouge) are also using timber exports as a means of financing their activities.
Local authorities are striking deals directly with foreign timber companies, many of which export the logs through Thailand.
The problem is compounded by an increase in slash-and-burn settlement of forest areas, much of it carried out by people made homeless by the fighting.
Together with the logging, this has already been a contributory factor in a series of floods, including ones in Kompong Speu and Kampot provinces which caused $150 million worth of damage.
Le Monde 17/18 May Far Eastern Economic Review 4 June
Tropical Forests
Vietnam restricts logging
The Vietnamese government has announced new restrictions on logging.
A ceiling of 638,800 square metres has been set for 1992, including timber from plantations.
Logging has been banned outright in a range of "national" , "protected" and "special purpose" forests, including large areas of the Central Highlands and the northern mountains.
Voice of Vietnam, 24 April
Tropical Forests
Study on logging profits
A study by the International Forest Science Consultancy has shown that log-exporting countries typically receive only 10 per cent of the total value of the processed timber.
Those who can "add value" by producing plywood receive up to 35 per cent, but the majority of the profits still goes to foreign companies.
Far Eastern Economic Review 4 June
Tropical Forests
Ecuador Indians granted land rights
The Ecudaorian government has granted land rights to four indigenous tribes — the Achuar, Quechuas, Swiwiar and Zaparo — who had earlier staged a protest march on the capital, Quito.
The grant recognizes their ownership of a little over one million hectares in the Pastaza region, in the east of the country.
This brings to three million hectares the total land area recognized as Indian since 1988.
The land rights do not, however, extend to underground mineral reserves [see ED no. 58 for details of British Gas's activities in Ecuador].
The government refused to agree to the Indians' demand that it abandon its militarized "security zone" on the Peruvian frontier, and pass a constitutional amendment recognizing the country as "multi-cultural and multi-national" .
The granting of Indian land rights triggered a wave of complaints from white settlers, who staged blockades of several forest roads in protest.
Le Monde 17/18 May
Tropical Forests
Oil exploration threatens Mexican forest
The Lacandon rainforest in Chiapas state, south-east Mexico, is under renewed threat from oil exploration.
Mexico's state oil consortium, Pemex, is carrying out exploratory drilling in the vicinity of Ococingo and El Cantil, in the expectation of substantial finds.
Associated activities, including road-building and the introduction of electricity, have led to a rapid expansion of settlements, notably at Benemerito, with peasant farmers moving in to clear stretches of the forest for crop growing.
Environmentalists warn that the development may place an intolerable burden on the remaining forest, whose area has shrunk from 5,200 square miles in 1943 to around 2,070 square miles today, some of which is notionally protected as a national park.
Washington Post 21 May
Tropical Forests
Rio forests suffer rapid destruction
Forests in the Brazilian state of Rio de Janeiro are disappearing at the rate of one football field in area every hour, according to the environmental protection group SOS Mata Atlantica.
The group presented the findings of a five-year survey of forests to the State Governor, Leonel Brizola.
According to the report, Rio de Janeiro state lost 30,000 hectares of its Atlantic forest — 3.25 per cent of the original area — between 1985 and 1990. cover.
At this rate, the forest will be completely destroyed within the next 30 years.
The report blames agriculture and illegal logging for much of the destruction, but also highlights the role of property speculators who have fenced off much of the coastal strip, often illegally.
New Scientist 16 May
Tropical Forests
Bolivian forest destruction accelerates
The lowland tropical forests of eastern Bolivia are being destroyed at an unprecedented rate, according to international aid agencies.
Around 200,000 hectares a year are being lost, equivalent to an annual depletion rate of 0.5 per cent— one of the highest in the world.
Cedoin, an independent monitoring agency in La Paz, estimates that the Bolivian government has granted logging concessions covering 22.5 million hectares, half the country's remaining forested area.
In theory, logging was suspended by law in January 1990, but it is reported to be continuing apace.
Many forestry officials charged with enforcing the law are poorly paid, and willing to accept bribes to allow timber operations to continue unhindered.
Meanwhile, redundant miners who lost their jobs when the state-owned mines were closed are moving into the forest in increasing numbers to set up farms.
Financial Times 13 May
Tropical Forests
Gold miners invade Venezuelan forest
Thousands of garimpeiro gold miners who have been ejected from the Yanomami reserve in Brazil are moving across the border into Venezuela, to join an estimated 5,000 already working in the so-called El Dorada triangle, seeking alluvial gold in the upper reaches of the Mazaruni and Cayuni rivers.
The waters are being polluted by mercury, oil and silt as a result of the mining.
The area is home to around 5,000 Warrao, Pemon, Kapon and Carib Indians, some of whom have been forced to flee their homes, with a number making their way into the Yanomami reserve.
Green Magazine, June 1992
Tropical Forests
ITTO facing budgetary crisis
The 12th session of the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) was held in Yaoundé, Cameroon, in May, against a backdrop of budgetary crisis.
The organization is heavily overspent, and is drawing on its working capital to finance the next meeting at its Yokohama, Japan, headquarters in November.
The only substantive decision of the Yaoundé session was a resolution asking timber producing nations to estimate what resources were required to achieve sustainable forest management.
The decision was derided by environmentalists.
A spokesman for the World Wide Fund for Nature described it as "a combination of a ransom note and a blank cheque" .
Financial Times 15 May
Tropical Forests
UK Customs seize illegal timber imports
British Customs officers have seized 28 tonnes worth of Chilean alerce timber, which had been illegally imported.
They raided two yards belonging to Timbmet, the country's second largest timber importer, at Oxford and Bicester.
Trade in alerce is banned under the terms of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
This is believed to be the first time that timber banned under CITES has been the target of Customs operations in Europe.
Alerce, known as "the redwood of South America" , is found in the temperate rainforests of southern Chile.
It can be exceptionally long-lived: one specimen is 4,200 years old, the second oldest tree on earth.
Timbmet, whose yards had earlier been the target of demonstrations by Earth First! activists, claimed that the wood had a valid Chilean export certificate, granted on the grounds that it came from standing dead trees.
Timbmet accepted that it was alerce, however, and agreed to co-operate with Customs officers.
Independent 29 May Guardian 29 May
UNCED
The Rio summit
After two years of preparation, the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED — also known as the "Earth Summit" ) took place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on June 3-14.
The conference's principal official outcomes were conventions on controlling climate change and preserving biological diversity, and a lengthy agenda outlining the extent of global environmental problems and the measures needed to tackle them in order to achieve the agreed goal of "sustainable development" .
Opinion was divided as to the extent to which the conference could be termed a success: many environmental campaigners expressed varying degrees of disappointment and anger at what they saw as its failure to set binding targets for resolving environmental problems, and to address adequately the links between third world poverty and environmental degradation.
Others however, including many of the heads of state and government who attended the conference, argued that it should be seen as a first step on the road to sustainable development, a welcome acknowledgement of the seriousness of the problem, and of the fact that global co-operation was needed to tackle it.
Parallel to the "official" summit, some 2,000 non-government organizations together with representatives of tribal peoples gathered at a "Global Forum" .
Origins of the summit The historical precedent for the summit had been set with the UN Conference on Human Environment, held in Stockholm, Sweden, in June 1972.
UNCED itself, however, was launched as a result of a UN General Assembly resolution passed in December 1989.
This in turn referred back to the 1987 report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, commonly known as the Brundtland Commission after its chair, the then Norwegian Prime Minister, Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland.
Much of the detailed work on the conventions agreed at the summit was carried out at a series of four preparatory conferences, known as "prepcoms" , the most recent of which, "Prepcom 4" , was held in New York in April [see ED no. 58].
Controversy surrounding summit Prior to the summit, governments and NGOs of varying persuasions traded accusations, many of them familiar rehearsals of long-standing differences.
There was much speculation as to whether US President Bush would attend: the fact that he did so was attributed to the persistence of William Reilly, the head of the US Environmental Protection Agency.
Other Administration figures had been calling for Bush to boycott the meeting, on the grounds that the US was coming in for excessive criticism.
Bush himself was quoted as saying that he did not "want to get into a major harangue down there" .
Administration officials also cast doubt on the environmental statements of other Northern governments, claiming that the French, German and Japanese, among others, were not matching their rhetoric with action.
The EC Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, however, fulfilled his threat to boycott the summit, principally in protest at the EC's failure to adopt a sufficiently firm, united stance on major environmental issues.
There was some concern expressed at the steps taken by the Brazilian authorities to "clean up" Rio for the summit.
Large numbers of street children and beggars "disappeared" from public view in the days preceding the conference, apparently bussed out to special camps or distant suburbs.
There were some unconfirmed suggestions that the incidence of murders of street children rose prior to the meeting.
Formal proceedings — Opening speech The summit was attended by delegations from 178 countries, with visits from 103 heads of state or government — a record number for any UN conference.
A total of 9,000 journalists attended.
In his opening speech on June 3, the UNCED Secretary-General, Maurice Strong, told delegates: "We have been the most successful species ever.
We are now a species out of control.
Our very success is leading us into a dangerous future…
The wasteful and destructive life-styles of the rich cannot be maintained at the cost of the lives and livelihood of the poor, and of nature.
No place on the planet can remain an island of affluence in a sea of suffering."
Principal agreements * Rio Declaration.
The summit approved a 27-page declaration laying down broad principles of sustainable development.
It set out the goal of "establishing a new and equitable global partnership" , and said that environmental protection should constitute an integral part of the development process, and not be considered in isolation from it.
It said that states had the sovereign right to exploit their own resources (by implication, therefore, ruling out coercive action to halt the destruction of tropical forests), but added the rider that they should not do so in a manner which caused damage to the environment of other countries.
Richer countries had a special responsibility "in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment" .
In one of the few official references to population control at the conference, the Declaration called on governments to "promote appropriate demographic policies" .
It enshrined the so-called "precautionary principle" , arguing that lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to halt environmental degradation (this was seen as directed in part at the US Administration's reluctance to agree to action to combat global warming).
Other elements covered the role that free trade, the rights of women, and the eradication of poverty had to play in achieving environmental security.
The Declaration was generally viewed as a somewhat unsatisfactory compromise between the widely differing wishes of various states.
* Agenda 21.
This 720-page document covered in some detail the measures needed to ensure sustainable development.
Described as a "blueprint for action" , its recommendations were not, however, binding.
Its core chapters covered the establishment of a framework for implementing UNCED's resolutions, central to which would be a new Sustainable Development Commission.
Subject to approval by the UN General Assembly, this has the task of monitoring progress towards the summit's goals, with annual meetings envisaged.
States are expected to submit annual reports on issues such as pollution control, biodiversity conservation, trends in health, poverty and population.
Additional funding to help developing countries in particular meet these goals is to be co-ordinated by the Global Environment Facility (GEF), jointly administered by the World Bank, and the UN's Development and Environment Programmes (UNDP and UNEP).
(The need for new funding, as opposed to better use of existing monies coupled with political and economic reforms, was disputed by some observers.)
The Agenda did, however, state that the present level of third world indebtedness made the provision of additional financing essential.
Among the many issues addressed in Agenda 21 was the principle of technology transfer (through which industrialized countries would help third world economies develop without compromising environmental security.)
The document also outlined broad strategies for combating common environmental problems such as the over-consumption of non-renewable resources; the loss of biodiversity; pollution of the air, land and seas; and toxic wastes.
* Biological Diversity Convention.
One of the two binding treaties agreed at the summit, this required states to take steps to preserve ecologically-valuable areas and species.
In the long term, it envisaged the compilation of a list of globally protected areas.
It laid down provisions for third world states to benefit from technology transfer and financial aid to help them preserve key areas, and for compensation payments in return for extraction of their genetic resources (seen as referring in particular to the exploitation of the gene bank of tropical forests by biotechnology companies).
It stated that "the first beneficiaries of the conservation and sustainable use of wild plant and animal species should be the rural communities and indigenous people whose traditional knowledge and respect for these resources has preserved them for centuries" .
The Convention was to come into force upon ratification by 30 states.
Alone of all the nations attending Rio, the USA refused to sign the Convention, chiefly on the grounds that it would prejudice the success of the US biotechnology industry.
William Reilly's efforts to persuade the Administration to agree to sign was reportedly the prime focus of tension between them.
US opposition to the convention had been co-ordinated by the Industrial Biotechnology Association, whose director, Richard Godown, had claimed that the treaty "was designed to hurt an industry that the US dominates, so that other countries may impede the US industry's growth while developing their own industries using our technology" .
The industry-backed "Competitiveness Council" , chaired by US Vice-President Dan Quayle, was reported to have played a key role in influencing Administration policy.
* Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Under this binding treaty, states were required to take steps to limit the emission of "greenhouse gases" , notably carbon dioxide (CO2).
At the insistence of the USA, the Convention stopped short of setting a binding target date for emission reductions.
Bush's attendance at Rio had reportedly been conditional on this.
However, the Convention did recommend that industrialized states aim to stabilize CO2 emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 (a target already agreed by the European Community and Japan).
Some oil-producing states, notably Saudi Arabia, had lobbied hard against an "energy tax" on fossil fuels.
The GEF is to channel aid to help developing countries meet the Convention's objectives.
By the end of the conference, both conventions had been signed (not ratified) by 153 states.
Secretariats to monitor implementation of the conventions are to be established in due course.
* A Statement of Forest Principles.
This was aimed in particular at limiting the destruction of tropical forests.
It recognized that forests were both a national resource in the sense of providing timber, food and fuel, for the country concerned, and a global resource, valuable both as a "bank" of genetic diversity (particularly plant-derived medicines), and as a "carbon sink," absorbing CO2 which would otherwise contribute to the greenhouse effect.
The Statement urged the development of sustainable forest management policies, due compensation to the host nation for access to the forests' genetic resources, and the provision of technical and financial aid to help developing countries preserve their forests.
Originally intended to have taken the form of a binding Convention, it was watered down to a "Statement" as a result of concerted lobbying by a number of timber-exporting countries, led by Malaysia, which viewed it as an attack on sovereignty, and accused northern countries of hypocrisy, given the fact that they had already destroyed all but a tiny fraction of their own virgin forests.
Northern NGOs pointed out that while Brazil had declared protected zones over 9 per cent of its forests, in Canada the equivalent was 3 per cent.
A statement issued on behalf of a number of developing countries said: "If forest management is of global consequence, so is management of the world's oil resources.
Are we going to have a global oil convention for sustainable global production, management and conservation of oil?"
Friends of the Earth reacted strongly to the lack of firm provisions for forest protection in the Statement, which it described as a "chainsaw charter" .
Speeches, aid pledges, reactions The UN Secretariat estimated that implementation of Agenda 21 would cost $350 billion a year.
Of this, it suggested that $70 billion should be in the form of aid from developed to developing nations — $40 billion in excess of that already being donated.
As a first step, it reiterated the UN's long-standing call for developed countries to give 0.7 per cent of their gross domestic product as aid — a target currently missed by all but a few.
The G77 group of developing nations called for a commitment from all developed nations to meet this target by the year 2000.
A total of only $2.5 billion "new" money was pledged at Rio.
In his address, President Bush called for all parties to make good commitments agreed at UNCED, adding that"the United States intends to be the world's pre-eminent leader in protecting the global environment…
The fact that we didn't sign one treaty [on Biodiversity]does not diminish…the US leadership role.
Sometimes leadership means not going with everyone else."
He proposed a follow-up meeting to assess progress on January 1 next year, and a conference of experts to draw up a world programme on conserving biodiversity.
The US would give $770 million a year from 1993, with $270 million earmarked for forestry aid in support of its "Forests for the Future" initiative.
UK Prime Minister John Major offered $100 million of "new" money, and announced the establishment of a "Darwin initiative" , placing British scientific expertise at the disposal of international efforts to conserve biodiversity, and a "global technology initiative" (performing the same function with regard to technology transfer).
Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa unexpectedly stayed away from UNCED, due to preoccupation with domestic politics.
His government pledged to increase its environmental aid by 50 per cent to $1.4 billion a year from 1993.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl declared a willingness to contribute additional funds of around $500 million a year as a contribution to an expanded GEF.
Speakers from the developing world stressed the links between environmental degradation and poverty, with several from the Pacific islands in particular warning of potentially catastrophic flooding due to thermal expansion of the oceans.
Expressing its disappointment with the decisions of the official summit, the Global Forum drew up a set of alternative treaties designed as "working documents for a post-summit era" .
In addition to the main subjects on the summit agenda, these covered topics such as the role of transnational corporations, military spending, environmental education, and the right to adequate food and clean water.
They coined the phrase "ecological debt" to describe the relationship between the North and South in terms of the former's excessive use of global resources.
Campaigning groups were on the whole sceptical of the extent of the summit's achievements.
Greenpeace's science director, Jeremy Leggett, said: "We need a paradigm shift.
I saw no sign of that happening in Rio.
Of course, we have to welcome any progress, but it has been microscopic."
Andrew Lees, campaigns director of Friends of the Earth UK, warned: "The North has done little to signal, let alone address, the issue of over-consumption.
Much of the burden of the environment and development crisis has been left on the shoulders of the world's poorest countries in the South."
Oxfam's policy director, Joan Davidson (part of the UK government delegation), focused on the debt issue: "What we need is a massive and immediate debt reduction to stop the haemorrhage of money from the poor South to the rich North" .
In his closing address, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said: "The current level of commitment is not comparable to the size and gravity of the problems" .
For his part, Maurice Strong declared that the summit had reached "agreement without sufficient commitment" , and concluded: "I believe that we are on the road to tragedy." 
UN information releases 14 June Daily UK, US and European newspapers.
Waste and Recycling
FoE "bring-back" campaign
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has launched a campaign to promote the environmental benefits of reusable packaging.
It is calling on the government to adopt a three-point programme with a view to: i) setting explicit packaging recycling and waste reduction targets; ii) reducing use of hazardous materials in packaging; and iii) increasing the market for recycled materials.
The new campaign highlights examples from around the world on the effectiveness of recycling.
These include: * Dutch studies which claim that energy savings of 33 per cent can be achieved by packaging milk in reusable plastic bottles; * savings of around 90 per cent in energy use and polluting emissions achieved by Swiss supermarket chain Migros through a switch from cardboard boxes to re-usable plastic ones; * the success of Sainsbury's "Penny Back" scheme, which encourages shoppers to re-use carrier bags.
This is said to be saving 1,000,000 bags per week — including 20,000 gallons of oil and 20 tonnes of plastic involved in their manufacture.
FoE blames the rise of the supermarket for the decline in the use of the refillable bottle, and cites a survey last year which showed that 84 per cent of shoppers would be prepared to return containers to retailers if supermarkets set up a suitable system.
I tcalls on manufacturers to agree on standard packet sizes toaid re-use.
FoE news release, 28 May
Waste and Recycling
French government waste bill
The French government has approved proposals for a new waste law.
This aims to reduce the mounting flood of household refuse, which currently stands at 70 million tonnes a year.
A levy of 20 francs for each tonne sent to landfill will be charged on refuse collectors, and the proceeds invested in research into clean technology and treatment centres.
This measure is projected to raise 375 million francs a year.
In addition, from the year 2002, all household and industrial waste will have to be "recovered" in some way (incinerated, composted or recycled).
Le Monde 6 May
Waste and Recycling
Rio plant opens
The world's largest plant for recycling rubbish and producing compost has been opened in Rio de Janeiro.
Built with French technology, the Caju plant will process half of the 1,120 tons of rubbish collected daily in the Brazilian city into 600 tons of an organic compost known as fertilube.
The plant will also produce around 150 tons of recyclable material such as plastic, paper, cardboard, glass and ferrous and non-ferrous metals, to be sold to industrial companies.
Voz do Brasil 27 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)