

Agriculture & Food
Canada bans Grand Banks cod fishing
The Canadian government has banned cod fishing on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland and Labrador — formerly the richest cod fishery in the world — in an effort to conserve rapidly-declining stocks.
Fisheries Minister John Crosbie denied, however, that over-fishing was to blame, claiming that "ecological factors" , including unusually cold water, were responsible.
The numbers of spawning cod in the area are among the lowest ever recorded.
New Scientist 11 July
Agriculture & Food
Organic farmers "insufficient to meet consumer demand" 
British farmers are not producing enough organic food to meet rapidly-rising consumer demand, with the result that imports account for 70 per cent of the annual market, according to the Organic Food and Farming Centre.
This is despite the fact that organic agriculture has expanded by 150 per cent over the last three years, to its present total of 125,000 acres — equivalent to 0.2 per cent of total agricultural land.
There are around 1,100 organic farmers.
The director of British Organic Farmers has called for government subsidies as an alternative to set-aside.
 "Paying farmers to do nothing is degrading both to the producer and to the environment" , argued Patrick Holden.
 "Offering incentives to organic farmers to produce food using environmentally-friendly methods for which there is a growing demand makes so much more sense." 
The Safeway supermarket says that, thanks to the economics of increased demand, the price premium charged on organic meat is now down to around 10-15 per cent, compared with 30 per cent 18 months ago.
Independent 7 July
Agriculture & Food
Set-aside encourages rabbits
The increase in the amount of farming land taken out of production under the government's "set-aside" scheme has led to a population explosion in rabbits, according to the Scottish Office.
Surveys suggest that the population has increased by 17 per cent over the past year.
In some areas of Scotland, the rise has been as much as 35 per cent.
Old-style large warrens, which had virtually disappeared as a result of modern farming techniques, are re-appearing in the middle of set aside fields.
Farmers are viewing the rise in rabbit numbers with concern, with damage costing the rural economy as much as £900 million a year.
Scottish Environment News in June 1992
Agriculture & Food
Scottish salmon catch declines sharply
Catches of Scottish salmon have declined by nearly 80 per cent since 1973, according to the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization.
The decline is generally in line with the 60 per cent fall in world salmon catches.
The Salmon and Trout Association believe that the use of driftnets is contributing to the decline.
Scottish Environment News in June 1992
Agriculture & Food
Call for renewed seal cull
Some Scottish fishing leaders are calling for revived seal culls as a means of boosting the local economy.
One such, Mr Goodlad, has said culling should be introduced to curb population growth among grey seals (blamed by some for falling fish stocks).
 "The prevailing view of the British public is likely to be that, if there is to be a choice between seals and fishermen, then it should be seals" , said Goodlad.
 "This is a clear example of how the strength of the environmental lobby directly threatens the long-term economic viability of our communities." 
The Scotsman 19 June
Conservation: Land
EC drops Twyford Down, other cases
The European Commission has announced that it is dropping court cases against the UK on five projects deemed to infringe EC law,[see EDs 57; 55; 52].
The projects include most notably the M3 extension at Twyford Down, as well as the Channel Tunnel rail link, the M11 link road to Hackney, east London, an incinerator at South Warwick Hospital, and a canning factory near Northampton.
However, it is to proceed with actions against the East London River Crossing through Oxleas Wood and the new BP oil terminal at Kinneil, near Grangemouth in Cumbria.
The new Environment Commissioner, Karel van Miert, described the decision as "reasonable and pragmatic" .
It accepted the British government's contention that environmental impact studies carried out at Twyford Down and the four other projects satisfied the spirit of the EC's environmental assessment directives.
However, the Commission ruled that this was not the case with the Oxleas Wood and Kinneil cases.
The Commission will now issue a "Reasonable Opinion" , giving the government two months to prove that it had complied with EC law.
If it does not do so, the case will be referred to the European Court for a ruling.
Anti-roads campaigners expressed bitter disappointment at the failure to proceed with the Twyford Down and M11 cases.
In each instance, the EC was seen as the last hope of halting the developments.
Some suggested that the decision was primarily political, linked both to a more cautious post-Maastricht policy on EC interference in the affairs of member states, and to the UK's assumption of the EC presidency.
Guardian 1 August Financial Times 1/2 August
Conservation: Land
Welsh estuary given Special Protected Area status
The Burry Inlet in Wales has been accorded the status of a Special Protection Area under the EC Directive on the Conservation of Wild Birds.
The Inlet covers 6,500 hectares of inter-tidal land between the Gower Peninsula and Llanelli.
It is an internationally important site for oystercatchers, knot and pintail, and of national importance for a range of birds including curlew, plovers and teal.
RSPB information 14 July
Conservation: Land
Spanish irrigation scheme threatens bustards
Plans by the Spanish government to irrigate large areas of steppe plain, with the aid of EC funding, are threatening the last European stronghold of the great bustard, together with 14 other birds protected by the EC Wild Birds directive.
The government aims to irrigate some 4 million hectares by 2010 through support from EC Structural Funds.
The International Council for Bird Preservation has launched a campaign for the withdrawal of the funding, and for the designation of the steppes as Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
This would allow farmers to claim EC money in return for traditional low-intensive, "bird-friendly" agricultural methods.
Fewer than 30,000 bustards remain in Europe, two-thirds on the Spanish plains.
New Scientist 18 July
Conservation: Land
Toxic land registration eased
The UK government has back-pedalled on plans for the compulsory registration of all sites contaminated by potentially-toxic waste.
Under the original plan, outlined in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, the register would include all 75,000 — 100,000 such sites.
Under pressure from property developers, local authorities and site owners, however, the government has now proposed that only the "most contaminated" sites (amounting to around 10-15 per cent of the total) would be registered.
These would include sites formally used for manufacturing gas, coke, lead, steel, asbestos, petroleum or chemical products.
However, some dockland and inner city areas would be excluded.
Under the revised plan, a two-tier system would be introduced, distinguishing between land that has been investigated or treated, and land where the extent of contamination has yet to be assessed.
The compromise left all sides unsatisfied.
The president of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, Christopher Jonas, said it would lead to "unnecessary blight and distort the property market" .
Friends of the Earth accused the government of retreating from a firmly-stated commitment to identify contaminated land.
Financial Times 1/2 August Guardian 1 August
Conservation: Land
Hedgerow incentives introduced
The UK government has launched a grant scheme to encourage the restoration of damaged hedgerows and their maintenance as wildlife havens.
Under the scheme, run by the Countryside Commission, farmers who enter into 10-year agreements will be eligible for a range of payments from £0.65 for every hedgerow tree planted to £2 per metre of hedge laid.
The Commission hopes that it will lead to the restoration of up to 400 miles of hedgerow each year.
Around 2,000 miles were destroyed every year during the 1980s, with a further 6,000 miles damaged by neglect.
The scheme has been welcomed by the National Farmers Union and countryside campaigners, both of whom, however, criticized as insufficient the £3.5 million available for the first three years.
Campaigners are demanding penalties, as well as incentives, to protect hedges.
Conservative MP Peter Ainsworth has introduced a bill which would make it compulsory for farmers to notify the planning authority of any plans to destroy hedgerows.
Independent 21 July
Conservation: Land
Ministry of Defence opens land to research
The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has agreed to open up 600,000 acres of its extensive land holdings for environmental research, and to offer the use of some of its ships, aircraft and personnel to help in the work.
The products of much of its observation work, including aerial photography, is also to be made available to researchers.
Announcing the decision, Defence Under-Secretary Lord Cranbourne said: "The culture and climate has changed in the last few months…
There will be a presumption in favour of co-operating wherever we can."
Applications for research will be screened by the Natural Environment Research Council.
Its chair, Professor John Knill, described the Ministry of Defence land as "an effectively pristine platform" , since much of it has never been subjected to modern agricultural techniques.
Guardian 2 July
Conservation: Species
Whaling ban upheld at IWC
The ban on commercial whaling is to remain in force for another year, as a result of decisions taken at the 44th annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) held in Glasgow, Scotland, on June 29-July 3.
Failure to lift the ban prompted Iceland to withdraw formally from the Commission [see ED 59/60], and Norway to announce a unilateral resumption of commercial hunting.
Meanwhile, "scientific" whaling, which allows a very limited catch supposedly for research purposes, will continue.
[For the previous meeting, held in Iceland in May 1992, see ED 47; for subsequent developments, see EDs 48, 49/50, 53/54, 56.]
Prior to the meeting, the IWC's scientific committee had said that the population of minke whales had now recovered to the point where renewed commercial hunting could be carried out on a sustainable basis.
It estimated the minke population in the Antarctic as around 750,000, and suggested that up to 100,000 could be taken from the area over the next decade.
Minke numbers in the North-East Atlantic (site of Iceland and Norway's hunts) number around 87,000 — 40 per cent of the estimated population prior to the start of intensive minke hunting in the 1960s.
In theory, new commercial catch quotas could be set at next year's meeting in Tokyo under a "revised management procedure" (RMP), although any such decision might be so hedged around with qualifications as to make it impossible to fulfil.
The UK government argued that the ban should continue until: i) there was "rock-solid" evidence of population recoveries; ii) a reliable catch-monitoring system was in place; and iii) more humane methods of killing whales had been devised.
UK Agriculture Secretary John Gummer, a renowned opponent of whaling, said that renewal of hunting would be"a return to the barbarity of the past.
Whales are an international — not a national — resource."
Throughout, the meeting highlighted the growing polarization between pro- and anti-whaling states, which has now reached a point which places the future of the IWC in some doubt.
The essential differences remain the same as last year: whaling nations such as Japan, Norway and Iceland [which withdrew from the IWC at the start of the meeting — see ED 59/60]accuse those opposed to whaling on largely ethical grounds, including the UK and US, of: i) misinterpreting the charter of the IWC, which was set up to regulate and sustain whale hunting, not to decide on the morality of whaling as such; and ii) interfering with the economic livelihoods of whaling communities.
They claim in particular that the arguments of those opposed to commercial whaling run counter to the decisions of the UNCED summit at Rio [ibid.], which enshrined the principle of "sustainable use" of natural resources.
Those opposed to whaling focus on its inherent cruelty, the non-essential nature of whale products, and the danger of over-exploitation.
The main points of debate at the meeting are covered below.
Norway to resume whaling In announcing its decision, the Norwegian government said that its intended catch of 2,000 minke per year was justifiable on a "sound, scientific and sustainable basis" .
It argued that a number of communities in the north of the country depended on whaling for their livelihood.
The decision drew fierce criticism, with the World Wide Fund for Nature warning that the country would become "an international pariah" , guilty of breaking the Law of the Sea.
 "There is simply no humane way to kill a 60-ton, ocean-dwelling mammal" , a spokesman commented.
Other IWC members expressed "deep concern" at the unilateral nature of the decision, warning that it undermined the Commission's efforts to agree on the details of the RMP.
Many saw it as ironic that the decision was strongly supported by Norway's Prime Minister, Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, generally regarded as the most "environmentalist" of all government leaders.
Some observers suggested that Brundtland's stance reflected domestic pressures to "stand up" to external attacks on Norway's fishing industry, after she was criticized for making concessions to the EC in fisheries talks earlier in the year.
A Norwegian spokesman insisted that there was no contradiction between its wish to renew "sustainable" whaling and its concern for issues such as global warming and ozone depletion.
He added: "It is a strange world we live in where it is not all right to kill some animals because they are prettier or more intelligent than others." 
Other Norwegians argued that whaling was no more cruel than any other forms of hunting indulged in by anti-whaling nations, including fox- or deer-hunting, and claimed that explosive grenades fired by the harpoon guns ensured that the whale died instantly.
A Norwegian whaling vessel, the Elin Toril, visited Glasgow during the meeting to support its government's stance, prompting direct action protests from Greenpeace supporters.
Norway's prospects of joining the EC might be harmed by its decision, if the EC were successful in demanding a seat for itself on the IWC.
EC Fisheries Commissioner Manuel Marin said that such a move would give IWC regulations the force of EC law.
 "Any country wishing to join the Community would have to go along with that" , he said.
Moves to form new whaling bodies Norway, Iceland, Greenland and the Faroe Islands announced plans to establish the North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission, with a first meeting scheduled to take place in the Faroes in September.
(The annual slaughter of pilot whales by the Faroe Islanders drew threats of a boycott of Faroese products from five animal welfare groups, including the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the Whale and Dolphin Society.)
Japan, Canada and Russia are to attend as observers.
The Japanese government, which also strongly supported a return to commercial whaling, announced that it was holding talks with Russia and South Korea with a view to setting up a similar organization for "rational exploitation" of marine mammals in the north Pacific.
Failure of Antarctic sanctuary plan A French proposal for the establishment of an Antarctic whale sanctuary was withdrawn when it became clear that it would not win the requisite 75 per cent level of support of IWC members.
Under the proposal, strongly supported by environmental groups and a number of other delegations, notably the UK, the Antarctic would be declared off-limits to whalers, even if the IWC approved a return to commercial hunting.
The region is one of the chief feeding grounds of the sperm, baleen and minke whales.
It has become the focus of concern after scientific studies suggested that depletion of the ozone layer was resulting in a 12 per cent reduction in numbers of phytoplankton — the organism at the bottom of the marine food chain, on which whales depend.
According to Lorraine Thorne of the Environmental Investigation Agency: "We just don't know what's happening to the marine ecosystem of the Antarctic.
How can we allow the commercial hunting of whales when they could be starved of food because of ozone depletion in a few years' time?"
Opposition to the proposal was expressed not only by the main whaling countries, led by Japan, but also by four small Caribbean states — St Kitts, St Lucia, St Vincent and Dominica.
They strongly denied suggestions that they had been "bought off" by offers of Japanese aid.
Further discussion on the proposal will be deferred until the 1993 meeting, when it is expected to be the main focus of environmental lobbying.
The IWC did however agree to renew until 2002 the status of the Indian Ocean as a whale sanctuary.
It had first been established in 1979, and was renewed for three years in 1989. * Evidence has emerged of continued "pirate whaling" in the south Atlantic.
A large piece of whale blubber, bearing the marks of fleshing knives, has been discovered off west Falkland.
It is believed to come from a fin whale.
The Falkland Islands government supports the Antarctic sanctuary proposal, and has banned all whaling in its 200-mile marine zone.
Daily UK, French, and US newspapers, 26 June — 7 July The Pilot, June 1992 Falkland Islands Govt information, 2 July WWF Information, 26 June
Conservation: Species
Airlines ban wild-caught birds
More airlines have responded to a campaign to ban wild-caught birds from their flights.
A total of 84 airlines have now responded, including many of the major carriers.
Among those to have signed up recently are Philippines and Malaysian Airlines, Aer Lingus, Air Zimbabwe, and the Japan Air System.
Birds Magazine (Royal Society for the Protection of Birds), Autumn 1992
Conservation: Species
CITES warns of fake permits
The Secretariat of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has warned that traders are making use of fake export permits in an effort to circumvent CITES bans.
Japanese customs officials have intercepted consignments of ivory bearing fake Malaysian permits, and fake permits from Cameroon are also reported to be in circulation.
Our Planet, no. 2, 1992
Conservation: Species
Coral consignment seized by UK Customs
UK customs officers have made two seizures of coral imported from the Philippines, in contravention of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
The coral, imported from the Philippines, was registered on import documents as "pre-1986" stock, export of which is permitted by the Philippines government.
But customs officers found strands of green seaweed clinging to the coral, indicating it was freshly-gathered stock.
This supports reports obtained by the TRAFFIC monitoring agency that illegal coral gathering is still widespread in the Philippines.
The CITES Secretariat has now asked the Philippines government to improve enforcement of its own laws.
In future, CITES will no longer recognize the existence of "pre-ban" stocks.
The coral is supplied in Britain for sale in aquaria and shell shops.
New Scientist 25 July
Conservation: Species
Dormouse joins recovery programme
English Nature is launching a programme to reintroduce the dormouse, once common throughout the country, now restricted to isolated sites in the south and west.
Land managers are being encouraged to manage woodlands in ways which will favour the dormouse, including introducing nesting boxes.
English Nature is to mount a study of the tiny mammal's habits, using radio tracking.
The decline of the dormouse has mirrored the loss of ancient forests.
Dormice spend much of the summer living in the treetops, and depend on a richly-interlaced canopy, with hollow trees for hibernation.
Other species covered by recovery programmes [see ED 45], include the large copper butterfly, fen raft spider, red squirrel, natterjack toad, lady's slipper orchid, fen ragwort and plymouth pear.
English Nature 16 July
Conservation: Species
Greek islands "centre of illegal trade" 
The World Wide Fund for Nature has accused the Greek government of allowing a flourishing trade in endangered species, after investigators from the TRAFFIC wildlife monitoring agency found hundreds of shops on the tourist islands selling a variety of wildlife products.
Among the objects discovered were coats made of jaguar and cheetah skin, sea turtle shells, ivory trinkets and stuffed rare birds.
All are banned under the regulations of CITES (the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species).
Although Greece itself is not a CITES signatory, it is obliged to implement its decisions as a member of the EC.
The TRAFFIC investigators reported that Greece was one of the world's biggest markets for trade in endangered cat species.
Observer 12 July
Conservation: Species
Australian wallaby species "extinct in wild" 
The last wild malas, a small species of wallaby, have died out in a fire in the Tanami desert of the Northern Territory.
The only remaining breeding population is in the Adelaide zoo.
The mala is the 14th of the 71 mammals unique to Australia to have died out since European colonization.
The Advertiser (Australia) 6 June
Conservation: Species
Barn owl releases to be controlled
The UK government is to ban the release of captive-bred barn owls into the wild without a licence.
The decision, which takes the form of adding the bird to Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act, follows growing evidence that captive-bred barn owls are prone to dying of starvation after release.
They have also been accused of competing with wild owls for food, and of introducing genetic differences into the wild gene pool.
Up to 3,000 barn owls are released into the wild each year, a practised described as "well-meaning but often ill-considered" by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
Birds Magazine (RSPB), Autumn 1992
Conservation: Species
Red squirrel "faces extinction" in the UK
The Forestry Commission has claimed that the red squirrel faces extinction in southern Britain, and continuing decline in the north, unless large areas of contiguous conifer forest are maintained.
According to the Commission, the grey squirrel (introduced from America at the end of last century) can out-compete the red for food supplies in broadleaved woods, but the latter can thrive in pure conifer areas, where grey squirrels cannot prosper.
The Commission suggests setting up red squirrel protection areas consisting of at least 2,000 hectares of mixed species coniferous forest, including Scots pine, Norway spruce, larch and Douglas fir, of various ages.
Tree News, Summer 1992
Conservation: Species
Indian Tiger poaching increases
Poachers have carried out a sustained assault on tigers in the Indian reserve of Ranthambhor, 140 miles south of Delhi.
Over the last three years, tiger numbers have fallen from 44 to 15, raising fears for their viability.
Trade in tiger products is banned under the provisions of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
The upsurge is linked to growing demand for tiger bone in the medicinal markets of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
Tigers in southern China formerly supplied much of the demand, but they have now been hunted virtually to extinction.
The tigers are normally trapped with bait, such as a cow, and then poisoned with pesticide.
The reserve was the flagship of Project Tiger, the recovery programme set up by the Indian government and the World Wide Fund for Nature in 1972.
New Scientist 11 July
Conservation: Species
US Court curbs chances of environmental law suits
The US Supreme Court has effectively limited the power of the Endangered Species Act, by dismissing a case which sought to establish that federal bodies must comply with the Act when funding projects overseas.
The decision, reached by a 7-2 majority, was seen as having wider implications, since it dismissed the case solely on the grounds that those bringing it lacked the standing to sue [see below].
Under the Act, passed in 1973, federal agencies must consult with the Interior Department to ensure that their activities do not threaten endangered species.
In 1986, the Department ruled that this obligation did not extend to the funding of overseas projects.
A legal challenge was launched by the Defenders of Wildlife group and other bodies, and upheld by the federal appeals court.
The Supreme Court was hearing the Department's appeal against this decision.
The Act includes a "citizen-suit" provision, under which individuals can challenge violations of the law, providing they can demonstrate that they will in some way be harmed by the violation.
The plaintiffs argued that certain specific projects would result in the loss of wildlife covered by the Act, and that therefore their own interests would be harmed.
The Supreme Court decided, however, that those bringing the case would not face "imminent injury" as a result of the projects.
Environmental lawyers warned that this ruling would place severe restrictions on future law suits.
A spokesman for Defenders of Wildlife argued: "This opinion, at its core, is just hostile to any kind of environmental lawsuit." 
One of the dissenting judges, Justice Harry Blackmun, criticized the majority group for engaging in a "slash and burn expedition" designed to keep environmental cases out of court.
Washington Post 13 June
Conservation: Species
New species discovered in Vietnamese "lost world" 
A number of hitherto-unknown species have been discovered in the Vu Quang nature reserve in western Vietnam during a survey organized jointly by the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Vietnamese Forestry Ministry.
The discoveries include a large dagger-horned mammal, known to local people as a "forest goat" , various fish, a sunbird and a variety of yellow box tortoise.
According to WWF team leader John McKinnon, the reserve is "like a lost world cut off from the rest of Indo-China" .
The area has escaped the ravages of war and forest clearance which have devastated most of the region.
The Vietnamese government is now planning to enlarge the reserve.
The finding of the "goat" has caused particular excitement, since i is one of the few large mammals to have been discovered this century.
WWF information, 17 July International Herald Tribune 28 July2
Conservation: Species
Drought forces Zimbabwe to move elephants
The prolonged and severe drought affecting southern Africa has compelled wildlife authorities in Zimbabwe to move up to 1,000 elephants from the Gonarezhou Park to private ranches in the Sava Valley to the north.
The authorities had earlier decided to kill other elephants as part of a major culling programme provoked by the drought [see ED 59/60].
As well as saving the animals from dying of thirst, the relocation is also intended to take some of the pressure off the park's vegetation, and so prevent it turning into desert.
In the longer term, Zimbabwe and South Africa plan to amalgamate the Gonarezhou and Kruger parks, together with a number of adjoining private game ranches, into the world's largest wildlife reserve.
They intend to submit funding applications to the Global Environment Facility.
Observer 19 July
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
Ivory poachers have stolen tusks from stuffed elephants in Maputo Natural History Museum, Mozambique.
The museum had been closed for several months because of a leaking roof.
Hundreds of dolphins are drowning in international waters in the Mediterranean as a result of being trapped in driftnets up to 110 kilometres (70 miles) long, used by South Korean vessels to catch tuna and swordfish.
Japan has announced that it intends to scale down the use of driftnets in the run-up to the UN ban which takes effect at the end of the year [see ED 53/54].
Independent 2 July International Herald Tribune 16 July Kyodo News Service, Tokyo, 19 June
Economics & Industry
World Bank projects "harm Brazilian poor" 
The World Bank has admitted that many of the projects it funded in Brazil during the 1970s and 80s resulted in massive environmental degradation and the eviction of over 100,000 poor farmers and their families, many of whom were forced into the shanty-towns of major cities.
The admission comes in the form of internal Bank documents prepared earlier in 1992 by its operations evaluation department.
They claim, however, that the Bank has learnt lessons as a result of the experience.
Among the $1 billion worth of projects criticized by the report were: * The construction of a series of dams along the Sao Francisco River, one of the country's largest, which "displaced tens of thousands of people" , including 70,000 who lost their land to the Sobradinho hydro-electric plant, and led to "the replacement of subsistence smallholders with commercially-oriented farmers" .
A second dam, at Itaparica, led to the eviction of over 40,000 people, at a cost of $63,000 per family.
Rehoused on inadequate land, they suffered from "intra-communal violence, alcohol abuse, family disintegration and low morale" .
Downstream from the dams, other farmers suffered from flooding and reduced soil fertility.
* The Carajas mining project in the Amazon rainforest, which, with its associated rail links, opened up the region to invasion from poor farmers and gold prospectors, resulting in forest destruction on a massive scale and the persecution of local Indian communities.
 "Environmental protection measures were almost entirely lacking" , the report concluded.
* The Polonoreste rural development and road construction project in western Amazonia which, although intended to boost economic opportunities for poorer farmers, had as its principal effect another wave of forest destruction and consequent soil erosion, as the government was unable to "keep incoming migrants from exploiting the very areas which the programme was designed to protect" .
New Scientist 18 July
Economics & Industry
More companies address environmental policy
The number of companies mentioning environmental issues in their annual reports has doubled over the last year to around 18 per cent of the total.
However, only around half of these provide any useful information, according to an analysis by Company Reporting, an industrial monitoring service.
Among those offering concrete commitments were National Westminster Bank, which said it took environmental issues into account when considering loan requests [see ED 58], and the Austin Reed clothing company, which claims to encourage its suppliers to meet environmental standards.
Financial Times 30 June
Economics & Industry
IBM's Environment Council
The computer company IBM has set up an internal "Environment Council" with a "green senior manager" in every department, in an effort to improve environmental performance.
According to company chairman Sir Anthony Cleaver, this has already resulted in concrete improvements, including the installation of energy efficient lighting, at an annual saving of £20,000 per year.
The company has called in environmental consultants, Sustainability Ltd, to carry out an independent audit, with a report to be published later in the year.
Environment Business 29 July
Economics & Industry
ICI recycles explosives
The chemicals company, ICI, has set up a new unit to recycle spent explosives.
Based in Toronto and Pennsylvania, it will focus on converting munitions into reusable commercial material and reclaim explosive waste sites.
Guardian 22 July
Economics & Industry
Malaysian court ruling triggers Japanese debate
A Malaysian court has ordered the Japanese chemical manufacturer, Mitsubishi Kaese, to suspend operations at its joint-venture plant in Ipoh, because of allegations that radioactive waste from the plant was contaminating the area.
The decision followed complaints from nearby villagers, and evidence of higher-than-average rates of leukaemia and congenital diseases in the area.
Mitsubishi owns 35 per cent of the Asian Rare Earth company, which produces minerals used in making electrical components.
In response, the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) warned all companies to ensure that their foreign investments did not create environmental problems.
There were also calls in Tokyo for a revival of proposed legislation, dropped last year, which would have compelled Japanese companies to run their foreign operations to domestic standards.
The court ruling comes at a sensitive time for the Japanese government, which is claiming a lead role in environmental affairs, and has strenuously denied that it encourages its hazardous industries to relocate to third world countries.
The company's appeal to the Supreme Court in August was suspended after protestors from Ipoh staged an angry demonstration outside the court buildings.
Financial Times 14 July, 4 August
Economics & Industry
Mexico ponders green tax
The Mexican government is considering ways of introducing a trade-related "green tax" to help raise money for tackling the country's growing pollution problems.
A levy on imports and exports is one possibility, although it may prove difficult to square with the free-trade regulations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
According to Santiago O  ate, attorney-general for environmental protection, the government has already invested $400 million in a programme to clean up the industrial zone on the US border, home to many of the so-called maquiladora industries, which locate there to take advantage of Mexico's relatively lax pollution regulations.
O  ate said that the government is to allow all citizens to sue for damages over environmental hazards, and to accompany environmental inspectors on site visits.
Financial Times 24 July
Economics & Industry
Mine damage detailed
Many of the world's major mining operations are having a disastrous impact on the environment, according to a new report from the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute.
The author of Mining the Earth, John Young, argues that "mining has come to rival water erosion as a force for changing the landscape" .
Each year, mining strips 28 billion tonnes of materials from the earth, and creates 2.7 billion tonnes of waste.
The report alleges that mining and smelting use up 10 per cent of all energy consumed each year.
The report has drawn angry reactions from mining organizations, which claim that environmental improvements are under way in many sectors.
Among the worst culprits, the report says, are copper mines.
Their waste, or "tailings" , contains a high proportion of sulphur which leaches out toxic metals.
Smelting plants which release around 6 million tonnes of sulphur dioxide every year have created huge ecological "dead zones" in many countries, with Britain alone losing 400,000 hectares of agricultural land as a result.
In the third world, some heavily indebted governments have encouraged the rapid development of mining as a means of raising foreign exchange.
Copper mining accounts for 86 per cent of Zambia's export revenues, although falling mineral prices have meant that overall revenue is well below the level hoped for.
The report calls for aid to help cuntries heavily dependent on mineral revenues to diversify their economies.
In the long term, the report says, the situation may improve as demand for virgin metals in industrialized countries continues to fall, and metal recycling increases.
Meanwhile, the mining industry in developed countries continues to be subsidized — to the tune of $5 billion in the US during the 1980s.
The American Mining Congress has lambasted the report as "a gross distortion of the truth" , arguing that its members at least abide by government-imposed standards, and have pioneered the development of environmentally-responsible practises.
Financial Times 30 July New Scientist 18 July
Economics & Industry
Procter & Gamble wins environmental award
The detergent and cosmetics company, Procter & Gamble, has been awarded the Gold Medal for International Corporate Achievement by the World Environment Center, an international organization which promotes worldwide exchange of environmental information.
The award, made annually, singles out P&G's "innovative" application of Total Quality Management techniques to environmental issues.
New Consumer, July-September 1992
Energy
World Bank-commissioned report criticises Narmada dam project
A report commissioned by the World Bank on the Narmada Dam in India concludes that the environmental impacts of the project have not been adequately addressed, and as no fair resettlement of the 250,000 tribal people is possible, World Bank funding should be suspended.
Though the Bank has accepted the report's findings, it insists that continued support for the project is justified.
The $5.5 billion project involves building a cascade of dams on the Narmada River with the aim of providing drinking water, irrigation and hydro-electric power.
The independent review of the project was launched by the World Bank last June, following local and international protests and the withdrawal of funding by the Japanese government.
The report advises the Bank to reassess the project completely as the number of people facing resettlement and the damage to downstream fisheries have been grossly underestimated, while the irrigation potential has been overestimated.
Meanwhile the Gujarat minister for Narmada development, Babubhai Jashbhai Patel, accused the report of being "prejudiced" , and reiterated the state government's resolve to complete the project.
BBC Wildlife June All-India Radio 21 June
Energy
Coppice-as-fuel encouraged
The UK Department of Energy is urging farmers keen to diversify from traditional crops to consider using set-aside land to grow coppiced wood for fuel.
The Department has published the results of trials which suggest that a single hectare of coppice can provide up to 15 tonnes of fuelwood every year — sufficient to heat a large farmhouse.
Scottish Environment News in June 1992
Energy
Hungary protests over Gabcikovo
The Hungarian government has issued a protest to Czechoslovakia over the continued construction work on the Gabcikovo Dam on the Danube — a focus of growing tension between the two countries [see ED 57; passim].
Hungary is particularly concerned over pumping operations at Hrusov, which it sees as both illegal under international law and ecologically harmful.
Environmentalists have warned that the dam poses threats to the ecosystem of the river and its valley.
The separatist Slovak government is expected to continue work on the dam despite protests.
Slovak Radio, 8 July
Energy
Protected wetland areas endangered by dam
The Greek government has decided to build a massive complex of dams to divert the Akheloos River, endangering protected wetland areas which host thousands of wading birds including several endangered species.
The decision to proceed with the hydro-electric and irrigation project has been taken despite the fact that essential funding from the EC has yet to be approved.
The EC was due to fund between 25 and 40 per cent of the £250 million (Ecu355 million) project, but has now postponed the decision out of uncertainty as to whether the project will be economically viable.
The Akheloos would lose 30 per cent of its water, and conservationists fear that the Mesolongion wetlands at the mouth of the river would dry up completely.
The EC is already funding a management programme for the threatened wetlands, and according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the Commission would be "pouring its own money down the drain" if it were to decide to back the scheme.
European 25-28 June
Environmental Politics
EC Commissioner appointed
Carlo Ripa di Meana's successor as EC Environment Commissioner has been named as Karel van Miert, currently Transport Commissioner.
Van Miert, 50, is Belgian, formerly leader of the Flemish Socialist party, and has a reputation as a committed environmentalist.
His initiatives in the field of transport policy have included a number of environmental strands.
A new Commission is due to be elected at the end of the year, and it is possible that Van Miert may only hold his post until then.
Meanwhile, Ripa di Meana has been recalled to Italy as Environment Minister [see separate item].
Environment Business 15 July
Environmental Politics
Countryside law "flawed and toothless" 
The UK Wildlife and Countryside Act has been described as "flawed" and "toothless" by the House of Lords, on the grounds that its provisions to prevent damage to valuable sites only apply to owners or occupiers — not outsiders.
The Law Lords were upholding a lower court's decision that the Southern Water Authority had not breached the terms of the 1981 Act by damaging a site of special scientific interest (SSSI).
The Authority had originally been convicted in a magistrate's court after it dug out a plant-filled ditch as part of drainage works on Alverstone Marshes SSSI, in the Isle of Wight, without the consent of the Nature Conservancy Council (as required under the Act).
The conviction was overturned on appeal, subsequently upheld by the Lords, who confirmed that the terms of the Act were limited to"owners and occupiers…
A stranger who enters the land for a few weeks solely to do some work on it does not fall into this category."
At present, they said, the law "would be insufficient to penalise the fly-tipper" .
Its only value was to allow time for English Nature and the other national successor bodies to the NCC to apply "moral pressure" .
English Nature said afterwards that it had taken the case to the Lords in search of a definitive ruling.
A spokesman for Friends of the Earth described the Act as"a charter for blackmailers and vandals.
If somebody entered the National Gallery and defaced a Gainsborough they would be prosecuted.
Do the same with our national natural treasures and they get away with it."
Independent 18 July
Environmental Politics
Brazilian Environment Secretary appointed
The Brazilian President, Fernando Collor de Mellor, has appointed Flavio Perri as Environment Secretary, in succession to José Lutzenberger, who was forced out of office earlier this year [see ED 57].
In announcing the appointment, Collor said Perri's foremost task would be the implementation of the sustainable development agenda set by the UNCED summit.
Perri was formerly executive secretary of the national UNCED working group.
After being sworn in, Perri declared his intention to work closely with Ibama, the Institute for Environmental Affairs and Renewable Resources (with which Lutzenberger had clashed), and announced that he would take over as Ibama President.
Voz do Brasil 14 July
Environmental Politics
Global 500 awards announced
The UN Environment Programme has announced a further 74 winners of its "Global 500" award, made annually since World Environment Day in 1987.
The awards are made in recognition of "outstanding contributions to the protection and improvement of the environment" .
Among the more well-known individuals honoured this year are Brigitte Bardot, Herbert Girardet, Jon Tinker, Ashok Khosla and Vo Quy.
The list also includes a large number of campaigners from third world countries who have worked on local issues.
Among the organizations recognized are: Bahai Vocational Institute for Women (India); Earthwatch Radio (USA); Golden Hope Plantations Berhad (Malaysia); NGO/UN Co-operation Forum (Indonesia); Nigerian Conservation Foundation; Paasban Family Planning Association (Pakistan); Saenaua Women's Association (Solomon Islands); Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel; Southern Women Against Toxics (USA); Sri Lanka Environmental Journalists Forum; the Dutch Cyclists Union; and the Women of Mupata Village (Zimbabwe).
Our Planet, No. 3, 1992
Environmental Politics
New German laws, French jobs
The German Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer, has appointed a commission charged with simplifying the country's complex environmental laws to make them more comprehensible, and introducing market mechanisms for environmental protection.
* Segolene Royal, France's Environment Minister, has announced plans to create 35,000 new jobs in environmental projects for the long-term unemployed, concentrated on cleaning up rivers and parks.
The Ministry and the French Environment Agency have together pledged FF40 million towards the scheme for 1993.
Environment Business 15 July
Environmental Politics
Gorbachev to head "Green Cross" 
Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev is to head the newly-established "Green Cross" , an organization set up at his own initiative with the aim of being an environmental equivalent of the Red Cross.
He was elected at a fringe meeting of the UNCED summit in Rio.
Pacific Islands Monthly, July 1992
Environmental Politics
Greenpeace budget cut
Falling donations have forced Greenpeace International to cut its 1993 budget from $36 million to $27 million, sell the largest of its seven ships, and make up to a quarter of its 500 campaigners redundant.
This is the first year since Greenpeace's foundation 21 years ago in which contributions — all of which come from individuals — have failed to rise.
Germany is the largest single source of donations, followed by the Netherlands, the US and UK.
US donations are believed to have fallen off in part as a result of the organization's opposition to the Gulf War.
The cutbacks come against a background of tension within Greenpeace, with some staff arguing that its "direct actions" have of late degenerated into photo-opportunity style publicity stunts, unlikely to cause any direct embarrassment to polluters.
They fear that its place at the cutting edge of environmental radicalism has been taking by groups such as Earth First.
Guardian 30 June
Environmental Politics
Inuit Circumpolar Conference
The sixth Inuit Circumpolar Conference, grouping Arctic peoples from Siberian Russia, Greenland, Alaska and Canada, met in the Canadian town of Inuvik, under the slogan "A common future for the Arctic" .
They discussed the threats to their livelihoods from ozone depletion, oil and industrial pollution, and the potential of accidents in abandoned nuclear installations following the end of the Cold War.
Delegates also expressed concern over the success of the anti-fur trade campaign, which had effectively shut down many of the markets for one of the Inuits' principal exports.
International Herald Tribune 23 July
Environmental Politics
Italy looks to simplify green laws
The Italian government headed by Giulliano Amato has declared its intention to simplify and strengthen the country's existing environmental legislation.
Carlo Ripa di Meana, formerly EC Environment Commissioner, has been appointed Environment Minister.
Among the government's green priorities are: the introduction of some form of energy tax, along the lines of EC proposals [see ED 59/60]; the promotion of recycling through new waste laws; and the establishment of a national policy on water supply, usage and treatment.
Environment Business 15 July
Environmental Politics
Van Miert calls for common environmental standards
In his first public speech as EC Environment Commissioner, Karel van Miert has called for common environmental norms to be applied across the EC, with a view to maintaining environmental standards without infringing the Community's commitment to free trade between member states.
He favours the use of fiscal incentives alongside regulation, particularly in the fields of carbon emissions and road haulage.
Working out how to meet the EC's target of stabilizing carbon emissions by the year 2000 should be a priority of the UK's Presidency, he said.
* UK Environment Secretary Michael Howard has warned that some EC environmental directives might be repealed during the UK Presidency.
He promised that implementation of EC environmental laws would be indeed be a priority of the UK's tenure, but added: "We are still looking at whether (the legislation) would benefit from shedding weight." 
Environmentalists fear that this might mean softening water standards — which have proved something of a bane to the UK.
Financial Times 24 July
Global Warming
Northern forests "mopping up carbon" 
The post-war expansion of forest cover in Northern countries is effectively "mopping up" increased carbon emissions, so compensating for the loss of tropical forests and countering the greenhouse effect.
This assertion is made in a new report by the Washington-based think tank, Resources for the Future.
Its author, Roger Sedjo, argues that new temperate forests are absorbing at least 700 million tonnes a year, compared to the 1,000 million tonnes released annually as a result of tropical forest loss.
He suggests that the new forests are the "missing carbon sink" which has puzzled scientists for some years.
Of the 7 billion tonnes of carbon emitted annually, around 3 billion stays in the atmosphere, contributing to the greenhouse effect, while 2-3 billion is absorbed by the oceans.
The destination of the remaining carbon is not clear, but Sedjo now proposes that it is in fact being absorbed by the new plantations in temperate lands.
According to his report, 24 out of 25 European countries saw their forest cover increase over the period 1954-84.
The most dramatic increase has been in the former Soviet Union, where the area of land under forest rose by 70 million hectares — three times the size of Britain — over the past 25 years.
New Scientist 11 July
Global Warming
Aircraft "high greenhouse polluters" 
Aircraft are responsible for a higher level of greenhouse gas emissions than previously thought, largely due to the disproportionately strong effect of nitrogen oxide (NOx) at high altitudes, according to new figures from the Energy Technology Support Unit (ETSU) based at Harwell, in the UK.
The unit calculates that, on a seat for seat basis, aircraft produce 684 grams of carbon dioxide (CO2), or its equivalent, compared with 83 grams produced by cars.
An electric train produces 31 grams per seat.
However, emissions of NOx gases in the upper atmosphere have a greenhouse effect 100 times more powerful than C02.
NOx breaks down into ozone, normally an unstable and short-lived gas.
In the cooler air of the upper atmosphere, the chemical reactions which destroy it are slowed down, thereby enhancing its greenhouse effect.
At ground level, NOx is three times more potent than C02, but at the height at which aircraft normally cruise (around 12 km), it can be over 300 times as powerful.
ETSU conclude that, although aircraft produce only 3 per cent of global NOx emissions, they have as much effect as all the other sources combined.
Rolls-Royce has announced that its engineers are working on ways to reduce NOx emissions, but scientists warn that any significant change will take time to develop, and require large amounts of investment.
New Scientist 25 July
Global Warming
Australia "highest rate of greenhouse emissions" 
Australia has the world's highest per capita rates of greenhouse gas emissions, according to the country's Bureau of Statistics.
An annual total of 11 tonnes of greenhouse gases are released for each Australian.
The comparable figure for the USA is 10 tonnes, while the OECD average is just 6.1 tonnes.
The country's dependence on motor vehicles appears to be the main cause.
During the decade 1981-91, the number of car drivers increased by 8 per cent, while fewer commuters walked, cycled or used public transport.
The country's annual per capita output of municipal waste increased to 681 kg, compared to 632 kg in Canada and just 313 kg in Sweden.
Predictions for the Australian climate in 2030 include a rise of between 10 and 20 cm in sea-level, increased incidence of tropical cyclones, and an average temperature hike of between 1 and 4 degrees.
The Advertiser (Adelaide) 2 June
Global Warming
El Niño drought "over" 
The El Niño climate phenomenon, which has been blamed for widespread droughts in southern Africa, Australia and south-east Asia [see EDs 57, 55]appears to be over.
El Niño is apparently triggered by the warming of ocean currents in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific, which set off a pattern of weather bringing drought to many tropical areas, but heavier than normal rain to the western American seaboard.
Normal weather is now returning to Australia, and the forthcoming monsoon is expected to bring much-needed rainfall to India later in the year.
El Niño strikes every five to seven years, on average.
Financial Times 8 July
Global Warming
Sea level rise "could be less than feared" 
The rise in sea levels as a result of global warming may be less than feared, according to a new UN study.
This suggests that the rise could be limited to 63 centimetres by 2100 — compared to earlier predictions of as much as 5 metres.
The study states that temperature increase could be limited to 0.2 degrees per decade, due to the oceans' ability to absorb additional heat.
Such a limited rise would effectively reprieve low-lying island states, such as the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu and the Maldives, from the inundation feared under previous estimates.
* However, a report by the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme puts anticipated sea level rise at 2 metres by 2100, leading to a further diminution of fresh water supplies on the Pacific islands, which already face a shortage.
The report suggests, however, that coral growth will be able to keep pace with sea rises of up to 3 metres over the next hundred years.
Pacific Islands Monthly, July 1992
Nuclear Power
US legal ruling on nuclear waste
The US Supreme Court has repealed the section of the 1985 nuclear waste federal law which compels states to find disposal sites for low-level radioactive waste if they have failed to come up with another solution by 1996.
Voting six to three, the court ruled that this ultimate threat violated states' rights.
Other provisions to provide incentives for states to dispose of the waste remained intact.
International Herald Tribune 22 June
Nuclear Power
British nuclear output continues despite US decision to stop
Britain is to continue producing plutonium and highly enriched uranium for nuclear weapons, despite the decision by the US government to stop doing so, and an appeal by President Bush for other nations to follow suit.
The Ministry of Defence commented that it welcomed the US announcement as an attempt to elicit a response from areas where there was a risk of nuclear proliferation.
Unlike the US and Russia, the Ministry said, Britain did not have large stocks of fissile material and British production would continue at a minimum level to satisfy the need for the deterrent and naval reactor requirements.
British Nuclear Fuels has been criticised for trying to conclude a deal with South Korea, a country which President Bush has named as increasing the proliferation risk.
US Central Intelligence Agency analysts have identified the use of weapons of mass destruction by "rogue" regimes as one of the biggest strategic threats facing the US.
Iraq's efforts to acquire nuclear weapons became one of the main justifications for the Gulf War.
The US decision will be welcomed by environmentalists concerned about the safety risks posed by several US nuclear bomb making plants, which were built in the 1950s.
But despite the halt in production, the US will retain the largest worldwide stockpile of weapons-grade plutonium and enriched uranium, contained in its existing weapons.
Guardian 14, 15 July
Ozone layer
Ministers to be urged to accelerate CFC phase-out
Government officials have agreed to recommend an accelerated phase-out of the main ozone-destroying chemicals by the end of 1995 to a ministerial meeting in Copenhagen in November of the 82 members of the Montreal Protocol.
The protocol currently calls for the elimination of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), halons and some other ozone-depleting chemicals by the year 2000.
Faced with accumulating evidence of rapid and widespread loss of ozone [see ED no. 59-60], officials agreed a complete phase-out of production of CFCs, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloride in industrialised countries by the end of 1995, and to stop halon production by January 1 1994, with essential uses to be met by existing supplies.
A timetable will also be recommended for the phase-out of CFC substitutes, such as hydrochlorofluorocarbons, which also destroy the ozone layer, although to a lesser extent than CFCs.
No firm action was taken on methyl bromide, a pesticide used as a fumigant, which has also been found to destroy ozone, and officials merely recommended a freeze on production and consumption at 1992 levels by 1995, with a 25 per cent cut by the year 2000.
Tight controls were strongly resisted by developing countries.
Financial Times 18-19 July
Ozone layer
Childhood skin cancer risk
Children in the UK have a 10-15 per cent increased chance of contracting skin cancer as a result of ozone-layer depletion, according to a Greenpeace report.
Harmful ultra-violet (B) radiation reaching the earth's surface is expected to result in a rise of 700 skin cancer cases a year for every 1 per cent decrease in the ozone layer.
Children are particularly at risk because of the amount of time they spend out of doors.
The report advises the use of sun cream and wide-brimmed hats as protective measures.
Greenpeace has called on the government to minimize the risk by banning all ozone-damaging chemicals with immediate effect.
Guardian 3 August Financial Times 3 August
Ozone layer
ICI plans "ozone-benign" chemical
ICI plans to manufacture "ozone-benign" chemicals to replace chlorofluorcarbons (CFCs).
The products will be used in refrigeration systems in the food industry and in large air conditioning systems.
Manufacture of the new hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) will begin within weeks.
Independent 2 July
Pollution: Air
Pollution "damages health of one in three" 
The health of a third of the population of England is at risk from air pollution, according to a Greenpeace study, with children and old people particularly vulnerable.
Traffic fumes are the main cause for concern, the report claims.
Deaths from asthma in various regions have risen by 30-60 per cent over the last decade, and one in seven children have now been diagnosed as suffering from the condition.
Low-level ozone pollution — resulting from the reaction of exhaust gases with sunlight, is the principal culprit, with many parts of the country regularly exceeding the World Health Organization's guideline safety level of 76-100 parts per billion (ppb) per hour.
Thanks to wind drift, the highest ozone levels are often found in country areas.
During the period April to September 1990 (the last year for which figures are available), WHO levels were exceeded on 27 days.
The Department of Health regards the WHO guidelines as over-cautious.
It issues pollution warnings only when the level exceeds 100 ppb, which it did on seven occasions in the 1990 summer.
Greenpeace has called on the government to take steps to discourage growth in vehicle pollution by halting the road-building programme, making city centres car-free, and investing in improved public transport.
It warns that the much-heralded pollution reduction benefits of catalytic converters (to be compulsory on all new cars from the end of the year) will soon be negated by increased traffic volume.
Observer 26 July Guardian 27 July
Pollution: Air
Californian air improving
A new study reports that air pollution has decreased by 50 per cent in much of Southern California over the past 10 years.
The study by the California Air Resources Board attributes the improvement to strict emission controls on motor vehicles and factories.
Coastal cities now experience about 200 to 400 hours of excessive smog annually, about half the amount recorded a decade ago, while inland cities suffer hazardous air pollution 600 to 800 hours a year, down by half.
International Herald Tribune 22 July
Pollution: Air
Pollution threat to Europe's forests
Atmospheric pollution is causing the loss of around 25 million square metres of European woodland each year, according to the European Parliament's Environment Committee.
It recommends a full evaluation study of the problem, and urges an end to the disagreement in the Council of Ministers over regulations governing finance for pollution research.
Environment Business 15 July
Pollution: Water
Transfer schemes rejected
The government has rejected proposals to overcome water shortages in south and east Britain by transporting supplies from the wetter north and west.
Instead, it is to concentrate on reducing water demand, currently rising at a rate of 1 per cent a year.
Heavy July rains have reduced demand, but have not helped falling aquifer levels.
In addition to the prohibitive cost, it was feared that transferring the relatively acidic water of the north-west to the chalk rivers of south-east England could cause substantial ecological damage.
Among the strategies suggested to cut demand are the introduction of water metering, tougher conservation standards for household appliances, and setting water companies mandatory standards for reducing leakage.
The companies may also be charged on a sliding scale for abstracting water from rivers and aquifers.
At present, they pay a flat fee for a license.
Such a move, it is suggested, would encourage water recycling.
Independent 31 July
Pollution: Water
Bathers get ill at "clean" beaches
Unpublished government research has revealed that bathers have caught sewage-related illnesses on two of Britain's cleanest tourist beaches.
Tests conducted at Lyme Regis and Paignton in August 1991 found that bathers were twice as likely to suffer pollution-related ailments including vomiting, diarrhoea, nausea and fever, than people who stayed on the beach.
Yet the amount of sewage bacteria measured at both beaches during the survey was many times lower than the basic European safety level used to define a "clean" beach.
During a month-long survey, Lyme Regis passed the EC's guideline for faecal coliforms which is 20 times tougher than the basic standard.
Fewer than 30 of Britain's 450 designated bathing beaches passed the tougher standard last summer.
Observer 5 July
Pollution: Water
Oil exploration licenses "threaten wildlife sites" 
The UK government's latest offer of oil exploration licenses threatens key wildlife sites, according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
Among the wildlife sites which could be "highly sensitive" to oil pollution, if drilling goes ahead, are the following: Solway Firth; Cardigan Bay; Forth Approaches; Inner Moray Firth; and sections of the English and Bristol Channels.
The RSPB claims that even a small oil spill in these areas could have a disastrous effect on wildlife.
Objections to the licensing were made by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee on behalf of the RSPB, English Nature, Scottish Natural Heritage and the Countryside Council for Wales [the latter three being the government's official conservation advisers].
RSPB information 30 July
Pollution: Water
FoE toxic waste campaign
Friends of the Earth has launched a toxic waste campaign by naming those companies possessing permits to discharge large quantities of toxic metals down sewers.
It is pressing for companies to be required by law to disclose details of trade effluents.
Andrew Lees, campaigns director of FoE, said: "While the public has a right to know about what companies are allowed to put down the sewers, the details of their actual discharges are kept secret" .
He also draws attention to the anomaly in regulatory practice, in that sewerage companies are involved in regulation, yet as private companies have a vested financial interest in accepting other companies' effluents.
The 11 metals concerned include copper, zinc, lead, nickel, cadmium and mercury.
The latter two are on the government's "red list" of particularly toxic substances.
BP, British Aerospace, ICI, Albright and Wilson, Ford Motor Company, Westland Helicopters, Courtaulds and British Steel are among the top 100 polluters, who together have permits to discharge an estimated 1.2 billion litres of industrial waste containing 23.3 tonnes of toxic metals into the sewers every day.
The highest single figure is that of Ectona Fibres, of Workington, which has permission to discharge up to 682 kg of metals per day.
FoE news release, 24 July Independent 24 July Guardian 24 July
Pollution: Water
Toxic algae in Scottish lochs
A number of dogs found poisoned on the shores of a small highland lochs may indicate that Scotland's large deepwater lakes have been affected by phosphate and nitrate pollution.
Toxic algae has previously been confined to lowland shallow lakes surrounded either by an increasing population or intensively farmed land.
A recent survey by Scottish Natural Heritage found that 22 out of 26 lowland lochs were suffering from toxic algae.
Independent 28 June
Pollution: Water
Assessment of Mediterranean pollution
A two-day conference addressing environmental protection in the Mediterranean was held in early July as one of a series of post-UNCED gatherings.
Organised by the Aspen Institute in Italy, the meeting considered the facts that some 120 coastal cities discharge their sewage into the Mediterranean, around 85 per cent of it untreated.
It is estimated that 24 per cent of Mediterranean beaches are unsuitable for swimming because of the sewage risk alone.
Industrial waste includes 120,000 tonnes of mineral oils, 60,000 tonnes of detergents, 3,800 tonnes of lead, 2,400 tonnes of chromium and 100 tonnes of mercury.
Intensive agriculture produces huge quantities of farm chemicals.
Estimates of other chemical discharges include 800,000 tonne of phosphorus, 320,000 tonnes of nitrogenous compounds a year and 120,000 tonnes of phenols.
Related pressures were considered including the conflict between industrial development and environmental risks, and pressure of resources and population increases.
If current predictions prove correct, for example, Algeria's population will have increased by five times between 1950 and 2025.
Greenpeace activists in Athens stress the long-term damage of the massive oil spills taking place in this "enclosed sea" every year.
Between 260 and 300 million tons of crude oil are transported through the Mediterranean every year, and of this an estimated 635,000 tons are spilled.
While the Mediterranean accounts for just one per cent of the waters of the world's oceans, it takes roughly 12.5 per cent of the world's oil spills.
F S Civilis, a marine scientist at the UN's Mediterranean Action Plan based in Athens, thinks it is not so much the oil spillage as the sewage from the coastal cities that is doing the most damage, with consequent algal growth killing off marine organisms.
 "There are some places in the Adriatic where marine life at the sea bottom has been completely wiped out" , says Civilis. * Ecologists gathered in Nice have called for the creation of an "international reserve of the western Mediterranean" , aimed in particular at protecting marine life from over-fishing, notably by the use of driftnets.
South Korean boats fishing for tuna have been singled out for blame.
Middle East Times 30 June — 6 July Financial Times 22 July * Le Monde 19/20 July
Pollution: Water
WWF to monitor "barren" North Sea
The World Wide Fund for Nature is to launch extensive monitoring programme of the North Sea after video cameras supervising an underwater cable-laying operation from Germany to the Shetlands revealed that the sea bottom resembled "a lunar landscape" bereft of life.
European 30 July
Pollution: Water
Rhine salmon to be reintroduced
The EC is joining with countries bordering the Rhine in a plan to reintroduce salmon to the river, six years after it was declared ecologically-dead as a result of the Sandoz chemical plant.
The last wild salmon was caught in the Rhine in 1958.
Eleven-metre high "ladders" are to be built to help the fish bypass weirs at Strasbourg's power stations.
The International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine says that its target of 90 per cent reduction of waste from industry and water treatment plants has to all intents and purposes been met.
But there are continuing problems with fertilizers and pesticides, and residues of polychlorinated biphenyls in fish.
Around 150,000 salmon were caught in the river in 1900, but by 1920 catches had dropped to 30,000.
European 30 July
Pollution: Water
River Seine re-oxygenated
The first of a series of pumps have been installed along the River Seine (France) in an attempt to re-oxygenate the river.
The pumps are intended as an emergency measure while more sewage treatment plants are being built.
Work to install the pumps began in 1990 when heavy rains increased the amount of untreated sewage entering the river, killing many fish.
A further 300 tonnes of fish were suffocated in May, when raw sewage flooded into the river after a storm.
The two prototype pumps, installed in the eastern Paris suburbs of Colombes and Rueil-Malmaison, use liquid oxygen.
New Scientist 18 July
Pollution: Water
London's water worst in UK
The Drinking Water Inspectorate has published figures showing that the Thames Water area has the worst water quality in the country.
A total of 5 per cent of samples taken fall below the Inspectorate's standard, compared to a national average of 1.3 per cent.
Thirty-four of the company's reservoirs were contaminated with faecal coliforms, and drinking water was also found to contain excessive levels of pesticide residues. 80 per cent of its water supply areas failed at one time or another last year to meet statutory requirements.
Thames blamed unacceptably high levels of pesticide use by farmers, local authorities and British Rail for its poor showing.
Guardian 30 July
Pollution: Water
Environmental threats to Torres Strait
The waters of the Torres Strait — a narrow stretch of Pacific containing a series of 150 islands and cays scattered between Cape York and Papua New Guinea — are being threatened by industrial operations, including mining and oil drilling.
The Ok Tedi mine in Papua New Guinea operates without tailings dams, dumping large quantities of waste rock and tailings contaminated with heavy metal into the Fly River.
In 1990 the Australian government began an investigation into heavy metal contamination of various marine species and sediments in the Torres Strait, though results will not be available until mid-1993.
Though there is a moratorium on oil drilling in the Torres Strait until 1995, there are four active oil drilling exploration areas in the Gulf of Papua.
* The Pacific island state of Kiribati is suffering from growing water pollution problems as a result of sewage and animal effluent leaching into its already restricted freshwater supplies.
Friends of the Earth (Fitzroy, Australia) newsletter, June 1992 * Pacific Islands Monthly, July 1992
Pollution: Water
Exxon Valdez skipper's conviction quashed
The misdemeanour conviction of Joseph Hazelwood, Captain of the Exxon Valdez, has been overturned.
After the 1989 Alaskan oil spill, Hazelwood was acquitted on charges of drunkenness and absence from the bridge, but found guilty of "negligent discharge of oil" .
[see ED 23 for accident; for legal action, see EDs 45, 46, 51].
The conviction was quashed on the grounds that, under federal law, a captain who reports a discharge cannot be prosecuted for it.
Alaska's Attorney General described the decision as "extremely unfortunate" , adding: "It's like a murderer shooting someone, calling the police to report it, and receiving immunity." 
Washington Post 10 July
Pollution: Water
Lake Victoria dying
Despite record fish catches in recent years, scientists say that Lake Victoria in Africa is slowly dying.
Twenty years ago, it contained more than 400 species of haplochromines, small fish that kept the algae down and maintained the food chain.
Half these species have disappeared and algae levels have soared.
Only three kinds of fish now exist in the lake, compared to 38 in the 1970s.
Researchers believe that the ecological balance was upset by the decision to introduce the Nile perch into the lake in 1960.
By 1985, Nile perch — a voracious predator that can reach up to 200 pounds — made up 59 per cent of the annual catch.
Environmentalists argue that in the West a similar crisis would result in parliamentary hearings and campaigns by pressure groups.
But because it is happening in Africa it has received little attention.
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, the countries bordering the lake, have been reluctant to invest in preserving a fishing industry that has not yet suffered economically from the ecological damage.
Washington Post 7 July Guardian 8 July
Transport
 "Cat" laws "won't curb Far East's transport pollution" 
Recently-passed laws making catalytic converters compulsory on new cars in Malaysia, Taiwan and Thailand will do little to curb vehicle pollution, because the rapid growth of motor traffic will soon outweigh any gains, according to transport analysts.
The exception is Singapore, where the catalysts' effect will be reinforced by existing restrictions on traffic density, principally achieved through limiting the number of new car registrations.
The region is the fastest-growing car market, with Thai car sales increasing by 30 per cent over the period 1988-91. * Indonesia and China are both reported to be planning similar laws to make "cats" obligatory.
New Scientist 11 July
Transport
Cleaner diesel buses claimed
A joint French-Greek research team's claims to have developed technology which eliminates 90 per cent of particulates emitted by diesel bus engines appear to have been borne out in tests on 110 buses in Athens.
The achievement is based on a ceramic particle filter in the exhaust system, coupled with a new fuel additive, a cerium-based organosoluble substance which lowers the particle combustion threshold from 600 to 480 degrees centigrade, thereby preventing filter meltdown.
The filter was developed by the University of Salonika, with the Rhone-Poulenc chemicals firm supplying the additive.
The Greek government is now recommending that the filters be fitted to all the city's buses, with a view to cutting exhaust pollutants by half in the busier areas.
Tests are also being carried out in Lyon (France) and Seoul (South Korea), and there are plans to market the technology in Brazil in a joint-venture with a local firm.
At present, the filter only works on certain types of diesel engines.
The new technology will add around £3,000 to the cost of the average bus.
Environment Business 15 July
Transport
US to toughen emissions standards
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced plans for tougher exhaust emissions standards in the country's dirtiest cities.
A new "high-tech" test will be introduced into the country's 80 most polluted areas, involving tests for carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides and leaks of fuel vapours, using a computer-activated treadmill to simulate a typical four-minute cycle of city driving.
The new tests will apply to all post-1983 cars; those from 1968 onwards will be required to take the existing basic emissions test, which checks only carbon monoxide and hydrocarbon outputs at idling speed.
The EPA estimate that up to one-third of cars may fail the high-tech test.
Washington Post 14 July
Transport
Germany plans road pricing
The German Transport Ministry has announced that it is planning to introduce road pricing in order to help meet the costs of vehicle pollution and highway maintenance.
Transport Minister Günther Krause is arguing for the introduction by 1996 of an annual fee for motorists of DM 200 — 400 ($133 — $266).
The government is also reported to be planning an increase in petrol tax later this year.
International Herald Tribune 13 July
Transport
Mazda's hydrogen-powered prototype
Japanese car company, Mazda, has produced a hydrogen-powered prototype vehicle, which it claims could go into production in eight years' time.
The 988cc car, aimed primarily at commuters, has a range of 120 miles.
Mazda claim that hydrogen is"a near-ideal, environmentally-safe, inexhaustible energy source.
When burned, it produces no harmful exhaust, merely water."
Environmentalists warn however that the generation of electricity required to produce the hydrogen (by electrolysis) will still cause pollution.
According to Paul Rutishauser of transport consultants, Transnet,"it's not pollution at the point of use but at the point of production that's the question.
Given current sources of electricity, there would be a severe emissions penalty from this supposedly clean fuel."
Green Magazine, August 1992
Transport
Car-pooling in Edinburgh
Edinburgh District Council has become the first UK city authority to promote a car-pooling scheme, following the launch of a commercial venture earlier this year [see ED 55].
The Edinburgh plan, backed by the Scottish Office, involves "journey-matching" which, for a fee of £7, brings together prospective car sharers.
The launch of the scheme follows surveys which showed that 80 per cent of cars entering the city have only one occupant.
A car carrying only one person produces 175 units of carbon per passenger mile, compared to 90 units for a two-person car.
Trains and buses produce an average of 50 units per passenger mile.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) May 92
Transport
Environmental concerns weighed by car buyers
Prospective car buyers are more influenced by a environmental impact than so-called "high performance" , according to a new survey by the Automobile Association.
Asked to list the most important qualities to be considered in purchasing a new car, respondents placed fuel economy fourth on the list (after reliability, all round vision, and accident avoidance), and air pollution control sixth.
Performance came 27th, selected by just 103 of 9,400 respondents.
The survey appears to contradict motor industry claims that customers still rate high performance as one of the most desirable attributes.
Green Magazine, August 1992
Tropical Forests
Sago harvesting in Indonesia "on industrial scale" 
The Indonesian government has embarked on large-scale commercial harvesting of sago palms in Irian Jaya (the western half of New Guinea), threatening the livelihood of tribal people who depend on sago starch as a basic foodstuff.
Sago palms have traditionally been gathered, in the wild, by local people for generations.
Although not grown in plantations, it is effectively tended as a crop.
Recently, however, the Indonesian government has awarded concessions to companies which are making use of trans-migration labour to harvest large quantities for the lucrative export market.
Clashes have broken out in places with the locals.
According to Marcus Colchester of the World Rainforest Movement, the industry "is stealing the food from the very mouths of tribal landowners" .
BBC Wildlife, August 1992
Tropical Forests
Bolivia grants land rights
The Bolivian government has granted limited land rights to five Indian groups over 27,000 square kilometres of Amazonian rainforest.
The area is protected from hunting, logging and forest clearance, and the Indians are empowered to set up their own system of forest guards, with the right to expel trespassers and impose fines and confiscation of goods.
BBC Wildlife, August 1992
Tropical Forests
Oil threat to Ecuador forest
Waorani Indian land in eastern Ecuador is under potential threat from the construction of an oil road and pipeline by the Dallas-based Maxus company.
The road will link seven wells in the area operated by Maxus, together with two owned by the state oil concern, Petroecuador.
Maxus has held talks with a Waorani organization, and has pledged to prevent colonizers coming up the road by setting up a checkpoint system.
But the Waorani remain concerned that the development will lead to settlement and pollution.
Survival International information, July 1992
Tropical Forests
Kalimantan "still burning" 
The forest fires which broke out in Kalimantan, Indonesian Borneo, in 1991 [see ED 52]are still burning, prompting renewed calls for an end to the logging practises which have created the conditions for the fires to thrive.
The Indonesian government's claim that traditional agriculture practised by the Dayak people is responsible has been universally rejected.
Among areas to have come under threat are the Bukit Suharto forest park (where smouldering coal seams have sparked fires in at least eight places) and the Kersik Luwai orchid conservation area.
BBC Wildlife, August 1992
Tropical Forests
Tonga's new national park
Tonga has given national park-style protection to the forests of"Eua island — the richest area, in terms of biodiversity, in the country, containing several endemic species, including a red musk parrot, banded iguana and insular flying fox.
Aid will be provided under the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme.
Pacific Islands Monthly, July 1992
Waste and Recycling
EC proposes recycling legislation
The European Commission has drawn up proposals for compulsory recovery of 90 per cent of all packaging waste.
At present, only 18 per cent of the 50 million tonnes of packaging produced in the Community every year is recovered.
Under the new proposals, unveiled by Environment Commissioner Karel van Miert, 60 per cent of all packaging waste would have to be recycled, and a further 30 per cent re-used as compost or burnt to generate energy.
The Commission also aims to put pressure on industry to cut the amount of non-recyclable packaging.
Industry groups have welcomed the proposal as a way to ensure a "level playing field" across the EC.
Current national laws and proposals vary widely.
Guardian 16 July
Waste and Recycling
EC waste law clarified
The European Court of Justice has issued a ruling clarifying the 1984 EC Directive on the cross-border shipments of hazardous waste.
It has decided that individual states can refuse imports of waste from neighbouring countries, but only if they can prove that the trade is dangerous to their health or environment.
The ruling has led to some confusion, as the barrier appears to contradict the EC principle of free movement of goods across Community borders.
The court case began in 1987, when the Walloon regional government in Belgium sought to block waste imports.
Dutch and German waste hauliers had been using the relatively cheap Walloonian dumps for some years, and Dutch waste firms sued on the grounds of interference with free trade.
There are over 300 dumps in Wallonia, and several have become the focus of concern after leaks of benzene, aniline and vinyl chloride.
The French government is seeking tougher restrictions on the movement of waste.
It has refused to support proposals for a new draft directive, which would specify that waste be treated as any other commodity, and thereby allowed unrestricted movement.
Environment Minister, Ségolène Royal, has warned that this could make France "the dustbin of Europe" , and argued instead that each country should treat its own waste "under the principle of self-sufficiency" .
The Commission is now drafting a directive which will require EC states to dispose of waste as close as possible to where it is generated.
Le Monde 28 May New Scientist 18 July
Waste and Recycling
UK councils to miss targets
Only 36 per cent of UK waste collection authorities are planning to meet the government's target of recycling 25 per cent of household waste by the end of the century, according to a survey by Friends of the Earth.
The majority blame the lack of markets for recycled materials.
FoE is calling on the government to establish a national strategy for reducing and recycling waste.
At present, some 4.4 per cent of household waste is recycled.
Friends of the Earth information, 1 August
Waste and Recycling
London borough to offer kerbside collection
The London borough of Kensington and Chelsea is to be the first local authority in the UK to introduce a kerbside collection service for separated waste.
From next April, residents will be asked to separate out ordinary waste from recyclable materials including glass, plastic, rags, paper and cans.
The borough estimates that recyclable waste amounts to 20,000 of the total 80,000 tonnes generated annually.
The recyclable material will be sold by the Borough at £15.40 per tonne.
Independent 28 July
Waste and Recycling
US toxic dump case settled
Six chemical companies and a property developer have agreed to pay damages of $207 million in what is believed to be the largest settlement of a court case over a toxic waste dump.
The case relates to the 58-acre Brio Superfund dump, 20 miles southeast of Houston.
Toxic chemicals dumped in the unlined landfill site were believed to be responsible for leukaemia and birth defects among children of families living nearby.
The $207 million includes payments to 1,700 families, in addition to the cost of buying up homes next to the dump.
The largest sum of $39 million came from Monsanto, which had sent the most toxic chemicals to landfill.
The settlement was reached out of court, with all defendants denying liability.
Los Angeles Times 21 June