

Agriculture & Food
US "should ban growth hormone" 
The General Accounting Office (GAO — the investigative arm of Congress), has urged the US government to ban the sale of milk and meat from cows treated with bovine growth hormone (BST).
In its report, the GAO said that while there were no direct risks to human health from BST, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had failed to take account of indirect effects in its assessment of the hormone, a genetically engineered product which increases milk yield.
The GAO is concerned about the increased use of antibiotics to treat the higher incidence of mastitis in cows which have been fed with BST.
It argues that the antibiotics could end up in milk and meat and thus affect humans.
Some US dairy farming organizations have been urging the FDA to ban BST for some time.
Curt Rohland, the president of the National Family Farm Coalition, said that the GAO report confirmed many farmers' views that treating cows with a synthetic hormone puts the animals under greater stress, making them more vulnerable to infection, and hence leading to an increased use of antibiotics.
Financial Times 21 August New Scientist 22 August
Agriculture & Food
Challenge to organic food
Organic farming has been challenged on the grounds of both economics and benefits.
Scientists from the British Association have stated that they have found no evidence showing organic food to be safer than food produced under conventional farming methods.
There was growing evidence, however, that wildlife was safer and richer on organically managed lands.
Michael Murphy, a Cambridge economist, reported that in 1989 the average income from organic farms was £1,000, though a few made as much as £8,000 profit.
At that time, the total organic output was less than one fifteenth of 1 per cent of all farmers' output.
He also pointed out that in a survey of 1,000 "organic" farms, only 400 were wholly free of pesticides and fertilisers.
Guardian 25 August
Conservation: Land
Zambezi targeted for water use
The Zimbabwe government has revived a plan to build a 250-kilometre pipeline to supply the city of Bulawayo and its environs with water from the Zambezi river.
The plan, first proposed by British colonial administrators 60 years ago, was included in Zimbabwe's most recent five year plan.
But two years of severe drought in the region have prompted suggestions to give the project a higher priority and to build it over the next two years rather than the next 14, as originally planned.
The pipeline would take water from a gorge between the Victoria Falls and Lake Kariba on the northern border with Zambia and follow the route of a railway line south to Bulawayo, the country's second city.
Overall costs of the project are estimated at between £150 million and £400 million, depending on the pipeline's capacity.
The main problem concerns the cost of pumping the water up the 1000 metre gradient to the city.
To keep costs down (by cutting pumping costs), the plans also provides for the construction of a large reservoir to capture rainwater.
Extracting water from the Zambezi is likely to prove a controversial issue internationally, given that the whole southern Africa region is suffering from the twin pressures of i) sharply rising demand for water due to a growing population and increasing reliance on irrigated agriculture, and ii) severe and prolonged drought.
In particular, abstraction of water is likely to affect the generating capacity of the Lake Kariba dam downstream.
The lake provides most of the electricity for Zambia as well as Zimbabwe.
New Scientist 22 August
Conservation: Land
Plantation forest to be protected
A 70-year old woodland has become the first plantation forest to be declared a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) by English Nature.
Special protection was given because the site provides refuge to one of Britain's rarest birds, the honey buzzard, a migrant from West Africa.
No more than 15 pairs of the bird are in the country, and the pair which has appeared at the site for the last 15 years is the only one in the south-west.
The 1,013-hectare site at Great Haldon, near Exeter, is part of a larger 2,833-hectare forest which also supports many other birds of prey, including sparrowhawks, common buzzards, goshawks, kites and osprey.
Independent 7 September
Conservation: Land
Study on impact of fungus harvesting
US biologists have started a long-term study on how the harvesting of exotic fungi affects the growth of forests in the northwestern United States.
Local conservationists have become increasingly concerned about the impact of the booming trade in wild fungi in the region.
Some varieties are highly prized in Japan and Europe, and a fungus forager can earn a lucrative living.
There are clear signs that supplies of fungi are now dwindling.
The effect of fungi harvesting on the forest environment arises from the symbiotic relationship between the fungi and the trees.
Underground fungi filaments supply nutrients and water to the trees' roots.
Some fungi are essential for young saplings, which rely on the fungal nutrients as they establish themselves.
New Scientist 29 August
Conservation: Species
EC may fund southern African ivory trade
The EC's overseas aid directorate has given conditional approval to a funding proposal for a southern African ivory trading centre, which would flout the existing provisions of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
Four of the region's governments — Botswana, Malawi, Namibia and Zimbabwe, with the tacit backing of South Africa — have established the Southern African Centre for Ivory Marketing (SACIM).
Although they have yet to resume ivory trading, the wildlife authorities in these states argue that a carefully-controlled trade based on the substantial "elephant surplus" in their parks would enable them to fund conservation work, including anti-poaching activities.
Such an interpretation of the concept of "sustainable use" of wildlife has been so far resisted by most CITES members [see ED 56 for details of the last CITES meeting, and the debate surrounding these issues].
The European Bureau for Conservation and Development supports this argument, however, and has submitted funding plans to the EC for consideration.
The proposal involves support for elephant tracking operations, the drawing up of new import and export controls, and a "public relations campaigns with the goal of…reopening markets for legal ivory and other elephant products" .
An elephant product warehouse would be set up in Gaborone (Botswana), to register and sell ivory.
The proposals have drawn fierce criticism from the Environmental Investigation Agency, which argues that EC funds would be better used to develop more environmental tourism in the region.
Observer 9 August
Conservation: Species
Low morale, mismanagement, blamed for Indian tiger crisis
Tiger numbers in Indian reserves are falling rapidly as poaching accelerates, against a background of accusations of corruption, mismanagement and insensitivity to the needs of nearby villagers.
The fall has been particularly marked in the Ranthambhore reserve [see ED 61], but an upsurge in poaching is only partly the cause, according to wildlife campaigners.
Insufficient funding and poor management is blamed for low staff morale, encouraging many of those employed in the park service to co-operate with the poachers.
The Ranthambhore Foundation claims that reserve officials have also been covering up the scale of the problem for fear of being accused of failing in their duties.
The Foundation questions whether Project Tiger — set up by the Indian government and the World Wide Fund for Nature in the early 70s — can be termed a success, and suggests that tiger numbers in India now might be as low as when the project began.
The Foundation's director, Valmik Thapar, also criticized the project's failure to take into account the needs of local people living on the fringes of the reserves, some of whom were forcibly relocated outside the boundaries when the parks were created.
Their requirements for food, fuel and fodder were not adequately considered, he argues, with the result that many now feel wholly alienated from the Project's aims.
Independent 9 August BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Conservation: Species
Dolphins to be protected by Council of Europe
An agreement will be signed in October by the Council of Europe to protect small sea mammals, of which dolphins are the most endangered.
The mammals will be given "conservation status" and national governments will be encouraged to enforce the protection order.
An estimated 6,000-10,000 dolphins die every year in Mediterranean drift nets, which also kill many whales, sea turtles and sharks.
Greenpeace is mounting a campaign against drift nets and Xavier Pastor, the Mediterranean co-ordinator, comments that some 800-900 of the 1,200 boats which regularly use drift nets come from Italy.
European 20-23 August
Conservation: Species
Norway "must choose between whaling and Europe" 
The Norwegian government must choose between continuing whaling and pursuing its aim of joining the European Community, according to EC Fisheries Commissioner, Manuel Martin.
At the recent meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC), Norway announced its intention to resume commercial whaling, in apparent contravention of IWC rules.
The EC intends to join the IWC in its own right, thereby ensuring that IWC rules are enshrined in EC law.
However, there is some confusion as to the applicability of the IWC whaling ban to Norway.
One IWC official has pointed out that, since Norway formally objected to the moratorium when originally passed in 1982, it is allowed to exempt itself from the terms.
It is also unclear whether the EC will be permitted to join the IWC, since the organization's 1946 founding charter stipulates that only governments can accede.
New Scientist 15 August
Conservation: Species
Spain's eco-pilots cause flamingo chick deaths
Spanish pilots working for the government-run National Institute for the Conservation of Nature (ICONA) have been blamed for scaring flamingo parents off their nests in the Ebro Delta nature park.
The incident, which caused the deaths of hundreds of flamingo chicks, has been highlighted by the Natural Heritage Defence League as an example of lack of coordination between public environmental organisations.
Nesting for the first time in the delta since the 16th century, the flamingos had flown up the coast from the southern province of Malaga after finding their traditional nesting ground in the Fuente de Piedra lake had dried up after a prolonged drought.
Biologists monitoring the nests saw one of the ICONA seaplanes carry out at least two low-flying sweeps over the nesting area, scooping up water from the delta.
New Scientist 5 September
Conservation: Species
Japanese crested ibis dying out
The crested ibis faces certain extinction in Japan after attempts to breed from the sole remaining pair have failed.
The poisonous effects of pollution from farm chemicals is blamed for the species' demise.
The bird became a protected species in 1960 and numbers continued to drop until the remaining five ibises were taken into captivity by Japan's Environment Agency in 1981.
Two died shortly afterwards and the third one died in 1986.
In April next year, the government will introduce a rare species bill, similar to Britain's Wildlife and Countryside Act, but the emphasis is said by Cecelia Song of the World Wide Fund for Nature to be more on development than on environmental protection.
New Scientist 5 September
Conservation: Species
Violence breaks out over Pyrenees' bears
Violent clashes have broken out in the French Pyrenees between protestors opposed to a new road tunnel and some local people in the Aspe Valley.
The protestors are concerned that the construction of the tunnel and its approach road threatens the future of France's last remaining colony of brown bears [see EDs 45, 45, 49].
An "international brigade" of young environmentalists who have taken direct action against the construction work have in turn been attacked by a "valley militia" of locals who support the development.
Extra police have been drafted into the area.
The local administration strongly supports the road scheme, which will improve links with Spain, arguing that it will help reverse economic decline.
Le Monde 11 August
Conservation: Species
Spain acts to protect bustard
The Spanish government has designated two environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs) on the steppes of Castilla y Léon province, to help ensure the survival of the great bustard.
The steppes support around 65 per cent of the remaining worldwide bustard population.
Designation as ESAs should release EC funds to enable the continuation of traditional, environment-friendly extensive farming techniques.
However, plans remain for the construction of major irrigation works — with possible support from EC structural funds — which would transform the habitat.
International Council for Bird Preservation information, August 1992 BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Conservation: Species
Countryside reform campaign
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has launched a campaign for the countryside which calls on the government to have a full package of countryside reforms in place by June 1993 when such plans must be submitted to the EC.
The RSPB recommends setting up a conservation programme with a target of one million hectares of surplus farmland to be managed for wildlife by the year 2000.
It urges the government to designate 30 per cent of the UK as Environmentally Sensitive Areas, to give farmers greater incentive to manage the countryside for wildlife.
The organization warns that continuing destruction of wildlife areas has put 40 farmland bird species under threat, including the barn owl (whose numbers have declined by over 50 per cent in Britain since the 1930s).
Even common birds such as swallows and skylarks are declining.
Wildlife habitats that have been particularly badly affected by agricultural changes include a total of 174,000 kilometres of hedges destroyed since 1984, 72 per cent of heathlands lost since 1830, and more than 60 Welsh Sites of Special Scientific Interest damaged by overgrazing between 1989 and 1991.
RSPB information 9 September
Conservation: Species
Red squirrel may be extinct within 10 years
The first survey of both private and state-owned forests confirms the apparently-inexorable decline in the red squirrel population.
Combining the Forestry Commission's annual squirrel statistics with information from almost half of the 2,300 private companies which own 60 per cent of Britain's woodlands, the survey reveals that the imported grey squirrels are continuing to encroach on the red squirrel's territory [see ED 58, 61].
The Commission is urging the government to allow poisoning of the grey squirrel nationwide in an effort to save the native species and to reduce the damage wreaked by grey squirrels on forests.
More than 65,000 grey squirrels were poisoned in 1991 but the law forbids bait to be laid in woods inhabited by both species.
Observer 23 August
Conservation: Species
Song thrush decline "due to chemicals" 
Increased use of chemical pesticides is causing a steep decline in the numbers of song thrushes in Britain, according to a survey by the British Trust for Ornithology.
The thrushes are thought to be harmed by consuming slugs and snails which have been treated with molluscicides, whose use has grown by 900 per cent in recent years.
The Trust is calling for research into the chemicals' effects.
BTO information, 11 August
Conservation: Species
Acid rain killing off Welsh river trout
Trout are disappearing from many Welsh rivers as a result of acid rain, according to a long-term study of the catchment area of the Llyn Brianne reservoir in the west of the principality.
The problem is exacerbated by the increase in conifer plantations.
Fir tree needles "capture" acid droplets from low cloud, drawing it into the soil.
Farm drainage ditches ensure that water runs directly into streams rather than being filtered through the soil.
Lime sprayed onto the surrounding hillsides neutralized the acidity, but risked disrupting wetland ecology.
Computer modelling studies suggest that a reduction of 60-90 per cent in acid rain will be necessary before the area's fish and associated wildlife, including fishing birds, can recover.
New Scientist 15 August
Conservation: Species
Record breeding season for rare British birds
A combination of ideal weather conditions and careful management of protected sites has resulted in a record breeding season for several of Britain's rarest bird species, according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
Among those which have reproduced in large numbers are birds of prey, including ospreys, marsh harriers and red kites — the latter having their most successful year for a century, with 79 breeding pairs in Wales raising 93 chicks.
Other species, including woodlarks, stone curlews and little terns, have also done well, although some, including the corncrake and golden eagle, did less well than hoped.
* The heron breeding population in the UK has reached its highest level since 1928, at around 6,000 pairs.
RSPB information, 11 August BTO News, August 1992
Conservation: Species
Rare species added to UK list
Fourteen new animals and 73 new plants have been added to the UK's list of protected species.
The animals include the pink sea fan, lagoon sea slug and silver water beetle.
Among the plants are meadow clary, silver centaury and early gentian.
It is now illegal to pick them without a licence.
BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Economics & Industry
IBM produces conflicting audits
Conflicting pictures of IBM UK's environmental performance have emerged from two separate green audits.
One, carried out by the Sustainability consultancy, portrayed the company in a very favourable light, and IBM published the report in full.
It subsequently emerged, however, that its remit was restricted to IBM's "management processes" .
A parallel audit of the company's technical record, carried out internally, is believed to have revealed a number of shortcomings, focusing on the low level of use of recycled materials in computer manufacture.
But, citing commercial interest, IBM have refrained from making this public.
The Sustainability report makes no mention of the other audit, despite the fact that its author, Sustainability director John Elkington, was aware that it was taking place.
There are also conflicting accounts of the terms of the audit.
Elkington denies that his recommendations were based on the BATNEEC principle (Best Available Techniques Not Entailing Excessive Cost), at the expense of full environmental accountability.
IBM UK's environmental operations chairman, John Gillett, claims however that BATNEEC was indeed the basis for the audit.
Sustainability's recommendations for action have also come under scrutiny, since they do not cover some of the deficiencies identified in the report, including the low-level of recycled materials use, and the company's preference for road, rather than rail, as means of product transport.
Environment Business 9 September
Economics & Industry
Corporate environmental information often "of little value" 
The number of companies incorporating environmental statements into their reports has more than doubled over the past year — but many of the statements provide little hard information.
The Edinburgh-based monthly monitoring service, Company Report, published the results of a survey of 570 reports, which revealed that the proportion containing environmental statements had risen from 10 per cent to 23 per cent since 1991.
Of these, however, 12 per cent were "usually vague or meaningless, lacking any real information content" .
A total of 3 per cent referred to independent green audits, but none commented on what measures, if any, had been taken to deal with the audits' recommendations.
Just three companies — ICI, RTZ and Thames Water — detailed the costs of the environmental protection measures which they had adopted.
Car makers Ford, and the leisure corporation Grand Metropolitan, were singled out as among the better examples, while statements by British Airways, BAT, Hanson and Allied Lyons were described as "of little value" .
Financial Times 2 September Environment Business 9 September
Environmental Politics
Assessment of pollution in Poland
The Polish central statistical office has released data on the level of pollution in the country.
It describes 27 regions and 80 towns as "ecologically endangered" .
The regions most badly affected included the main population centres of Upper Silesia, Gdansk, Lodz and Bydgoszcz; in total one in three Poles lives in such areas.
The office reports that the birth rate in danger areas is less than half that in other regions, and in Lodz the death rate is higher than the birth rate.
It also mentions particularly damaging polluters, such as the Belchatow power station which has blighted the surrounding area with emissions of gases 20 times higher than in other danger areas.
Since 1989 the emission of pollutants has in fact fallen, but only because the economy has collapsed.
Polskie Radio (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts), 19 August
Environmental Politics
Assessment of pollution in Lithuania
The Lithuanian government's report to the UN Conference on Environment and Development provides a detailed inventory of the state of the country's environment.
Outlining a legacy of fifty years of development under Soviet communism, the report concludes that "an alien, totalitarian and centralized management system ruined Lithuania's economy [and]devastated its environment" .
Almost every part of Lithuania's industry has ecological shortcomings.
It consumes twice as much energy, water and other raw materials, per unit of production, as most industrialized countries.
The greatest sources of pollution are cars, power stations, the chemical industry and agriculture.
Specific mention is made of, among others, the Ignalina nuclear power station, which is badly constructed and lacks proper safety procedures; the Akmene cement works, which causes respiratory diseases and dermatitis among local people; the Jonava fertilizer plant, the site of a major accident in 1989 involving the emission of 7,000 tons of ammonia; and the Mazeikiai oil refinery, which emits 62,000 tons of pollutants, including phenol and acetone, directly into the air every year.
Other serious environmental problems highlighted by the report are groundwater pollution, inadequate waste-water treatment, soil erosion, and dumping of hazardous waste.
Baltic Independent 14-20 August
Global Warming
Use of renewable energy "must triple" to meet EC carbon targets
A massive increase in the contribution currently made by renewable sources to Europe's overall energy needs is required if the Community is to meet its goal of stabilising carbon dioxide output by the year 2000, according to the European Commission.
Although it accepts that a carbon tax would provide some incentive to conserve energy and invest in renewables, the Commission has proposed the revised ALTENER programme in order to stimulate demand for renewable energy, at a proposed budget of ECU 40 million for its five-year span starting January 1993.
Among its aims are a threefold increase in the generation of electricity from renewable sources, with particular focus on the potential for biofuels.
The programme suggests that these could achieve a 5 per cent share of total vehicle fuel consumption, through the production of 11 million tonnes of fuel per annum from the seven million hectares of land taken out of food crop production under the EC's agriculture policy.
Such land could, in theory, be used to produce up to 30 million tonnes of fuel, with further advantages of biodiesel being its sulphur-free composition, its "extremely positive" energy balance, and its price competitiveness provided it is tax-free.
In the short term, the Commission will concentrate its efforts largely on biomass, biofuels, energy-from-waste, wind power and small hydro power, with funds available for such purposes as drawing up national inventories on the use of renewables, creating uniformity of standards and implementing a statistical recording system.
Providing the European Parliament does not delay the proposal's passage, Commission officials expect the Council of Energy ministers to approve ALTENER at its November 13 meeting.
Environment Business 9 September
Global Warming
German carbon dioxide cuts "too ambitious" 
The German government's aim of for a reduction of carbon dioxide emissions by 30 per cent on 1987 levels by the year 2005 is likely to fall short of expectations.
A report on the development of Germany's energy sector to 2010, prepared by Basel-based consultants Prognos, concludes that a reduction of just 10.4 per cent can be expected.
The conclusion is supported by a Research Ministry strategy paper, which argues that only the construction of eight new 1,300MW nuclear power stations in conjunction with the increased use of coal/gas combination technology will enable Germany to achieve the desired reduction.
The German government is pushing the European Commission for the introduction of a carbon tax, arguing that it should not be dependent on the co-operation of the USA and Japan, which would only postpone its introduction indefinitely.
Some of the revenue from the tax — likely to reach a total DM40 billion (£14 billion) annually in Germany — is earmarked to pay for German coal subsidies when the existing system expires after 1995.
Environment Business 9 September
Global Warming
Effects of rising sea levels in Britain
Research published by Friends of the Earth suggests that rising sea levels could make severe flooding a frequent occurrence along the south and east coast of Britain in the next century.
On behalf of FoE, three environmental scientists from the University of East Anglia have calculated that by the year 2030 sea levels in the southeast of England will be between 28 and 84 centimetres higher than today.
This figure is higher than the average sea level rise calculated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change because the east side of England is already slowly sinking due to geological movements.
The scientists warn of the potential threat to towns, beaches, golf courses, marinas and nature reserves along the coast.
They estimate that extremely high sea levels, which historically occur roughly once every century, could be expected more than once every five years in many seaside towns by 2030.
Independent 10 August Guardian 10 August
Global Warming
Norway's call for carbon taxes
Norway's Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland has called for tough carbon taxes to protect the global environment at the biennial Offshore Northern Seas oil and gas conference in Stavanger.
Norway, which produces more than two million barrels of oil per day, has introduced its own carbon taxes, making its own petrol prices among the dearest in the world.
But other oil producing countries have claimed such taxes only contribute to the state revenues of rich, oil-consuming countries while reducing the earnings of developing countries dependent on oil exports.
Financial Times 26 August
Global Warming
Samples of 17th century air?
After two years of careful preparation, scientists at the NASA Langley Research Centre in Virginia, United States, are about to extract air samples from three sealed lead coffins interred in the 1680s.
Provided the seals have remained intact and the air is uncontaminated, analysis of the samples is expected to give a unique insight into the composition of the atmosphere at that time, and consequently provide an indication of changes which have occurred in the last three centuries, the period of worldwide industrialization and the extensive burning of fossil fuels.
A scientist at the centre said that finding uncontaminated air in any of the three coffins would be the "Rosetta Stone of the atmosphere" .
The air samples could give scientists vital information about long-term changes in the chemical composition of the atmosphere.
The only other clues available on this aspect until now have been air bubbles in polar ice caps, but there are doubts about how closely the composition of the bubbles matches that of the atmosphere at the time they were trapped.
Lead coffins were very rare in colonial America, and could only be afforded by the very rich.
Only two others have been discovered in North America, and they had been opened in the 18th century.
New Scientist 29 August
Global Warming
Peat bog destruction boosts greenhouse effect
The destruction of peat bogs is contributing to global warming, according to a report commissioned by Friends of the Earth and prepared by the Wetland Ecosystems Research Group of Exeter University.
Like oil, gas and coal fields, peat bogs act as vast carbon stores.
Digging them up for fuel or compost, or draining and ploughing them for farming and forestry, causes significant emissions of carbon dioxide to the air.
The report estimates that exploitation of bogs in Britain results in carbon dioxide emissions equivalent to 40 per cent of that produced by the country's transport vehicles.
Independent 15 August
Nuclear Power
Bradwell reactor life extended
The Nuclear Installations Inspectorate has approved an extension to the life of the Bradwell reactor in Essex.
The decision has been strongly criticized by environmental groups, who argue that Bradwell is one of the dirtiest nuclear reactors in Britain.
Its radiation emissions are said to be a severe health risk to local residents.
Bradwell, a Magnox-type reactor opened in 1962 with an original life span of 30 years, will now continue in operation until 1998.
Following the successful application, Nuclear Electric, the government-owned nuclear power generating company, is expected to apply for similar extensions to more of its seven ageing Magnox plants.
Independent 11 August
Nuclear Power
Plutonium ship sails for Europe
Despite a worldwide protest campaign, the first in a series of shipments of plutonium from Europe to Japan to supply the local nuclear-power industry is going ahead.
A Japanese freighter left Yokohama in mid-August, with its name and port of registration blanked out, to pick up one tonne of plutonium extracted from spent nuclear fuel at the Cap La Hague reprocessing plant in France.
The shipments, which are expected to transport up to 30 tonnes of plutonium from Cap La Hague and Sellafield (UK) to Japan over the next 20 years, have aroused international protest.
Greenpeace and other environmental organizations criticize them because of the risk both of accidents and the possibility of nuclear material falling into the hands of terrorists or governments intent on developing nuclear weapons.
The Indonesian and South African governments have banned the convoys from their waters on safety grounds.
New Scientist 29 August
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl reactor fears
The Ukrainian environment minister, Yuri Shcherbak, has warned that the concrete shell encasing the damaged Chernobyl nuclear reactor is cracking and that the plant is now "the most dangerous nuclear facility on earth" .
He quoted "dramatic data" which had been presented to a recent meeting of a committee charged with deciding the future of the shell.
Times 9 August
Nuclear Power
Bulgaria to stop uranium mining
The Bulgarian government has decided to end the mining of uranium by 1995, according to press reports.
The Ministry of Finance has set aside funds to cover workers' back pay and the mines' debts.
The government intends to ask foreign organizations to provide technical and financial assistance to rehabilitate the polluted areas around the mines.
As one example of the need for urgent action, the magazine 168 Chasa has reported that an abandoned mine near Sofia is filling with water which in turn is contaminating groundwater.
BTA news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 11 August
Nuclear Power
Tests said to have wide-ranging natural effects
Underground nuclear tests not only cause displacement in the earth, they also cause landslides, earthquakes, floods, typhoons, hurricanes and tidal waves, according to Ikram Karimov, deputy director of the Azerbaijani Institute of Geology.
Karimov claims to have discovered a direct correlation between nuclear tests conducted at the Soviet testing site of Semipalatinsk over the years and earthquakes throughout the former Soviet Union.
Similarly, he claims that a powerful test in China in May was to blame for various natural disasters in Central Asia and an earthquake in California.
He also attributes other abnormal natural phenomena, such as the mass beaching of whales on the Australian coast earlier this year, to the effects of nuclear tests.
ITAR-TASS news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 13 August
Nuclear Power
Dumping threatens public health in Kazakhstan
A senior government official in Kazakhstan has warned of the growing danger posed by unsupervised dumping of industrial waste including components or instruments with powerful sources of ionizing radiation.
In the past radioactive waste was transported to Russia for burial.
Now, according to V. Slavgorodsky,"Russia is refusing to accept the dangerous transports and we do not have any burial facilities of our own.
The situation is extremely alarming and continuing to deteriorate."
Kazakhstan currently has one radioactive waste burial site, but in scientists' opinion it is unsafe.
The Kazakh government has recognized the problem and has accepted a programme for the construction of appropriate burial sites.
But as yet it has not approved a timetable or set aside funds for construction.
Izvestiya (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 11 August
Nuclear Power
CIA warns of problems in Russia
Robert Gates, the director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), has told a Senate select committee that forty years of inadequate nuclear waste handling have created high risk of nuclear disasters in the former Soviet Union.
In his view Russia and the other successor states will need years and billions of dollars to clean up and monitor radioactive pollution.
"The chemical and energy sectors…face the highest risk, but serious breakdowns could occur in railroads, civil aviation and nuclear power plants.
In some cases, accidents have already occurred", he said.
Gates based his assessment on data which the CIA has collected on the Soviet nuclear power programme since the first Soviet reactor was commissioned in 1954.
Washington Post 17 August
Ozone layer
UNDP assistance announced
Technical assistance will be provided by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to help 22 developing countries replace and phase out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), halons and other ozone-depleting substances.
Financed by an interim multilateral fund set up by the Montreal Protocol on the Protection of the Ozone Layer [see ED 59/60; 35/36], the work aims to help compensate developing countries for the technical and financial costs of switching to substitute chemicals or processes.
Bangladesh, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, Iran, Kenya, Sri Lanka and Trinidad and Tobago will be helped to phase out ozone-depleting substances, and related technical assistance will be provided to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Ghana, Jordan, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Uruguay and Venezuela.
UN information release, July-August
Ozone layer
Green fridge runs into trouble in Germany
A company in eastern Germany which plans to make a fridge free of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) is struggling financially and is in danger of being liquidated.
This despite the fact that DKK Scharfenstein, based near Chemnitz, has more than 43,000 advance orders for the environment-friendly fridge.
The "Green Freeze" replaces the usual CFC refrigerants with a mixture of propane and butane, which have no effect on the ozone layer and do not promote global warming.
The walls of the fridge need to be slightly thicker because the insulation is not as effective as CFC-blown foam.
The design has been developed by Harry Rosin of the Dortmund Hygienic Institute.
He initially offered the technology to major manufacturers like Bosch, Bauknecht and Siemens, but all rejected it.
He then contacted Greenpeace, which put him in touch with Scharfenstein.
The main outstanding problem with the design is that energy consumption levels are too high to meet energy efficiency standards applying in Germany, the United States and other countries.
The German Electro-technology Federation, the association of appliance manufacturers, has described the new fridge as "inefficient" and "dangerous" .
The federation has in turn been accused by Greenpeace of making false claims in an effort to maintain the market dominance of their own models.
New Scientist 22 August
Pollution: Air
EPA will not tighten standard for urban ozone
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced that it will not be tightening the standard for low-level ozone, the principal ingredient of smog.
Yet EPA officials have admitted that the decision — delayed some seven years beyond the statutory deadline — takes no account of the latest research on the impact of ozone on health.
Nor did the agency consult a commission of independent scientists set up by Congress with the specific task of advising the EPA on such matters.
US researchers have found that healthy people exposed to ozone in laboratories for several hours lost 40 per cent of their lung power.
Reactions are even more severe when exposed to ozone in the open air.
Animal studies have shown that chronic long-term exposure to ozone causes lung scarring similar to that associated with cigarette smoking.
The EPA claims that its study was hampered by pressure of time in meeting an August 1 deadline set by a federal court decree, imposed after the American Lung Association sued the EPA last October in an attempt to force a new review.
Washington Post 4 August
Pollution: Air
Indonesia produces "clean coal" 
An Indonesian mining company, PT Adaro, has started mining coal with a very low sulphur content from a huge deposit in southern Kalimantan (Borneo).
The coal, said to the cleanest ever mined, is being marketed as "enviro-coal" .
Experts have described the coal as similar to natural gas in terms of its sulphur dioxide content.
Its composition obviates the need for sulphur-removing equipment in power stations, which produce additional carbon dioxide.
The new coal is expected to be used primarily for blending with higher-sulphur or dirtier types.
The reason why the coal is so "clean" is unclear, but may be due in part to the very wet conditions in the region over the millions of years during which the coal was formed.
International Herald Tribune 11 August
Pollution: Air
Health risk from air pollution
Britain's Liberal Democrats have called for urgent measures to tackle the health risks posed by air pollution, including more investment in public transport to cut down on exhaust emissions, the acceptance of World Health Organisation (WHO) monitoring guidelines, and an increase in air pollution monitoring stations.
Asthma is one of the few diseases on the increase in Britain said Simon Hughes, the party's environment spokesman.
His own analysis of government figures suggested that the number of prescriptions for the treatment of asthma had more than doubled to 27 million a year over the last decade.
According to his calculations, more than 20.5 million people,— over a third of the population — are in groups considered to be at risk from air pollution — those aged under 14, people over 65, pregnant women and unborn babies [see ED 58, 61].
Hughes pointed to the fact that there are only 12 nitrogen oxide monitoring stations in the UK, compared with 200 in Germany, and 1,337 in Japan.
He called on the government to triple the number of existing monitoring stations, to ensure that each town and city with more than 250,000 people was monitored for all known pollutants.
Independent 5 September
Pollution: Water
Gulf War pollution not as a bad as expected
The huge oil spills off Kuwait and Saudi Arabia and the burning of oil wells in Kuwait during the Gulf War in early 1991 did less damage to the marine environment than had been feared, according to scientists.
A team from the International Atomic Energy Agency's Marine Environment Laboratory examined samples of sediments, molluscs and fish along the Gulf coast from June to October 1991.
They found that oil pollution around Bahrain was actually less than before the war.
They suggest that this was because virtually no oil tankers frequented the northern Gulf during the seven months between the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the end of the war, when Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil production was subjected to a worldwide embargo.
The team also concluded that severe pollution was confined largely to 250 miles of the Saudi coastline south of Kuwait, that most of the oil in the spills had been digested by microbes, and that sea-bed levels of cancer-causing chemicals produced by burning oil were no higher than those found in estuaries in the United States or Britain.
Responding to the findings, Greenpeace said that it would be wrong to conclude that the Gulf had escaped a major environmental catastrophe.
It pointed to reports that catches of shrimp (the Gulf's most important food source) had fallen dramatically since the war.
There was still an urgent need for an international effort to clean up the Gulf and to study the long-term effects of the spills and the burning, the organization said.
Independent 20 August International Herald Tribune 21 August
Pollution: Water
UK companies to monitor their own pollution
The Department of the Environment has announced that in future industrial companies will routinely monitor their own effluent discharges for toxic chemicals under guidelines laid down by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP).
The latter will carry out a small number of random spot checks to verify a company's samples.
The new measures are part of the government's policy of "integrated pollution control" , under which many of the powers of the National Rivers Authority (NRA), an independent statutory body, are being transferred to the inspectorate, an arm of the Department of the Environment.
The change has been sharply criticized by environmentalists.
According to Tim Birch of Greenpeace,"asking polluters to police themselves is ridiculous.
We are now back to a situation where industry is both poacher and gamekeeper".
Greenpeace and others also point out that the HMIP has only a small team of monitors and will not be able to perform the tasks of the NRA in this sphere.
Independent 22 August
Pollution: Water
Faroese whale-eaters poisoned by mercury
Children in the Faroe Islands have been discovered to have alarmingly-high levels of mercury present in their tissues, apparently as a result of their mothers consuming meat from pilot whales during pregnancy.
A survey carried out by local health workers showed that about 20 per cent of Faroese children had levels of mercury in excess of the safety limit as set by the International Programme on Chemical Safety.
[The Faroese has earlier appealed to Greenpeace — which had strongly campaigned against the islanders' traditional whale-hunt — for help in countering pollution which they claimed were making the whales inedible — see ED 49/50.]
New Scientist 15 August
Pollution: Water
Pollution increasing in North Sea fisheries
An unpublished report for the German government obtained by Greenpeace show that levels of heavy metals are rising in the central North Sea area, including the Dogger Bank, a major fishing ground.
The report blames industrial discharges from British waterways, including the Tyne, Firth of Forth and Humber, for a "significant" amount of the pollution.
The findings expose the failure of North Sea states to meet commitments to reduce industrial pollution entered into under a convention signed in Paris in 1974.
They also contradict the British government's long-standing claim that pollution is worst along the coastlines and falls off further out to sea.
The research, carried out by scientists from the University of Bremen, reveals that seawater levels of cadmium, aluminium, manganese and nickel rose between 1986 and 1990, while levels of lead, iron, copper and zinc remained virtually unchanged.
High levels of cadmium, lead and chromium were also found in sediment in the Dogger Bank.
Observer 9 August
Pollution: Water
Greenpeace attacks polluters
Greenpeace has accused British industry of being the largest polluter of the north-east Atlantic region, and the UK government of licensing the destruction of rivers and seas.
In a report on marine pollution, the organization states that 12,000 pipes have been licensed to discharge industrial effluent.
These allow some 5,000 tonnes of toxic materials to flow into the seas every year under a policy enshrined in the 1990 environment white paper which accepted that "rivers have to be used for waste disposal by industry" .
The report quotes government figures which show that 40 per cent of toxic metals entering the north-east Atlantic comes from British rivers.
It identifies eight pollution "hot spots" at the mouths of the Thames, Humber, Tees, Tyne, Wear, Mersey, Severn and Solent waterways.
Greenpeace also accuses the government of not complying with international agreements signed by Britain, such as the 1974 Paris Convention on cleaning up the North Sea.
The Department of the Environment has rejected the report, claiming that it contained misleading information and that the existing statutory framework was effective in controlling pollution.
Guardian 11 August
Pollution: Water
 "Lethal cocktail" discharged into Scottish waters
A "lethal cocktail" of pollutants, including oil, toxic organochlorines and heavy metals, are being poured into Scotland's estuaries and coastal environments, according to Greenpeace.
Oil and chemical plants around the Firth of Firth, in particular the large British Petroleum and ICI plants, are the "major offenders" .
In this context Greenpeace also attacked the record of Scotland's river purification boards for being less effective in enforcing legal guidelines than the National Rivers Authority (NRA), its counterpart in England and Wales.
Independent 21 August
Pollution: Water
NRA prosecution record
The 1991/92 annual report of the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has shown that it prosecuted and won less than 2 per cent of cases of river pollution reported during the period.
The report shows that 29,524 pollution incidents were reported in England and Wales in 1991/92 and that the NRA successfully prosecuted just 536 cases.
The success rate for prosecuting in the worst pollution cases was much higher — 115 out of 338 incidents.
Both figures constitute a slight increase over the previous year.
The total fines levied more than doubled over the previous year, from £428,000 to £1.05 million.
Environment Business 12 & 26 August
Pollution: Water
UK water price warning
Ofwat, the water industry watchdog in England and Wales, has warned that water bills could double in real terms by the year 2005 because of the cost of meeting environmental regulations.
Ofwat estimates that water companies will have to spend between £28 billion and £43 billion between 1995 and 2005 to improve the quality of drinking water and clean up beaches and sewage discharges.
The estimates are much higher than those made in the past because of the need to comply with new, stricter EC environmental directives.
The figures are included in a report which aims to open a debate among water companies, consumers and regulators, about the desired level of water quality and the way improvements should be financed.
Financial Times 14 August
Pollution: Water
Baltic improving
Organochlorine pollution of the Baltic Sea is declining.
Japanese and Polish scientists have studied samples of cod-liver oil taken from fish and found that levels of DDT had fallen from 25 micrograms per gram in 1974 to 3 micrograms in 1989, and levels of PCBs had fallen from 18 to 7 micrograms over the same period.
Despite these improvements, however, the scientists warn that the Baltic continues to be "imperiled by the long-term accumulation of toxic chemicals" .
New Scientist 22 August
Pollution: Water
Netherlands to protect North Sea
The Dutch cabinet has agreed a plan to declare the country's North Sea territorial waters a protected environmental zone.
Legislation will be put forward to allow stricter controls on chemical dumping and sewage and fertiliser discharges (the latter from farms along the coast and rivers).
The aim is to reduce pollution levels to those of the 1930s.
Times 22 August
Pollution: Water
Paper mills "flouting effluent limits" 
Paper mills in Britain which are breaking the law by discharging more effluent into rivers than permitted are nearly all escaping prosecution, according to a report published by the Women's Environmental Network, an independent pressure group.
According to the report, 42 of the 56 mills investigated (out of a total of 100 in Britain) had exceeded their discharge limits at least once in the two years to March 1992, and the eight worst offenders had done so on at least half the occasions when effluent was tested.
Only five of the 42 offending mills had been successfully prosecuted.
The report, the second of its kind, said that the situation had deteriorated; the percentage of mills breaching their limits had risen from 65 per cent before 1990, to 75 per cent in the 1990-92 period.
Guardian 2 September
Pollution: Water
Rivers main source of sea pollution
River pollution is the main source of the zinc, copper and lead being discharged into the seas around Britain, the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has confirmed.
According to the NRA's figures, 200,000 tons of nitrogen, 32,000 tons of orthophosphates, 3,000 tons of zinc, 500 tons of copper (in the latter two cases half of the total), 340 tons of lead (nearly three quarters of the total) and five tons of mercury flowed into the sea in 1990.
Around one third of the heavy metals were discharged into the River Weaver, a tributary of the Mersey in northwest England.
The NRA's chief scientist, Jan Pentreath, said that heavy metals and pesticides had to be controlled more effectively because of their toxic effect on the marine environment.
Greenpeace's scientific director, Susan Mayer, warned that discharges of toxic waste into rivers and from there into the sea could soon trigger "marine meltdown" a large-scale collapse of fish and sea mammal populations".
Pollution is likely to have played a key role in the mass die-offs of seals, dolphins and fish and other natural disasters in recent years, she claimed.
Guardian 27 August
Pollution: Water
Thai resort clean-up
Thailand's two most popular tourist resorts, Phuket and Pattaya, have been declared pollution-control zones under the new Environmental Protection Act which came into force in June.
National and local government authorities now have sweeping powers to control development in the two resorts and to force hotels and other businesses to carry out clean-up measures.
A renewable environmental fund of 5 billion baht (US$200 million) has been set up under the new act.
Three quarters of the first tranche has been set aside for cleaning up Phuket and Pattaya.
The first priority is to provide sewage treatment facilities.
Plans to carry out similar programmes in other resorts will depend on the success of the first two schemes.
The Thai tourist industry, an important foreign currency earner, has been hard hit by media reports of environmental pollution in the main resorts, with criticism focusing on the discharge of untreated sewage into rivers and the sea.
New Scientist 15 August Far Eastern Economic Review 13 August
Pollution: Water
Amoco Cadiz pays up again
The Amoco Corporation, owner of the Amoco Cadiz tanker which caused one of the worst oil spills in history when it ran aground off the French coast in 1978, has agreed to make a further payment relating to the accident.
The Amoco Corporation has just agreed to pay compensation of 2.5 million francs to a syndicate of fishermen, who lost earnings when six boats from the port of Sibiril in northern Brittany were confined to port for a month.
The settlement is in addition to the much larger sums "a total of 1.3 billion francs" which Amoco finally agreed to pay the French state and local authorities after a 14-year legal battle in the US courts.
The case ended in April 1992 when the company decided not to appeal against an appeal court ruling made three months earlier [see ED 55].
Several other independent groups have sought and obtained compensation payments, but this was the largest so far.
It is estimated that around two-fifths of the settlement will be needed to pay off the syndicate's American lawyers (who had taken on the case on a "no win, no pay" basis).
Le Monde 18 August
Pollution: Water
Brazilian mercury levels
High levels of mercury have been detected in the Pantanal wetlands of southwestern Brazil.
The Pantanal, at 140,000 square kilometres, is the world's largest wetland area.
Researchers have found fish there with 24 times the level of mercury considered safe by the World Health Organization (WHO).
The mercury is dumped into the rivers of the region by miners who use it to extract gold from silt.
Luiz Marques Vieira, the scientist who carried out the research, says the findings are "extremely serious" .
The fish of the Pantanal form a major source of food for the local population.
The region also has one of the largest concentrations of wildlife in the world.
Mercury poisoning "will upset the whole ecosystem" .
New Scientist 12 September
Transport
Call for enforcement of speed limits
Strict enforcement of speed limits on motorways and other main roads in Britain would lead to a reduction in fuel consumption which would in turn reduce the country's pollution problems, according to the environmental consultancy Earth Resources Research.
Its report used Department of Transport figures on average actual vehicle speeds to show that emissions of carbon dioxide and nitrogen dioxide could be significantly reduced, by 3.1 per cent and 4 per cent per year respectively, if speed limits were properly enforced.
The report also argues that existing measures such as cameras are unlikely to ensure enforcement and calls for the installation of mechanical speed-limiting equipment in cars and lorries.
Guardian 24 August
Tropical Forests
Brazilian forest fire emissions to be measured
A $5 million joint American-Brazilian venture to monitor emissions from forest fires in the Brazilian Amazon has been launched in an attempt to measure the role of the emissions in the global climate and their possible threat to human health in Brazil.
Albert Setzer of the INPE, the Brazilian space-research centre, who has been monitoring the forest fires for several years, says the fires cause a concentration of potentially-dangerous particles many times higher than the levels recommended by the World Health Organisation.
For the last three years the number of fires recorded during the Amazon burning season, July to October, has fallen, partly because of government action and partly because the economic slump has affected cattle ranchers and farmers.
But this year satellite monitoring indicates a possible increase in the incidence of burnings, after a rainy season shorter than usual gave way to three months' drought.
Between August 6 and 12 the NOAA satellite registered 11,904 fire points in the Amazon basin, with most of the fires around the fringes of the forest.
Guardian 4 September
Tropical Forests
 "Sustainable" exploitation of Amazon
Brazil's Environment Secretary, Flavio Perri, has announced that the government intends to open up the Amazon to economic exploitation in a "sustainable, nondestructive way" and that cattle-raising, mining and agriculture would all be considered.
However, the government survey planned to determine "which areas are suitable for which type of activity without causing serious environmental damage" has been criticised for lack of research capability by the National Institute of Amazonian Studies.
Observers also fear that some state governments, favouring development at all costs, may declare whole regions open for exploitation without any pretence at environmental assessment.
Former Environment Secretary Jose Lutzenberger argues that the government's first priority should be to regenerate the soil of the 400,000 square kilometres of the Amazon basin that have already been deforested, rather than encourage the opening up of virgin forest land.
New Scientist 12 September
Tropical Forests
Consultants provide "green cover" for Guyana logging company
Scottish biologists and a UK government research centre have been accused of giving a green seal of approval to a major logging operation in the South American state of Guyana that could destroy large areas of virgin rainforest.
The charge has been made by Friends of the Earth (FoE) and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) against the Edinburgh Centre for Tropical Forests which has subcontracted the work to one of its members, consultancy LTS International.
Logging company Barama, a joint enterprise between South Korean firm Sunkyong and Malaysia's Samling Timbers, has been granted a 25-year concession on the 1.6 million hectare government-owned land on the condition that a satisfactory forestry management plan is drawn up.
LTS claim that Barama is "genuinely setting out to achieve management of the forest on a sustainable yield basis" , but Francis Sullivan of WWF points out that "sustainable yield is only the tiniest aspect of true sustainable forest management" and that the proposal makes no provision for the preservation of biodiversity.
Ghislain Pascal of Survival International says the Amerindians who live in the area have not been told about the logging plans and deplores the fact that "Samling — which has devastated the lands of the Dayak peoples in Sarawak — should ever be able to negotiate a deal without social and environmental impact assessment being carried out." 
New Scientist 12 September
Tropical Forests
Indonesian logging "poised to increase" 
The pace of logging in the Indonesian archipelago is set to increase as a result of the lifting of a ban on the export of raw logs.
This is thought likely to result in the collapse of the country's wood-processing industry, already under intense competitive pressure from Japanese companies.
The present deforestation rate is 1,200,000 hectares a year, and rising.
New areas, previously protected, are being opened up to loggers, including the 35,000 hectare Tanah Laut Forest reserve, on the southern tip of Kalimantan.
A concession covering some 80 per cent of this area has recently been awarded to a state-owned logging concern.
* A confidential World Bank report states that Indonesia only retains 30 per cent of the profits from logging, as opposed to 85 per cent from its oil industry.
BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Tropical Forests
Vietnam biodiversity project
The Vietnamese government has signed an agreement with the UN Development Programme intended to help conserve biodiversity, to be financed by the Global Environment Facility (GEF).
The programme will be centred around a network of forest reserves and national parks.
Vietnam has lost around half its forest cover in recent decades through a combination of war and population pressure.
Around 2 million hectares of natural forest remain, and this is being cleared at the rate of around 100,000-200,000 hectares every year.
Vietnam News Agency, 1 August
Tropical Forests
 "Devastating" Indonesian paper project may be halted
The future of a major logging, pulp and paper project planned for the Merauke area of Irian Jaya (west Papua) has been put in doubt after the withdrawal of one of the two companies supporting it.
The project would have involved the clear-felling of 800,000 hectares of tropical forest and its replacement by eucalyptus plantations.
It had been widely denounced as disastrous both for the environment and the local Auyu forest people, whose traditional lands would be devastated [see ED 46 for a detailed account of the project].
One of the programme's original investors, the multi-national Scott Paper, pulled out in 1989 after a lengthy campaign by environmentalists, notably Survival International and the Women's Environmental Network.
Now Indonesia's second-largest company, PT Astra, has also withdrawn.
One of Astra's shareholders is the International Finance Corporation, a subsidiary of the World Bank.
It is not clear whether the decision is the result of World Bank pressure.
Survival International information, 21 August
Tropical Forests
Vietnamese plans golf course in forest park
The Vietnamese authorities have concluded an agreement with a Taiwanese company to construct a major golf course development in the heart of the Thu Doc forest park on the edge of Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon).
The decision has provoked a rare outburst of open opposition, led by Thai Van Trung, one of the country's leading unofficial green activists.
The government defends the plan on the grounds of the $70 million revenue it will supposedly attract over the next 25 years.
Trung argues that the city needs a "green lung" of forest belt to counter pollution.
He also cites a recent disastrous attempt to build a golf course at Vung Tau, 120 km south-west of the city, where a Taiwanese company clear-felled forest before abandoning the site on the grounds that it was too windy for golf.
Without the trees, soil erosion in the area accelerated rapidly.
Another planned golf course in the Central Highlands has also provoked anger among locals.
Writing in the Labour Sunday newspaper, environmental journalist Tran Trong Thuc, suggests: "Officials fear they'll get a bad reputation among foreign investors if they reverse their decision" .
But he adds: "We're starting to get the feeling that foreigners can buy anything in Vietnam if they have the money." 
Far Eastern Economic Review 20 August
Tropical Forests
WWF-Malaysia "undermines forest campaign" 
The World Wide Fund for Nature-Malaysia has been accused of undermining anti-logging campaigns by claiming that, in Peninsular Malaysia at least, "forest policies are among the best in the world" and "as close to sustainable as any major producing country" .
WWF-Malaysia is opposed to the tropical timber boycott advocated by most environmental groups, and it has echoed the Malaysian government's complaints that European environmental groups are using misinformation in their campaigns [see EDs 57, 58].
A spokesman for WWF-International commented: "There are problems [with the group]which will take time to work out.
But we're not going to disaffiliate WWF-Malaysia, and they're not going to leave the WWF family."
BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Tropical Forests
Malaysian "urban rainforest" saved from development
Plans to develop Penang Hill, an isolated patch of forest on one of Malaysia's most densely-populated islands, has been halted after a protest campaign.
Developers had planned to construct a hotel, leisure and golf course complex on the hill's summit, which is the source of five rivers, 40 per cent of Penang's freshwater, and home to a number of rare species, including flying lemurs and giant squirrels.
A campaign based on petitions, letter-writings, and revelations of inadequacies and irregularities in the development's plans, persuaded the government to reverse the initial approval which it had given to the scheme.
Observers have contrasted the success of this campaign, in urban Malaysia's "backyard" , with the failure to restrain logging elsewhere in the country [see preceding story on this page].
BBC Wildlife, September 1992
Waste and Recycling
France and Germany clash over waste ban
The debate within the EC over trans-frontier movement of waste [see ED 61]has been fuelled by the French government, which has banned with immediate effect the import of all domestic waste after discovering that potentially harmful hospital waste from Germany was being imported illegally into France.
After the discovery of consignments of hospital waste, including syringes and blood bags, in a quarry rubbish tip in eastern France, French customs officers intercepted at least 20 German trucks, and found them also to be carrying hospital waste, sometimes mixed with ordinary domestic rubbish.
Germany's tough waste disposal regulations are believed to be encouraging unscrupulous operators to dump toxic waste in neighbouring countries.
In theory, the waste dumped in France should have been recycled within the German Duales System [see ED 49/50; 56].
The problem has become exacerbated since German unification.
Much of West Germany's waste formerly went to East Germany for disposal.
The German Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer, expressed disappointment at France's action, arguing that it was an unnecessarily abrupt response.
French state prosecutor, Béatrice Dupuis, commented: "We have discovered the tip of the iceberg.
It is possible that we are dealing with a massive international rubbish smuggling operation."
Her comments were supported by Greenpeace Germany, which claimed that much of the export of harmful waste "is in the hands of organized criminal networks" .
The newly-imposed French import ban applies to all countries except those with existing direct waste disposal arrangements with France.
Within France, the issue has become absorbed into the debate over the forthcoming referendum on the Maastricht treaty, with opponents claiming that an EC single market would result in France becoming the "dustbin of Europe" .
Le Monde 13 August Independent 18, 19, 21 August International Herald Tribune 20 August Environment Business 12/26 August
Waste and Recycling
Franco-German agreement on waste management
The French and German environment ministers, Ségolène Royal and Klaus Töpfer, have signed a series of agreements concerning waste management.
The issue caused some friction after the French emergency legislation on August 19, in the wake of the hospital waste disposal scandal [see preceding story in this issue], banning all waste imports except for waste that was incinerated, composted or recycled in some way.
The two governments agreed to call on other EC countries to accept firm deadlines in achieving self-sufficiency in treating their household and industrial waste.
France had thus far been alone in urging firm timetables.
The two governments also undertook to co-ordinate customs and police investigations of illegal waste shipments, and pledged to cooperate on the development of recycling technologies (notably in packaging, cars and domestic appliances).
Le Monde 2 September Environment Business 9 September
Waste and Recycling
German draft law on industrial waste
In an effort to persuade industry to take into account the disposal costs of its products, German Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer has announced new legislative proposals under which disposal costs would be included in the product's retail price.
Those which can be recycled, re-used or in some way "recovered" will attract a lower disposal price premium than those which have to be dumped or incinerated.
The aim is to encourage a flow of used product materials back into industry as secondary raw material.
Töpfer claims this will be a further step towards "an ecological and social market economy" .
Environment Business 12/26 August
Waste and Recycling
Germany takes further step to boost car recycling
The German Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer, has presented draft regulations which will make it compulsory for car manufacturers to take back their old cars for recycling or disposal.
The measure, which must still be approved by the full cabinet and parliament, will apply to German as well as foreign manufacturers (the latter represented by importers).
It will apply only to cars registered after the law comes into effect.
Older cars will be exempt if disposal costs exceed the value of recycled parts, as will cars destroyed in accidents.
 "In the past, the emphasis was on developing, manufacturing and marketing cars" , Töpfer said in announcing the measure.
 "In future, anyone who produces and markets vehicles should also be made responsible for their disposal." 
Financial Times 19 August
Waste and Recycling
UK aluminium can recycling rates boosted
The proportion of aluminium cans recycled in the UK increased from 11 to 16 per cent during the first quarter of 1992, according to figures released by the Aluminium Can Recycling Association.
The increase was largely due to the start up of Canadian company Alcan's dedicated can recycling plant at Warrington, northern England.
The company collects cans in bulk from seven "aggregation centres" spread across the country, where merchants receive "factory gate" prices without incurring the costs of delivery all the way to Warrington.
Europe's can recycling rate last year was 21 per cent.
Sweden, with 85 per cent, recorded the highest proportion, followed by Iceland (75 per cent ) and Switzerland (50 per cent ).
A total of 32,350 tonnes of aluminium were recycled in Europe last year (an increase from 25,000 tonnes in 1990).
Financial Times 5 August
Waste and Recycling
New method of tyre incineration produces oil and gas
British engineers have developed a new method of incinerating spent vehicle tyres at high temperatures, breaking them down into gas and oil for fuel, and "char" — a residue which is rich in high-quality carbon.
The oil and gas produced in this way can be pumped directly into a nearby combined heat-and-power plant, while the char can be used either as a fuel in its own right, or for filters.
The system, currently undergoing testing at an AEA Technology plant, works by incinerating the tyres at temperatures up to 1080 degrees centigrade.
The incinerator is fitted with a condenser to capture exhaust oils and a "scrubber" to clean gas emissions.
It is said to produce less emissions than conventional "power-from-tyre" plants AEA, together with engineers Herbert Beven, intend to market the plant, known as a "Multi-Purpose Disposer" .
Each plant would be able to handle around 300 tyres in 9 hours.
Each tonne of tyres produces up to 220 kilograms of oil, 240 kg of gas, 420 kg of carbon and 160 kg of steel.
New Scientist 29 August
Waste and Recycling
UK council's ambitious recycling scheme
Halton council (comprising the towns of Widnes and Runcorn) in north-west England has signed a 20-year joint venture with a recently formed waste management company, Biomass Recycling, to reuse 98 per cent of the contents of domestic waste by 1995.
The target far exceeds that set out in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, which requires local councils to recycle 25 per cent of waste by the turn of the century.
Officials calculated that the council would have to invest £500,000 per year to meet the target.
Under the joint venture the council will pay nothing, while profits will accrue to Biomass.
The initial investment costs are covered by Energy Holdings, a subsidiary of the Jardine Matheson financial group.
Biomass will combine a range of recycling techniques to deal with the 40,000 tons of domestic waste generated by the 125,000 residents of Halton every year.
Waste will be sorted centrally at a waste stream sorting plant; easily recyclable materials such as metals, glass and plastics will be sent to reprocessing plants in the region; organic material will be composted and sold for fertiliser; heat generated by the decomposing material will be used to warm ponds to farm prawns and crayfish, and gas will be sold to a local power-generating company.
Tim Midgely, a director of Biomass, said: "The technology we're using is as old as the hills.
It's crackers no one has done this before."
* The Department of the Environment has confirmed that it has no immediate intention of raising its target of recycling 25 per cent of domestic waste by the end of the century.
Environmental groups have argued that the target is far too conservative.
Environment Business 9 September
Waste and Recycling
UK government ban on toxic waste imports
The British government has banned future imports of hazardous waste from Switzerland and Australia.
Proposals for bilateral agreements, put forward by both these countries, have been turned down by the UK Department of the Environment on the grounds that Britain, along with other European Community countries, is aiming to achieve self-sufficiency in waste disposal.
Hitherto Switzerland accounted for a third of all hazardous waste imported into Britain.
Environment Business 9 September
Waste and Recycling
Rubbish trucks powered from rubbish
Four electric rubbish trucks in Japan are running on batteries which are charged using electricity generated by the incinerator plant to which they deliver their rubbish.
The local council in Yokohama hopes to increase the number of these trucks to 30 in the near future.
The main drawback at the moment is the weight of the batteries.
Each truck has to carry 26 of them, together weighing over a ton.
The potential of the new trucks will remain limited until their weight can be brought down.
Financial Times 26 August