

Agriculture & Food
End of BSE epidemic in sight?
The epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) among Britain's cows is showing signs of levelling off.
This suggests that there have been no new cases of infection since the 1988 ban on feed made from rendered down remains of sheep, the apparent cause of the disease.
The incubation period for BSE is between two and seven years, and the first cases were diagnosed in mid 1987.
Epidemiologists believe that BSE results from cattle food infected with the agent which causes scrapie, a disease of sheep very similar to BSE.
Because the average age at which cows begin to show signs of BSE is four to five years, it was estimated that the disease would start to die out four or five years after the source of infection was removed.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) had initially predicted that the incidence of BSE would start to fall by the end of 1992, but, it says, some farmers continued using the feed after the introduction of the ban.
There is also growing evidence that the age of cows diagnosed with BSE is rising, another indication that the disease is on the decline.
As the epidemic progresses, younger cows would be expected to disappear from the pool of infected animals.
 "Signs of a coming plateau have been there for a long time and are now getting better and better" , according to independent consultant Richard Kimberlin.
New Scientist 20 March
Agriculture & Food
Study on pesticide cancer links
The largest ever study of possible causal links between pesticides and cancer is being launched by the US National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
The $14.7 million study, expected to last around 10 years, will focus on 100,000 farmers, their families, and other pesticide users in the states of Iowa and North Carolina.
It aims to discover why farmers who in general enjoy better than average health are nonetheless more likely to develop a range of cancers, including leukaemia and cancers of the prostrate, brain, stomach, skin and lip.
Pesticides News, March 1993
Agriculture & Food
Dutch pollution controls backfire
Up to half of all the meadows in the east and south of the Netherlands have been seriously damaged by flocks of crows probing about among the grass roots for grubs of a dung-dwelling beetle which have appeared in much greater concentrations than normal.
Researchers have found the soil to be infested with around 500 grubs per square metre instead of the usual five or so.
Some researchers have suggested that the plague may be an unforeseen consequence of a scheme aimed at reducing the release of acid-rain-causing compounds into the atmosphere.
Farmers in the region are not allowed to spray manure over the surface of their fields.
This ban was imposed because the practice releases ammonia, a catalyst in the conversion of atmospheric sulphur dioxide into sulphate, thus accelerating the formation of acid rain.
Instead of surface spraying most farmers use machines which "inject" the manure into the soil through slits about 5 centimetres deep.
Henk Vlug of the Dutch Plant Protection Service has suggested that the beetles are attracted to the fields by the odour of manure and lay their eggs in the slits.
Other researchers have rejected the manuring method as the cause of the problem and instead believe the explosion of the grub population may simply be due to the population dynamics of the beetle.
New Scientist 20 March
Agriculture & Food
Hedgerow incentive launched
The Countryside Commission has launched a programme to restore 400 miles of hedgerows in England.
Farmers may qualify for grants of up to £2 per metre from the Hedgerow Incentive Scheme if their hedges have become overgrown, thin or gappy.
Figures show that England lost over 53,000 miles of hedgerow between 1984 and 1990.
Green Magazine, April 1993
Agriculture & Food
Rural land loss charted
The UK is losing agricultural land at the rate of 15,000 to 20,000 hectares every year, according to a new report.
The Lost Land, published by the Council for the Protection of Rural England, estimates that since 1945 a total of 1,500,000 hectares has been lost.
Rural land now accounts for 85 per cent of the country's total land area of 10.597 million ha.
During the period 1990-90, urban areas expanded at the rate of 11,000 ha per year.
Information on woodland is harder to come by.
In general, the report suggests that large areas of broadleaved woods have been converted to conifers, but that this process is now being at least partially reversed.
The report recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should take an active role in preventing unnecessary loss of farmland to development, and explore ways of finding more non-agricultural uses of rural land, as well as encouraging a reduction in the intensity of agricultural production.
Pesticides News, March 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Greek river diversion plans condemned
Greek environmentalists have launched a campaign to halt the planned diversion of the country's largest river, under EC-funded scheme which they warn will have disastrous environmental consequences.
At present, the Acheloos river flows west from the Pindos Mountains into the Ionian Sea.
The £400 million plan envisages diverting part of the waters to flow east across the Thessaly Plain into the Aegean.
The additional 1 billion cubic meters of water is intended to provide hydro-electric power via three dams and to help boost production of tobacco, cotton, sugar beet and pulses in the region.
But environmentalists warn that the diversion will upset the delicate ecological balance of the river system, as well as causing massive disruption amongst the network of lagoons, wet meadows and riverine forests of the Acheloos estuary.
They claim that impact studies revealing likely "catastrophic consequences" for wildlife have been deliberately suppressed by contractors.
Guardian 11 March
Conservation: Habitat
World Bank refuses to back Venezuelan drainage project
The World Bank has invoked environmental as well as economic reasons for its refusal to fund a massive drainage project planned for central Venezeula, which conservationists warn will have disastrous environmental consequences.
The Japanese International Co-operation Agency is, however, still contemplating involvement, with Japanese construction companies interested in contracts.
The project, which may take up to 30 years to complete, envisages canalizing the Apure river, together with three other tributaries of the Orinoco, and thereby draining 30,000 square kilometres of llanos,— seasonally-flooded savannah.
It is intended that the reclaimed land should be used for agriculture, as opposed to its present use as seasonal cattle ranching.
The canals would also allow commodities such as coal, fuel oil, farm produce and timber to be transported between Venezuela's industrial centres and the mineral- and forest-rich lands to the east and south.
Opponents of the scheme fear that, as well as damaging the wildlife which depends on the llanos, including numerous birds and freshwater dolphins, the scheme would open up the forests of the south to mining, logging and settlement.
BBC Wildlife, April 1993
Conservation: Habitat
New protected sites for birds
The British government has granted international status to a number of major wildlife sites in England.
Great Yarmouth North Denes, the Nene Washes, the Ouse Washes, Hornsea Mere, Gibraltar Point, Flamborough Head and Bempton Cliffs have been designated Special Protection Areas (SPAs) under the European Community's Birds Directive concerning the conservation of wild birds.
Roydon Common, the Nene Washes and Gibraltar Point have been listed as Wetlands of International Importance under the Ramsar Convention, an international agreement aimed at promoting the conservation of wetland sites, in particular wildfowl habitats.
The decisions have been welcomed as "good news" by English Nature, the statutory advisory body to the government on nature conservation.
It urged the government to recognize further sites to meet its commitment to protecting Britain's wetlands.
English Nature press release 5 March
Conservation: Habitat
First green victory for anti-roads campaigners
The UK Department of Transport's plans to build a road through rare water meadows in Herefordshire have been rejected on environmental grounds after a public inquiry — reportedly the first time that a road project has been halted because of environmental concern.
The route of the planned Hereford by-pass would have run through the valley of the River Lugg, east of the city, rich in tarditional wetland plants.
It is also one of the few remaining "Lammas" meadows in Britain.
These are farmed under a medieval system of agriculture, which resreves the period from Candlemas (Feb. 2) to Lammas Day (Aug. 1) for hay growing — hence the rich profusion of wild flowers.
The inquiry inspector's report strongly criticized the Department of Transport's "cost-benefit" analysis used to justify the choice of route.
New Scientist 13 March Guardian 12 March
Conservation: Species
Threat to Spanish bears
The future of Spain's last remaining brown bears is in doubt after the government has decided in principle to go ahead with the construction of a major dam in a valley that is crucial to their habitat.
The Vidrieros valley in the north of the country forms a corridor along which the smaller of the two surviving groups of bears travels.
Conservationists are concerned that disturbance from the construction could split up the group, believed to be around 20 strong.
The gene pool of the resulting subgroups would be too small to ensure the viability of the population.
Following widespread protests the government announced the cancellation of the dam project in early March.
But subsequent protests by local farmers, whose land has suffered from drought in recent years, prompted it to reverse the decision.
A spokesman for the Ministry of Public Works and Transport declared, however, that "environmentally kind alternatives would be studied before a final decision is made" .
New Scientist 20 March
Conservation: Species
Egyptian resentment against royal hunting intensifies
Rising resentment is being reported in the Egyptian press against hunting expeditions by Gulf Arab princes, notably from Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
The most common quarry is the houbara bustard, which, after centuries of hunting with falcons, has been virtually wiped out in the Arabian Peninsula.
Egyptian newspapers have drawn attention to the fact that the government has approved hunting parties despite the fact that the houbara has absolute protection under Egyptian law.
There are also reports that hunting parties are using firearms against Dorcas gazelles in the Eastern desert, again contrary to law.
The government is reportedly unwilling to enforce conservation laws in the case of influential royal parties from its Gulf allies.
The Egyptian press campaign follows a similar outbreak of dssent in Pakistan, where the government decreed recently that a number of named Gulf rulers were exempt from a 10-year ban on houbara hunting.
BBC Wildife, April 1993
Conservation: Species
Eider ducks disappearing
Numbers of two North American species of eider duck, the spectacled and Steller's, have declined sharply in the past decade and may soon disappear from the continent as breeding birds, according to the US Fish and Wildlife Service (F&WS).
Both populations, which nest mostly in Alaska and to a lesser extent in Siberia, are down by more than 90 per cent.
F&WS officials predict that they may disappear altogether by 2006 [see also ED 59-60].
The reasons for the decline are as yet unclear.
Studies show that pesticides are not to blame.
Factors which have been suggested are habitat loss, global warming (affecting Arctic wetlands) or nuclear fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986.
Ronald Garrett of the F&WS "Endangered Species Office in Anchorage, Alaska, commented that" we simply don't know"the cause of the decline — one of a growing number of apparently inexplicable population collapses in animal and bird species.
BBC Wildlife, April 1993
Conservation: Species
Californian fish controversially listed
The Delta Smelt, a small fish living in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River delta in northern California, has been listed as "threatened" by the US Fish and Wildlife Service.
The designation compels the state authorities to take measures to ensure the fish's survival.
The decision has aroused controversy because the fish's decline (by 90 per cent over the last 20 years) is attributed to the increasing abstraction of water from the delta, which supplies two-thirds of California's drinking requirements.
If the fish is to be saved, the abstraction will have to be cut back significantly, at a time when the state is only beginning to emerge from seven years of drought.
The State Governor, Pete Wilson, has protested to President Clinton about the decision.
New Scientist 20 March
Conservation: Species
Norwegians hone pro-whaling arguments
The Norwegian Foreign Ministry has called home senior diplomats from eight main embassies for a two-day course on how to deal with foreign criticism of the country's policy on whale hunting.
Norway declared in July 1992 that it would resume commercial hunting of minke whales, in defiance of a moratorium agreed by the International Whaling Council (IWC) in 1985 [see ED 61].
* A US-based group, Sea Shepherd, has claimed responsibility for sabotaging a whaling ship in northwestern Norway in December.
The ship was scuppered and seriously damaged.
Guardian 10 March Independent 10 March
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
A new species of spider has been discovered in a field in Cambridgeshire.
The new species is a member of the Linyphiidae family, and at 1.2 mm long is about half the size of its relative, the money spider.
It is pale, with very small eyes, suggesting that it spends much of its time underground.
Spanish biologists have discovered a new colony of 350 monk seals off the disputed territory of Western Sahara.
This doubles the known world population.
The colony is believed to owe its success to the continuing war between Morocco and the Polisario guerrillas, which has curtailed fishing in the area and allowed fish stocks to recover.
Consideration is now being given to using the colonies as a breeding stock to reintroduce the monk into some of its former territories, including the Senegal River, the Canary Islands and the Black Sea.
South Korea, China, Taiwan and Yemen have been identified as countries trading illegally in rhinoceros horn by the standing committee of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of World Fauna and Flora (CITES).
At a meeting in Washington the committee adopted a resolution urging the 118 CITES members to enforce a trade embargo on these countries unless they take significant steps to stop the trade.
Reports from Zimbabwe suggest that poachers are killing black rhinos even though they have been dehorned by the authorities to make them unattractive to hunters.
The poaching of elephants and the illegal trading of ivory is on the increase in Tanzania, according to the country's wildlife department.
Anti-poaching units were fighting "a losing battle" , it said.
New Scientist 20 March; 3 April Yonhap news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 11 March Green Magazine April Guardian 19 March
Conservation: Species
WWF report on risks to North Sea seabirds
A report by the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has set out in detail the changes to the nature and composition of the seabird communities in the North Sea as a result of human activity.
Drawn up with the assistance of experts from eight North Sea countries, An Assessment of Human Hazards to Seabirds in the North Sea, gives an overview of the past and present hazards to North Sea birds, predicts future population trends, and recommends ways of restoring the natural balance of the seabird community.
The study highlights six types of hazard affecting seabird populations: human exploitation, predation, fisheries, pollution, disturbance and habitat change.
The major observed cause of death for seabirds comes from pollution by oil and oily substances.
Most deaths are caused not by catastrophic accidents but by fouling from oil that is illegally but routinely discharged from ships.
The overfishing of herring and other fish has caused problems for bird species dependent on these stocks, particularly in wintertime.
At the same time the expansion of fisheries in the region has increased the food supply for scavenging seabirds who live off discarded fish and fish offal.
In the past the harvesting of seabirds for food and the predation by animals introduced by humans had a major impact on seabird colonies.
To restore the natural balance of the seabird community, the WWF calls for (i) an end to overfishing of deep-water fish and shellfish,(ii) the gradual elimination of the practice of discarding fish at sea,(iii) the prohibition of all oily discharges in the North Sea from tankers and other vessels of more than 400 tons, and (iv) the introduction of regular surveys of beached birds to monitor oil pollution trends.
WWF information 24 March
Conservation: Species
Tigers "face extinction" within 10 years
Tigers face extinction within 10 years unless governments do more to protect them, according to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
In the face of poaching, land clearance and logging, the world's population of wild tigers has fallen to around 7,000; three of the eight main species have died out and a fourth is on the verge of extinction.
The WWF is calling on governments to set up conservation programmes which take into account the needs of local people, and ensure that they can draw direct benefits from the presence of tigers in their area.
Guardian 1 April
Conservation: Species
Ukrainian biodiversity reduced
The biological diversity of both flora and fauna in Ukraine is in decline, according to the figures released by the Ministry of Environmental Protection.
Some 381 animal species, 81 species of bird, and numerous species of plants were registered as endangered in 1992 alone.
Ukrainian Television report (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 27 February
Economics & Industry
EC green audit scheme agreed
The EC has announced a voluntary environmental audit scheme for industry, agreed after discussions between EC Environment Ministers.
Companies taking part will be required to set environmental policies, goals and management systems, carry out systematic environmental assessments every three years, and have their performance verified by an EC-approved auditor.
A register of licensed auditors is to be set up for each member state.
Participants willbe required to make the results of the assessments available to the public.
Those companies who qualify will be able to publicize the fact — probably using a version of the EC's 12-star emblem — but will not be able to include it as endorsement on products (in part for fear of confusion with the Community's "eco-labelling" scheme — see ED 67).
The regulation should be in force by end — 1993.
European 25 March Financial Times 24 March
Economics & Industry
Ecolabelling standards agreed
The European Commission has accepted the first set of standards worked out for the EC's ecolabelling scheme, which aims to inform consumers about the environmental impact of particular products.
The standards, drawn up by the UK Ecolabelling Board, concern washing machines and dishwashers, and are based on consumption of water, electricity and detergent.
It is estimated that about 20 per cent of current models would qualify.
The ecolabelling initiative has been highly controversial [see ED 67].
It has been considerably delayed, and it is now expected to be launched formally in the autumn.
Several EC countries have in the meantime set up national labelling schemes.
Independent 20 March
Economics & Industry
Businesses uncertain of green investments
Many companies regard expenditure on environmental measures as an operating cost and a drain on profits rather than as an investment, according to a report by the consultants P-E International.
Based on a survey of 250 companies, the report says that "over two thirds of companies expect operating costs to increase as a result of addressing environmental issues" and notes that "there is considerable uncertainty about the commercial benefits of responding to many environmental concerns" .
The report observes that many companies do not take action on environmental issues until they are forced to do so by legislation.
It argues that companies which anticipate legislation are able to adapt more gradually and more cheaply than those which wait.
But it also points out that there may be cases where technology changes fast to the benefit of companies which wait or where environmental investment can be a competitive disadvantage when a company exports to parts of the world with less stringent regulations.
Financial Times 10 March
Economics & Industry
East German clean-up plan
The German government has approved at massive programme to clean up one of eastern Germany's most polluted regions, the triangle linking Halle, Leipzig and Bitterfeld, formerly a major centre of lignite mining and chemical processing.
With an estimated cost of DM15 billion, the five-year programme is being implemented through the Treuhandanstalt, the agency responsible for selling off the state-owned assets of the former communist regime in East Germany.
The agency believes that investors will refuse to buy plants in the polluted region if they will also have to pay for cleaning up the environment.
Financial Times
Economics & Industry
ICI claims major emissions cut
In its second environmental report, the chemicals company ICI claims that it has reduced its worldwide emissions by 9 per cent over the period 1991-92.
Outputs of hazardous waste were cut by 26 per cent, from 475,000 tonnes to 350,000 tonnes, compared to 1991, and by 48 per cent compared to 1990.
Output of non-hazardous waste fell by 9.7 per cent in 1990-91.
Overall, ICI aims to cut waste by 50 per cent by 1995, using 1990 as a baseline.
Energy consumption was cut by 12 per cent compared to 1990.
The company was, however, prosecuted 21 times over environmental incidents — on five occasions in the UK and seven in the US.
Announcing the results, Chairman Sir Denys Henderson admitted that much remained to be done in this area.
Financial Times 22 March
Energy
World Bank funding for Narmada Dam withdrawn
The Indian government has announced that it is to refuse further World Bank funding for the highly controversial Narmada Dam project [see EDs 61; 64].
In doing so, it is seen as pre-empting a likely decision by the Bank itself, which had suspended the granting of the final $170 million of its $450 million funding package pending further examination of the Dam's environmental and human impact, following a critical report last year [ibid].
The Narmada project involves a total of 30 large, 135 medium-sized, and 3,000 small dams.
It is intended to provide household water to 30 million people, and irrigate crops which could feed 20 million, as well as generating large quantities of hydro-electric power.
The scheme was first mooted in 1946, but subsequently delayed because of disputes between the three states which share the Narmada river's resources — Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.
The project was restarted in 1979, and approved for a World Bank loan in 1985.
Thus far, only the largest dam, at Sardar Sarovar, has been half-completed, and some 84 miles of canal dug.
The project has drawn heavy criticism from environmental and human rights activists, who warned that it would submerge some forests and erode others, disrupt fisheries, increase the risk of malaria and other insect-borne diseases, and fail to supply useful amounts of water to those areas of drought-stricken Gujarat most in need of it.
It would also lead to the forcible relocation of up to 250,000 people, many of them from small tribal communities.
Opposition to the scheme had come from both international environmental groups and from local communities and Indian organizations.
Their persistent lobbying is seen as being the prime factor behind the World Bank's decision last year to impose new conditions on its continuing support.
These included carrying out further work on the impacts of relocating tribal people, and studying the effect on fisheries.
The Bank was due to review progress towards meeting these conditions in April; shortly before the Indian government announced its decision, the Bank had warned that it was not yet satisfying the new conditions.
Announcing the government's decision, Indian Ministers insisted that it was solely related to their wish to proceed without outside interference, and claimed that the project would go ahead, and would meet or exceed the standards set by the Bank.
This claim was greeted with scepticism by both campaigners and foreign diplomats.
They questioned whether the project would now be able to proceed.
Campaigner Ashish Kothari commented: "Apart from the funding, the World Bank lent credibility to the project." 
Medha Paktar, of the Save the Narmada Movement, described the loss of Bank support as"a death knell for the project.
It cannot possibly go ahead without the various kinds of international aid coming in".
Other activists warned however that the government might raise new funds for the central engineering work by diverting money from the planned resettlement programme.
Meanwhile, Asia Watch, the human rights monitoring agency, has alleged that the state governments involved have used violence against opponents of the project.
Although the Sardar Sarovar dam is only partly complete, the rise in water level caused by the forthcoming monsoon rains is expected to drown at least four villages.
Paktar is co-ordinating a "do-or-drown" protest, in which she and local villagers will risk submersion rather than lose their land.
Financial Times 30 March Guardian 31 March, 2 April Independent 1 April New Scientist 10 April Economist 10 April Survival International information 31 March World Development Movement information 30 March Press Trust of India 30 March
Energy
Gabcikovo update
Pablo Benavides, the European Community official who has been trying to mediate between Slovakia and Hungary over the future of the Gabcikovo hydroelectric project [see ED 67, 68], has said that his efforts to negotiate a compromise have "reached the limit of possibilities" .
Summing up his goodwill mission, Benavides said that the sharp differences between the two sides would only be overcome by a political decision made at highest level.
He suggested a summit meeting between the Hungarian and Slovak prime ministers, Jozsef Antall and Vladimir Meciar, and the EC commissioner in charge of external relations, Hans van den Broek.
He said that the basic principle for a compromise should be that "all extreme proposals, such as dismantling the project, should be ruled out, but that at the same time the Danube should not suffer irreversible damage" .
The European Parliament has adopted a resolution urging both sides to accept arbitration from the International Court of Justice in The Hague.
The Hungarian government has announced plans to deal with the rapid drying up of the Szigetkoz area, rich in wildlife and forests, where groundwater levels are falling following the Danube diversion.
MTI news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 4, 12 March East-West Environment, March 1993
Energy
GCC warning on energy taxes
The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which includes Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and three other major oil producers, has warned that it will cut oil exports if Western countries go ahead with the introduction of energy taxes.
They claim that the West is using environmental arguments as a foil for reducing their dependence on oil and developing alternative energy sources.
Guardian 19 March
Energy
St Lucia "hot rocks" plan abandoned
A plan to harness the hot springs of the Soufriere volcano on St Lucia, in the Caribbean, to generate geothermal energy has been abandoned because of unexpected technical problems and lack of funds.
The effort to explore the energy potential of the volcano began in 1986 with financial help from the US Agency for International Development (USAID) and the United Nations.
Two trial drillings produced results that attracted the interest of several US companies, but negotiations to exploit the well for commercial use broke down because they insisted on full control over the project, which the St Lucia government refused because it considered it to be a matter of national interest.
A team of consultants from New Zealand brought in to evaluate the potential of the well has discovered that a damaged casing was blocking the flow of steam.
To unblock the well or drill a new one would require a new allocation of foreign aid.
According to government estimates, the Soufriere geothermal project could potentially provide electricity for around a quarter of the island's population and saved about US$250 million in foreign exchange over a 30-year period.
Caribbean Times 9 March
Energy
Details of US energy tax plans
Following the announcement by President Clinton that his administration would introduce a range of measures to encourage energy conservation [see ED 68], further details about the proposed federal energy tax have been made public.
The tax will be levied at the rate of 25.7 cents per million British thermal units (BTUs) on heating fuels and at 59.9 cents per million BTUs for transport oil.
It will not be levied on fuels for export, non-fuel uses of fossil fuels, or renewable sources like solar, geothermal, wind or biomass energy.
The tax will be phased in over a three-year period from July 1994.
As a result of the tax, prices for heating buildings will increase by around 3 per cent for electricity-based systems, by 4 per cent for natural gas and 8 per cent for heating oil.
Prices for petrol will increase by 5 per cent.
It is anticipated that by the end of the decade the price rises will have reduced earlier demand forecasts by less than 2 per cent.
This does not take into account, however, the impact of various complementary programmes aimed at conserving energy.
Association for the Conservation of Energy Briefing Notes no. 9, 1993
Energy
Reaction to UK coal white paper
Environmentalists reacted with caution to the UK government's White Paper on the future of the coal industry, drawn up in response to the widespread protests over the announcement of pit closures in October [see ED 64].
Most welcomed the general conclusion that "in the longer term, environmental pressures will operate against coal as a primary source of energy" , although many expressed disappointment that the government had not undertaken a more far-reaching assessment of the country's energy needs and their environmental impact.
The White Paper proposes closing just 12 pits, as opposed to the 31 originally scheduled, with a further six to be mothballed.
It guarantees sales of 160 million tonnes of coal over five years to the electricity generators, but will phase out subsidies prior to privatization, which is to be speeded up.
No restrictions will be imposed on sales of French electricity.
A further £12 million over the next three years will be made available for research into "clean coal" technology (based largely on "topping cycle" gasification to reduce harmful emissions — see EDs 55; 64].
The so-called "Dash for Gas" will continue, with no restrictions on the development of gas-fired power stations.
Magnox nuclear power stations will remain open, and the planned nuclear review is to be brought forward by a year.
The government will publish an annual energy review.
One of the major environmental decisions surrounds the target for the amount of electricity to be generated from renewable sources by the year 2000, which is to be increased by 50 per cent to 1,500 megawatts.
This was welcomed by environmentalists, although most suggested it was still too low.
The government criticized what it saw as contradictions within the environmentalist stance.
 "Some of the groups" , the White Paper said,"found themselves attempting to reconcile a wish for strict emissions targets, and hence a wish to phase out all fossil fuel burning, with a dislike for the nuclear option and support for coal in the short term.
They were able to do so only by [making]implausible assumptions about the speed at which renewables and energy efficiency could contribute."
Observers suggest that the White Paper's proposals will not make much difference to the overall amount of coal burnt in the UK, although a greater proportion will be likely to come form UK sources.
Annual output from open-cast mines is expected to fall by four million tonnes to 12 million by 1997-98.
Use of orimulsion — the controversial high-sulphur oil-shale fuel [see ED 65/66]— is expected to fall by 500,000 tonnes annually.
Daily UK newspapers, 26 March New Scientist 3 April
Environmental Politics
Poor Green performance in French elections
The ecologists did much less well than opinion polls predicted in elections to the 577-seat French National Assembly held in two rounds on March 21 and 28, 1993.
Although polls had anticipated a share of as much as 19 per cent of the vote the two ecologist parties' actual share was only 7.63 per cent in the first round of voting on March 21.
Only two candidates (Dominique Voynet in the Jura and Christine Barthet in Haut-Rhin) managed to get through to the second round on March 28 but neither was then elected.
In November 1992 the two French ecologist parties "the radical Les verts and the more pragmatic Génération écologie" had reached an entente but this appeared to result in the image of both parties being less clearly identified.
Their respective shares of the vote in the first round of voting were: Les verts 4.01 per cent, Génération écologie 3.62 per cent .
The result nevertheless represented an improvement on Les verts' share of 0.35 per cent of the vote in the first round of the last legislative elections in 1988.
(Génération écologie had not contested in 1988 election.)
The result meant that both parties failed to capitalise on the widespread disaffection with the mainstream parties and in particular with the ruling Socialist Party (PS) which had been discovered in recent months to have been involved in a number of scandals.
The PS share of the vote fell from 34.76 to 17.59 per cent in the first round of voting and it won only 54 seats (252 in the outgoing National Assembly).
The winners were the Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) which increased its representation from 126 to 247 and the centre-right Union for French Democracy (UDF) which increased its from 131 to 213.
They went on to form a government led by Edouard Balladur of the RPR thus ushering a second period of cohabitation of a right-wing government with a socialist President (François Mitterrand).
Le Monde throughout March French Embassy, London Le Monde dossier on the legislative elections (published 8 April)
Environmental Politics
UK technology transfer scheme attacked
The British Prime Minister, John Major, has announced a package of government measures to encourage technology transfer from UK companies to the developing world.
But environmentalists have criticized them for failing to address Southern countries' real needs.
The measures are centred round a three-year "global technology partnership initiative" , which will help British companies to assist their counterparts in the developing world "to bypass old technologies and move straight onto cleaner processes" .
The government will also meet half the costs of British companies offering training to executives from overseas.
A new government guide lists more than 400 companies which can offer technology, training or expertise.
Speaking at the opening of the Global Technology Partnership conference, Major said: "The world market for environmental goods and services is at about $200 billion per year.
It is anticipated to grow by a further 50 per cent in the next seven years.
That is a prospect few businesses will wish to ignore."
Environmentalists claimed that Major's initiatives were focused more on finding export markets for existing UK technology than on identifying practical priorities in the third world.
Frank Almond, Chief Executive of Intermediate Technology, said that Major had "missed the mark in a quite spectacular manner" , and that there had been no apparent attempt to look at what was either affordable or appropriate.
Independent 25 March Guardian 25 March
Environmental Politics
Russian army's environmental force
The Russian armed forces have set up an "environmental protection directorate" , on the initiative of the Environment Ministry.
Its main task would be to ensure that the environmental impact of military activities were kept to a minimum.
Environmental audits are to be carried out during military exercises.
Rossiyskiye Vesti, Moscow, 26 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests
MPs call for forest revival
The UK Parliament's Environment Select Committee has called on the government to encourage the growth of more forests and to revive Britain's hardwood timber industry.
Central to the committee's 50 recommendations was a call for a national forestry strategy, to assess what types of forests were required, and how best to manage existing woodland.
The committee urged the government to fulfil its commitments made at the UNCED Rio summit by preparing a set of National Forest Principles by the end of 1993.
Forests should be used as elsewhere in Europe to control local climates and absorb carbon dioxide and polluting emissions.
Government scientists had calculated that one million hectares of new trees could "fix" between 2 and 5 per cent of total carbon emissions.
A revival of the near-moribund hardwood timber industry could be encouraged through the formation of co-operatives to harvest, market and make use of timber at local and regional level, the Mps said.
At present the country imports nearly 90 per cent of its timber requirements.
They urged support for "multi-purpose" forestry which would combine recreational, commercial and environmental benefits.
The possibility of using wood to generate electricity should also be explored.
The committee expressed concern over loss of public access as Forestry Commission woodland was sold off, and said that as a first step, all existing rights of way should be maintained.
In an oblique reference to the Oxleas Wood scheme [see ED 68], they asked the government to think again about any road schemes which would destroy ancient woodland.
Financial Times 25 March Guardian 26 March
Forests
Forestry Commission planting plans
The UK's Forestry Commission estimates that a total of 99,000 hectares will be planted over the next three years.
More than £75 million will be made available to assist private sector planting through the Woodland Grant Scheme.
The trend continues towards more small plantations of mixed or broadleaved trees, as opposed to large-scale blocks of conifers.
Broadleaves now account for 46 per cent of all new plantings in the UK.
Scottish Environment News in March 1993
Forests
Clinton acts on US old-growth forests
President Clinton has given his staff two months to draw up a balanced solution to the continuing controversy over the logging of the Pacific North-West old-growth forests — fiercely opposed by conservationists, but strongly defended as economically essential by many local people.
Logging has been severely restricted by both local and federal authorities in the last few years [see EDs 63; 59/60; 57; and 52 for detailed coverage of the history of the dispute and the issues involved].
Clinton's initiative followed an unprecedented conference held in Portland, Oregon, and involving both the President, the Vice-President, Al Gore, Cabinet officials, loggers, timber executives, fishermen, scientists and conservationists.
Addressing the conference, Clinton acknowledged that government policy on the issue had been confused: "Different federal agencies hitched their horses to different sides of the cart and then wondered why the cart wouldn't move forward." 
Loggers argued passionately for allowing cutting to continue on economic grounds, but were opposed by fishing industry representatives, who claimed that the populations of salmon on which their work depended were plummeting as a result of their breeding streams becoming silted up due to logging.
Income from sport and commercial fishing has fallen by 80 per cent over the last four years.
Among the solutions proposed at the conference were increased emphasis on sustainable logging and the production of finished wood products, a halt to exports of raw logs, retraining loggers and employing them on repairing damaged forests and rivers.
Some 14,000 loggers have lost their jobs since 1990.
Ecologists stressed the richness and diversity of the forests — in some places greater than that of tropical rainforests — and the fact that 90 per cent of those on federal land have already been logged.
Clinton warned that the outcome of the conference"cannot possibly make everyone happy.
Perhaps it won't make anyone completely happy.
But the worst thing we can do is nothing."
Independent 2 April Financial Times 2 April New Scientist 10 April
Forests: Tropical
Miners cleared from Yanomami lands
In a bid to protect the Yanomami Indians, Brazilian police and military are evacuating the illegal gold miners who have streamed into the Indian reserve in Roraima state.
Some 3,000 of the estimated 11,000 miners have been removed from the area, some of them forcibly.
The 20,000 Yanomami in Brazil and Venezuela are threatened by imported diseases and pollution; the operation is the second attempt since 1990 to clear miners from the area.
In an attempt to deter miners from returning, the airspace over the Yanomami reserve has been closed to private aircraft by the Brazilian air force and a radar system has been installed in Boa Vista, the state capital, to monitor violations.
However, Brazil's Justice Minister Mauricio Correa, on a visit to the area, warned that a long-term solution to the problem of the state's unemployed miners would have to be found.
He proposed encouraging ranching and farming on non-Indian land.
International Herald Tribune 9 March
Forests: Tropical
Cambodian log exports continue
Thai companies are continuing to import Cambodian timber despite the ban imposed by the UN and the Cambodian government in January [see ED 65/66].
Logs and processed wood from Cambodia are being brought into Thailand through Laos to circumvent the ban, according to Thai customs officials.
A report prepared by Thailand's National Security Council shows that although Thai companies are the biggest violators of the export ban, other Asian countries are also involved.
Thai intelligence sources say up to 200 saw mills, many run by Japanese or Taiwanese companies, are still functioning in Cambodia and processed timber is being exported by sea to Japan, Singapore, Vietnam and Thailand.
The Nation, Bangkok, 16 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Bangkok Post 12 March
Forests: Tropical
Norwegian miners pull out of Ecuadorian park
Norwegian goldmining company Ecuanor has cancelled its application to regain the mining concession it held in Ecuador's Podocarpus National Park.
However, the company's activities may already have done irreversible damage to the park, which has been identified as the second most important in the world for bird life, with 10 per cent of all species.
The company's mining concessions were illegally awarded in 1986 but annulled in late 1990 by the Ecuadorian government.
In 1991 Ecuanor reapplied for the permits under a law permitting mining in protected areas if it were deemed "in the national interest" .
Although the company has now withdrawn, the trails it cut into the park have opened the area up to illegal mining, hunting and logging.
Between 200 and 500 miners are said to be inside the park, polluting it with mercury, and local politicians appear reluctant to remove them.
Environmentalists also fear that the National Institute of Forestry and Natural Resources (INFEAN) is controlled by those who favour opening up all of Ecuador's national parks to organised mining.
BBC Wildlife April 1993
Forests: Tropical
European firms destroy African rainforests
Companies from the European Community are heavily involved in the destruction of African rainforests, according to a report by Friends of the Earth (FoE).
The report, Forests Foregone: The European Community's Trade in Tropical Timbers and the Destruction of the Forests, reveals that more than a hundred logging and timber processing companies owned or backed by European firms are operating in West and Central Africa.
It treats with scepticism the timber industry's claims that developing countries receive valuable foreign earnings from their timber exports, and points out that European governments receive far more in taxes from the sale of tropical timber products than is given to developing countries in aid for forestry projects.
The EC remains the largest importer of rainforest timber by value, buying nearly Ecu3,000 million worth of tropical hardwoods and hardwood products in 1990.
The report calls for the EC to legislate to ensure that tropical timber imports come from sustainable sources and to enforce minimum operating standards for EC companies working in tropical forest areas.
It also calls for increased aid to tropical countries to enable them to achieve sustainable forest management.
Simon Counsell, FoE's tropical forest campaigner, said: "Timber companies controlled from Paris, Brussels and Bonn are ripping the heart out of Africa, whilst the European Community refuses to intervene to control the trade.
Instead of fostering sustainable development, European governments are growing fat on the profits of rainforest destruction".
Friends of the Earth information 11 March
Forests: Tropical
ITTO "suppresses" report
A Cambridge University report listing threatened species of tropical forest trees has been suppressed by the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO).
The report, by the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, was commissioned by ITTO and part funded by the UK's Overseas Development Administration.
The study identified a total of 1,868 species of tree involved in the world timber trade.
Of these, 190 were listed as threatened in two or more countries, and a further 304 as threatened globally.
However, at an ITTO seminar in Cambridge, chaired by the UK and attended by 10 of the organization's members, it was decided to suppress the report on the grounds that it might damage trade.
The seminar took the view that the timber trade helps preserve forests by giving them economic value.
Restrictions on trade could "weaken the case for retaining natural forests" .
It claimed that some trees might have been listed as endangered through insufficient data, and decided that if the report were published, it could adversely affect efforts to sell species "mistakenly" included on the list.
Friends of the Earth's Tropical Forest spokesman described the report as "the story of an ecological catastrophe in the making" , and added that "the government should have the courage to publish the report — after all, the British people paid for it…the government has let itself be led by the nose by the timber trade into suppressing the report for the narrow commercial advantage of those involved." 
The seminar also rejected a British and Dutch proposal which would have extended the study to create an international database on endangered tree species, and drawn up plans for monitoring trade in timber, including the "development of international trade controls" .
It called instead for "the development of a few national databases" which would be exclusively "under the ownership of the country concerned" .
Guardian 29 March New Scientist 3 April
Forests: Tropical
Failure of UK forestry aid schemes
Four UK forestry aid schemes — in Lesotho, Kenya, Cote d'Ivoire and southern India, have been strongly criticized in a report prepared for the Overseas Development Administration (ODA).
In particular, they have been censured for failing sufficiently to take into account the needs of local people.
In Cote d'Ivoire, West Africa, which has lost most of its original cover of rainforest, the ODA contributed towards a project which was meant to maintain existing plantations and create new ones.
During its course, however, some 40,000 hectares of natural forest which had been damaged by logging were cleared for plantations, resulting in the loss of wildlife and biodiversity and leading to increased soil erosion.
In Lesotho, a project to set up small plantations for fuelwood failed to consult local villagers, and the plantations are now underused and uneconomic.
In the light of the findings, Friends of the Earth has written to Overseas Development Minister Lynda Chalker, asking for an urgent review of the UK's expanding forestry aid programme.
An ODA spokesman said that the Administration acknowledged past failures, and that it was now aiming to pay more attention to the needs of the poorest and their environments.
 "We've been self-critical in public and learned important lessons" , he said.
Independent 6 April
Forests: Tropical
Zimbabwe's forests on verge of extinction
The forests of the Chimanimani mountains, on Zimbabwe's border with Mozambique, which are among the most species-rich areas of Africa, have been all but destroyed during the 10 years in which the region has been under military control.
Conservationists discovered the extent of the destruction when they were allowed back into the area recently.
Much of the land has been used for squatter settlements for refugees from the fighting in Mozambique, while other parts have been cleared for banana plantations.
The forest is unique in that it has affinities both with the central African rainforest to the north, and the coastal forests of Mozambique.
It is home to a number of rare birds and animals, including Grant's Bush Baby.
Conservationists are calling for an immediate halt to the clearing, in the hope that the remaining forest will be able to regenerate.
A number of proposals for eco-tourism as a way of funding the forest's preservation, and providing an income for local people, have been put forward.
BBC Wildlife, April 1993
General Reports
Contraceptives cut family sizes
Average numbers of children per family in developing countries have fallen from six in 1960 to four today, thanks to growing use of contraceptives, according to the latest John Hopkins University Population Report.
Data gathered from 300,000 women in 44 developing countries shows that about a third of married women in the developing world are now using modern family planning methods.
Social factors are also said to have played a part in the decline in family sizes: women living in towns and cities and educated women tend to have fewer children.
The report's authors point out, however, that such social changes are not essential.
Dramatic reductions in total fertility have been achieved in countries such as Thailand, still predominantly rural, and Bangladesh, despite extreme poverty, thanks to vigorous promotion of family planning.
Fertility rates have not yet begun to decline in sub-Saharan Africa, but the report notes that in many African countries demand for contraceptives often exceeds supply.
US charity Population Action International has singled out five countries "Bangladesh, Indonesia, Iran, Peru and Zimbabwe" for an award marking their success in providing access to family planning.
Five other countries "Russia, Poland, Pakistan, Iraq and Ireland" are given awards for being "tragic examples of countries unresponsive or actively opposed to the desires of women and men for greater control over their reproductive lives" .
New Scientist 13 March
General Reports
Population strategy in disarray
Northern governments preparing for next year's Cairo conference on population have been unable to agree a joint strategy.
The UN Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) estimates that developing countries will need $9 billion a year by 2000 to fund population control programmes.
Developed countries agreed in 1989 to meet half this amount.
However, at present, they spend only $800 million on population programmes, equivalent to just 1.2 per cent of their total aid budget.
At the preparatory meeting in Geneva, Scandinavian countries had proposed increasing spending on population control programmes to 4 per cent of all overseas aid by the year 2000.
This was rejected by other states, including the UK and US: a UK representative said it could "lead governments to spend money on projects regardless of their quality" .
This was despite growing evidence that birth rates are falling in key third world states simply as a result of more widespread availability of contraceptives.
According to statistics soon to be published by the UN, the average number of children per mother in Bangladesh has fallen from 6.7 in 1975 to 4.7 now, and that of Kenya from 8.1 to 6.3.
There is also evidence that ideological opposition to population control, which was widespread at the 1974 and 1984 conferences, is on the wane.
However, as Nafis Sadik, head of UNFPA, pointed out: "Even if every woman only had 2.1 children [the replacement level]the population is already so large [at just over 5.5 billion]that we will be headed for 8.5 billion people no matter what" .
Present estimates suggest that, by the year 2025, the population of rich countries will have risen from 1.2 to 1.4 billion, and that of developing states from 4.1 to 7.1 billion.
New Scientist 3 April
Global Warming
EC Ministers urge energy tax
Six EC countries have threatened to refuse to ratify the UNCED Convention on Climate Change [see ED 59/60]unless agreement can be reached on an EC-wide energy tax.
Germany, Italy and the Benelux countries are particularly critical of Britain's apparent lack of enthusiasm for such a tax.
The UN convention calls on governments to stabilise carbon emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
Recently, British Ministers have suggested that this target can be reached through relatively minor measures such as the imposition of VAT on domestic fuel and increases in petrol duty.
Environment Minister David Maclean described an energy tax as "an interesting concept" but "not essential to meet our targets" .
The UK is, however, looking increasingly isolated on the issue, given recent US moves to introduce energy taxes [see ED 68].
Present EC proposals are for a tax of $3 per barrel of oil equivalent, rising to $10 per barrel by 2000. * EC Environment Commissioner Ioannis Paleokrassas said that under present national programmes for carbon reduction, emissions would still be 3 per cent above 1990 levels at the end of the decade.
Independent 24 March Financial Times 23 March
Global Warming
Euro MPs call for emissions cut
The Socialist group in the European parliament has called for the EC to set more ambitious targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
The call "for a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2005, rather than stabilisation at 1990 levels in 2000, to which the EC is committed" forms part of a list of 55 environmental measures which the group is calling for the community to implement.
Only Germany and Denmark have so far agreed to adopt the 20 per cent cut as a target.
The Socialist group is also calling for early agreement on the energy tax proposed by the European Commission and for the introduction of mandatory energy efficiency standards on appliances such as boilers, washing machines and cars.
Among its other demands are: i) that manufacturers should be obliged to take back and recycle products at the end of their useful life; ii) that the EC should take steps to set up a comprehensive system of environmental liability; and iii) that environmental impact assessments on construction projects and other EC-funded programmes be strictly enforced both within and outside Europe.
Financial Times 17 March
Global Warming
Climate change "can happen very quickly" 
Studies by American scientists of the deepest parts of Greenland's ice core have produced evidence of rapid climate changes in the past.
Researchers from the Desert Research Institute in Nevada found that electrical conductivity in the ice core fluctuated widely over less than five years.
Electrical conductivity measures the amount of dust in the atmosphere, which is correlated with average temperature.
As the earth warmed after the last ice age, between 15,000 and 9,000 years ago, the conductivity of the ice fluctuated greatly.
The warming phase was interrupted by a cold snap in which the first flip from warm to cool took only three years.
Similar fluctuations have been found in other climate data going back 130,000 years.
New Scientist 13 March
Global Warming
Japanese airliners monitor atmosphere
An atmosphere sampling device is to be installed on Japan Air Lines (JAL) aircraft to help monitor global warming.
The device, developed jointly by JAL and Japan's Meteorological Agency, will collect air samples at high altitudes to measure concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere.
Kyodo News Service 25 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Global Warming
Earlier nesting "signals global warming" 
Large numbers of British birds are nesting up to 22 days earlier than normal, possibly reflecting changes in climate as a result of global warming, according to a report by the British Trust for Ornithology.
The Trust surveyed 83 species, and found that 33 are nesting between one and 22 days early, in a trend which started in the mid-1970s.
Only five species are nesting later than normal.
The trend is particularly prevalent among migratory birds.
New Scientist 20 March
Global Warming
Recession cuts UK CO2 emissions
Declining consumption of coal, oil and gas led to a 3 per cent fall in the UK's carbon dioxide emissions, to 156 million tonnes, in 1992.
The fall calls into question Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont's justification in his March budget for imposing VAT on domestic fuel as being necessary to help reduce energy consumption and to meet the target, to which the UK is committed, of stabilising CO2 emissions at the 1990 level of 160 million tonnes by 2000.
Environmentalists point out, however, that the fall in emissions was largely due to the economic recession; if the UK economy revives, consumption and emissions will increase as a result and further measures will have to be taken to meet the target, which is in any case widely seen as very modest.
Andrew Warren, Director of the Association for the Conservation of Energy, said that: "The fall is largely due to nuclear energy being ring-fenced and given a guaranteed market while coal declines.
It shows how much we could do to address the threat of climate change if we were really serious about saving energy."
Independent 23 March
Nuclear Power
China "solves" problem of waste disposal
China has solved the problem of disposing of solid radioactive waste and has set up a complete purifying system for radioactive liquid and gaseous waste, according to participants in a seminar on nuclear science in Beijing.
Sites are being selected for final disposal of radioactive waste.
Li Xuequn, a senior engineer at China National Nuclear Corporation, said the nuclear industry had developed a complete industrial system covering the whole process of nuclear activity from the mining of uranium to the disposal of waste.
Environmental quality appraisals over the past 30 years showed that the nuclear industry had had an "inconsiderable" effect on the country's environment, he said.
Li said the Qinshan nuclear plant, opened last year, and the Daya Bay plant, due to open this year, have both set up complete waste disposal systems.
Xinhua, Beijing, 19 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
China and Taiwan co-operate on radioactive waste disposal
China and Taiwan are reported to be close to agreement on joint development of a centre for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste.
The centre, expected to cost US$1,000 million, will be sited either in northern China or on an island in the South China Sea.
It would be able to accommodate 150,000 drums of radiocative material accumulated in Taiwan since 1979, as well as low-level waste produced by both governments for the next three years.
Xinhua, Beijing, 19 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Czech reactor goes ahead
The Czech government decided at a cabinet meeting on 10 March to give the go-ahead for completion of the Temelin nuclear plant in southern Bohemia.
Completion of the 2,000-MW plant, begun in 1977, was put on ice following the Chernobyl disaster in 1986.
The decision clears the way for Westinghouse Electric of the US to complete negotiations on a US$410 million contract to bring the Soviet-designed plant up to Western safety standards, under recommendations made in an International Atomic Energy Agency study in 1990.
This is the first time that Western technology has been integrated with Soviet-designed reactors.
Completion of the plant has been bitterly opposed by environmental campaigners, who criticise the government for favouring nuclear power at a time when other European nations are phasing it out.
The Austrian government has also strongly criticized the plans: the plant is situated just 40 miles from the Austrian border.
Environment Minister Frantisek Benda voiced concern about the plant, calling on the government to pass a nuclear regulatory law to ensure it operates safely.
The plant's output will allow a 40 per cent reduction in the capacity of brown coal-fired power stations in northern Bohemia, which are causing severe pollution in the area [see ED68].
The trade union representing the workforce at these plants had threatened to go on strike if their jobs are put at risk.
The Prime Minister, Vaclav Klaus, has accused environmentalist opponents of the scheme of misleading public opinion with "trivial, childish and out of date arguments" .
International Herald Tribune 11 March Financial Times 11 March Le Monde 23 March
Nuclear Power
EBRD to help make Soviet stations safer
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is to finance urgent operations to improve safety at nuclear power stations in the former Soviet Union.
The Group of Seven countries intend to allocate US$320 million for the purpose, with funds already committed by Japan, France, Germany and the UK.
A total of US$150 million is needed to complete reconstruction of the 25 stations of the Chernobyl type.
The overall cost of bringing 57 former Soviet stations up to world standards has been put at US$9,000 million.
ITAR-TASS, Moscow, 1 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Soviet dumping revealed
The Russian government has published a report acknowledging that large quantities of Soviet nuclear waste were dumped at sea, in violation of international standards.
It confirms a number of previous reports over the last few years [see EDs 68, 67, 65/66, et passim].
Radioactive waste had been disposed at sea by the Northern and Pacific Navies and the Murmansk merchant fleet.
According to the report: "The most serious potential radioactive danger is posed by the dumping in shallow waters around Novaya Zemlya and the Kara Sea of reactors from atomic submarines and a container from the icebreaker Lenin with nuclear fuel already unloaded" .
It claimed, however, that there appeared to be no immediate threat to humans or the environment.
The report concluded that, until safer land-based storage systems had been devised, Russia would have no alternative but to continue the dumping of liquid radioactive waste at sea.
*Greenpeace has revealed details of four incidents of dumping of radioactive waste by the Soviet navy in the Sea of Japan between 1985 and 1992, including the dumping of unprocessed liquid waste from a nuclear power station last year.
The Russian navy is thought to have used one dump site, off North Korea, at least as recently as December 1992.
Greenpeace's Joshua Handler says information from Russia is sometimes neither reliable nor forthcoming.
Greenpeace has little idea of how radioactive the waste was in the four incidents described, or of how it was sealed in protective casing.
Nuclear waste is not thought likely to threaten the food chain if it sinks below 500 metres, but researchers are concerned by the lack of accurate information about Soviet dumping.
** The Kola peninsula in northern Russia is facing an environmental catastrophe, according to local reports.
Existing nuclear storage facilities are either full to overflowing or close to it.
Large numbers of nuclear-powered submarines are laid up at a harbour near Murmansk.
Interfax News Agency, 16 March International Herald Tribune, 3 April *Far Eastern Economic Review 18 March **ITAR-TASS, Moscow (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl fallout reflected in child cancers
The number of cases of thyroid cancer among children in Belarus (Belorussia) has risen 100 times since the Chernobyl disaster in 1986, with the highest levels in the areas where radioactive fallout was greatest.
In February alone, thyroid cancer was diagnosed in half of all children examined at the Belorussian radiation medicine clinic.
Ostankino Channel 1 television, Moscow (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Gulf war veterans exposed to radiation
The National Toxics Campaign Fund, a US-based charity says the unexplained illnesses of hundreds of Gulf war veterans may be due to being exposed to radiation from weapons tipped with depleted uranium.
In a report delivered to Congress and the White House, the Fund says the contamination came from about 4,300 rounds of armour-piercing shells fired from tanks and aircraft.
Depleted uranium, one of the hardest metals known, is classified as low-level nuclear waste.
People living near about 50 American weapons manufacturing and testing sites may also have been exposed to carcinogenic radiation, the fund said.
The US army denied that radiation from the munitions posed any widespread hazards.
Guardian 19 March
Nuclear Power
Turkish nuclear plans attacked
Greenpeace has criticised Turkey's plans to build a nuclear power station at Akkuyu on the Mediterranean coast.
 "This development would not only be a danger in itself but also help set a trend which will make it easier for other countries in the region to follow," a Greenpeace statement said.
Turkey has announced plans to build two 1,066-MW nuclear plants by 2010, one at Akkuyu and the other possibly at Sinop on the Black Sea.
They form part of a project to quadruple electricity generating capacity to 350,000 million kWh by 2010.
Work on the Akkuyu plant is expected to begin in 1996.
 "In view of the unpopularity the nuclear industry has earned in the developed world, it is now looking for markets in the developing world," Greenpeace said.
Middle East Times 9 March
Ozone layer
Ozone depletion reaches record low in North
Record low levels of ozone have been observed over large areas of the Northern hemisphere, according to the World Meteorological Organization.
But it cautioned that this did not constitute an ozone "hole" , similar to that over Antarctica, as had been widely reported.
Some observers speculated that the surprisingly high level of ozone depletion might be linked to aerosols from the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano.
International Herald Tribune 24 March
Ozone layer
First ozone-friendly fridges made
The first truly ozone-friendly fridges have begun production in Germany, thanks to the rescue of a bankrupt firm by Greenpeace.
The propane/butane fridges use no chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) or hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) in their production; 285,000 are expected to be made this year.
Manufacturers in the US, Australia and China are said to have expressed interest.
Guardian 19 March
Pollution
Contaminated land registers abandoned
The UK government has abandoned proposals to draw up a register of contaminated land, after sustained criticism from property developers, who argued that it was prejudicing their activities.
The register, which had been provided for in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act and featured in the Prime Minister's "Citizen Charter" , would have covered an estimated 100,000 sites.
It would have obliged local authorities to draw up a register of contaminated sites in their area, and supervise their clean-up.
Announcing its decision, the Department of Environment said it had responded to three main criticisms: i) the register would have listed all potential, not necessarily actual, contaminated sites, since it included all locations where specified industries had been sited; ii) sites would not be removed from the register, even if after clean-up; iii) there was no specific provision for determining who should bear the liability, and the costs, of the clean-up.
Property developers welcomed the decision, arguing that had the register gone ahead, it would have blighted land values across the country, particularly in the (once heavily-industrialized) Midlands, and would have depressed efforts for regeneration of run-down urban areas.
Many of the sites which would have been included on the register included former gas works, tanneries, smelting plants and rubbish tips.
Values of many homes plummeted after they were included on provisional lists.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors estimated that 600,000 acres had been blighted, including large areas of Sheffield and Birmingham.
In its place, the government is to set up a "new wide ranging review" of how local authorities could help clear up polluted sites, and of whether they had adequate powers and finances to carry out the task.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard commented: "The government remains determined that contamination does not give rise to unacceptable risks to health and safety, to groundwater and the environment." 
Both the Labour Party and the Royal Institution expressed disappointment that a firmer decision had not emerged.
Friends of the Earth accused the government of "caving in to pressure from property developers and abandoning proposals that would have protected the public from accidentally buying contaminated land" .
Financial Times 25 March Guardian 25 March
Pollution: Air
Bohemia protests grow
Protests over the severe pollution in Northern Bohemia [see ED 68]are escalating.
In the first mass demonstrations since the "Velvet Revolution" of 1989, marches have been staged through Prague and Chomutove, badly affected by the smog from old coal-fired power stations.
The growing popular discontent, together with mounting evidence of serious effects on local people's health, is seen as a key reason behind the decision to go ahead with the Temelin reactor [see above].
East-West Environment, March 1993
Pollution: Air
Finnish oil industry cuts emissions
The Finnish oil industry has reduced emissions of sulphur dioxide by 80 per cent in the past 12 years.
Discharges from refining and use of oil fell from 300,000 tonnes in 1980 to 60,000 tonnes in 1992, exceeding targets for the reduction of emissions by 2000.
Improved refining technology and the use of more low-sulphur oil have helped cut emissions.
Yleisradio, Helsinki, 2 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
German government to investigate chemical accidents
The German government has announced the appointment of a commission to investigate an explosion at the Hoechst chemical plant in Frankfurt, which left one worker dead and another suffering third-degree burns.
The explosion was the latest in a series of accidents at Hoechst plants, and Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer called for tougher application of safety controls enforced by the state inspectorate.
Parliament announced that it would hold an emergency debate on the accidents.
The German Chemical Industry Association rejected stricter controls, saying chemical enterprises were already making all necessary safety checks.
Less than a month before the explosion, an accident at Hoechst released 10 tonnes of potentially carcinogenic chemicals into the air over a Frankfurt suburb, leading to calls for evacuation of the area.
Other incidents included the discharge of oil-polluted water into the Main river and the discharge of a chemical cloud, said to be harmless, which coloured cars parked nearby turquoise.
The main Hoechst plant in Frankfurt was blockaded by Greenpeace after the company refused to allow it take water and earth samples.
Financial Times 17 March European 11-14 March
Pollution: Air
Russians "in ecological crisis" 
A total of 20 million people in Russia are living in areas where the ecological situation is "critical" , according to a report by state environmental protection officials.
In 100 large industrial cities, pollution levels averaged over 10 times the acceptable limit.
Russian industrial enterprises emitted about 60 million tonnes of atmospheric pollutants annually; vehicles accounted for a further 20 million.
A reduction of 7 per cent in total emissions last year was accounted for by the drop in industrial production, rather than stricter pollution controls, the report said.
Radio Moscow, 16 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
US pollution futures market
The first pollution futures market, trading in "permits to pollute" , has opened for business in Chicago, where the first trade in permits took place last year [see EDs 59/60; 63].
It follows the establishment of the principle of pollution trading in the US Clean Air Act [see ED 47].
The trading opened when the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) auctioned off permits to emit sulphur dioxide.
Trading was relatively light, with only 150,000 of the 275,000 tonnes of "permissible pollutants" taken up.
In part, this is because the country's main coal-fired power plants had been awarded free permits for 75 per cent of their "baseline" output (calculated on the basis of their average emissions in the 1980s).
The main buyers were those plants which planned to delay the introduction of desulphurizing "scrubber" equipment.
This initial auction, aimed at establishing a market price, raised around $21 million.
Depending on bulk, the price per tonne varied between $122 and $450 — significantly less than most estimates of the cost of cutting emissions by fitting "scrubbers" .
The scheme is intended to help achieve the Administration's aim of cutting SO2 output by half.
Companies which exceed their permitted allowance will be liable for fines of $2,000 per excessive tonne.
EPA administrator Carol Browner described the auction as a success, claiming that it proved "utilities and the public are taking emission trading seriously and that a market-based approach to environmental policy can succeed in meeting the dual goals of environmental protection and economic growth" .
Economist 3 April New Scientist 10 April
Pollution: Water
Bathing safety questioned
More than 70 British beaches have been omitted from the latest edition of the Marine Conservation Society's authoritative Good Beach Guide after new research suggests that waters previously considered safe may in fact be hazardous to health The research, carried out by the Departments of Health and Environment, reveals that previous UK standards were too lax.
It indicates that the much tougher EC standards should now be regarded as the minimum target for British beaches [see ED 59-60].
According to the Society, the major health hazard is still sewage pollution.
At least 88 per cent of sewage from coastal towns is discharged into the sea raw or after only basic screening to sift out solids.
Of the 91 recommended beaches, 21 are in Scotland and 29 in the South-West.
Among those beaches dropped form the guide are Padstow in Cornwall, Weymouth, Swanage and Lulworth Cove in Dorset, Teignmouth in Devon, Whitby in Yorkshire, and Wells in Norfolk.
Those beaches which benefit from improved sewage treatment systems, such as Hunstanton in Norfolk, are praised for their water quality.
The Society is highly critical of the Seaside Awards [see ED 55]launched by the Tidy Britain Group with backing from tourist authorities and the government, which place great emphasis on beach facilities and take a more relaxed attitude to water quality.
It describes these as "possibly the most outrageous piece of environmental trickery relating to beaches" , which were "simply a tool by which a flag of sorts will fly at those UK resorts with borderline water quality — the same resorts which the Department of Environment's own research shows carry an unacceptable risk to health" .
Guardian 5 April Independent 5 April
Pollution: Water
EC to review quality standards
The European Commission has announced a wide-ranging review of all its directives on water quality.
At present a quarter of Europe's rivers fall below community standards.
Speaking at a London conference, Tom Garvey, deputy director-general of the environment directorate, said he was disappointed at the lack of improvement in EC water quality in the past 20 years.
Water companies in many EC countries have been campaigning for a review of standards, arguing that many are unnecessary and expensive to implement.
ing water quality standards.
Financial Times 16 March
Pollution: Water
Polluters to pay more
British companies may face higher charges for discharging polluted water into rivers, according to Environment Minister David Maclean.
Speaking at a conference in London, Maclean said that"a charge based on the amount and type of pollutants discharged to water would give a direct financial incentive for cleaner effluent.
Those who polluted least would pay the lowest charge."
The government is preparing a report on the options.
At present the National Rivers Authority charges for distraction and abstraction licences only at a level sufficient to cover its monitoring costs.
A spokesman for the Chemical Industries Association said the industry was keen to improve its performance but asked to be considered in the context of everybody else's pollution, such as farm waste.
Maclean added that the government should urge the European Commission to accommodate more subsidiarity, allowing countries to decide some water standards for themselves.
The Commission is in the process of reviewing its directives on water quality (see above).
Financial Times 17 March
Pollution: Water
Pueblo Indians push for cleaner water
Pueblo Indians in New Mexico have become the first to invoke an amendment to the 1987 Clean Water Act which allows certain American Indian reservations to set their own water quality standards.
The move could force the city of Albuquerque to spend US$250 million cleaning up its water waste so that the Rio Grande is clean enough to drink in religious ceremonies when it reaches Isleta Pueblo, 20 kilometres downstream from the city.
Albuquerque is suing the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which approved the pueblo's high water quality standards, for release from its obligation to conform to them.
The city claims the levels set by the pueblo for one pollutant "arsenic" are 1,000 times lower than occur naturally.
The EPA says it was obliged to approve the pueblo's standards: "If an entity such as a state or a pueblo wishes to adopt standards that are stricter than national standards, we cannot stop them." 
The case could start a trend: two other New Mexico pueblos are already pressing for stricter water standards along their stretches of the Rio Grande.
New Scientist 20 March
Pollution: Water
Port discounts for safer ships
Rotterdam, the world's busiest port, is to offer oil tanker owners reductions in docking fees if they meet high safety standards.
The requirements for a certificate of quality from the port, which could save US$10,000 a visit, include added crew training, a detailed maintenance plan and special steps to prevent oil leaks.
International Herald Tribune 11 March
Pollution: Water
Gulf war spills hit shrimps
Conflicting evidence is emerging of the recovery of the Gulf from the massive oil spills and other pollution caused during the war against Iraq two years ago.
The effect on the shrimp population appears to have been catastrophic: fishing boats are returning to Bahrain with only 1 per cent of their pre-war catches.
Bird life has also been affected, with thousands of white-cheeked terns abandoning their nests in recent months, apparently because of the disappearance of the fish on which they feed.
This may, however, be linked with the unusually cold winter.
Other studies show that in the Gulf's warm water temperatures the oil has dispersed very quickly, and shifting sands have covered up oil on the beaches.
The International Atomic Energy Agency's marine environment laboratory says that parts of the Gulf are cleaner than they were before the war, although there are still heavily contaminated spots.
New Scientist 20 March
Pollution: Water
Tanker routes round UK to change
In the aftermath of the Braer oil spill off the Shetlands [see ED 67; 68], UK shipowners have launched a voluntary code to keep tankers away from the more environmentally-sensitive stretches of British coastline.
The Chamber of Shipping, which set up a task force to review routing procedures, examined 15 coastal areas where existing routing agreements did not provide specific advice for tankers.
Financial Times 23 March
Transport
Road tunnel fuels Oxleas controversy
The government's approval of a £30 million road tunnel under the Devil's Punchbowl, an important Surrey wildlife site and beauty spot, has fuelled controversy over its refusal to spend a smaller amount on a similar scheme in Oxleas Wood, London, which is scheduled for destruction by a new motorway [see ED 68].
The mile-long tunnel will carry the new A3 Hindhead bypass under the bowl.
The National Trust, which owns the Punchbowl and adjoining Hindhead Common, had threatened to use its statutory powers to force Parliament to make a (costly) compulsory purchase of the land.
The Roads Minister, Kenneth Carlisle, defended the decision to more than double the costs of the road by citing "the beauty and sensitivity of the countryside" .
He declined to comment on the parallel with the Oxleas case.
Construction following a public inquiry is likely to begin in 1997.
Independent 26 March Guardian 26 March
Waste and Recycling
Recycler extends operations
Duales System Deutschland (DSD), which collects most of Germany's recyclable household waste, has been asked by the government to extend its operation to industrial waste.
The decision was attacked as anti-competitive by independent waste collectors.
DSD operates the Grüne Punkt (green dot) system, which collects for recycling 80 per cent of consumer packaging.
The system is financed by higher prices paid for goods bearing the green dot symbol.
DSD was set up by 600 enterprises in response to legislation requiring industry to collect and recycle the packaging it produces.
After an investigation by the Federal Cartel Office, DSD has offered to compensate independent waste collectors for the higher costs they incur.
Financial Times 18 March
Waste and Recycling
German clean-up fund created
The German Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer, has announced that 15 billion Deutschmarks (£6.3 bn) will be made available for cleaning up the estimated 70,000 hazardous waste dumps in former East Germany.
This amount should cover 75 per cent of the clean-up costs; the remainder will be met by state authorities.
Töpfer also announced that DM13 billion would be made available for cleaning up uranium mines, and DM45 billion to shield buildings from (naturally-occuring) radon gas.
New Scientistt 20 March
Waste and Recycling
UK demands ban on German dioxin shipment
Michael Howard, the UK Environment Secretary, has asked his German counterpart, Klaus Töpfer, to ban a proposed shipment of dioxin to Britain.
The 1,000 tonne consignment of chloro-benzene contaminated with dioxin was due to be transported from a pesticide plant in Hamburg to an incinerator in Pontypool, Wales.
According to Greenpeace, German waste management companies had refused to handle the waste because of the high dioxin content.
Under existing EC law, no country has the power to ban waste imports.
This should change in May 1994, when a new EC directive comes into force allowing bans on hazardous waste imports.
Guardian 23 March Financial Times 23, 24 March
Waste and Recycling
French plastics recycling plan
French plastic manufacturers and bottle suppliers have joined together to set up a recycling company, "Valorplast" , which intends to recycle around 1 billion plastic bottles by the year 1996.
The company will establish four separate enterprises to deal with polyvinylchloride (PVC), high density plastic, plastic bottles containing carbonated drinks, and materials made of mixed plastics.
Its operations should produce around 40,000 tonnes of recycled plastic per year.
France currently produces around 800,000 tonnes of plastic waste per year, accounting for 4 per cent of household waste.
Of this, undamaged bottles and containers make up 200,000 tonnes.
Recycled plastic is at present more expensive than virgin material — 3,500 French francs per tonne, compared with 1,350 francs per tonne for "new" plastic.
Subsidies will be required to make the recycled version cheaper.
Le Monde 12 March
Waste and Recycling
Germany takes back Romanian waste
The operation to return 425 tonnes of toxic waste from Romania to Germany began on 9 March with the arrival of two trains equipped with special containers.
Germany agreed to finance the return of the toxic chemicals, supplied by the former East Germany as agricultural aid, after Greenpeace threatened to return the waste itself and invoice the German government [see ED 68].
The operation is expected to cost DM3.3 million and take at least four weeks.
German Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer stressed that it was a "one-off" operation and that there was no question of the German government assuming "default liability" for the criminal behaviour of disposal firms or inaction by state authorities.
DPA 1 March, ADN 10 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Independent 12 March