

Agriculture & Food
Atlantic fisheries in crisis
Over-exploitation has led to a collapse in numbers of bluefish tuna, swordfish and cod in the Atlantic.
The Atlantic swordfish is at half 1978 levels, while breeding populations of bluefin tuna in the western Atlantic are down by 90 per cent since 1975, from an estimated 250,000 to 22,000.
A mature bluefin tuna can fetch US$30,000 on the Japanese market.
A conference was held by the UN to discuss the problem this summer, following on from last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, but was mainly devoted to national issues such as data collection and dispute settlement.
Environmental groups such as the World Wide Fund for Nature had argued that it should focus on issues such as the development and use of selective fishing gear, reduction of waste, the protection and restoration of endangered species and the preservation of marine habitats.
WWF News Autumn 1993
Agriculture & Food
Risk to children from pesticides "underestimated" 
A new report by the US National Research Council, commissioned by the US Congress, has warned that children face disproportionate risks from pesticide residues in food.
The report reinforces the conclusions of an earlier study by the Natural Resources Defense Council in 1989.
The 1989 report concluded that children receive greater exposure to pesticide residues than adults.
This is in part because, relative to their weight, they consume both more food and larger quantities of fruit, which is more likely to contain significant levels of pesticides.
Tests conducted on animals suggested that children are also more likely to retain a greater dose of certain toxins because of increased absorption and decreased elimination.
Detoxifying enzymes and mechanisms are also less well developed in children and adults.
The new report confirmed these concerns, questioning whether existing toxicity tests were sufficient to take account of these issues.
It called for changes in US regulatory practice to reflect this, and demanded that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) take more account of health concerns when setting safe levels.
It suggested that the conventional "safety factor" which allows for uncertainty in extrapolating the results of animal tests, and for variations in sensitivity among humans, should be increased by a factor of 10 when there is evidence of post-natal toxicity, or where data relative to children is lacking.
A further report by the Environment Working Group questions the effectiveness of test routines in US Food and Drug Administration laboratories.
It claims that from 80 to 100 per cent of residue analysis tests at 12 FDA laboratories failed to find 80 per cent of the pesticides used in agriculture.
It suggested that millions of US children were receiving up to 35 per cent of their entire lifetime dose of carcinogens by the age of five, and calls for cuts in pesticide use, including the phasing out of all those classed by the EPA as carcinogens.
The EPA and FDA, together with the Department of Agriculture, promised that they would use both reports "as a basis for formulating the legislative and regulatory policies needed to put the Administration's principles [for cutting pesticide use]into effect" .
Pesticides News, September 1993
Agriculture & Food
OECD launches Pesticide Forum
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD — grouping the major industrialized nations) is to launch a three-year "Pesticides Activity" .
It will have three major goals: i) promoting sound, consistent national pesticides registration procedures; ii) sharing the work of re-registration of old pesticides; iii) reducing risks to human health and the environment associated with pesticide use.
The Activity is to be co-ordinated by a Pesticides Forum comprising government regulators and representatives from NGOs including farming and environmental groups, and international bodies such as the UN Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization, and the World Health Organization.
One of its prime thrusts will be achieving harmonization of data requirements, testing methods and review processes used in pesticide registration.
Pesticides News, September 1993
Agriculture & Food
High pesticide residues in India
A nationwide survey by the Indian Council of Medical Research has detected high levels of pesticide residues in cows' milk, and toxic metals including arsenic, cadmium and lead in infant canned products.
Over 1,600 of 2,205 samples of cows' milk had pesticide residues, including "widespread and excessive" quantities of DDT and HCH (also known as BHC).
Pesticide News, September 1993
Agriculture & Food
Protests over plant patents
Protests are being staged by farmers and environmentalists in India and the UK to highlight the threat to native plants by Western companies seeking patents over traditional plant extracts.
The specific case generating anger in India involved W.R. Grace, a US company.
Grace is claiming patents for products derived from the natural oils of neem, an evergreen tree, which are used locally for insecticides, contraceptives and soap.
Under the proposals for the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), genetically-engineered plant varieties are to be protected by patents or similar legislation.
Many opponents of the measures fear that small farmers and others in developing countries will be restricted from using traditional seed varieties and placed at a disadvantage as a result.
W R Grace gained a patent on neem extract, which it called Margosan-O, in 1988, claiming that it had developed a means of stabilizing the extracts.
Grace has set up a plant in India to process neem.
Critics claim that the company will corner the market for neem-based pesticides, drive up the price of neem seed and price local producers out of the market.
Independent 2 October
Agriculture & Food
Tanzanians protest against pesticide plant
Protests are being staged in the northern Tanzanian town of Moshi against the construction of a pesticides plant.
The plant is designed to produce pesticides such as aldrin, dieldrin, lindane, atrazine, simazine and paraquat, among others.
The factory, owned by a government company, National Chemicals Industries, was made possible by an $11.88 million soft loan from the Italian government.
Construction is proceeding despite an interim court order restraining the company from putting it into commission.
Greenpeace International, August 1993
Agriculture & Food
Sheep dip risks
Leaked preliminary results from a study by the department of environmental and occupational medicine at Newcastle University have suggested that organophosphorous sheep dips may affect those regularly involved in sheep dipping.
The dips may have an effect on blood lymphocytes.
Tests were conducted on students wearing the recommended protective clothing.
Further tests are continuing.
@H3 = Scenes (Scottish Environment News), August
Agriculture & Food
Record number of pesticide incidents reported
The UK's Health and Safety Executive investigated a record number of 226 pesticide incidents in 1992.
The increase may reflect a rise in reporting, rather than actual poisoning.
A total of 84 incidents were said to have caused ill-health.
In one case, a man died after being splashed in the face with paraquat when he dropped an open container of the substance.
Pesticides News, September 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Biodiversity convention meeting
A meeting in Geneva of officials and environmentalists from over 130 nations has discussed the implementation of the international treaty on biodiversity arising from last year's UNCED summit in Rio.
The biodiversity convention signed at the summit has been ratified by the required 30 countries and is due to come into force at the end of this year.
The main aim of the meeting was to discuss how to persuade countries to create their own national strategies for biodiversity protection.
Other topics for discussion included the sharing of benefits from genetics research between rich and poor nations, including technology transfer, intellectual property rights and access to genetic resources.
Financial Times 8 October
Conservation: Habitat
UK response to EC habitat directive
The UK government has issued a consultation paper on the further protection of wildlife and habitats designed to conform with an European Community (EC) directive on habitats which is due to come into force in June 1993.
This would involve the creation of Special Areas of Conservation (SACs).
The directive requires member states to designate sites with rare and important habitats and species, with priority given to the most threatened sites.
All sites should be protected from damage or development, managed so as to conserve or increase their wildlife value, and monitored.
The government has proposed changing planning laws to ensure that nature conservation agencies and planning authorities abide by the directive.
All sites are to be notified by 2004.
The proposals were attacked as being too weak and vague, with only the minimum legal protection given to sites.
The paper, presented by the Minister of State for the Environment, Tim Yeo, was criticized by the shadow environment secretary, Chris Smith, as being a betrayal of Conservative election manifesto promises.
He said that the existing system of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) had proved ineffectual, with over 500 SSSIs destroyed in the past two years, and that the legal protection to be given to SACs was still unclear.
Conservationists expect the government to rely on the existing network of 5,800 sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs), which are given only limited protection under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act.
Friends of the Earth commissioned Dr Derek Ratcliffe, former chief scientist of the Nature Conservancy Council, to draw up a skeleton list of 112 sites which the government should designate under the directive, including internationally rare habitats such as the lowland heaths of Dorset and the Flow Country of Caithness.
Guardian 5 October Independent 17 September
Conservation: Habitat
Campaign to protect lowland heaths
A national lowland heath programme has been launched by English Nature to arrest the spread of trees on to what was once open heath.
The programme aims to raise awareness of the importance of lowland heath, which provides a habitat for a unique range of often rare plants and animals, including all six of England's reptile species and some of the country's rarest birds, such as the Dartford warbler and nightjar.
English Nature is providing £150,000 over three years in grants to support heathland management projects.
English Nature 15 September
Conservation: Habitat
Brazilian wetland gets Ramsar protection
Brazil's Lago Mamiraua has been designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention, one of three such sites in the country.
The Mamiraua region in the Amazon, an area rich in biodiversity, with many endemic species, is home to some 7,000 people.
The World Wide Fund for Nature is working with local people on a management plan to ensure sustainable use of fisheries and to prevent over-exploitation of fish and timber by people from outside the region.
WWF News Autumn 1993
Conservation: Habitat
New Forest given EC protection
The New Forest has been designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) for birds by the UK government, making it the 38th site in the UK so designated under the EC wild birds directive.
The forest contains a range of different habitats, including ancient wood pasture, open heathland and valley mires, all rare in Europe.
Significant numbers of England's nightjars, woodlarks and Dartford warblers breed in the New Forest, which is vulnerable to development pressures from roads, pipelines and recreational facilities.
English Nature, the government's wildlife adviser, expects to recommend at least 20 sites for SPA protection in 1993/94. * Slapton Ley, a coastal freshwater lake in south Devon, has been upgraded from a site of special scientific interest to a national nature reserve.
English Nature 22 September * Independent 13 September
Conservation: Habitat
Native pinewoods "needed for birds" 
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) is calling for immediate action to restore Scotland's few remaining native pinewoods.
Its report, Time for Pine: A future for Caledonian pinewoods, calls for concerted action to ensure better management of the pinewoods, which cover less than 1 per cent of their former range.
It is also seeking an expansion of pinewoods in the core areas of Deeside, Strathspey and the River Beauly catchment.
The woods are the main refuge of birds such as the capercaillie, crested tit and the Scottish crossbill.
RSPB information 15 September
Conservation: Habitat
Anti-tourism protest in Malaysia
The Berewan people of the Tutoh river area in Sarawak's Mulu National Park are staging protests against a hotel and golf course development on their land.
They claim that some 2,000 acres has been subsumed into the Park.
Tourists visiting the area are being leafleted, and local Berewan landowners are erecting signs warning against trespass and calling for respect for indigenous property rights, as recognized by the United Nations.
Tourism in Focus, Autumn 1993
Conservation: Species
Delay on US sanctions on Norway for whaling
The possibility of US trade sanctions being imposed on Norway for defying the international ban on commercial whaling have receded, after President Clinton stated that a delay would allow further time for negotiation.
Norway resumed limited commercial hunting of minke whales earlier this year, breaking the International Whaling Commission ban imposed originally in 1985, and upheld this year.
The Norwegian government argues that the increased numbers of minke whales world-wide justifies resumed hunting.
A quota of 160 whales for the year was set, of which 156 have been caught.
Financial Times 5, 6 October International Herald Tribune 6 October
Conservation: Species
Supermarkets help Faroes boycott campaign
Several British supermarket chains have asked their suppliers to stop using fish which comes from the Faroe islands, after the Environmental Investigation Agency called for a boycott of Faroese products in protest at the annual killing of pilot whales.
Safeway, Asda and the Co-op have responded to the EIA's call, while Sainsbury and Marks & Spencer are labelling all Faroese fish.
Fish exports account for 90 per cent of the Faroe Islands' export income.
Time Out, 13-20 October
Conservation: Species
Norway sells whale skeletons
A Norwegian company is offering the skeletons of minke whales for sale.
Norway resumed commercial whaling earlier this year, defying the international ban, claiming that the minke whale was not a threatened species [see ED74].
The 30-foot long skeletons are being offered for sale to museums and wildlife centres, including some in the UK, where conservationists are calling for an embargo.
The price is estimated at about £8,000, or twice the price of a replica skeleton.
Independent 28 September
Conservation: Species
Sea lions victims of fishermen's anger
An increasing number of sea lions with gunshot wounds are being washed up on Californian beaches.
They are thought to be the victims of fishermen, who blame them for meagre fish stocks.
Last year biologists from the Marine Mammal Centre collected 75 wounded sea lions, most of which died.
So far this year 21 have been found.
This compares with just 37 recorded between 1984 and 1992.
The Californian population of sea lions is increasing at the rate of about 5 per cent a year.
Sea lions often follow fishing boats and take fish from hooks.
Conservationists argue that they are far less of a threat to stocks of fish such as salmon than water diversion schemes and bad logging practices.
New Scientist 18 September
Conservation: Species
Octopuses safe from experiment
The British government is to protect octopuses from scientific experiments.
The octopus will be the first animal without a backbone to be protected under regulations that already cover experiments on vertebrates.
The Animal Procedures Committee, set up to advise the government on animal experiments, recommended that there was sufficient evidence of sentience to give one species of invertebrate, the common octopus, protection.
A minority of the committee voted against the decision on the grounds that there was no definite scientific evidence that such animals experience suffering.
Most research involving octopuses takes place outside the UK.
New Scientist 2 October
Conservation: Species
Kenyan flamingos die "in response to over-population" 
About 5,000 pink flamingos in western Kenya have died of a bacterial infection in recent weeks, which veterinarians say is a natural reaction to over-population.
Kenya has about one million flamingos living around lakes Nakuru and Bogoria, a major tourist attraction, and the species' survival is not said to be threatened by the epidemic, which is expected to die down in about a month.
Independent 1 October
Conservation: Species
Sea eagles in Scotland
Eight pairs of sea eagles attempted to breed in Scotland this year, with four pairs successfully rearing a total of five young.
The birds were reintroduced in a joint programme of Scottish Natural Heritage and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
The Joint Nature Conservation Committee and the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology were also involved in the project.
Between 1975-85, 82 sea eagles were imported from Norway to be reintroduced into Scotland.
Of these, 12 have been found dead and fewer than 10 territorial pairs have been established.
A further 10 chicks were brought from Norway this year and released in mid-August.
Members of the project envisage that up to 50 more birds may need to be introduced over the next two years before a self-supporting sea eagle population can be established.
Scenes (Scottish Environment News), August 1993
Conservation: Species
Modern farming blamed for bird loss
A significant decline in the numbers of some traditional bird species in the UK is due to modern farming methods, according to research published by the British Trust for Ornithology.
The research was based on observation and recording by volunteers of 200 plots of farmland in lowland England and Wales.
Most concern was expressed over the position of seed-eaters.
Nine species of seed-eaters were studied.
Of these, only two, the chaffinch and the greenfinch, registered a slight increase in population over the period.
The others all showed a decline, with four species — goldfinch, reed bunting, skylark and linnet — accounting for the worst results.
Modern farming methods, particularly in arable crop fields, were thought to be responsible for the declines.
More efficient weed control and the autumn sowing of crops were depriving birds of resources, particularly during the winter months, making the fields highly unattractive habitats.
Independent 8 October
Conservation: Species
India seizes tiger bone hoard
Tiger bones and skins from leopards and other endangered species worth nearly £500,000 have been seized in raids by Indian police and TRAFFIC, the trade monitoring arm of the World Wide Fund for Nature.
The raids, in Delhi, followed a country-wide operation in which TRAFFIC officials trailed contraband materials.
Some 287 kilos of tiger bones were recovered, enough to account for 20 animals, thought to have been poached from national parks.
Two people have been charged under India's Wildlife Protection Act.
The world tiger population is estimated at between 6,000-9,000; if poaching continues at the present rate the tiger will be extinct by early next century, according to expert predictions.
The Global Tiger Forum, set up under India's leadership to help protect tigers, will hold its first meeting in December.
New Scientist 2 October
Conservation: Species
UNEP aims to protect rhino
The UN Environment Programme is to extend its African Elephant Conservation Facility to include rhinoceroses in Africa and Asia, as well as the Asian elephant.
The move follows a conference held in Nairobi in June which brought together representatives of states where rhinos are found with consuming countries, donors and conservationists.
The Facility will aim to secure financial resources and ensure government commitment towards preventing the rhino's rapid slide to extinction.
Our Planet, no. 4 1993
Conservation: Species
Australian marsupials "on the brink" 
South Australia's remaining marsupial population is threatened with extinction within 12 years, as a result of "disastrous" management of national parks, according to Liberal Party.
Among those animals threatened are the mala, sandhill dunnart, numbat, mulgara and western-barred bandicoot.
More than 20 animals have become extinct within the state over the last 10 years — compared to 40 during the last 194 years, since colonization.
The state government has announced a review of parks management.
Recent estimates put the cost of saving the threatened animals at around A$10 million.
The Liberals blame poor staffing levels for much of the problem.
The Advertiser (Adelaide) 22 September
Economics & Industry
World Bank doubles environmental lending
The World Bank almost doubled lending for environmental protection in its financial year ending in June.
Out of total environmental lending of US$2,000 million for 23 projects approved last year, the Bank lent US$1,300 million for pollution control and the protection of the urban environment, US$521 million for natural resources management and US$173 million to help build up environmental protection institutions in developing countries.
In its report, The World Bank and the Environment 1993, the Bank acknowledges that despite the increase in lending, a number of weaknesses remain in its environmental policies, particularly on public consultation.
"In many of the projects surveyed, consultation with affected populations and local non-governmental organisations (NGOs) had been limited at best.
Where it did occur, it helped improve project design and correct local misconceptions of investments and their impact,"the report says.
The Bank pulled out of India's Narmada project after widespread criticism of the large-scale involuntary resettlement involved [see Energy section, below].
A recent Bank project in north-west Brazil, Planaforo, which aims to help correct some of the damage caused to indigenous peoples by the Bank-funded road through Rondonia state, has itself come under attack.
Local NGOs criticised the tiny proportion of the US$167 million funding going to indigenous people, just 1.8 per cent of the total, and called for stricter controls on the use of the funds by Brazilian government agencies.
The 300 surviving Uru Eu Wau Wau Indians, whose lands were opened up to outside exploitation by the road project, are said to be suffering from diseases brought in by illegal miners.
A team from the government's Indian agency, Funai, has been accused of illegally removing timber from the area.
Financial Times 28 September Guardian 28 September
Economics & Industry
EC adopts pollution control legislation
The European Commission has adopted draft legislation on integrated pollution prevention and control aimed at achieving "a balanced system for reduction of emissions from industrial installations into the air, water and soil" .
The draft emphasises the use of best available technology and maximising transparency and public access to information on pollution control.
It also calls for a simplified system of authorization, with industrial licensing being concentrated in a single agency.
The Commission presently hopes that the directive will be adopted by mid-1995.
It would apply to new plants almost immediately, while new licenses for existing plants would have to be sought within 10 years, and renewed at least every decade to take account of advances in pollution control technology.
Environment Business 22 September
Energy
EC goes soft on fridge energy
Recommendations from energy experts for sharp cuts in energy consumption by refrigerators are being ignored by the European Commission, which is seeking to reduce fridge and freezer energy consumption by 10 per cent by 1 January 1997.
Environmentalists argue that this target could be met within a year by using existing technology such as improved insulation and door seals.
Greenpeace says the standards applied in Germany, where fridges use up to 50 per cent less energy than elsewhere, should be the European norm.
The European 9-12 September
Energy
India to review Narmada project
The Indian government has agreed to hold a public review of the Sardar Sarovar dam project on the Narmada river after protesters called off threats to drown themselves in the river in an effort to stop the project.
Leading environmentalist Medha Paktar and 400 others were arrested to prevent them commiting samarpan (self-sacrifice) in protest against the dam project, which would force 250,000 tribal people to move from the Narmada valley.
They were released when the terms of the review were found acceptable.
The government has promised to complete the review within three months and make its results public a month later.
The World Bank and Japan have already stopped aid for the US$1,000 million project, a network of about 30 dams being built across three states, against a background of mounting concern about its human and environmental consequences [see EDs 69, 70].
Guardian 6, 7 August All-India Radio 6 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Energy
Brazil boosts sugar power
One-fifth of the electricity in Brazil's Sao Paulo state could soon be generated from sugar cane, following an agreement between the state government and alcohol distilleries.
The cane is used to produce ethanol, used as fuel by one-third of the country's cars.
The pulp, or bagasses, left over from this process is then burnt to produce electricity which at present fuels only the distilleries themselves.
The owners of 150 distilleries have now agreed to sell power to the state electricity companies, and estimate that by replacing the present steam turbines with gas turbines they can increase their output from 200 MW to 3,000 MW in 15 years.
The state will pay the same price for the electricity as it pays to hydroelectric power stations, while the capital cost of the generators will be born by the distilleries, saving the state the US$8,000 million cost of a new 3,000-MW hydroelectric power station.
New Scientist 18 September
Energy
WEC reports on renewable energy
Coal and nuclear power will be the most "readily available" energy sources when oil reserves start to run out in the middle of the 21st century, according to the latest projections by the World Energy Council (WEC).
The report, the product of four years' work by a special WEC committee, attempts to bring renewable energy sources into the council's calculations for the first time.
The committee's conclusion is that the proportion of world energy consumption supplied by renewables, now 2 per cent, could rise to 4 per cent by 2020: a trebling of the amount of energy supplied by renewables.
This projection is based on current policies, and the assumption that the price of fossil fuels will rise while the cost of renewables will fall.
The report argues, however, that with special help from governments and international initiatives, the renewable energy proportion could rise to 12 per cent.
To achieve this target, cumulative investment of US$2,400,000 million would be required between now and 2020.
Capital investment of US$930,000 million in fossil fuel-based systems would be required to produce the same amount of energy.
The report makes few comparisons, however, between the cost of renewables and that of nuclear power.
The report's definition of renewables covers power generated from wind, solar, geothermal, wave, small-scale water and biomass sources, but excludes large-scale hydroelectric power and "traditional biomass" (wood burning), two of the largest current sources of renewable energy.
If these sources were included, renewable energy would contribute about 18 per cent of current world energy use.
Financial Times 15 September
Environmental Politics
EC directives "not implemented" 
EC directives on environmental policy are being ignored by member states, according to a report by the European Commission.
Complaints of non-compliance received by the EC have risen by one-third since 1991.
The Commission suggests that the increase is due in part to a growing public awareness of the need for environmental protection, coupled with a lack of opportunity for individuals to appeal to national courts.
Among the most common directives inadequately implemented were those on freedom of access to environmental information, wild bird protection and environmental impact assessment (with the UK registering numerous complaints on this issue).
Denmark is cited as the most successful member state in terms of implementing EC directives, with a compliance rate of 99 per cent(109 out of 110 directives implemented).
This is followed by the Netherlands (97 per cent), France (96 per cent ), Belgium (94 per cent ) and the UK (93 per cent ).
Greece is last with an 86 per cent compliance rate.
Environment Business 22 September
Environmental Politics
EC "breaking own rules" on funding
Greenpeace is accusing the European Commission of breaking its own rules on environmental impact assessments (EIAs) by approving aid to two Spanish power stations before an EIA had been carried through.
According to Greenpeace, the Commission in March 1991 approved funding of Ecu108 million, equivalent to 29.6 per cent of the total cost of the project, as part of the EC's structural funds grants.
The project, involving the construction of two oil-fired plants on the island of Gran Canaria, qualified for a mandatory EIA under the terms of an EC directive, but this was not carried out until February 1993 — after one of the stations had been completed.
Greenpeace has warned that it may demand a legal review.
The allocation of structural funds in southern Europe has been criticized on numerous occasions as causing environmental damage [see EDs 56; 70].
Environment Business, 22 September
Environmental Politics
Launch of new European lobby group
A new high-profile lobbying organization has been set up with a view to rasing environmental issues in the European Commission.
Génération Europe has been founded by former EC Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana, and green politicians Brice Lalonde (France) and Roelants du Vivier (Belgium).
Tomorrow Magazine, Oct-Dec 1993
Environmental Politics
French environment ministry budget increased
The budget for the French Environment Ministry is to be increased by 9.1 per cent for the coming year.
The overall sum totals 1,688 million francs.
The largest increase in funding is to go to coastal conservation, which received an increase of 25 per cent to 134 million francs, followed by money to rehabilitate degraded areas.
The budget also includes provision for 250 volunteers for environmental "national service" , and other projects aimed at mobilizing young people.
Schemes for environmentally friendly energy production were the main losers in the budget, receiving less funding than this year.
Le Monde 28 September
Environmental Politics
French environmental leader resigns, is replaced
Patrick Legrand, president of France Nature Environnement, the federation of French environmental groups, has resigned after only five months in office.
His departure follows that of his predecessor, Jean Untermaier, who spent only one year in the post.
Legrand claims the federation is paralysed by "immobility" and "pusillanimity" .
The federation faces a financial crisis, with a deficit of Ffr550,000 on its Ffr6 million budget in 1992.
It has failed to collect subscriptions from its 700,000 members and is saddled with loss-making projects, such as the journal la Lettre du hérisson, which costs FFr250,000 for a circulation of 1,000 copies.
Six of the federation's eight permanent staff were made redundant after its last general assembly in May.
Claire Métayer was chosen as the new president of France Nature when the executive council of the organization met in Paris to choose a successor to Patrick Legrand.
Métayer, a chemist at Nantes University, is president of a nature conservation association in the Loire region.
Le Monde 12, 29 September
Environmental Politics
Yeo outlines Tory environment policy
In a speech given to a fringe meeting organized by the Tory Green Initiative at the Conservative Party annual conference in Blackpool, the UK Minister of State for the Environment, Tim Yeo, outlined the main points of his party's environment policy.
He claimed that adding VAT to domestic fuel and power would help create a greener and cleaner world by stimulating the use of more energy efficiency measures, particularly in the home.
On pollution he confirmed that the Department of the Environment was considering the introduction of tradeable pollution permits for sulphur dioxide emissions.
Under the scheme, firms producing fewer emissions than their allowed quota would be able to sell the surplus units to other companies who were exceeding their allowances.
Similar charges for water pollution and water abstraction were also being considered.
On waste, Yeo stated that a levy on landfill waste would encourage waste producers to move away from landfill and towards other methods of disposal, including recycling.
Financial Times 8 October
Forests
New forestry monitoring body established
A new international organisation, the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), has been set up by environmental groups with the aim of setting worldwide standards for good forest management.
Established by the World Wide Fund for Nature and other environmental groups, the FSC will accredit independent certification companies that will in turn certify that timber products achieve standards set out by the FSC.
The certifying companies will inspect timber companies' forest management operations and track logs from the forest to the shop floor, enabling consumers to buy wood and timber products they know come from well-managed forests.
FSC's brief also extends to safeguarding the interests of indigenous peoples and forest dwellers and to promoting timber produced by local communities.
According to the FSC's founders, most existing "green" timber labels are misleading and awarded by interested parties.
Independent certificates awarded by the FSC will provide a reliable guide for consumers.
World Wide Fund for Nature information, 30 September
Forests
Victoria's timber industry "mismanaged" 
A highly critical report on the local timber industry has been published by the auditor general's office of the Australian state of Victoria.
The report shows that forestry management practices are not being effectively enforced and that timber resources are being mismanaged.
The state's timber industry is heavily subsidised, the report says.
According to its figures, the industry made a loss of Aus$13.2 million on hardwood operations in 1990/91.
Government reforestation targets are not being supported by adequate funding and cannot be realised, the report claims.
It also argues that long-term environmental and economic sustainability may not be possible unless the government takes responsibility for detailed assessments of the flora and fauna of native forests, and for the effective monitoring of logging operations.
Friends of the Earth (Fitzroy) Newsletter, August-September 1993
Global Warming
Uncertainty on ice melt
Glaciologists meeting to discuss the impact of global warming on the Antarctic ice sheet have concluded that they are not sure whether rising temperatures could cause a catastrophic rise in sea levels.
Sea levels worldwide would rise by 60 metres if the entire Antarctic ice sheet, which contains 90 per cent of the planet's fresh water, were to melt.
But a much smaller rise could be devastating for many coastal areas and islands.
Recent ice core studies from Antarctica show temperature changes in the past few years far greater than any in the past 400 years.
The evidence indicates that the polar regions are among the first to detect changes arising from greenhouse warming.
Studies are also showing that the edges of the ice shelves are breaking up, to form icebergs, far faster than would be expected.
However, none of the studies have gone on long enough to make reliable predictions.
New Scientist 25 September
Global Warming
Hot weather brings out the pests
Recent abnormally warm weather has fostered the spread of poisonous spiders along the south and east coasts of England, according to the Department of the Environment.
The inch-long spiders, which can give an unpleasant bite, are thought to have arrived on fruit boats and are now common in Portsmouth and Worthing.
Slugs, aphids, rats and pigeons also thrived in the mild winters and hot summers between 1988 and 1990 causing considerable crop damage.
The report explores the effects of the warm weather "the winter of 1988/89 was the warmest in central England since 1659" on plants and animals, although it says there is no evidence that global warming was responsible for the high temperatures.
Grapes and sunflowers flourished in southern England but the real winners were suppliers of insecticides: sales to agriculture and horticulture rose by more than a third in 1989.
Financial Times 24 September
Nuclear Power
Finnish MPs reject nuclear plan
Members of the Finnish parliament voted by 107 to 90 to reject a proposal to build a fifth nuclear power station.
The project to build a 1,000-MW station, was first considered in the mid-1970s, but frozen after the Chernobyl disaster in 1986.
The plant, which would have cost between £1,100 million and £1,700 million, had already been backed by the cabinet, but was rejected by MPs on environmental grounds, despite the boost it would have given to recession-hit Finnish industry.
Finland has four nuclear power stations, generating 2,300 MW of about one-third of its total electricity needs.
Greenpeace described the result of the vote as "of worldwide significance" .
Financial Times 21 September Guardian 25 September
Nuclear Power
China refuses to help Kazakh clean-up
China has rejected an appeal from Kazakhstan for help in cleaning up an area of Kazakh territory adjacent to China's Lop Nor nuclear test site.
Tests have been conducted at Lop Nor since the 1960s, including two last year, but Beijing denied any responsibility on the grounds that Lop Nor was downwind of Kazakhstan.
Far Ea stern Economic Review 16 September
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Electric promises to go green
In its first environmental report, Nuclear Electric has pledged to stay within self-imposed radiation limits for workers three times more stringent than legal requirements and to foster openness and dialogue with local communities.
It also promised to cut energy and water consumption by 5 per cent this year.
The company said its power stations last year effectively saved the emission of 55 million tonnes of carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide emission levels from the generation of electricity by nuclear means were 4 per cent of those produced by coal-fired stations and 8 per cent of gas-fired ones, even when the mining of raw materials and construction running of the plants was included, the company argued.
Financial Times 17 September
Nuclear Power
Greenpeace fails to stop THORP tests but wins locus standi
Greenpeace's High Court legal challenge to the commissioning of British Nuclear Fuels' (BNFL) thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) at Sellafield has failed.
Mr Justice Otton ruled that the government's regulatory authorities had acted rationally and lawfully in allowing the commissioning to go ahead [see ED 74].
However, the judge also rejected BNFL's arguments that Greenpeace did not have sufficient direct interest in the matter to give it the locus standi (or recognised legal status) to appeal to the court for a judicial review.
Mr Justice Otton said: "I reject the argument that Greenpeace is a" mere "or" meddlesome"busybody, or even an officious bystander.
I regard the applicants as eminently respectable and responsible and their interest in the issues raised is sufficient for them to be granted locus standi."
This view was widely seen as having implications for future legal actions by pressure groups.
Greenpeace had argued that the commissioning tests, which involve the use of radioactive materials, should not have been allowed before a final decision on the plant's go-ahead.
The government is expected to take a decision on whether the plant will be allowed to open within a month or two of the ending of the latest round of public consultations on 4 October.
Greenpeace executive director Lord Melchett said that if the government gave the go-ahead without calling a public inquiry, Greenpeace would return to the courts to seek a second judicial review "with our right to do so already established" .
Greenpeace has meanwhile challenged BNFL's claim, in letters to members of parliament, that 5,450 jobs will be lost if THORP is not allowed to go ahead.
It said the figure was four times greater than the estimate made recently by the independent Henley Centre, and that the company was "ruthlessly exploiting the jobs issue" .
* A report submitted as part of the public consultations on THORP says that an extra 200 fatal cancers and 10,000 skin cancers will be caused by the first 10 years of discharges from the plant.
The report by Terramares, a group of Oxford scientists, says many of the deaths would be preventable if discharges were reduced using available technology.
** In the US, legislation proposed by 25 members of the House of Representatives called on President Bill Clinton to initiate "high-level discussions" with the British government with a view to halting the THORP project.
The House has already passed an amendment to the 1994 Defence Bill calling for talks with the UK on cancelling the project and for halting all civilian as well as military plutonium production.
The legislation stated that the plant posed serious environmental hazards and increased the risk of nuclear proliferation.
The call to stop the plant also has the backing of the Pentagon, which points to the proliferation risks of plutonium reprocessing and separation.
Guardian 15, 16, 27, 30 September, 1 October Financial Times 30 September * Guardian 29 September * Independent 29 September ** Guardian 16 September
Ozone layer
Antarctic ozone hole increases
British scientists have revealed that the hole in the ozone layer above the Antarctic this year is the largest yet measured.
The regular surveys carried out by the British Antarctic Survey at its Halley Bay and Faraday stations show that two-thirds of the layer had been destroyed before the end of September.
Further loss was expected during October — traditionally the time of the deepest holes.
Guardian 6 October Financial Times 6 October Independent 6 October
Ozone layer
Cold triggers ozone loss
Low temperatures may be the key to ozone loss in the atmosphere, according to recent studies.
The studies, carried out at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, show that the reactions which convert chlorine into the active form that destroys ozone take place as the temperature drops below 200 degrees Kelvin.
The presence of cold icy particles in polar stratospheric clouds acts as the catalyst unlocking the harmful chlorine, rather than the composition of the particles themselves.
Active chlorine is released during the cold winter months and reacts with ozone in spring, triggered by the arrival of more sunlight.
One implication of the research is that particles entering the stratosphere may trigger ozone depletion, even though they may have quite different chemical compositions to other particles in the stratosphere.
New Scientist 18 September
Ozone layer
Northern ozone levels at record lows
The northern hemisphere is experiencing record lows in ozone levels, according to data from the World Meteorological Organisation.
The winter and spring months of 1992 and 1993 saw the lowest ever concentrations of total atmospheric ozone over North America, Europe and Siberia between 45 and 65 degrees North.
Winter-to-spring ozone levels in the northern hemisphere declined by about 3 per cent a decade between 1969 and 1989, but the acceleration in recent years means the total decline since 1969 is now 14 per cent.
New Scientist 18 September
Pollution: Air
UK government claims on acid rain
The UK is meeting its international commitments to reduce acid rain, according to the government.
It has published figures claiming that emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide last year were below the quotas given to Britain under the European Community's large combustion plants directive.
The directive covers emissions from power stations, refineries and other heavy industrial plants.
Recorded emissions of sulphur dioxide were 2.67 million tonnes in 1992, while nitrous oxides totalled 701,645 tonnes.
This compares with quotas for the year of 3.25 million tonnes and 925,000 tonnes respectively.
Much of the fall was attributed to the reduced use of coal-fired power stations.
The reductions have been criticized by environmentalists as not going far enough.
Financial Times 6 October
Pollution: Air
Labour policy on asthma week
The UK Labour Party has issued a five-point plan for tackling the growth of cases of asthma.
Labour's environment spokesman, Chris Smith, highlighted the cost of air pollution to the country in health and other terms.
Emissions of nitrogen oxides from vehicles are blamed for much of the dramatic increase in asthma, particularly among children where one in seven suffers from the disease.
The Labour plan calls for an increased effort to meet the EC nitrogen dioxide directive; better monitoring and the regular broadcasting of air quality information on the media; the retrospective fitting of catalytic converters to vehicles; and a halt to the government's road-building programme.
Labour Party press release 4 October
Pollution: Air
Sweden criticises UK on acid rain
The UK's failure to do its fair share in cutting European air pollution is threatening Sweden's economy, according to Swedish Environment Minister Olof Johansson.
He told a London conference on acid rain that nearly half of southern Sweden's forest soils are seriously damaged now, or at risk of serious damage over the next 15 years.
 "We fear that several Swedish forests are close to their tolerance limits," he said.
 "Apart from alarming effects on biological diversity…this will have harmful effects on the Swedish economy." 
Britain contributes 11 per cent of the acidity falling on Sweden, secodn only to Germany's 15 per cent, according to Johansson.
The Minister said that most nations were willing to spend between 0.2 and 0.7 per cent of their GDP on reducing acid rain.
The UK's ambitions, he said, involved a cost of 0.1 per cent of GDP.
In negotiations, Britain has offered to cut its emissions of sulphur dioxide to 71 per cent of 1980 levels by 2005, whereas it is widely accepted that a total cut of 80 per cent by 2000 is necessary.
A leading British civil servant, John Murlis of the Department of the Environment, admitted at the conference that British government policy on acid rain had been "tardy" and "highly equivocal" during the 1970s and 1980s.
He said that the British advocacy of the "critical loads" approach "the scientific method used to determine what quantities of acid rain damage ecosystems and hence what reductions in emissions need to be made"  "has often reflected considerations other than critical loads" .
This advocacy, he said, "has been seen by many countries as tainted with a political desire for delay in agreeing further emission reductions" .
Independent 18 September New Scientist 25 September
Pollution: Water
Antarctica "tainted" by pollution
Lead from car and industrial emissions has been found off the coast of Antarctica, proving that the world's last great wilderness is being tainted by pollution.
Researchers from the University of California have found extensive lead pollution at more than a dozen sites.
They also discovered that wind circulation does not, as once thought, protect Antarctica from airborne pollution.
The lead, believed to come from industrialised countries in the southern hemisphere, is at very low concentrations and does not pose a threat to living organisms.
Independent 16 September
Pollution: Water
Arctic meeting fails to reach agreement
Environment Ministers from eight Arctic countries meeting in Nuuk, Greenland, in September, failed to reach agreement on providing finance for monitoring pollution in the region.
The countries represented were Canada, the USA, Denmark, Iceland, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Norway and Russia.
Since the programme was proposed at a previous meeting in 1991, only Denmark had actually contributed any funds.
After the Nuuk meeting Danish Environment Minister Svend Auken declared himself disappointed at the "lack of political will" to tackle the problem.
The conference agreed that Russia was the principal source of Arctic pollution, an accusation largely accepted by Russian Environment Minister Viktor Danilian, who called for foreign assistance with pollution abatement and modernization of key industries, notably nickel, copper and cobalt processing in northern Siberia and on the Kola Peninsula.
The USA, which was the only country not represented by Cabinet-level official, declined to offer any financial assistance.
Le Monde 21 September
Pollution: Water
Pollution threat from abandoned mines
Recent mine closures and the proposed privatisation of British Coal is focusing attention on what is to happen to costly pumping activities.
Water rising through abandoned mines could pollute rivers, kill wildlife and contaminate drinking water.
In County Durham, for example, British Coal is spending £6 million a year keeping its remaining coastal pits dry but now has no operational interest in the network of 11 pumping stations.
After centuries of intensive mining, Durham now has no deep pits left in operation.
The National Rivers Authority is in negotiations with British Coal on the issue, and is considering legal action, although it is not clear if this would succeed.
A recent study showed that polluted mine water would start to flow into the River Wear within three months of pumping coming to a stop.
Financial Times 1 October
Pollution: Water
Water pollution incidents on the rise
The number of water pollution incidents in England and Wales rose by 4 per cent in 1992 to a total of 23,331, according to official statistics produced by the National Rivers Authority (NRA).
Of these, oil pollution incidents accounted for 26 per cent of the total, rising disproportionately from 5,288 in 1991 to 6,136 in 1992.
The number of agricultural pollution incidents fell by 7 per cent, however, while the number of Category 1 (major) farm pollution incidents was down dramatically by 32 per cent on the previous year.
The NRA initiated 297 prosecutions during 1992, obtaining convictions in all but seven cases.
The largest fine imposed was £15,000, relating to a major sewage pollution incident in the NRA's North West region.
NRA information, 7 October
Pollution: Water
Windsurfer sues water company
Southern Water is being sued for £20,000 by a windsurfer who claims he contracted Hepatitis-A from the sea off Eastbourne, Sussex.
James Andrews, a former Lloyds insurance broker, now unemployed, was ill for 18 months.
He claims Southern Water failed in its duty to prevent health problems caused by piping sewage into the sea.
He has been granted legal aid for the case, which if successful could lead to hundreds of other claims.
Researchers at Leicester University are monitoring 400 water sports enthusiasts, who they believe are up to three times more likely to suffer viral disorders than the rest of the population.
EC regulations require water authorities to test sea water for bacteria, but not for viral content.
Research in the USA, however, has shown that the HIV virus can survive, in insufficiently treated sewage which has been pumped out to sea, for up to 12 hours.
Welsh Water is the only British water authority committed to ending the widespread practice of pumping sewage out to sea.
Guardian 17 September
Transport
US plans 80 mpg car
Car makers General Motors, Ford and Chrysler are co-operating with the US government on a programme to develop vehicles with three times the fuel economy of today's models.
The target is around 80 miles per gallon (mpg), compared with the current requirement for car makers to produce a fleet whose fuel consumption averages 27.5 mpg.
On average cars sold in the US consume around 28.1 mpg, according to Environmental Protection Agency statistics, twice as efficient as cars sold in the 1970s but with little change in the past seven years.
Government defence and space laboratories will be involved in the research, on development of new lightweight and recyclable materials, three types of new engines (electronic, fuel cell and more efficient petrol engines) and advanced manufacturing techniques.
Environmentalists fear that the programme is designed to conceal a retreat from a campaign pledge made by President Clinton to increase average fuel efficiency required by law to 40 mpg by 2000 and 45 mpg by 2015, which has been fiercely resisted by car companies.
It is also argued that the problem is not the availability of fuel efficient cars but the lack of incentive to buy them, given low US fuel prices.
Clinton's proposals for higher energy taxes have been rejected by Congress.
Financial Times 30 September Guardian 30 September
Transport
US car technology initiative
US car companies are to be given government help to produce more fuel efficient models.
The help will come in the form of technology originally developed in the USA for the arms industry and federal scientific assistance.
The new initiative was launched at a meeting between President Clinton and the chief executives of the three largest US car manufacturers: General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, at which a new 10-year target was established to create a practical and affordable model running at a level of fuel efficiency three times higher than at present.
Car producers will be given access to strong lightweight materials and advanced capacitors originally designed for weapons systems, while the Advanced Research Projects Agency will help design more efficient motors and fuel cells, and the Army Tank Command help on computer systems.
International Herald Tribune 30 September
Transport
Airlines opposes new environmental standards
European airlines are resisting EC moves to improve their environmental standards.
The airlines, facing their fourth successive year in the red, are urging the EC to drop plans to lower maximum noise levels and nitrogen oxide emissions, arguing that they could increase operating costs, reduce the resale value of operators' fleets and put them at a competitive disadvantage to international rivals.
The draft directives still have to be adopted by the European Commission, approved by EC governments and the European Parliament.
New noise standards would then take effect in April 1995, with emissions rules coming into operation in 1996 and being tightened further in 2003.
The airlines believe environmental standards should be agreed through an international framework, such as the International Civil Aviation Organisation.
Financial Times 16 September
Transport
Australians "dying of lead poisoning" 
Over 2,600 Australians are dying needlessly every year of heart attacks linked to high levels of lead in the bloodstream, according to a report commissioned by the National Health and Medical Research Council.
The report found that there was "reasonably consistent evidence" of an association between blood pressure levels and levels of lead in blood.
If elimination of lead in petrol could reduce blood levels by half — as the study assumed — it would reduce average blood pressure levels by 1 to 2 points, thereby meaning that 12,000 fewer people would need treatment for hypertension annually, there would be 6,000 to 12,000 fewer heart attacks, and up to 2,655 lives would be saved — more than the total number of fatalities on the nation's roads each year.
The report added that the study had only considered 35-64 year-olds, and that "the estimated effect would increase dramatically if older age groups were included in the analysis" .
Opposition politicians accused the government of complacency in delaying action to remove lead from petrol.
The Australian 8 September
Transport
Road pricing experiment launched in Cambridge
The first experiment in road pricing in the UK has started in the city of Cambridge.
The project is backed by the Department of Transport and is part of a Europe-wide initiative to test and develop road pricing equipment.
The system involves a network of roadside beacons, with "smart cards" , complete with a reader and meter fitted inside the vehicle.
If a car fitted with the reader enters the system area, the roadside beacon will start the meter.
If the speed of the car drops below a certain level because the driver is driving in peak hour congested traffic, the smart card will start deducting units.
Mike Sharpe, Cambridgeshire's director of transport, stated that it was unlikely that any full-scale scheme would be operating before the end of the century.
Public scepticism and opposition had to be overcome before the system could function effectively, he said.
Independent 8 October
Transport
Road pricing "threat to rural areas" 
The Countryside Commission has warned that motorway tolls could lead to severe congestion in rural areas.
The commission says evidence shows that even a modest toll of 1.5 pence a mile for cars and 4.5 pence for lorries could cause one tenth of motorway traffic to divert to other roads.
Even without tolls, country roads are likely to be three times as busy in 2025 as they are today.
The Commission calls for higher fuel taxes and vehicle excise duty to be used to reduce traffic growth.
Independent 29 September Financial Times 30 September
Transport
Ministerial statements on cars and roadbuilding plans
Environment Secretary John Gummer hinted during a speech at the Partnerships for Change conference in Manchester that the government favoured road pricing or "congestion charging" as a means of controlling traffic, at least in London.
Gummer said at the conference that motor vehicles had "increasingly destroyed our cities and increasingly destroyed the quality of life of many people" .
However, he defended the widening of the M25 motorway around London, and the building of bypasses in rural areas.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor meanwhile told a Freight Transport Association conference that the building of new motorways through greenfield sites was "a thing of the past" .
The government's roadbuilding programme was now concentrating on bypasses and improvements to the existing motorway and trunk road network, MacGregor said.
 "Our efforts are focused on getting the best from out broadly completed motorway network." 
Financial Times 21, 30 September Guardian 21 September
Waste and Recycling
German recycling scheme close to collapse
Germany's ambitious recycling programme is on the brink of collapse.
Waste management companies which collect used packaging are threatening to stop work unless they are paid the DM200 million they say they are owed by Duales System Deutschland (DSD), the recycling company set up by German industry to manage its responsibilities under the 1991 recycling law.
The government is expected to intervene.
DSD manages the green dot scheme; use of the green dot on packaging allows it to be dumped in special collection bins for recycling.
However, more than half of DSD's members have not paid them the fees that enable them to use the green dot and the company, with a deficit expected to reach DM800 million by the end of the year, is on the verge of bankruptcy.
The scheme's finances have also been hit by low prices for recycled waste, partly caused by the vast quantities now being collected.
Guardian 3 September Le Monde 3 September
Waste and Recycling
EC waste recycling directive watered down
EC environment ministers have moved closer to agreeing targets for recovering and recycling waste.
In doing so they favoured a more flexible approach than that contained in the proposals put forward by the European Commission.
The aim of the original Commission directive was to reduce the vast amounts of waste currently being buried in landfill sites.
It suggested that countries should recover 60 per cent and recycle 40 per cent of each form of packaging material within five years of the directive becoming law, increasing to 90 per cent and 60 per cent respectively after ten years.
Many member states regarded these aims as too ambitious and the targets as too high.
Critics of the directive, including the UK, France, Italy and Spain, pointed to the problems caused in Germany by its failure to cope with its packaging laws.
These states also complained that Germany was dumping waste in other EC states because of its own inability to deal with the high targets it has set itself under its own laws.
The imports were said to be stifling local recycling industries.
The Belgian presidency of the Community suggested a compromise which would allow recovery of waste through incineration, and the setting of an overall target of 40 per cent for the recovery of all forms of waste.
Financial Times 6 October European 30 September
Waste and Recycling
Smuggled German waste to be returned by Hungary
Hazardous waste smuggled from Germany into Hungary is to be returned.
The Hungarian Minister of Environmental Protection and Urban Development, Laszlo Tarjan, stated at a press conference that up to 500 tonnes of waste had been smuggled into the country.
After notification from Greenpeace, German officials had revealed to their Hungarian counterparts that waste from a chemical factory in Halle had entered Hungary under false documents and been transported in barrels to different areas of the country.
The two Hungarian companies involved in the operation, Nemeth es Tarsa Kft and Plichtimpex Bt, have been ordered to return the waste to Germany.
Chemical analysis of the waste was continuing.
MTI news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 21 September
Waste and Recycling
Supermarkets back recycling scheme
British supermarkets, under government pressure to reduce the volume of waste packaging, are backing a door-to-door recycling scheme pioneered in Worthing, West Sussex.
Under the scheme, specially converted dustcarts collect household rubbish, with paper, plastics and aluminium already separated out by householders in plastic crates provided by the local authority.
During the Worthing trial, three-quarters of the 5,000 households involved used the crates to collect recyclable materials.
Now Worthing hopes to convert four of its eight dustcarts with sponsorship from the Institute of Grocery Distribution, the supermarkets' think-tank, to extend the service to half the town.
The Institute plans eventually to extend the service to the whole of West Sussex and Hampshire, about 1 million homes.
Using a single vehicle, to collect normal household rubbish as well as recyclables, is far cheaper than using separate vehicles, as in some other schemes.
The estimated extra cost of the Worthing scheme is £2.80 per household per year, against £17 for schemes using two vehicles.
Independent 14 September
Waste and Recycling
Plastics recycling under threat
British Polythene Industries (BPI), the country's largest polythene producer, is threatening to shut its recycling operation unless the government encourages its competitors to introduce similar schemes.
Its subsidiary, Second Life Plastics, collects waste plastic from farmers and recycles it for BPI at a cost of £120 a tonne.
However, waste polythene can be bought from the Netherlands for about £60 a tonne, including shipping costs.
BPI says its recycling operation will close at Christmas unless the government acts.
Chairman Cameron McLatchie said the decision would be taken "with some regret, but the difference in cost, at approximately £300,000 per annum, is too great for us to bear" .
Independent 14 September