

Good evening ladies and gentleman.
Good evening, Bert.
 
Thanks for coming along tonight  as you see  we have our  A G M tonight  and er  hope er  to see a lot more faces here tonight  
his car broke down.
Oh apologies from Brian   his car broke down.
Oh well  .
Jack should be here.
er  Brian W  Val  anybody else?
I think people shy off the A G M,because they're frightened of getting jobs on the committee.
Right then  could we have the minutes from the previous A G M, please.
The minutes of the annual general meeting held at  Labour Club   on Monday the seventh of December  nineteen ninety two.
There were thirteen members present,in the chair  apology er apologies from Joe and Emily  and Robert who were injured in a car crash on the way here.
Minutes of the A G M on the second of December nineteen ninety one were read  proposed Jack   and seconded    that they be accepted.
All in favour  there were none against  and no abstentions.
Matters arising  there were no matters arising  unusually.
Secretary's report  the secretary thanked Joan and Reg  for the club during the year  especially for donating items for the open show for the  and Christmas social.
It was a very hard job holding everything together  and it required tremendous dedication from everyone concerned.
Difficulties had arisen over the Globe Hotel in February last year  and we have been forced to move yet again.
We were once more experiencing difficulties  hopefully  they would all be  out before too long.
We hadn't managed to get any speakers this year  but had all enjoyed the previous meeting in Oc in October.
There had been a trip to Yorkshire in April  and another to the British Aquarist Festival  in November, both of which had been enjoyed by all.
This concluded the secretary's report.
Brian  proposed  Wilf  seconded that the be, the, seconded that the report be accepted  all in favour, there were none against and no abstentions.
Show secretary's report  in the show secretary's absence  due to the accident  on route tonight  the chairman said  Mrs  had done a fantastic job over the year  and he wished to record his thanks to her.
The fish on the bench have increased over the year  and he asked everyone to bring out just one fish  every meeting.
The secretary would phone to find out if they were alright  after the accident and if nec necessary  contact the chairman.
Treasurer's report  the balance sheets were circulated to all and the treasurer went through each item  of expenditure, explaining in detail.
There was a healthy balance  for nineteen ninety three  and this was mainly due to members supporting raffles  and the fact that we have not put the show stand off  at the British Aquarist Festival for a couple of years.
This had built up the present balance to what it now was.
Mr  proposed  seconded that the report be accepted.
All in favour  none against and no abstentions.
This concluded the reports.
There was no librarian's report  due to Mr  being absent.
The chairman thanked all those who had worked hard and tirelessly over the last year  for the benefit of the club and its members.
Election of the committee.
Now I don't propose to go through  erm the proposers and seconders, I shall just go through  the nominees  er  and there was no opposition.
So  er presumably  er you understand that it was, they were all elected.
The chairman  Peter   vice chairman, Bill    secretary, H    treasurer  A B   show secretary, E   assistant show secretary, R   librarian, Jane   committee  J   M   W   and J .
All these members were elected unanimously and unopposed.
Now, any other business.
We were asked to try to arrange an inter-club table show  with  Hulton Aquarist Society.
The secretary would approach the  Hulton secretary.
The treasurer asked if we could make an early start to the meetings  eight P M prompt.
It looked very bad when we advertised an eight P M start  and if 
if you members came along  there was only two or three people here at eight P M.
This concluded the business of the A G M  and the chairman closed the, the meeting at ten ten  ten past ten.
Other club business  social evening on Monday the twenty first of December  Mr  would donate egg and cress sandwiches  B W  would donate cheese  cheese and onion  Wilf  would donate boiled ham.
Secretary would arrange chicken pieces  pork pies  sausage rolls, sausages on sticks  cheese and onion  and cheese and pineapple on sticks  and would also donate mince pies.
Jack   may be able to donate some scones  we would have bingo  a knock-out  competition and the whisky roll  plus a raffle.
Prizes required please.
There was no further business  the chairman closed the meeting at ten forty P M.
Any matters arising from those minutes?
No matters arising?
Can we have a proposer and seconder, please?
Yes is there a proposer?
 

And a seconder?
Seconded.
  

I haven't got a   you don't give me one!


I'll give you er  give you an extra cup of tea at supper time.


Thank you.
Oh  hang on a minute, the secretary can go first.
Oh matters arising.
there's none arising.
No  correct.
No matters arising.
No.
propose  second  
Yeah but Joe  Joe proposed
Yeah we've done that bit  we've done that bit 
and Brian  seconded  
we've done that bit
now we're on to matters arising.
Yeah  minutes of the previous A G M proposed and seconded, right?
Matters arising proposed and seconded that they be accepted  recommendations 
 
Yeah  no no, because there was no matters arising.
Just put that on so you can  proposing and seconding .
Confusing, isn't it?
No, not really!
Right 
Secretary's report 
Can we have the secretary's report.
Yeah.
Erm  secretary's report, it's much the same as last year  er, we had two trips  this year  two coach trips  one to the Yorkshire Aquarist Festival in Ap was it April?
I think it was April, wasn't it?
And one to the British Aquarist Festival in October.
They were both enjoyable  erm  I can't really say which I enjoyed the most  er, I thought they were both very good  and of course good value for the money  because they don't charge very much for the fares  well I don't think they do.
Erm  then we had the  three-way inter-club  table show  with  Hulton and Skelmersdale and St Helens  erm  the first one was  St Helens  and that was the only  wasn't it, about April  and we won that  we, we  it was a whitewash really, wasn't it?
Erm  then we had one at Sk  Hulton in July  and we won that  er, not quite as much of a whitewash was it?
Nevertheless we won handsomely.
And the third one was at  Skelm 
Which was not organized because we don't know anyone  
which was   we don't know who won  we don't know what the score was but we think that   but we're, we're assuming that that's because they bring out all their secret showmen  who don't sh travel  they have a little core, hard core of  that don't travel  but they, they bring them out 
they bring them out at their own table shows and, and it's  
Appropriate that we should  that much 
Well that appears to be so .
I never cared for results  never cared for results at all.
Robert is  
We never saw a fish either.
No.
I don't think erm  on reflection, I don't think that a three-way table show is a good thing.
I would prefer to see an inter-club with  Skelm and an inter-club with  Hulton I think they get too big, two clubs is too difficult to organize when there's three  cos you, you're getting  it's not , it's the 
It's not that   the show secretary was er  at  club  had not done his job.
At Skelmersdale?
Yeah.
I mean he's in the auction when he should be with them  writing the labels.
Yeah.
Yes  I mean it doesn't go down well and I'll  say the things you have to do when you when you're helping to run a club, you have to commit yourself to the club and you have to do the jobs that th presented by the club.
I mean I date mine, er well I don't date 'em I  I sign the cards at home and do all that at home before I go 
That's right.
and then when I come here I've just got to date  what fish is on the bench.
That's right.
And it cuts down the work then.
The way he's doing this  is there's  they can go.
Well that's no use is it?
That's no use.
I know they were still judging after midnight  and that's no good really  no good at all on a working week.
When we got there we had to  species of fish  and then take it out and 
Yeah  yeah.
It's a good idea  it's a good idea in principle  but, but it's not a workable proposition when you've over a hundred fish  and there's evening 
Yes.
she hasn't got enough time 
one of the  didn't come till nearly quarter past ten.
Yeah  yeah.
 
I think it er, on reflection I think er I would discourage  members from having a three-way table show  I like the, the one-off  you know, one against one  because it works better 
 

yeah.
I think it works better.
 
Yeah.
Yes of course yeah, but the, you know, we, we have to, I have to make a report and I have to recommend  so I'm recommending  that we forget about the three-way stuff.
Er, we had a breeders' meeting in October which was  I enjoy them very much, I enjoy the  the talk because it's the first chance I get during the year when I can sit down and listen  and I don't have to worry about them generally, in another club, I don't have to worry about minutes or anything, I just sit and listen and it's great  it, I really enjoy that.
Meetings  once again I have to say  the old, old  chestnut  please can we start at eight o' clock  er we're getting new members who  get a bit discouraged when we have a late start.
I know it isn't easy  but erm  I think we should  you know, try and we  advertise starting at eight o'clock  and very often there's only Alan and I here at eight.
So if we could all try our best to get here at eight o' clock.
Particularly when we're trying to get juveniles into the club  I mean they want to go at ten possibly  you owe them  not starting till 
Yeah  yeah.
It's very difficult to 
nine there's nothing, you know  they'll get discouraged.
So you  John  now  Jonathan   he's only fifteen, I know he looks in his twenties, but he's only fifteen and he's done a lot of homework  so it makes him  late and it makes him uncomfortable and he's fidgety because he  knows he's got to disturb us when he goes out, he doesn't  doesn't enjoy disturbing us, so  I have to make that clear to you.
Erm  again i er the old story, we can't get speakers on a Monday and  better luck in last year  this year, sorry  er  I was able to get Danny   but there again he came very expensive  erm  but we brought, we had to bring him from Lancaster so  er, you can't expect him to come for nothing.
So  erm  and another thing I was going to suggest    erm  I need help really  erm  for the meetings, I need somebody who will help, a social secretary say  somebody who will help with the raffles  and somebody who will organize meetings, what's going on at meetings  because it's getting, the job is getting most difficult  and I work part-time and it's, it's, I'm not getting any younger  and I'm finding it a struggle to try and get everything fixed, the raffles and the  what's going on and  everything organized, so if you, if you  if you could see the way clear, perhaps we could create a  social secretary or an assistant secretary where we could have  somebody who can give a hand with the organization of the meetings 
Just to get things like slide shows or erm  videos and things, you know, that's how we're gonna  
organizing the raffles  just to get things like slide shows organized  videos organized  just a little bit of help.
Will you?
Thank you, Robert.
Yes.
So if we make a list of what we've got  when you have a video night, if you or, or somebody else has the video  list, you can say, well if you bring them back 
That's right  and we, Brian had the club slides  which he very kindly handed over to us  when he, he, he felt it became difficult for him  to cope with it  erm  cos his dad's not well.
We have the club slides in our house  so that you know  really whoever takes over organizing the meeting should really have those and  they're all sorted out in order so  it's just a case of diving in the bag and looking for  whatever you want, ever the  I always try to bring some fish  to look at, to the  the scr to the screen  erm  some of the fish that were on show on the table for that particular sh er in erm  table show  because I think it shows interest and to learn more about the fish  and it's always  nice when somebody else knows a lot more about the  particular species than you do, and i is able to tell you   quirks and fancies that they have.
So I always try to do that but I, I, again I find that  it's very erm  very tiring and it's very, gets very  can get very involved with it, so I would like  us, I'd like you to think of the idea of a social secretary  to help with the raffles and organizing what's going on at the meetings  please.
Erm  and that's about all I have to say, Mr Chairman.
need a proposer .
I keep losing me place.
 
I'll have put me 
I know it's, it's not  not 
and the report from the treasurer  can we have your report, please?
This is what everyone's been waiting for.


have the er  figures in front of you  of our  progress during the last twelve months  you will no doubt see that we are in a very  nice  financial position  er only a pound and a penny off that magic thousand pound in  in the club now.
Erm  during the year we've made about  er two hundred and  two hundred and twenty odd pounds.
Er  it's not due to my  expertise at all, it's just mainly due to the fact we don't go to shows these days  we've always  in the good old days when we used to go to shows we spent probably a hundred and thirty to two hundred pounds a year so we never had very much money  as we don't go to these shows and spend this money it is  it is a it is accumulating each year.
Erm  I'll go through, roughly through the accounts in case anybody's not quite clear what it's all about.
Er   we started off with seven hundred and seventy five pounds, seventy six, at the beginning of the year  er  the membership is only thirty seven, we have fewer members but er  that's a very small proportion of our income.
Four pound for visitors  only seem to come and then disappear  not many of them seem to join us.
Erm  because of a social evening er we had a raffle and a whiskey bowl  I think the purists might not like the E in whiskey but that's the way it's been done  that must be the southern way.
Erm    right the Yorkshire Aquarist Festival we had a coach  two ninety three pound on the coach  and a raffle  a hundred and six pound  erm  on the inter-club  we had a fourteen pound twenty five entry and we had a raffle, twenty nine twenty five, making forty three pound fifty.
Yorkshire was quite a  success this year, we made a lot of money o on the income side  er sixty two pound for entries  ninety one pound ten for refreshments  hundred and nine forty for the raffle, our  kind and thanks to  Bert  
Thanks to Bert   
it says here.
for breaking the record for four minute mile.
The tombola  thirty nine  again  thanks to Bill for breaking the records.
Five hundred and fifty pound and sponsorship  coming from the members of course fifty three pound fifty.
All our  w most of our money does come from  the members themselves as you've seen.
Er  the er  the breeders' evening  now what happened on this breeders' evening is that the  they run the raffle  then give us our expenses out of it  so that eleven  pound eighty is the is the part of the  raffle proceeds which we need  to, to e to er  for our expenses, you'll see on the other side  erm  that we spent that eleven eighty, six  eighty for  er refreshments and five pound for the rent.
Er, the rest of it they take  for the er  to keep the breeders'  going  keep .
Erm 
oh yes  excellent.
er  the  coach to er  to er  Bowness  on the bus we took thirty nine pound  erm  with  discount from last year  people who er bought some last Christmas  we made twenty three pound on that   the library, only thirty pence  course, we've had trouble with the library because  we can't leave it here now  and er  so that's why it's s so low the, the income.
Er six twenty for the sale of badges  fancy some of that was from a previous year.
Yes it was  it was.
I forgot about the sale of badges last year   
that's probably two years actually er  income from that.
sales  that were left over from the open show, three pound thirty  fourteen pound ten for the  collection, now that is  as you see, that is over from last year  last year the table show   so we actually have double the number of entries on the bench this year  which is a healthy sign 
Really  that
and er  hopefully  if we can only just bring enough fish each and every time  erm we'll even get it higher.
Now as you can see, our main income is our raffles  two hundred and sixty pound, that is an increase of  ooh  seventy five pound on last year.
Paid a hundred and eighty five last, two hundred and sixty this year.
Er  I'd just like to thank everybody for their generosity  for taking part so .
Erm  we're trying to have beer put on  the price each time now to make it worthwhile  so you get a chance of getting your money back.
Right that makes a total of seventeen eighty six, sixty one  over the year.
Erm, right on the expenditure side we have our normal subscriptions for the year, A S  erm the F B A S  which you all know, there's no strangers here who don't know what these are  the A L A  and the Whale and Dolphin er  Preservation Society which we have taken on as a personal thing  in the, in the er  name of the club  because it's cheaper 
No, it's in my name.
It's in your name but it's on behalf of the club.
It's on behalf of the club, yeah.
Because the  the, the club one's getting rather expensive  so we  yeah 
Eighteen pounds.
so we decided to join that for this year.
The rent for the club room er five pound per go, a hundred and fifteen pound  erm the Christmas social, we spent fif thirty five fifty one on the refreshments and seven eighty nine on the whisky, making a forty three forty expenditure  the club trophies, we spent nineteen pound fifty this year and we saved a lot of money on that this year, we spent about a hundred and thirty to forty last year  erm so we have got a  quite a difference  just trying to find last year's  erm  there they are  trophies, a hundred and sixteen pound we paid last year  so have, we did save a lot of money by doing them ourselves more or less.
Erm  the inter-club show erm  we had to pay judges  er  two of them  thirty pound, we would normally have got Keith  for nothing, I know that   we had two judges so we had to pay them  er we did like  so that's two fifty pounds and we bought some  we had some old trophies which we were able to buy plates for  to use for that event.
Erm  postage and stationery eight forty four  raffle tickets  ten thirty eight  raffle prizes, sixteen twenty four,if I'm short.
Erm  table show judges, we had a table at the beginning of the year when we had the gentleman from Runcorn, what's his name?
Paul.
Paul came to  came to judge  erm  er that's the only time we've had a judge.
Er  hundred and forty pound for the coach to Yorkshire  which we got  on the other side, a hundred and six pound back so the  club  er  sponsored that, a hundred and thirty four pound, and thirty four pound.
Erm   right the open show  fifty nine ninety five for the hire of the hall, much the same as last year, it's keeping pretty well down  er, it's, we paid fifty three eighty last year, but I think because  little bit for a longer time this year.
Erm  the judges, seventy five  er  and that's ten pound less than last year, maybe because we're struggling to get judges  forty two pound for the trophies  erm    er, fifteen pound for the fish tank  and plates at seventy five forty seven, crisps, eight seventy eight, which we struggled to sell  we think you could sell crisps but we had a struggle.
Postage, stationery, fourteen O six  raffle tickets, eleven pound, making a total of two thirty twenty six  as against on the other side the income, three ninety six  so we made a hundred and sixty six pound on  on the open show  which is a great  increase on last year because last year we only made  twelve pounds something  twelve pound and a penny we made last year, so this is a great increase.
the coach to   the breeders' evening  that's what I mentioned before, we paid for the refreshments and the rent  show secretary has only claimed two pounds which is a scandal really  she's probably paid twenty out, twenty pounds 
Yeah  I think so cos she's sitting here smiling.
So Joe doesn't get so many mushy peas.
Er  champion of champions  we've, I bought some prizes for the champion of champions, and food  er  just to go with the trophies  er Keith  again was our judge and erm  knowing that he doesn't  willingly accept money, he wants to come and do it for nothing  erm  how many proposed that we  buy him something  a bottle to take with him, so we bought him a bottle of wine to take with him and er  that was the three pound.
So that gives us a total  expenditure of seven eighty seven sixty two for the year  and that leaves us with a balance  er of the year and that's nine ninety eight ninety nine pence.
So we're exceedingly well off really  for the size of the club  and my trip to  Amazon, up the Amazon collecting fish gets nearer and nearer 
Gets nearer every day  You wouldn't get 
Erm 
very far on a thousand pound though, would you?
Well as I say  I mean we're doing very well  and all the money  and, and you know, ninety percent of the money comes out of the  the er  the members' pockets really  I mean ev even the sub for the open show, we put out a lot of that  even  the stuff  and things like this, so we do provide an awful lot of money.
Er  we haven't used very much of it this year  I mean I think er  I mentioned a few weeks ago the, the  question of trips out  perhaps in the spring to do fish  and that, we could consider  er  we don't want to just go er  accumulating money for the sake of it  erm, we want to get some benefit out of the money we've got.
Erm  we may of course go to  Bowness next year  if the circumstances change and we can manage it  that will course cost a fair amount of money  but that remains to be seen, we'll have to wait and see how the club progresses during the year  whether we think we can do it .
Right, any questions?
No?
We don't  them.
We don't  with thousand pound in his back pocket  can't be bad.
It's coming to the stage soon when we'll have to put it in a building society, get some interest on it.
I mean  sh shame in the banks  I mean we don't get charges any charges from this bank, I mean if, if you er  put it in some banks you get interest  charge you on your cheques and all sorts of things, it, it's as broad as it's long usually  but er  I mean we are gonna accumulate money, I don't think we should accumulate very much more now, we, we've ample funds for everything we need  er  but it's a question 
But it's just lying in the bank dormant and it's not making any interest  I know it's not being, I know we're not being charged but 
Trouble is  
 
building society, I don't know  they do it.
Maybe you could  the only way we could do it is  er a joint account  and that would be have to be based on trust  you know, a mutual trust between er y your two main people  er y you would just have to trust them  erm  nobody, how do members feel about if you 
That's true.
Well it's a  and stuff like that, I mean  
But I mean I
 
the reason I propose  giving   he has to do is come  
It's embarrassing.
and sometimes he, he, he feels it be putting on those  
Yes  yes  and he's such a nice man and he does it so willingly if he can.
That's why he's  
Yes.
Oh, I'll have one off him, yeah
when it's done like, you know it's going 
Oh yes, I'll have one him.
Yeah, he's doing it.
Yes  yes.
We are struggling with judges aren't we?
And what about, you know  about the judges, don't you?
Yes, but it doesn't  
I just mentioned it er  we have we have had a suggestion from B class judges    that er  that the B class judges can show at er  an, an open show  providing, providing they declare beforehand  
Providing they declare their interests   
it is what I've always thought for a long time that  somebody like Brian   if he's not  if he's not showing at our fish  at our show, even as an A class judge, I, I  fail to see why he can't  judge at our show  it's, he goes to  Skelm and, and judges there and our fish will be there or    strange really when we're struggling for judges that, that we don't do these things.
Yeah, but we're looking at the financial side, aren't we really?
W with Brian  
Well I know  I mean it  we're struggling to get judges, aren't we, and it's not going to get any better, it's going 
No.
to get worse if anything, not better  the way things are going.
We're obviously  obviously  thinking along these lines  
 
Is there?
He, he was   apparently  and then  on the Saturday or Sunday h h he, he  started to reject so he had to go back in.
Oh.
Yeah.
Where did he used to live?
Yes.
Where was he from?
So all, all the A class judges are getting a little bit long in the tooth now 
No more questions?
No one, no more questions?
I'd like er  to thank Alan  for being involved  erm  a proposer and seconder?
Proposed by  Steve   seconded by 
Right er   please  can we have your report please.
Well it's not much, I mean 
You would like to see more  on the tables 


Well we have had more fish out  yeah  we have had more fish out 
in the show 
Pardon?
Where did we come in the show ?
Ninth
Ninth
Ninth
that wasn't too bad.
I shall put in the report must do better!


do better!


we do want more fish out.
any comment about  the s the sort of format of the table show  do we want to change them at all 
How, how did it work out on the champion of champions night with having the  the table show, the full table show that we cancelled when Danny  came  er how did it work er did it work out comfortably?
Oh yeah 
Er I felt, I've been after Danny for nearly twelve months to come see  and not been able to get him on the night I want him  the only night he was able, was available was  I think it was one night when we had something else on  I can't remember what it was.
Erm  I think it was an inter-club actually, oh the inter-club table show  was the only night he could manage and that was no good to us  so erm  we, we  the only way we could do it was to t bring him the night that there was a full table show  transfer the full table show to the champion of champions  judge that first  and put the winning fish into the champion of champions and I know, well it's gonna be  woof  you know  a rush and that will, oh well, never mind.
Least we knew we'd get some extra fish didn't we?
yeah it's good that they had a fairer chance of getting on to the tables 
twenty minutes 
So erm I'm  you kn I don't propose to do that again because I wouldn't er  I wouldn't arrange a speaker if we had a full table show but  it's nice to know that it did work out because we were, I was forced into a corner a little bit  erm and I think it was worth it because we  as I say I've waited a long time for Danny and he was well worth  listening to, I can listen to Danny for hours because he  he just speaks  and, and tells you about his fish, I'm, I'm very  very fond of listening to Danny cos I think he gives a good talk.
 
he has  he  the same problems that we've all had  you know erm  and yes he's, he's, he's very easy to listen to  despite the fact that he's a southerner.


But we'll forgive him that 
He comes from near Windsor, doesn't he, cos he said he has a mate has a fish shop in Windsor  
That's right 
often go to Windsor
That's right.
We was looking at a video 
erm it's an old one  and it's called Fancy Fish  and we were sorting our videos out to list 'em   and then we'll make a list  and then we'd let you have and then if you want a video and that, you know what you got  and we were looking through this Fancy Fish  and it's erm I don't know if you remember it, it shows an open show  at Oxford   
Oh yeah, I think so.
Yes I remember.
Anyway  it's an open show 
Yeah
I think the 
and he's got longer hair.
Yeah  yeah 
Yeah
Well he still looks young, I mean despite the fact that he's a grandfather I think twice over 
Grandfather for years 
been a grandfather for years.
He's got a  a   Oh dear .
Right er  may I just make one comment on   by bringing the  table show  with Danny   and er th champion of champions   it er  it er I don't know how many people   champion of champions,
Can't hear you.
you know, I, I couldn't bring all the fish  I mean I just put some on the table   I couldn't bring all the champion of champions
Cos of the tank  couldn't carry it.
because of the time and the 
Yeah
It probably would never happen again cos it was 
Yeah it was a lot of work 
Yes  yes.
We had no  how many people showed on Monday?five of them?
Yeah.
There's a lot of it actually, it'd be nice if 
I realize that, you know  I would say  five of them  five people  in both departments  champion of champions   let's hope that it never happens again, you know, these things do happen.
Well  is on that, you know.
There was yourself  and , Jack  
and   er 
You didn't bring any ?
No I didn't bring any, no 
Erm  that gentleman
 
 
Was it the cold water temperature 
It could have been worse  could have been worse.
Would only be 
Couldn't have been really much better really,
Well 
Yeah
Well he was dashing out when I  when I called him  erm his wife answered the phone and she said  you just  him he's going out at the door  so he came rushing back and I said I wanted him to judge  champion of champions and  the  and I said there'll be two  and he said, hang on, and he's write it down said I'll just stick it all at one and see to it when I come back, oh I gotta go and he went.
Yeah.
And that was it.
Yeah yeah  yeah.
Well he, he appreciated  at the previous table show on the sixth of October  and that was a case when it was always  you know, because Danny only told me on that night that he could come.
Yeah.
So it was all a hotchpotch, it was all  and I had to do the  the best  I could for those who showed fish and that was the only way I could do it.
Right er  thanks Emily  for your report.
Any proposers and seconders?
I'll propose Emily's report and, and in doing so I'd like to say  thank you to her for her sterling work this year, I think she's done a terrific job  erm and I'd like to thank her personally for the help she's given me over the year.
I couldn't have managed without her.
Any seconders?
Got to get your name in the minutes somehow.
Right, thanks Emily.
Erm  librarian's report 
sixty P and thirty P
Oh is it?
Thirty pence.
Yeah well 
We auc we auctioned  the books after as you know  and erm  so I  I'll have to make a new list of what's left and let you have it.
I know I, I will be against 
they take books out once or twice and then  the older members don't take 'em out 
I mean I know it's difficult 
Yeah.
having them at home  I mean  erm   
Yeah
but they're still not  
They didn't  they didn't take them out of the  Joe  you know  erm 
 
er I think we get a saturation point and the thing that annoys me is  that young fellow who came to the club  had a   got, we got a special  went to the special trouble of getting a  for him  and I cannot get it off him and he lives up Newton way somewhere  I've been to him three times 
I've been to that house   
and I've I've phoned three or four times  and you can get no reply  and I'm, I'm a bit cheesed off with it  cos this is the second time 
small claims court.
For want of a better word they're actually stolen   books are stolen.
I'll get it  I'll get it back, I know where he lives.
Do you?
I mean   
Yes I've phoned and I've written three times  and I've written to his mother  our official letter, official no headed notepaper  she's not there, she works as a nurse doesn't she?
She's not in till nine o' clock.
Well they  anyway, were they?
They were  
 
order it specially  cos it's not a book you'd ask for often, is it I suppose.
Yes I know er yes I er er I er er I, I think it's a good thing  that people, if they ask for information, you've got to buy books to get them.
But what's aggrieved me is that he's just waltzed off with it  and not  
It looks like he just  and come here just to get a book.
I'll ask him  and he's, he's just ignoring all the er 
That's right  a letter that we're taking him to court 
I know there's a couple  
 
Erm 
yes.
What was his name?
 
Alan .