

South Cambridgeshire District Council South Cambridgeshire Hall, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 1PB Telephone (0223) 351795
Dear Resident, The Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards (CIMAH) Regulations introduced by the UK Government in 1984 required many chemical companies with large stocks of potentially hazardous chemicals to notify local residents that such chemicals are being stored or used and what actions residents should take in the event of a serious emergency.
The CIBA-GEIGY Works at Duxford is not affected by these regulations because the quantities of chemicals stored there are below the minimum levels set under the CIMAH regulations.
It is however felt by both Company and the County and District Councils that against the background of EEC directives, increasing regulations and a more open attitude to information, it is appropriate to fully inform the local residents about what to do if a major incident does occur.
This is in the nature of "Be Prepared" .
Over recent months Cambridgeshire County Council have been working closely with CIBA-GEIGY Plastics, Duxford to produce an Off-Site Emergency Plan for the Duxford Works.
This has now been completed.
For the purposes of the plan, we have taken a fire as our incident.
We would like to tell you the procedures we will follow in the unlikely event of such a fire giving off toxic fumes.
The plan is based on alerting the residents in the path of the smoke or fumes and telling them in which direction to move and where to go.
No siren will be used and the alert will be given by verbal warning arranged by the Police.
Rest Centres have been earmarked and routes and alerting procedures pre-planned.
The decision to prepare an Off-Site Emergency Plan at Duxford is not because there is an increased potential for an off-site or on-site emergency at CIBA-GEIGY.
Stock holdings of chemicals have not increased significantly over the past 20 years and there are no plans for a major increase in them in the foreseeable future.
Furthermore during the whole history of over 50 years there has never been an incident which would have required an Off-Site Emergency Plan to be put into action.
Fire security measures are continually updated and improved so that the chance of fire has been even further reduced.
If you have questions about the Off-Site Emergency Plan, or are unclear about what is involved, we shall be holding a public meeting for you to meet representatives from the Emergency Services, the Health Authority, the District and County Councils and CIBA-GEIGY Plastics.
They will be there to explain the plan and answer any questions which you may like to raise.
The meeting will take place on Tuesday 16th May at 8 pm in the CIBA-GEIGY Canteen.
All residents are welcome.
Should you not be able to attend there will be informal discussions with Parish Councils and other groups in the following weeks which will further help the passage of information.
Yours sincerely, Chief Executive Officer