

ecologically safe
ECOVER
BIO-DEGRADABLE HOUSEHOLD CLEANING PRODUCTS
FOR PEOPLE WHO CARE ABOUT THE ENVIRONMENT
ECOVER products provide a unique range of highly effective cleaning agents for use about the home which have a minimum impact on the environment.
They are fully bio-degradable in a maximum of three days*, by which time all the active ingredients are broken down into natural harmless substances.
By using ECOVER products you can contribute to a safer world.
With over 10 years experience of developing and manufacturing ecologically safe products, ECOVER maintains a research laboratory which constantly monitors the composition and quality of the products in accordance with a strict set of standards.
THE ECOVER CODE
These generally break down very slowly and often incompletely, prolonging the polluting effect on our water systems, and endangering the plants, animals and micro-organisms which live in them.
They often contain toxic impurities and may be an irritant to the skin.
Ecover, however, uses only natural vegetable oil based cleaners, derived from renewable resources, which break down rapidly, completely and safely.
NO PETROLEUM BASED INGREDIENTS
These act as an unnatural fertilizer for algae which then use up the oxygen in the water during their rapid growth.
This lack of oxygen decreases the activity of micro-organisms which break down detergents.
Fish and water plants suffer too, and in extreme cases an area of water can be literally suffocated as in the infamous case of Lake Eyrie in North America.
NO PHOSPHATES
N.T.A. was considered the alternative to phosphates in washing powders at the start of the 80's, but it is now banned in the USA because it combines with heavy metals, as does E.D.T.A. In this way carcinogenic substances such as lead, mercury etc., which normally remain at the bottom of lakes and rivers, are reintroduced to the water supply.
These complexed substances are then very difficult to remove in the drinking water production process.
NO N.T.A. OR E.D.T.A.
These are added to washing powders only to give an illusion of whiteness.
They can be extremely irritant to the skin and have a very low degree of bio-degradability in purification plants.
Tests have shown them to restrict growth and cause mutations in micro-organisms.
NO OPTICAL BLEACHES
During the breakdown of these types of bleach, many different kinds of organo-chlorine substances can be produced, some of which are known to be highly toxic and carcinogenic.
NO CHLORINE BLEACHES
These are known to be extremely irritant to the skin and can cause asthmatic reactions in some people.
Cases of pulmonary  haemorrhage have  occurred in workers in factories producing these substances.
NO ENZYMES
Usually petroleum derived, they can be toxic, dangerous to water organisms, often irritant to the skin and very slow to breakdown.
Instead, ECOVER uses only natural plant extracts for perfumes and no colourings at all.
NO SYNTHETIC PERFUMES OR COLOURS
*Washing Powder — maximum 5 days.
ECOVER PRODUCTS AND THEIR INGREDIENTS ARE NOT TESTED ON ANIMALS
Composition: Coconut oil based cleaner, milk whey, seasalt, citric acid, chamomile and calendula extracts, citrus oil.
ECOVER product range
WASHING-UP LIQUID
ECOVER washing-up liquid contains whey which helps to keep your hands in good condition and calendula oils which stimulate the healing of small cuts and scratches.
This product cleans effectively without producing a mass of foam, so it can be used sparingly.
Composition: Coconut and palm oil based cleaners, zeolite water softener, silicates, soda, glauber salt, cellulose colloids, perborate, citrus oil.
WASHING POWDER
ECOVER washing powder cleans effectively at all temperatures without the use of harmful ingredients.
It is suitable for both natural and synthetic fibres and for use in all types of washing machines, as well as for hand washing.
Composition: Coconut oil based cleaner, acetic acid, seasalt, pine, lemon, eucalyptus, turpentine and lavender oils.
TOILET CLEANER
ECOVER toilet cleaner does not contain strong acids like phosphoric acid or hydrochloric acid, the basis of most toilet cleaners.
It contains acetic acid (vinegar) and should be used overnight to allow its gentle action to work, using a toilet brush in the morning before flushing.
Like all ECOVER products it will not disrupt the action of septic tanks.
Composition: Liquid soap from linseed, soya, peanut and rapeseed oils, citric acid, pine, eucalyptus and citrus oil.
FLOOR SOAP
ECOVER floor soap is for all types of floors.
Like real scrubbing soaps, the small pores in the surface of the floor are filled with saponified oils so that, with regular use, a deep natural shine will develop.
The penetrating scents of pine, eucalyptus, lemon and orange oils are released when mixed with water and act as a mild preventative disinfectant.
Composition: Coconut oil based cleaner, coconut and palm oil soap, very finely ground chalk, seasalt, chamomile and calendula extracts, citrus oil.
CREAM CLEANER
ECOVER cream cleaner is suitable for all areas in kitchens, bathrooms and around the house including acrylic and fibreglass surfaces.
It is non-abrasive and free from phosphates.
Composition: Saponified vegetable oils, water, ethanol, citrus oils.
FABRIC CONDITIONER
ECOVER fabric conditioner does not contain imidazoline, found in most conditioners.
Because of this it is rapidly bio-degradable.
It should be added to the last rinse in both machine and hand washes, and is suitable for all kinds of fabric.
Composition: Coconut oil based cleaner, liquid soap from linseed, soya, peanut and rapeseed oils, citric acid, seasalt.
citrus oil.
WOOL WASH LIQUID
ECOVER wool wash liquid is a gentle cleaner and conditioner for wool.
No other powder or softener is needed.
It has to be tried to see the effect!
It can be used for both machine washes on the wool programme or in hand washes.
Composition: Coconut oil based cleaner, vegetable oil soap, coconut and palm oil, wood pulp, clay, seasalt, calendula extract, citrus oils.
HEAVY DUTY HAND CLEANER
ECOVER heavy duty hand cleaner will remove oils, grease, dirt etc. from your hands effectively, leaving a wonderful smell of lemon and orange oils, and without leaving you feeling like you've lost several layers of your skin!
It also contains calendula extract to stimulate the healing of small cuts and scratches.
Suitable for use in garages or anywhere with a lot of grime!
AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD HEALTH STORES
DISTRIBUTED BY FULL MOON.