

World Peace
A Step by Step Approach to World Peace Region by Region
 "…an imaginative and practically oriented work…heartily commended." 
Shridath Ramphal, Secretary General Commonwealth Secretariat.
 "Once more we all owe to Ted Dunn a debt of gratitude for another book in which his international vision is grounded in regional reality." 
Bruce Kent, Chair CND.
 "I firmly believe the Proposal represents a very wise and potentially creative way in which the world could deal with its most pressing needs." 
John Baker, Bishop of Salisbury
 "Ted Dunn is one of our most original thinkers and persistent workers for world peace." 
John Ferguson, formerly Chair UNA, editor of Reconciliation Quarterly.
By harnessing the wealth of experience already existing in the UN and Commonwealth, Ted Dunn argues that there is a practical path to achieve disarmament and development through a region by region approach with a long term aim of strengthening international law.
This Book Is A Valuable Tool In The Building Of World Peace.
Ted Dunn is editor of Alternatives To War And Violence and Foundations Of Peace And Freedom.
by Peter Archer, Solicitor General, last Labour Government
Foreword
In his introduction to the epic report, North-South, Willy Brandt recalled an African leader who had invited his Commission to "contribute to the development of worldwide moral values" .
Each further discussion of issues about hunger, the environment, freedom and peace emphasises again how none of them can be approached in isolation.
There can be no solutions until humanity has learned the meaning of words like co-operation, unselfishness, fraternity and trust.
And if agreement can be attained on moral standards, to the point where they can be embodied in a global system of enforceable law, we are in business.
This was the theme of Mr. Dunn's exciting symposium, Foundations of Peace and Freedom, published in 1975.
This new study is based on the thesis that agreement on values and purposes is more likely to be achieved at regional level, among peoples of a broadly similar cultural background and experience, than globally.
So we may put together a future for Mankind brick by brick.
As a model, he begins with the Marshall Plan to regenerate the shattered Europe of 1947 on a regional basis, with material assistance from a wealthier region.
Indeed, that initiative led later to such common ventures as the European Convention on Human Rights and the EEC.
Even in Europe their experience has not always been encouraging.
Perhaps the human race is beset by problems which it lacks the moral capital to resolve.
Perhaps we are doomed.
But if there is hope, it lies in the imagination and faith of latter day prophets like this author.
If Ted Dunn is wasting his time, then we are lost.