

Facing The Future
WIN a Cuba Holiday for 2 or £1,000 cash
7 DAYS
more than just a week in politics
Victorian values have turned Britain into a more divided country.
Homelessness and poverty are increasing.
Britain's economy is fragile, run for short-term profits.
Few young people face a secure future.
Individual greed dominates Thatcher's ideology, but there are signs that her crusade is gradually grinding to a halt.
Growing forces of opposition are challenging this government.
Campaigns in defence of education, the health service, and against the poll tax hold the potential to unite large sections of the population.
The economy, environment, and Britain's international role are areas of great popular concern.
Thatcher's fourth term is not inevitable.
Facing the Future
Mere opposition is not enough, united opposition and clear political alternatives are essential to build a basis for change.
Committed campaigning on progressive policies is a vehicle to unite people in opposition and for change.
United Opposition
7 DAYS is a campaigning political weekly.
We analyse the politics beyond political boundaries, examine ways of opposition, and focus on Thatcher's Achilles' heel.
7 days
7 DAYS is critical and controversial.
We challenge dogma of the past and concentrate on perspectives for the future.
7 DAYS has a vision beyond Thatcherism, committed to progress, a strategy for change.
In 1989 the Communist Party enters a major debate around the redrafting of our programme "The British Road to Socialism" .
We report on all the differing views which will produce the only comprehensive strategy for the advance to socialism.
We invite you to join this debate in 7 DAYS.
The British Road to Socialism
For as little as £2 per month 7 DAYS will be mailed to your home every week.
And with every new subscription received by first post on Friday 7th April we guarantee 5 free entries in the Communist Party's 1989 Grand Draw "Facing Up To The Future" .
7 DAYS
Subscribe now and win a Holiday in Cuba
And for every subscriber you win, we'll reward you with 10 additional chances.
All tickets sent by return post.
See overleaf for details of three easy subscription options.
lst prize donated by Progressive Tours
Holiday for 2 in Cuba or £1,000 in cash
2nd prize
Holiday for 4 on Northumberland Coast
3rd prize
Original prints by artist Ken Sprague