

GREENPEACE
THE LONDON WHALE WALK
Once , the London Walk is taking place at Trent Country Park.There will be live entertainment throughout the day and a wide range of Greenpeace merchandise will be on sale.
The walk passes through beautiful scenery of the Park's wooded trails and water garden — it's hard to believe you're in London.
Take the Piccadilly Line to Cockfosters.
Enter the Park at the Cockfosters Road Gate.
Head towards the cafeteria and you'll see the Greenpeace marquee to the right, where you register for the walk.
The route is about ten miles long.
Further queries: Kirsten Denker on (071) 354 5100/359 7396.
Walk No. 101
This year, two Japanese-style T-shirts are available to walkers and non-walkers alike.
Choose an unbleached cotton shirt with a 2 colour print (size XL only) or a multicolour design in sizes to fit all the family.
Both bear the message "Japan — please let the whales have a future too!" 
(Offer exclusive to the Whale Walk 1990).
The Whale Walk T-shirts
By taking part in the Walk for the Whales, people all over Britain show their deep concern at the continued slaughter of whales.
This year, that concern can be put into words by everyone who takes part.
Each walker will receive a protest postcard, addressed to the Japanese Ambassador, which we will ask you to sign, stamp and post on the day.
Special post boxes will be set up at each walk to receive the postcards.
Tell Them Why You Walked
Last year, around 10,000 walkers completed an average of ten miles each in the Whale Walk — in other words Greenpeace supporters walked 100,000 miles for the whales.
So after your walk, let the Japanese Ambassador know that you've just walked for the whales — and why.
Please collect your sponsor money and send it back to us WITH THIS SPONSOR FORM, to Greenpeace, Whale Walks Department.
30/31 Islington Green, London N1 8XE.
Sponsor Form
Important
Please take photocopies of this form before filling it in if you are going to collect lots of sponsors.
To receive more forms, or a list of all Whale Walks taking place through Britain, please send a SAE to Greenpeace, Whale Walks Department, 30/31 Islington Green, London N1 8XE, or call (071) 359 7396 and leave your name and address.
Walk This Way in London
The London Whale Walk starts at 11 am.
You can come along and register any time after this, bearing in mind that the walk finishes at dusk.
At Trent Park, you will be given a registration form to fill in and hand in before starting the walk.
Please make sure that you write down your registration number in the space provided on the sponsor form.
At the end of the walk a marshal will sign your form.
Funds raised contribute to Greenpeace campaigns to save the whales and the natural world.