

anc catalogue
The ANC is the undoubted leader of the struggle for national liberation in South Africa.
The ANC stands for a new South Africa, a South Africa in which racism shall be a thing of the past, where human dignity and equality shall prevail in the life of the country and its people, where the goals enshrined in the Freedom Charter shall be transformed into a living reality.
The ANC calls for international support to isolate the apartheid regime.
Economic sanctions, the cultural and sporting boycotts, and diplomatic isolation must be maintained and intensified.
The apartheid regime must establish a climate for genuine negotiations to enable a peaceful solution to South Africa's problems to be found.
It is the pressures of the people of South Africa and our supporters around the world who will compel the regime to negotiate real and fundamental change.
Nelson Mandela and other political leaders have been released from prison.
The ANC, the SACP and other organisations have been unbanned.
Apartheid is still in place.
No Fundamental Change has been made.
State Violence Continues.
Our Struggle Continues.
We Need Your Support.
 "We have waited too long for our Freedom" (Nelson Mandela, on the day of his release)
The Articles shown in this catalogue are intended for all to show their support for the ANC's principled stand against Apartheid and for a new unitary democratic non-racial South Africa.
The colours of the ANC flag are black, green and gold.
Black symbolises the people, green the fertility of the land, and gold the mineral wealth from beneath the soil.
These colours were adopted by the ANC in 1925.
Symbols of the African National Congress
The Flag:
The wheel dates from the 1955 Campaign for the Congress of the People which drew up and adopted the Freedom Charter.
The wheel rolling to freedom symbolises our goal of a united people developing in struggle, and forging a new united, democratic, non-racial South African nation.
The Wheel:
The fist of our fighting people represents a unified determination born in the fight for national liberation.
When people sing our national anthem, they raise their fists and then the battle-cry is echoed: Amandla Ngawethu!
Matla ke a Rona!
Power to the People!
Mayibuye iAfrika!
Africa Must Come Back!
The Fist:
The spear and the shield symbolises the early wars of resistance.
This tradition is continued today by the ANC and especially its military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, the Spear of the Nation, which was formed in 1961, 49 years after the formation of the ANC, as the shield of the people.
The Spear and the Shield: