

General Considerations
INTRODUCTION
This book covers the legal aspects of buying a business by acquiring its assets and undertaking rather than by acquiring the shares of the company that operates the target business.
It is a guide for practitioners and does not attempt to expound academic points which are better dealt with by numerous text books.
This book deals mainly with the purchase of business assets from a corporate vendor by a corporate purchaser.
However, the points covered are also relevant for sales by sole traders and by partnerships.
Indeed, for sole traders and partnerships a disposal of their business will, by its nature, inevitably involve the sale of business assets.
The acquisition by the corporate purchaser may be the purchase of the vendor's entire assets and undertaking.
More often it involves the purchase of an operational division or the purchase of one business owned and operated by a multitude of different companies within a group.
It is envisaged that the legal practitioner will first be instructed once the client believes he has struck a deal.
The client may feel the deal has been negotiated and merely wants the lawyer to tie up the loose ends.
Alternatively he may consider that the transaction has only been agreed in outline and requires the lawyer to negotiate the details.
Whatever the circumstances the lawyer should resist either his own temptation or the client's instructions to prepare a contract at this early stage.
If the job is to be done well then the drafting and negotiating of the sale agreement should involve the least time in the entire exercise.
At this stage the most important step, assuming it is practical, is for the lawyer to meet the client.
The purpose of the initial meeting is for the lawyer to:(a) understand why the business is being bought and sold;(b) understand what is being sold;(c) identify who is involved; and  (d) discuss the structure for the sale, namely whether the purchaser should buy assets or shares.
Purpose of the sale
A brief discussion with the vendor or purchaser of the reasons for the sale should bring out the main commercial objectives of the transaction including specific concerns.
Identification of key issues at an early stage should make the whole negotiation process easier and will enable the lawyer to co-ordinate an appropriate team of specialist advisers (if necessary) from the outset.
The reasons for selling can vary enormously and will affect what the vendor sees as the key issues.
Examples of different reasons for selling include sales by individual vendors who are retiring, sales by individuals who have inherited a family business, management buy-outs, group reorganisations, unbundling or demergers as defence mechanisms against a hostile bid, group rationalisations and sales by receivers and liquidators.
The timing of the transaction may be connected with the purpose of the sale and be critical to the transaction as a whole.
For example, if the sale is a demerger or unbundling process used to counter a hostile bid, timing will be critical.
If the bidder's aim is to separate a target into its component parts, it has failed if the target does this itself.
Similarly timing is important in group rationalisations either because the transaction must be completed within the current financial year or because overheads must be reduced rapidly if the core business is to survive.
Identify the business being sold
As obvious as it may sound, it is essential to understand and identify the business being sold and the use to which the purchaser will put the assets.
This cannot be overstressed.
Share sales tend to be rather less complex structurally than asset sales in that through buying the shares the purchaser acquires all the assets and liabilities of the target.
Consequently due diligence forms a larger and more important part of share sales than of asset sales and in terms of legal costs can be an expensive process.
With asset sales the purchaser does not assume the liabilities except as regards employees, unless this is specifically agreed.
With an asset sale the purchaser selects the assets he wishes to buy and leaves behind all other assets.
The key to selecting the appropriate assets is as follows:(1) First, understand what the business is that the purchaser wishes to buy.
The Standard Sale Agreement (see Appendix III) includes a definition of the business and this in turn is used to  identify the assets and undertaking the purchaser will buy.
It is important to consider each individual element of the business.
For example if the business primarily sells paperclips does it include the design, manufacture, packing and sale of the paperclips or is it simply a sales outlet?(2) Second, understand what assets the vendor uses in order to conduct the business being sold, where these assets are located and who owns them.
In the example of the paperclip business it is important to know whether the vendor has its own or an external design team.
If it is external, who owns the designs?
Equally, it is important to know where the manufacturing and design processes take place and whether the vendor packages the paperclips itself or sub-contracts this service externally.
If the vendor is part of a group it is also necessary to determine which companies in the group own the assets used in the business.
For example the leases of the factories may be owned by one service company whereas the long term supply or customer contracts are held by a different company.
Care must be taken to ensure that these assets are included in the sale if they are needed by the purchaser for operating the business.
(3) Third, and most important, understand which of the assets used by the vendor are required by the purchaser and which are to be excluded and retained by the vendor.
In the example of the paperclip business the purchaser may already have its own metal foundry and surplus premises and will not wish to acquire the long term supply contracts or factory premises.
Equally the purchaser may consider that the in-house design team and intellectual property is fundamental to the business and will not be prepared to enter into any transaction unless the key employees are transferred.
Conversely, if the design team designs other products for the vendor's group, the vendor may not be willing to agree to the transfer.
(4) Fourth, although it is unusual the purchaser may have agreed to take over some liabilities such as payments under leasing arrangements or after sales repairs.
Considerable care must be taken to ensure that the precise nature and scope of these liabilities is identified and that the purchaser does not acquire more than he bargained for.
Identify who is involved
Asset sales are complex transactions.
Both the vendor and purchaser will require specialist advisers in various fields.
Once the nature of the business has been discussed and key concerns identified  it is necessary to consider in what areas specialist advice should be sought.
Lawyers will be willing to advise in areas such as employment, pensions, intellectual property, taxation and property.
In addition the purchaser will need to specify other advisers such as accountants (particularly if a report or completion accounts are to be prepared), actuaries, insurance brokers and bankers.
The important point is then to establish a clear line of communication.
The lawyer should, in accordance with Law Society Rule 15(2), write naming the partner in charge and the members of the team.
At this stage it is also necessary to specify the individuals in the purchaser's or vendor's organisation who are authorised to give instructions.
Assets or shares?
One of the first issues the parties will face is the decision of whether to buy assets or shares.
This section discusses some of the many separate factors that affect the decision.
It cannot be overstressed that in any particular circumstance most of the factors will be irrelevant and that one factor will tend to dominate the decision and determine the form of any particular sale.
Which factor predominates will depend largely on the relative negotiating strengths of the vendor and the purchaser and on the specific circumstances of the parties, their objectives and the business being sold.
For this reason the list of factors is neither exhaustive, nor set out in order of importance.
Many of the factors, particularly relating to taxation are discussed in more detail later in this book.
If the vendor's business has been successful he will normally wish to sell the shares in the company that operates the business.
The classic reason is to avoid a double tax charge.
This really applies only where the vendor is a company owned by individuals.
A double tax charge may arise if the company sells its assets and the vendor wishes to extract the realised profit from the company.
In such a case the company may face corporation tax arising from the disposal of its chargeable assets.
If the vendor then extracts from the company what profit is left, either by way of dividend or a return of capital, this will also be taxed.
Double tax charge
The concept of double tax is not always as drastic as it first sounds, particularly in the current economic climate where trading and capital losses are perhaps more common than profits and gains.
The vendor's company may be able to carry earlier losses forward to set off against the gain or if the capital assets were bought by the  company only within the past few years, it is possible that there may be a loss rather than a gain.
Also it should not be assumed that the vendor will wish solely to extract the profit from the company.
In any event a vendor should always be required to quantify the potential tax charge.
There is a prevailing tendency to discuss the theory of the double tax charge without quantifying it.
The vendor should be encouraged to consider the practical consequences or even the many reliefs that may be available.
The main reason a purchaser will insist on buying assets, and may perhaps refuse to deal with the vendor on any other basis, is that the purchaser can then select which of the vendor's liabilities he will assume and more importantly which he will leave behind for the vendor to deal with.
If, however, the purchaser buys shares, he buys the company as a separate living entity together with its entire history, which of course includes all its liabilities both actual and contingent.
Alternatively, if the purchaser buys assets he does not take over any of the vendor's liabilities (except employees) unless expressly agreed.
Liabilities
The purchaser will insist on an asset sale either because he has identified significant liabilities which he cannot risk or because he is simply nervous as to the general state of the business and the risk of unforeseen liabilities.
Specific liabilities often relate to actual or potential litigation or to unprofitable contracts.
The following are other more general concerns as to the extent of the liabilities:(1) If the purchaser's finance for the transaction is limited he will probably need to know the precise amount of the liabilities he is taking over.
In such a situation the purchaser will normally be willing to take over the vendor's liabilities up to a specified maximum or as specifically itemised in completion accounts.
(2) The purchaser may have no confidence in either the vendor's ability or the vendor's intention to fully and properly disclose the liabilities of the company.
(3) The purchaser may consider that given the financial standing of the vendor there would be little prospect of recovery from the vendor for undisclosed liabilities of the company even if the purchaser were to succeed with a warranty claim against the vendor.
Receivers nearly always sell assets.
To a large extent this is merely one example of the preceding factor, namely that the purchaser is not willing to take over all the liabilities of the company.
Also a receiver is only appointed over the assets of a company and does not control the  shares in that company unless he has been appointed receiver over the assets of its holding company.
Hence, the receiver may not be in a position to sell the shares.
With an asset sale, the purchaser's due diligence exercise should be quicker and therefore cheaper and it will probably be safer.
The distinction in the due diligence exercise is that, with an asset sale, the purchaser is verifying the existence and ownership of specified assets and liabilities, but with the share sale the purchaser's exercise is to check the non-existence of certain matters.
It is nearly always quicker to check what exists than to check that nothing extra is included in the assets and liabilities of the company.
As with due diligence, the warranties in an asset sale are likely to be far shorter and hence quicker and cheaper to negotiate than in a share sale.
Further, in a share sale a purchaser will also wish to negotiate a tax indemnity.
This is not needed in an asset sale.
Receivership sale
Due diligence
Warranties and measure of damages
The purchaser may consider that if there is a warranty claim the measure of damages will be more generous in an asset sale than in a share sale.
In a share sale, unless the warranties are on an indemnity basis, the purchaser will claim for the reduction in value of the shares.
This is not necessarily as great as the increase in the liabilities of the target company related to the breach of warranty, particularly if the purchaser has only paid a nominal price for the shares in the first place.
Consents and minority shareholdings
As a general rule the number of third party consents that a vendor (or perhaps purchaser) must obtain are normally greater if it is an asset as opposed to a share sale.
The main consents required are discussed later, but include landlord's consent to assign leases and major customer's or supplier's consents to assign contracts.
In the current economic climate, however, consents are usually quite easy to obtain if the purchaser appears financially sound particularly in comparison with the vendor.
As a result, consents have tended to be easier and quicker to obtain in recent years.
It should also be borne in mind that in some circumstances, there may well be extensive consent requirements even on a share sale.
These may arise if there are minority shareholders in a company and pre-emption rules apply either under the Articles of Association or under a shareholders' agreement.
Shareholder consents can be particularly difficult and time-consuming to obtain if some of the  shares are held in a trust either for the families of other shareholders or for employees or as part of the company's pension fund.
A purchaser of shares may need to resort to petitioning the court to buy out minority shareholders.
Change of control provisions
Contracts with the company's major suppliers or customers may have change of control provisions.
These would entitle the customers or suppliers to terminate their contracts with the company if some or all of the shares in the company are sold and may therefore deprive the purchaser of the company's main assets.
These place the parties in a similar position to an asset sale, namely needing the consent of a third party.
Examples of change of control provision are commonly found in software licences and contracts to supply Government departments such as the Ministry of Defence.
It is therefore by no means certain that share sales would be quicker to complete.
The Companies Act (CA) 1985, s151 will prevent the purchaser from using the assets of the company or a subsidiary as security for a loan made to enable the purchaser to buy the shares in that company.
There are no such restrictions on an asset sale.
The purchaser can therefore grant a charge over the assets purchased as security for financing the transaction.
This can be particularly important in highly geared transactions such as management buy-outs.
The purchaser may discover either at the outset of negotiations or from its due diligence exercise that the ownership of the assets it wishes to buy is distributed amongst various companies in the vendor's group.
By buying one company in the group the purchaser will not necessarily acquire all the assets necessary to conduct that company's business.
For example, the vendor may have used separate management companies within its group for owning properties, employing staff and maintaining insurance.
Alternatively, the business may be run as divisions of separate group companies.
Such a purchaser may choose to buy selected assets from selected companies.
In any event the purchaser will want to know that he is buying the right assets from the right companies.
This may be dealt with by each company selling to the purchaser such assets as it owns.
Alternatively, the vendor may either set up a new company and transfer assets into the company from all over its group before selling the shares in the new company, or transfer the assets into its main trading company which will in turn transfer the assets to the purchaser.
A multiple  transfer of assets may be time consuming if consents are required and may give rise to unnecessary stamp duty.
When dealing with a sale from a group, there will be important tax considerations which are addressed later in the book (see Chapter 7).
Sometimes the business being sold is operated as a division of the vendor rather than as a separate subsidiary.
Either the purchaser will buy the relevant assets of the division direct from the vendor or the vendor will transfer its assets into a new company before selling the shares in that company.
This concept is often referred to as a "hiving" of assets.
Alternatively the vendor may wish to transfer out to a new company all the assets and liabilities not being sold or assumed and then sell the shares in the original company.
Again there are tax considerations which are discussed later.
The purchaser of shares will pay stamp duty at a half of one per cent on the total consideration paid or payable on the shares.
The purchaser of assets will pay stamp duty at double this rate but on only part of the consideration.
Therefore, it is quite possible that the actual amount of stamp duty paid may be considerably less than that on a share sale.
For example, the purchaser of assets will only pay stamp duty on that part of the total consideration which is attributable to assets transferred by the documents.
Such assets include property, intellectual property, goodwill, debtors and fixed plant.
Stamp duty is not necessarily paid on assets transferred by delivery and the purchaser may wish to apportion a significant part of the price to these assets, subject to other tax considerations.
Financial assistance
Vendor's group organisation
Divisions—hiving assets
Stamp duty
Furthermore, if documents of transfer for certain assets are executed outside the United Kingdom stamp duty will not be payable until the documents are brought back into the United Kingdom.
By executing and keeping such documents outside the United Kingdom the purchaser can significantly reduce the stamp duty it must pay.
Stamp duty cannot be avoided on a share sale as the stock transfer forms will need to be stamped before the purchaser can be registered as the owner of the shares.
The purchaser of assets can claim capital allowances on certain items such as plant and machinery (see Chapter 7, page 122).
The risk for the vendor of assets is the possibility of balancing charges if the assets are sold for more than their written-down value.
For the purpose of its own capital gains base cost the purchaser of assets buys those assets at the value attributed to them at the time of purchase.
If the purchaser buys shares, the company will continue to be considered as having bought those assets at the original base cost to the company.
If the purchaser himself intends to dispose subsequently of these assets he will prefer to have acquired them at the higher base cost to minimise capital gains or corporation tax on a subsequent disposal.
The tax losses of a company may be available to the purchaser of the shares in the company but are not available to the purchaser of the assets unless the hive across procedure is followed (see Chapter 7, page 127).
Under the Income and Corporation Taxes Act (TA) 1988, s343, if certain conditions are satisfied, the tax losses of a trade can be transferred to a new company and set off against future profits of the same trade if conducted by the receiving company.
Such an arrangement is subject to attack by the Inland Revenue under the principle in Furniss v Dawson [1984]1 All ER 530 whereby the Inland Revenue are entitled to ignore each of the individual steps and consider the substance of the transaction as a whole.
Capital allowances
Base cost
Tax losses
In any event most vendors recognise the value that the tax losses represent to the purchaser and negotiate some payment for these.
However, a purchaser should not pay for tax losses until such time as it has been able to use them.
The purchaser may defer tax payable on the sale of other qualifying assets by rolling over the gain made on disposal into the acquisition cost under the Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act (TCGA) 1992, s152.
This is discussed in Chapter 7, page 119.
The purchaser will be able to deduct before tax the acquisition cost of trading stock and work in progress.
The acquisition cost of shares, on the other hand, is not deductible.
Roll-over relief
Trading stock and work in progress
EARLY STEPS
Heads of terms
The purchaser and vendor should consider whether or not they wish to sign heads of terms before proceeding to due diligence and  negotiating the sale agreement.
The heads of terms, which should be a brief document, will summarise in general terms the basis of the transaction that has been agreed in principle.
Most importantly the heads of terms must state that they are 'subject to contract".
This is a hallowed statement signifying that the terms set out are nothing more than an intention and will not become binding on any party until a formal contract has been negotiated, executed and exchanged.
The concept goes back at least as far as 1877 when Jessel MR stated in Winn v Bull [1877]7 Ch 29 that "where you have a proposal or agreement made in writing expressed to be subject to a formal contract being prepared, it means what it says; it is subject to and is dependent upon a formal contract being prepared." 
The danger of not including a statement of subject to contract is that one party may subsequently argue that the heads are a binding agreement either as the main contract or as a collateral contract.
In deciding whether a contract exists it was stressed in Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Malaysian Mining Corp [1987]1 WLR 799 and Edwards v Skyways Limited [1964]1All ER 494 that a court will seek to ascertain what common intentions should be ascribed to the parties from the terms of the documents in question and the surrounding circumstances.
Even if the words 'subject to contract"are used the purchaser should be wary of creating an ancillary contract.
Disputes that arise when a sale is not completed often centre around allegations by the vendor that it has incurred costs such as commissioning an accountant's report on the express understanding that the purchaser would reimburse the cost if the transaction failed.
The execution of heads of terms is not an essential part of the transaction and will not be appropriate in all instances.
The various disadvantages and advantages in using heads of terms are listed below.
The parties may try to negotiate specific parts of the transaction in detail.
This takes time and the heads are not the appropriate forum for protracted negotiations.
Rather, the time spent negotiating detailed heads of terms is usually better spent on starting due diligence or negotiating the main agreement.
The lawyer's time will add to costs and is unlikely to result in time savings at a later stage.
Furthermore, the time frame for completing the transaction may not allow the luxury of negotiating heads.
Disadvantages
The purchaser will be negotiating the heads from a position of weakness in that it will know far more about the vendor's business once the due diligence has been completed.
The purchaser may be tempted to take a stance it might not have chosen if the same negotiations had taken place at a later stage.
One party may seek to reject a point in the sale agreement because it was not covered in the heads of terms.
For example, a vendor may refuse to undertake restrictive covenants as these were not mentioned in the heads of terms.
Alternatively, a purchaser may refuse to provide a parent company guarantee if this was not covered in the heads.
If the heads are restricted to general terms they are a useful means of outlining the transaction and identifying the main areas the parties want to see included in the sale agreement.
For the purchaser's lawyer, it is a useful basis from which to start preparing the draft sale agreement.
Advantages
It is also a useful means of identifying difficult points without which either party will not complete the transaction.
For example, it may be essential to the purchaser that particular plant and equipment is transferred.
If the vendor is adamant that it be retained, it is better for all concerned that the deadlock be established early.
Most importantly the heads can contain terms that are binding on the vendor and purchaser.
This is normally dealt with by specifying in the heads that all its contents are subject to contract except for specified paragraphs.
The main areas that the parties will wish to be binding are:(a) confidentiality;(b) costs;(c) exclusivity period.
If a separate confidentiality agreement has not been signed an appropriate undertaking can be embodied in the heads.
Confidentiality agreements are discussed in more detail later.
It is normal practice for the heads to specify that each party will be responsible for the costs of its own advisers.
However, if one party is to bear the costs of the other it is important to specify this in the heads and ensure it is binding on all parties.
Once the purchaser has started due diligence, it will be incurring both the costs of professional advisers and dedicating considerable internal management time to the project.
Ideally the purchaser would wish to have the vendor negotiate actively with the purchaser on an exclusive basis during an initial period.
However, the purchaser should be aware that the effect of the decision by the House of Lords  in the recent case of Walford v Miles [1992]1 All ER 453 is that the purchaser can achieve exclusivity only in the sense that the vendor undertakes not to negotiate with a third party for a fixed period.
The vendor cannot be forced to negotiate with the purchaser.
Confidentiality
Costs
Exclusivity period—lock out clauses
In Walford v Miles the House of Lords maintained the long established principle that a mere agreement to negotiate is unenforceable because it lacks the certainty necessary for a binding contract and held that any concept of a duty to carry on negotiations in good faith is inherently repugnant to the adversarial position of the parties when involved in negotiations.
However, the House of Lords approved the concept of exclusivity (lock-out) clauses.
Indeed the clause in dispute in Walford v Miles was a lock-out clause in that it represented an undertaking by the vendor not to negotiate with anyone other than the purchaser.
The clause was not framed as an obligation on the vendor to negotiate with the purchaser in good faith.
However, despite being framed as a negative provision, the House of Lords held that the clause was unenforceable as it lacked certainty in that it was not for a fixed period of duration.
The House of Lords believed that a period of exclusivity would be valid and binding on the vendor provided that consideration passed between the parties, that the terms of the period were certain and the parties intended to be bound.
Lord Ackner stated that: There is clearly no reason in English contract law why A, for good consideration, should not achieve an enforceable agreement whereby B, agrees for a specified period of time not to negotiate with anyone except A in relation to the sale of his property…
But I stress that this is a negative agreement—B by agreeing not to negotiate for this fixed period with a third party, locks himself out of such negotiations.
He has in no legal sense locked himself into negotiations with A.
An exclusivity clause, therefore, requires careful drafting.
The duration of the exclusivity period should first be clearly defined.
It should then identify the consideration passing.
This is normally the purchaser proceeding with due diligence and thereby incurring the costs of its professional advisers or, alternatively, a vendor may demand a cash payment in return for the exclusivity period.
Whether or not this is a deposit towards the purchase price is a matter for negotiation.
A cash payment is unusual and either reflects the bargaining strength of the vendor, or, in recent times, may be demanded by receivers and liquidators in recognition of the duty they owe to the creditors.
It is questionable whether lock out clauses are worthwhile.
They may give the purchaser some assurance before incurring professional costs but the courts will not order the vendor to negotiate.
The main  remedy for an aggrieved purchaser would be to seek an injunction within the exclusivity period and compensation for the costs it incurred.
If an ex parte injunction is to be sought the purchaser should ensure that the exclusivity clause is clear and precise.
In particular the purchaser should not grant exceptions to the exclusivity as the court will then require the attendance of the vendor before granting the injunction.
Set out below is the form of a lock-out clause which could be used in a heads of agreement.
The introduction to the heads will specify that the clause is binding on both parties and is not subject to contract.
In consideration of the purchaser incurring the costs of its professional advisers in commencing due diligence and negotiating the binding agreement the vendor hereby undertakes to the purchaser that during the period from today until midnight on []19[] it shall not negotiate the sale of the business with any person (either directly or indirectly) other than the purchaser The only essential content of the heads of terms is to specify that they are subject to contract except for one or two specific clauses.
Apart from that, there are no rules regarding the contents.
In fact the heads should outline the transaction in as general terms as possible.
Normally both the purchaser and vendor will wish to identify the business being sold and the price paid, together with the method and timing of payment.
The purchaser should specify any key assumptions made in reaching the price such as net asset position or profitability of the business and alert the vendor to the fact that the price may change if the assumptions are not correct.
Common provisions in heads of terms
It is advisable for the purchaser to draw attention to any points which may cause difficulties if they are not raised until a later stage.
The main areas are the fact that the purchaser will require the vendor to give warranties and perhaps indemnities, enter restrictive covenants and perhaps provide a parent company guarantee or some form of security.
At an early stage the purchaser's solicitors will prepare an information questionnaire raising detailed questions as part of the due diligence process in relation to the business.
Early responses to the information questionnaire will assist the purchaser's solicitors in tailoring a standard sale agreement to the vendor's business.
A standard form is set out in Appendix II.
The questionnaire is very much in a standard form and should always be amended to reflect the  business being sold.
For example, if the business is a retail operation the purchaser will be particularly concerned about the level and quality of stocks.
If the business is a service industry, the purchaser will be more interested in the staff and existing contracts than the state of the plant and machinery if any.
Information questionnaire
Before issuing the questionnaire the purchaser's solicitors should first collect and review all information that the vendor has already given the purchaser.
(It can be embarrassing to discover that the information requested was in fact supplied to the purchaser six weeks before the date of the request.)
However, the purchaser should bear in mind that some of the information supplied previously is historic and revised updates should be requested.
The purchaser should avoid asking for superfluous information.
Generally the more information requested the longer it will take for the purchaser and its solicitors to review.
This increases not only professional costs but also the risk that important information embedded in the general mass becomes overlooked.
Although there is a school of thought that, if the vendor is besieged with questions, its management will be too occupied to negotiate with anyone other than the purchaser, it is important to consider who is operating the business if the full time attention of senior management is taken up with demands for information.
The area is of particular significance in management buy-outs where there is the risk that an unwilling vendor will demand that management devote the whole of their time and attention to managing the business or otherwise risk breaching their terms of employment.
As and when the information is supplied, it is in both the vendor's and purchaser's interests to ensure that the documents and complete copies are carefully indexed.
The documents will normally be referred to by the vendor in its disclosures against the warranties.
It is fair for the purchaser to resist disclosure of any documents referred to in the disclosure documents and care should be taken to ensure complete copies are supplied.
Confidentiality agreements
The vendor should consider with its lawyer whether a confidentiality agreement is necessary.
It may be that the purchaser signed a confidentiality agreement at the outset of negotiations.
If no agreement has been signed, the vendor may want an appropriate agreement before revealing any confidential information as part of the due diligence.
It is not essential to have a written agreement.
As a matter of common law, if the purchaser receives information relating to the  vendor's business which he knows or ought to know is confidential, the purchaser is under a duty to maintain the confidence and not to use the information.
However, from the point of view of enforcement and for the sake of certainty, the vendor should provide a draft confidentiality agreement to the purchaser as early as possible.
A standard form of agreement is set out in Appendix I. The essential elements of a confidentiality agreement are an acknowledgment by the purchaser that:(a) the existence of the negotiations and all information received relating to the vendor's business is confidential;(b) the purchaser will maintain the confidentiality and ensure that all persons receiving the information maintain the confidentiality;(c) the purchaser will only use information for assessing its acquisition of the business and for no other purpose;(d) the purchaser will return all the information and either return or destroy all copies if the transaction does not complete.
A further level of protection sought by some vendors is an undertaking by the purchaser not to solicit the vendor's employees if the transaction fails.
When presented with the draft confidentiality agreement, the purchaser should ensure that there are adequate exemptions to the confidentiality obligation.
For example, the purchaser may be required to make disclosures either under the rules of a stock exchange or pursuant to a court order.
On the other hand, the vendor should seek to restrict the number of exemptions.
In order to ensure an injunction will be available the vendor will wish to restrict the number of exemptions to the confidentiality obligation and hence minimise the risk of the injunction being overturned.
Property issues
Subject to the importance of the property assets as part of the business acquisition, it is advisable that the purchaser's solicitors carry out a full investigation of title to establish that the purchaser will acquire the property assets free from any adverse encumbrances, obligations or restrictions.
A full investigation of title is time consuming and should be started as early in the negotiation process as possible.
However, assuming the properties are significant assets, a full investigation of title is to be preferred to either reliance upon a certificate from the vendor's solicitors that the vendor has a good and marketable title (since certificates of title are qualified and their benefit depends upon the status of the firm of solicitors providing them) or reliance upon  warranties and indemnities alone since the purchaser would rather have problems disclosed before the purchase than have to rely upon a right to sue under warranties which will be subject to general limitations.
The purchaser will seek extensive property warranties in addition to investigating title.
The main investigations that a purchaser should carry out are:(1) General enquiries of the vendor's solicitors.
(2) Searches and enquiries of the public registers.
(3) Investigation of title to the properties.
The purchaser's solicitors will raise preliminary enquiries with the vendor's solicitors to obtain general information about the property.
Replies to enquiries should be reinforced by a specific warranty that all written replies to enquiries in respect of the property (whether on behalf of the vendor and/or themselves) by the vendor's solicitors are true and accurate in all respects and there is no fact not disclosed which would render any such information insecure or misleading.
Investigations
General enquiries
The matters to be covered by enquiries are as follows: Title details—whether the property is freehold or leasehold; ownership of boundary walls and fences; details of any disputes affecting the property; details of any disputes with owners of adjoining properties; details of notices received; details of services available to the property; details of access and shared facilities; details of encumbrances, covenants or restrictions affecting the property; planning/rating.
In addition where the property is leasehold the following further information is required: Lease details—confirmation of compliance with landlord's and tenant's covenants in the lease; service charges; insurance; the need to obtain any consents to the assignment of the lease.
A number of searches and enquiries should be made in respect of each property.
The searches are listed below and should be submitted by the purchaser's solicitors at the earliest opportunity.
The results of these searches (other than the local land charges search) are normally supplied within two to three working days after the date of their submission.
The time it takes to receive local land charge search results varies greatly depending upon the particular local authority and can take between one and four weeks to obtain.
Likewise the cost varies depending upon the local authority.
In addition, depending upon the location of the property, enquiries may need to be raised with British Rail, National Rivers Authority, British Coal, the British Waterways Board or London Regional Transport.
Replies are normally obtained within five working days of making the enquiries.
The vendor should be required to deduce its title to any properties included in the business sale at the earliest possible stage to reduce the possibility of the vendor not disclosing unacceptable encumbrances on the title.
Following exchange and prior to completion of the business acquisition, the purchaser's solicitors should submit a further search to establish the right to have the transfer of the property registered in priority to any other person dealing with the property or to have the property conveyed in priority to matters affecting the estate.
In the case of registered land, this involves a search at HM Land Registry against the title number to the land and in the case of unregistered land, a search against the vendor and previous estate owners for the length of period of each estate owner's ownership.
Either search affords to the purchaser a priority period during which either the transfer of registered land must be completed and an application made to HM Land Registry for its registration or the conveyance of unregistered land must be completed.
Searches and enquiries
Title investigation
Pre-completion searches
CONSENTS AND APPROVALS
In many transactions it is either necessary or thought by one of the parties to be commercially worthwhile to obtain consent for or approval of certain items before the business transfer is completed.
Areas in which consents or approvals are often needed are described below and relate to:(1) Articles of association.
(2) Shareholder agreements.
(3) Banking finance arrangements.
(4) Industry consent.
(5) Property.
(6) Contracts.
(7) Stock Exchange class consents. (8) Consideration shares.
(9) Substantial transactions with directors.
(10) Non-UK purchasers.
(11) Competition approvals or clearances.
It is normal practice, subject to negotiation, for contracts to be executed on the basis that completion will only take place once the relevant consents have been obtained or approvals given.
In the interim period the business will still be managed by the vendor.
The vendor will be unwilling to allow the purchaser to manage the business in case completion never takes place.
The purchaser will not wish to manage the business for fear of becoming a shadow director of the vendor under CA 1985, s741.
Rather, it is normal for the vendor to undertake in the sale agreement to carry on managing the business in its ordinary course and not to enter into transactions outside the ordinary course of trading without the purchaser's prior consent.
An  appropriate provision is contained in Clause 5.1 of the standard sale agreement (Appendix III).
Subject to the relative negotiating strengths the vendor may agree not to undertake specific matters in relation to the business without the purchaser's prior consent.
Articles of association
It is common for the articles of association of a company that is a management buy-out vehicle, a joint venture company, or which is owned by multiple shareholders to provide that the sale of the assets and undertaking of the company requires the consent of specified individuals.
The articles are on public record and the purchaser runs the risk of a disgruntled shareholder seeking to have the sale set aside if its consent was not obtained.
The vendor is likely to have disclosed its articles as part of its disclosures against the warranties.
The relevant consent requirement is normally contained as a class right in the articles or sometimes as a restriction on the powers of the directors.
In any event, if the vendor's shares are divided into more than one class, the purchaser should check the vendor's articles of association.
Equally, if the vendor is part of a group, the purchaser should check the articles of association of each parent company and the ultimate holding company.
Often the articles of the holding company will provide that consent is required for the sale of the assets of the holding company and of any of its subsidiaries.
Sometimes the restriction is drafted so that consent is only required on the sale or disposal of a "material" part of the assets and undertaking.
If in doubt the purchaser should insist that the vendor obtains from its shareholders either a consent or an acknowledgment that their consent is not required.
As a result of the House of Lords' decision in Russell v Northern Bank [1992]1 WLR 588, it is likely that the next few years will see the return in popularity of "golden shares" .
These are single shares in a company containing special rights which effectively grant the shareholder, normally an institution, the right to veto certain actions of the company.
One right would be that a sale of the business will require the consent of the holder of the golden share.
Alternatively the sale of assets requires shareholder approval and the voting rights of the golden share will outweigh the rights of all other shares (Foss v Harbottle (1843) Hare 461).
Shareholder agreements
It is common for a shareholders' agreement to provide that the sale of the assets and undertaking of the company requires the approval of the shareholders.
Similar restrictions will often be contained in the  articles of association of the relevant company (see page 18).
Traditionally the vendor would be a party to the shareholders' agreement and will give an appropriate undertaking to each of the shareholders.
However, as a result of Russell v Northern Bank it is less likely that companies will be parties to such agreements lest any provision in the agreement is considered a fetter of the vendor's statutory powers and the agreement is declared invalid.
Unlike the articles of association, the shareholders' agreement is not normally a matter of public record.
The purchaser should ask the vendor for a copy of the shareholders' agreement, assuming that the vendor is a party.
Before disclosing the agreement the vendor should ensure that he is not in breach of any confidentiality undertakings contained in the agreement and if necessary first obtain the consent of the other parties before disclosing the agreement to the purchaser.
Banking and finance arrangements
If the vendor has granted any fixed or floating charges over any of the assets, the purchaser will insist that it acquires these assets free of all such charges.
The existence of the charge will normally have been revealed to the purchaser either by the results of its initial company search against the vendor or through the disclosure exercise.
In relation to a fixed charge, the purchaser should insist that completion will only take place if a deed of release in terms satisfactory to the purchaser is delivered at or before completion.
The chargee is unlikely to provide the release before completion and therefore this is invariably the last condition precedent to be satisfied.
Difficulties over timing are normally resolved by the respective lawyers giving appropriate undertakings, particularly if the chargee will not release the charge until it has received part of the sale proceeds.
As regards the floating charge, if the sale of the vendor's assets is an event of crystallisation, the purchaser should insist on a similar deed of release.
If the sale does not crystallise the charge, the purchaser should insist on receiving a certificate of non-crystallisation in terms which are to its satisfaction.
It is of course a fact of life that the bankers may seek to renegotiate the vendor's finance arrangements, particularly if the purchase price will be a significant realisation for the vendor.
Further consents to the sale may also be needed under the terms and conditions of the vendor's loan stock, loan agreements and other finance arrangements including leasing contracts.
Similar consent provisions may be contained in the financing arrangements of the vendor's shareholders and ultimate holding company.
For example, a loan agreement may provide that a disposal of the assets of the  holding company or of any of its subsidiaries requires the prior written consent of the lender.
Similarly, considerable thought must be given to cross default provisions if the vendor is part of a group of companies.
A purchaser will have no knowledge of such agreements and will insist on a warranty by the vendors that no consents are required (see standard sale agreement, warranty Q6—Appendix III).
The vendor should take care to check that the sale of the assets will not put it or its parent companies in breach of covenants given in any loan agreements.
In particular the vendor should check for cross default provisions which would affect the other companies in the vendor's group.
Industry consents
For certain businesses the purchaser may require the prior consent or approval of an industry regulator before it can commence the new business or amalgamate it into its existing business.
The precise nature and requirements for such approvals are beyond the scope of this book but common examples are in the fields of insurance (see the Insurance Companies Act 1982 and the Financial Services Act 1986), banking (see the Banking Act 1979), newspapers (see the Fair Trading Act 1973), telecommunications, building societies, Ministry of Defence contractors and bars, hotels, restaurants and off-licences (see the Licensing Act 1964 and the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956).
Property
There are three areas relating to the vendor's property where the purchaser may require the consent or approval of a third party before proceeding to completion.
These are landlord's consent, survey and environmental audit.
Nearly all leases contain restrictions against alienation restricting the circumstances in which the lessee (the vendor) may assign, sub-let or share occupation of the property.
It will be necessary to comply with these provisions where the business is being sold, rather than where the company holding the tenancy is being sold.
However, change in control restrictions may also apply on a share sale.
Generally, there will be a requirement that the landlord's consent is obtained before the lease can be assigned.
Provided that there is no absolute bar against assignment, it will be implied at law (if not expressly) that the landlord's consent is not to be unreasonably withheld—Landlord and Tenant Act 1927, s19(1).
Traditionally some vendors oppose asset sales on the basis that it takes too long to obtain the landlord's consent and the long delay between exchange and completion causes uncertainty for the business.
The effect of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1988, however, is to impose a statutory duty on the landlord to consider an application for consent to assign "within a reasonable time" .
The landlord may be liable to the vendor in damages if the vendor suffers loss through the landlord's unreasonable delay in considering the application.
Whilst pursuant to the Landlord and Tenant Act 1988 the burden is now on the landlord to show that it acted reasonably in withholding consent or in imposing conditions upon its consent, the landlord is entitled to require references, accounts and other relevant financial information.
If the purchaser is setting up a new company to take over the business of the vendor, since that new company will have no track record, the landlord may well be entitled to look for additional security, such as a parent company or bank guarantee or a rent deposit.
(1) Landlord's consent
If consent is required pursuant to the lease not only for the assignment of that lease but for sharing occupation or parting with possession of the property, the vendor who allows the purchaser into occupation pending consent to the assignment will breach the provisions of the lease.
The landlord would be entitled to sue for damages for breach of covenant and/or endeavour to forfeit the lease (although the risk of forfeiture is extremely unlikely in the current market).
If the vendor does allow such occupation pending landlord's consent, the agreement should include appropriate indemnities from the purchaser and oblige the purchaser to vacate immediately on notice.
Occasionally leases do not require consent for sub-letting and this may be a more suitable structure.
This is less satisfactory for the vendor, however, as it will remain liable as tenant of the landlord and there is a risk that in years to come the purchaser may be unable to pay the rent.
The vendor will then be in a similar position as if it were still the original tenant under the lease and it will remain liable if an assignee defaults unless the landlord releases to vendor in the licence to assign.
The purchaser will sometimes make completion conditional on receiving a satisfactory surveyor's report in relation to the property.
It is normal practice for the purchaser to order a survey for two reasons.
Firstly, as with any property, a purchaser wants an assessment of the physical state of the property and an assessment of whether it will be suitable for its business.
Secondly, the purchaser will require the surveyor to assess potential liabilities under repairing obligations in  the lease and in particular for dilapidations.
This is very important if the lease has nearly expired.
(2) Survey
The purchaser should resist allowing the vendor to impose a condition drafted in general terms that the purchaser must be satisfied with the result of a survey.
Inevitably there is always something wrong with a property and the vendor will not wish to let the purchaser use a minor problem as an excuse for not completing the transaction.
A suitable compromise, however, is to incorporate a degree of materiality.
For example, the condition will not be satisfied if the results of the survey estimate that the cost of "essential" repairs will exceed a specified amount or that the property is unfit for the purchaser's proposed use.
Purchasers, particularly American corporations, are becoming increasingly sensitive as to the potential environmental liabilities in properties they acquire.
Often difficulty arises if the purchaser insists not only on extensive environmental warranties and indemnities but also on applying different liability limitation compared to that negotiated on the other warranties.
This may be unacceptable to the vendor.
A suitable compromise is for completion to be conditional on the results of an environmental audit.
As with the surveyor's report (see (2) above) it is advisable to define a level of materiality to prevent the purchaser using the results as an excuse not to complete.
At the time of writing, costs for an initial investigation are in the region of £3,000 to £5,000+VAT.
Bore samples will increase these costs.
(3) Environmental audit
If an audit is to be undertaken, the vendor should agree the letter of instruction with the purchaser.
The vendor will not wish to authorise any work which would require the landlord's consent such as taking samples from the foundations, walls or roof of the property.
Contracts
Often on a business transfer, parties to contracts with the vendor will need to consent to or agree to the contract being assigned or novated to the purchaser.
This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
If there are contracts which are essential to the conduct of the business, the purchaser should make obtaining consent to assign or novate these a condition precedent.
For example, the business may be the sole distributor of certain products within the United Kingdom.
Alternatively the business may have three long-term customer contracts essential to its operations.
If the price paid for the business has been calculated on turnover it  is important to the purchaser that he benefits from all existing contracts.
If these contracts require consent to assign or novate the purchaser may insist that completion only takes place once a specified number of consents have been given or, in particular, consents in relation to the most important contracts comprising a specified percentage of annual turnover.
In addition to, the purchaser will normally base the price on the assignment or novation of all contracts and provide that the price reduces on an agreed formula if any consents are not obtained within a specified period.
Stock Exchange class consents
Procedures laid down by the International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland Limited ( "the Stock Exchange" ) may be relevant if either the vendor or purchaser are quoted companies or are subsidiaries of quoted companies.
If the transaction falls within one of four relevant classes full compliance with the relevant procedure will be a condition precedent to the completion of the transaction.
The procedures are set out in the Admission of Securities to Listing (the Yellow Book) and the requirements are contained in Section 6 of Chapter 1 of the Yellow Book.
The Yellow Book is currently being revised and the existing edition is due to be entirely replaced.
At the date of going to press the class tests have not been significantly revised, but there are a number of proposed detail changes and clarifications.
However, since those changes were not finalised at the date of going to press and further revisions are possible in the light of comments it is not appropriate to review them here.
The comments below are a summary of the provisions of the current Yellow Book.
Purchasers and vendors who are listed companies should seek guidance from their solicitors and other professional advisers concerning Stock Exchange requirements at a very early stage in any transaction.
The Stock Exchange may, as discussed below, require the publication of announcements or listing particulars.
Listing particulars are technical documents which must be drafted by professionals and approved by the Stock Exchange and any transaction timetable must be adjusted accordingly.
The Yellow Book also requires the approval of shareholders for certain transactions and it may be necessary for the contract to have a gap between exchange and completion.
It is possible to obtain derogation from certain Stock Exchange requirements but this must be applied for in the early stages of a transaction.
The precise procedure is dictated by the relevant Class of the transaction.
A Super Class 1 transaction will require an announcement to be made to the Company Announcements Office of the Stock Exchange and to the press and will require a circular to be sent to shareholders.
Unlike the other Classes, a Super Class 1 transaction will also require the prior approval of shareholders in a general meeting.
A Class 1 transaction will require an announcement to be made to the Company Announcements Office of the Stock Exchange and to the press and will require a circular to be sent to shareholders.
However, a Class 1 transaction is not sufficiently important to require shareholder approval.
A Class 2 transaction will require an announcement to be made to the Company Announcements Office of the Stock Exchange and to the Press.
They do not require a circular to be issued or prior shareholders' approval.
A Class 3 transaction will require an announcement to the Company Announcements office and the press and for a circular to be issued, but only if some or all of the consideration is to be satisfied by the issue of securities for which a listing is to be sought.
A Class 4 transaction will normally require the prior consent of the company in a general meeting.
The tests for Super Class 1, Class 1 and Class 2 transactions relate to the size of the transaction.
The test for a Class 3 transaction relates to the form in which the consideration is to be satisfied.
The test for a Class 4 transaction depends on the relationship between the parties involved.
(A) Super Class 1
(B) Class 1
(C) Class 2
(D) Class 3
(E) Class 4
Class tests
In testing for Super Class 1, Class 1 and Class 2 transactions it is necessary to make three comparisons between the listed company and the business it is disposing of or acquiring.
The comparisons relate to net assets, net profits, the consideration and, where shares are issued as consideration, the shares to be issued compared with those previously in issue.
If any of the comparisons produces a value of 25 per cent or more then it is a Super Class 1 transaction.
If the value is 15 per cent or more but less than 25 per cent it is a Class 1 transaction.
If  the value is 5 per cent or more but less than 15 per cent then it is a Class 2 transaction.
The assets comparison operates by comparing the value of the assets being sold to the value of the assets of the acquiring or disposing company, whichever is listed.
The assets means the book value of the net assets (excluding intangibles and after deducting loan capital and tax provisions) taken from the most recent published consolidated accounts adjusted to take account of the subsequent transactions which have already been notified to shareholders.
The Stock Exchange Quotations Committee may be willing to relax the test if a significant element of the assets sold comprise intangible assets such as goodwill.
The profits comparison operates by comparing the net profits before tax and excluding extraordinary items attributable to the assets being sold compared to either the vendor as a whole or the purchaser.
The consideration comparison operates by comparing the aggregate value of the consideration received with the assets or gross capital of the vendor or purchaser as appropriate.
If part or all of the consideration is to be determined after completion, such as an earn-out or completion accounts (see pages 43–47), the parties should seek guidance from the Stock Exchange who in turn will wish to ask the parties' financial advisers to elaborate on the expected consideration.
The equity comparison operates by comparing the equity capital issued as consideration by the purchaser to that previously in issue.
There is a further comparison in the case of an acquisition by a listed purchaser.
This compares the value of the purchaser's market capitalisation and various assets and liabilities (including debt securities) with the value of the consideration payable and various assets and liabilities of the target.
The test for a Class 4 transaction depends on the relationship between the parties involved in the transaction including their respective officers and associates.
A Class 4 transaction is one where a company enters into a transaction with or for the benefit of a "Class 4 party" .
A Class 4 party is a director or substantial shareholder of the company or an associate of such party.
It includes any people who, within the year before the transaction, were directors of the vendor or purchaser or any other company which is within its group of companies (including subsidiaries of its ultimate holding company) and includes shadow directors as defined by CA 1985, s741.
A substantial shareholder means any person who is or was within the preceding year a holder of 10 per cent or more of the nominal value of any class of capital of the vendor or any other company within its group, including subsidiaries of its ultimate holding company having  rights to vote in all circumstances at general meetings of the relevant company.
A wide definition of associate is contained in Section 6 of Chapter 1, paragraph 1.2 of the Yellow Book.
Finally, for very large acquisitions (which may constitute reverse takeovers) the Stock Exchange may require shareholder approval.
The purchaser will also normally be treated as a new applicant for listing, its securities will be suspended and it will be required to publish listing particulars.
The acquisition will be a reverse takeover if the purchaser, being a listed company, issues to the vendor as consideration for the asset sale, shares in the purchaser which are equal to or greater than 30 per cent of the issued share capital of the purchaser.
Under rule 9 of the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers the vendor will be under an obligation to make an offer for the entire issued share capital of the purchaser unless a whitewash procedure is granted by the Takeover Panel.
The class tests are summarised below.
Summary
Consideration shares
If part or all of the purchase price comprises shares in the purchaser, the purchaser must check whether it has sufficient authorised and issued share capital and whether the directors have existing authority to allot and issue new shares under CA 1985, s80.
If the authorised share capital is not adequate it will be necessary to convene a shareholders' meeting to pass an ordinary resolution increasing the authorised capital.
Likewise if the authority to allot and issue has expired or is insufficient a further ordinary resolution of the shareholders will be needed.
If the purchaser is a listed company it is likely that it will need to apply for a listing of the consideration shares.
Under the rules of the Stock Exchange if the shares of a particular class are listed all shares issued in that class must be listed.
The purchaser will need to prepare listing particulars unless the consideration shares will comprise less than 10 per cent of the issued listed shares after they have been issued.
If listing particulars have been issued during the previous year some of the contents requirements for the new listing particulars are relaxed.
The purchaser should consider whether the business being bought needs to be valued for the purpose of CA 1985, s103 (exemptions).
The purchaser should identify the need for an independent valuation as early as possible to avoid subsequent delay nearer completion.
It should be noted that substantial acquisitions of public company shares as well as takeovers are governed by the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers ( "the Code" ).
The Code applies to offers for all listed and unlisted public companies considered by the Takeover Panel to be resident in the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
The Takeover Panel may be asked for advice by telephone and responds very quickly to enquiries.
It is also generally flexible about giving exemptions to Code requirements where appropriate.
Substantial transactions with directors
The asset sale may need the prior approval of shareholders of a relevant company if the vendor is a director or a person connected (as defined in CA 1985, s346) with a director of the purchaser or its holding company or the purchaser is a director or a person connected with a director of the vendor or its holding company (see CA 1985, s320).
The relationship does not extend to directors of subsidiaries.
The transaction must involve the acquisition of non-cash assets (as defined in CA 1985, s739(1)) of more than £100,000 or 10 per cent of the company's net asset value as determined by the audited accounts for the preceding financial year.
CA 1985, s321 contains various exceptions to the requirement of shareholder approval including the transfer of assets within a group of companies.
Under CA 1985, s317 a director of a company who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, interested in a contract or proposed contract with his company is required to declare his interest at the meeting of the board.
Furthermore, a disclosure of the transaction may need to be made in the company's annual accounts as a result of CA 1985, s232.
Finally, where directors or associated persons are involved, the purchaser and vendor should both take care to ensure that there is no  breach of CA 1985, s330 which imposes restrictions on several classes of transactions for the benefit of directors including loans, guarantees, quasi-loans and credit transactions.
Non-UK purchasers
It is rarely necessary to obtain government consent before selling a business to a non-UK purchaser.
Historically it was necessary to obtain the prior consent of the Treasury before transferring all or part of a business to a company outside the United Kingdom.
Failure to obtain approval was a criminal offence under the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1970 (TA), s482 as re-enacted in the Income and Corporation Taxes Act (TA) 1988, ss765-767.
The general offence was abolished by the Finance Act (FA) 1988, s105(6).
However there is one important exception that remains.
Under TA 1988, s765(1) (d) it still continues to be an offence for a company resident in the United Kingdom for tax purposes to transfer shares in a non-resident subsidiary to a non-resident purchaser.
Therefore in an asset sale, if the purchaser is non-resident and the assets include shares in a non-resident company, the vendor should consider the need to obtain prior Treasury approval.
Merger control and competition law are becoming increasingly important factors in business acquisitions.
At an early stage the parties should consider whether any prior approvals or clearances to the transaction are required under both domestic and EC law.
It cannot be overstressed that the purchaser and vendor should continue to consider the need for approvals and clearances throughout the course of negotiations as a change in the terms of the transaction may trigger the relevant legislation which regulates anti-competitive practices, mergers and the creation or expansion of monopolies.
Competition approvals and clearances
Introduction
The five main areas in which approvals may be needed and which are discussed below are:(1) The Restrictive Trade Practices Act (RTPA) 1976. (2) The Fair Trading Act (FTA) 1973. (3) Article 85 of the EEC Treaty 1957 (Article 85) dealing with anti-competitive agreements.
(4) Article 86 of the EEC Treaty 1957 (Article 86) dealing with abuse of a dominant position.
(5) EC Council Regulation (EEC No 4064/89) regulating concentrations between undertakings (the Merger Regulation).
RTPA 1976 is the area to which most attention has been given in this section as this is likely to be the most relevant area for readers of this book.
The main criticism of RTPA 1976 is that the tests for registration are rigid and complicated and, unlike Article 85, do not consider the likely effect of the relevant restrictions on competition.
The wide scope of the tests imposes a heavy administrative burden on the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) as, although many agreements are registrable, few of these may have any real adverse effect on competition.
The future of RTPA 1976 and FTA 1973 is somewhat uncertain.
The form of RTPA 1976 has been considered in the Government's Green and White Papers of 1988 and 1989 (Review of Restrictive Trade Practices Policy Cmnd 331, 1988 and Opening Markets: New Policy on Restrictive Trade Practices Cmnd 727, 1989).
Both propose legislation aimed at dealing with anti-competitive effects rather than the form of an agreement.
The White Paper suggests the prohibition of anti-competitive agreements together with much wider powers of investigation.
Substantial fines would be imposable under the new legislation.
Third parties harmed by anti-competitive agreements may bring proceedings for damages.
In 1992, the Government confirmed its intention to introduce new legislation giving stronger powers to deal with cartels when the legislative timetable permits.
The Government reiterated its intention to introduce a prohibition on anti-competitive agreements and concerted practices.
The Government's Green Paper on the Abuse of Market Power published in November 1992 considered the case for parallel changes to UK competition law (namely the monopoly provisions of FTA 1973 and the Competition Act 1980) to prohibit the abuse of market power by individual companies along the lines of Article 86.
The Green Paper suggested three possibilities for change including a proposal to adopt a general prohibition on abuse of market power in place of existing legislation similar to the Article 86 approach and supported by strong investigatory powers for the OFT, financial penalties for breach and the possibility of third party actions.
It was reported in the press in April 1993 that the Government had backed down on its proposals under industry pressure and was merely proposing to strengthen existing legislation by giving wider investigatory powers to the OFT and by granting power to the Director General of Fair Trading to grant interim orders prohibiting abuses of market power.
Written details of any restrictive agreement (whether written or oral) which amounts to a "registrable agreement" as defined in RTPA 1976 and which does not fall within an exemption must be sent to the OFT for registration.
Registration has two particularly important consequences for purchasers.
First, through registration, the terms and conditions of the asset sale agreement and all related agreements can be inspected by a third party as they appear on the public register.
Related agreements may include the vendor's disclosure letter and any bundles of documents including existing customer contracts, patent applications and litigation summaries which are integral parts of the overall transaction.
Second, if there are significant restrictions in the transaction which some parties are not willing to abandon, the Restrictive Practices Court (see below) may declare the restrictions void and demand appropriate undertakings for the benefit of other parties.
Breach of these undertakings would place the parties in contempt of court.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Act (RTPA) 1976
RTPA 1976 applies both to restrictive agreements affecting the supply of goods and those affecting the supply of services.
The provisions relating to goods and services are very similar.
RTPA 1976 applies to agreements or arrangements between two or more persons carrying on business in the United Kingdom in the production or supply of goods or services or in the application of a manufacturing process to goods, being agreements in which two or more of the parties accept restrictions in respect of the matters contained in RTPA 1976, s6 in relation to goods and those contained in reg 3(2) of statutory instrument (SI) 1976/98 in relation to services.
Those restrictions relate to:(a) prices to be charged for goods or services; or (b) the terms or conditions on or subject to which goods or services are to be supplied; or (c) the quantities or descriptions of goods to be produced, supplied or acquired or the extent to which, or the scale on which services are to be made available supplied or obtained; or (d) the manufacturing process to be used, or the quantities or the description of goods to which such a process is to be applied; or (e) the form or manner in which services are to be made available, supplied or obtained; or (f) the persons to, for or from whom or the areas or places in or from which goods or services are to be supplied or acquired.
For an agreement to be registrable under RTPA 1976, restrictions of the type listed in s6 or art 3(2) of SI 1976/98 must be accepted by two or more parties to it.
Careful consideration needs to be given as to how many restrictions are being undertaken and by how many people.
One situation commonly overlooked is where the vendor and directors of the vendor or the directors of the vendor's parent company accept restrictions.
The vendor and its directors will constitute separate persons each accepting restrictions for the purposes of RTPA 1976.
However, "inter-connected bodies corporate" are treated as a single person.
Therefore an agreement solely between a parent company and a subsidiary is not registrable, even if both accept restrictions.
Equally if the vendors are two or more companies in the same group, the agreement will not be registrable merely because both vendors undertake restrictions unless the purchaser also undertakes restrictions.
However, in Re Cadbury Schweppes Ltd's Agreement [1975]2 All ER 307 a parent company and a subsidiary were not treated as a single person where two companies agreed to accept restrictions on the supply of goods to a third which was a subsidiary of one of them.
In an asset sale, the entire transaction, namely the main sale agreement together with all ancillary agreements, must be looked at in the light of RTPA 1976.
Account must be taken not only of restrictions in the main sale agreement but also of those contained in other agreements entered into as part of the transaction, such as exclusive licence agreements, side letters, and service contracts.
For example, as part of the sale arrangements, the purchaser may grant an exclusive licence to a company in the vendor's group covering intellectual property rights.
Part of the licence will be an undertaking by the purchaser not to sell goods covered by an invention.
Restrictions will be found in non-competition covenants included in service contracts executed by key employees on completion as part of the transaction.
When does an agreement need to be registered?
Common restrictions
When there is a delay between exchange of contracts and completion, the asset sale agreement will often contain restrictions on the vendor to protect the purchaser during the interim period.
Basic provisions are contained in Clause 5.1 of the Standard Sale Agreement (Appendix III).
The vendor will undertake that the company will refrain from doing certain acts or matters pending completion.
An example of such a clause which may amount to a restriction is the obligation not to enter into any contract for the acquisition or the sale of goods outside the normal course of business.
RTPA 1976 expressly excludes from registration agreements of the type described in Sched 3 of the Act.
They include exclusive dealing agreements, trademark agreements, patent and registered design agreements, know-how agreements, copyright agreements and agreements as to goods with an overseas operation.
Exemptions
For the purposes of an asset sale, the most important exemption relates to the restrictive covenants sought by a purchaser in order to protect the goodwill of the business being purchased.
Clause 15 of the Standard Sale Agreement (see Appendix III) contains common examples.
The exemption is contained in the Restrictive Trade Practices (Sale and Purchase and Share Subscription Agreements)(Goods) Order 1989, SI 1989/1081 and the Restrictive Trade Practices (Services)(Amendment) Order 1989, SI 1989/1082.
These orders do not contain a blanket exemption for agreements that come within their terms but provide that in deciding whether or not an agreement is registrable no account shall be taken of any restriction: which limits the extent to which the person accepting the restriction may compete with the acquired enterprise, or may be engaged or interested in, disclose information to, or otherwise assist any business which so competes, provided that the restriction subsists for no longer than the permitted period.
A number of conditions must be satisfied for the exemption to apply:(1) The vendor must agree to transfer the whole of his interest in a business as a going concern to the purchaser.
The exemption will not apply to a mere agreement for the sale of specific assets or where the vendor is disposing of only part of his interest in the business.
(2) The agreement must not contain price restrictions.
(3) Such restrictions as are accepted may only be accepted by the vendors, their associated companies or by individuals.
(4) The restrictions to be disregarded must last for not more than five years from when the agreement becomes operative or for not more than two years beyond the expiry of any relevant employment or services contract, whichever is the later.
Particulars of the registrable agreement have to be furnished to the OFT before the relevant restrictions the agreement contains take effect and, in any event, within three months of the date of the agreement.
That is the date of exchange of contracts, not the date of completion.
If a purchaser fears an agreement may be registrable, it should incorporate into it a suspension clause similar to that in Clause  16.11 of the Standard Sale Agreement (see Appendix III).
Such a clause does not relieve the parties from the obligation to register a registrable sale agreement, it merely suspends the operation of the relevant restrictions until particulars of the agreement have been furnished to the OFT.
Such particulars must be furnished within three months of the agreement being made.
Failure to register renders the restrictions void and unenforceable.
It will also be unlawful to seek to give effect to, to enforce or purport to enforce restrictions in an unregistered agreement.
Any third party suffering damage as a result of such an unlawful act will have a right of action.
The Director General of Fair Trading may also apply to the Restrictive Practices Court for an order restraining a party from operating such an agreement.
Any person who breaches such an order will be in contempt of court and will be liable to a term of imprisonment or a fine or both.
Consequences of registration
Once an agreement has been registered in the register of restrictive agreements (which is open to public inspection), the Director General may refer it to the Restrictive Practices Court for a decision on whether the restrictions it contains are contrary to the public interest.
Alternatively the Director General may confirm he has decided not to refer the agreement to the Court where:(a) any directly applicable provision of EC law applies to the agreement;(b) the agreement has expired or has been terminated;(c) all the relevant restrictions have been removed;(d) the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has discharged the Director General from his duty to take proceedings where he is satisfied that the restrictions are not of such significance as to call for investigation by the Court.
It has to be noted that if one party only removes the restrictions it does not automatically save the agreement unless the remaining restrictions are too insignificant to justify reference.
In order to establish whether an agreement is registrable the following steps should be followed:(1) Consider whether you have copies of all the agreements comprising the entire transaction.
These may be a mere sale agreement or may include other ancillary agreements such as service contracts, licensing agreements, supply agreements etc. (2) Consider whether there are two parties carrying on business in the United Kingdom in the supply or production of goods or in the supply of services.
(3) Which part of RTPA 1976 are you considering—goods or services or both?(4) Establish which parties are accepting restrictions.
(5) Do any of the exemptions apply?(6) Find out whether there is an information agreement pursuant to the Restrictive Trade Practices (Information Agreements) Order, SI 1969/1842 which brought within RTPA 1976 information agreements relating to the prices, charges or terms and conditions on which goods are to be supplied.
This Order does not apply to service agreements.
(7) If registrable, insert a suspension clause.
FTA 1973 governs the control of mergers in the United Kingdom and applies to "mergers qualifying for investigation" .
The sale of business assets above will not give rise to a qualifying merger.
However, a sale of business assets often represents the merger of two businesses where it is combined with the transfer of business activities such as goodwill or the benefit of contracts.
Under FTA 1973, s64 the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, when concerned about the likely impact of a proposed or completed qualifying merger on the public interest, may refer such a merger to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) for investigation.
In deciding whether to make a reference to the MMC the Secretary of State may ask for advice from the Director General of Fair Trading, as the OFT usually carries out a preliminary examination of the merger.
Whatever the outcome of the MMC investigation is, the final decision of whether to allow the merger to go ahead or not will be made by the Secretary of State.
Summary
The Fair Trading Act (FTA) 1973
A "merger qualifying for investigation" occurs where:(1) Two or more enterprises must cease to be distinct.
This will be the case where they are brought under common control or ownership or when one of the enterprises ceases to be carried on as a result of an agreement between the enterprises to prevent competition.
There will be a common control when the acquirer becomes able materially to influence the policy of the target or to control the policy of the target or acquires a controlling interest in the target.
(2) At least one of the merging enterprises is carried on in the United Kingdom or by or under the control of a company incorporated in the United Kingdom.
(3) The merger has taken place within the last six months (unless it has taken place in secret).
(4) Either:(a) the enterprises are both engaged in supplying or consuming goods or services of the same description and have  between them at least 25 per cent of the market of those goods or services in the United Kingdom or a substantial part of it (the "market share test" ); or (b) the gross value of the assets acquired exceeds £30,000,000 (the "assets test" ).
It remains the policy of the authorities to refer mergers to the MMC primarily on competition grounds.
The MMC will analyse the merger to find out whether it falls within FTA 1973 and whether it operates against the public interest (as defined by FTA 1973, s84).
Where a qualifying merger is considered to have a potentially adverse effect on the public interest, the Director General of Fair Trading may, as an alternative to a reference to the MCC, negotiate statutory undertakings with the parties relating to the separation or division of certain parts of the business.
These undertakings will be legally binding.
If, however, no undertakings can be negotiated and the MMC investigates the merger and finds that it operates or may be expected to operate against the public interest, the Secretary of State has power to order the parties not to proceed with a proposed merger or to order divestment by the purchasing company if the merger has been completed.
If an asset sale is a qualifying merger under FTA 1973, because of the risk of an order for divestment the purchaser should make completion conditional on prior approval by the OFT using a clause similar to that in Clause 4.1(b) of the Standard Sale Agreement (see Appendix III).
To obtain prior approval the parties involved must contact the OFT and provide details of the transaction and its expected effects, if any, on competition and on other matters of public interest.
For this purpose a new statutory pre-notification procedure was introduced by the Companies Act 1989 and has been in effect since April 1990.
The procedure is only available for proposed and not completed mergers and the merger proposal must have been made public.
The procedure involves the purchasing party to a proposed qualifying merger completing a prescribed form know as a "Merger Notice" and submitting it to the OFT.
Once such a notice has been accepted by the OFT, the period within which the merger must be evaluated starts to run.
If the merger has not been referred by the end of this period it is deemed to be cleared.
The initial period lasts for 20 working days.
This initial period can be extended by two further extensions of 10 and 15 working days respectively to a maximum of 45 working days.
Purchasers seeking clearance and other parties submitting information to the regulatory authorities face prosecution if they supply false or misleading information.
It is important to note that since 1 October 1990 fees have been payable in respect of applications for merger clearance.
The fees vary  from £5,000 to £15,000 and depend on the value of the assets taken over.
If the Secretary of State has considered a proposed merger and made a decision as to clearance or otherwise in respect of it a fee will also be payable even if no application for clearance has been made.
The parties should consider Article 85 in transactions where either of the parties involved belongs to a corporate group with a turnover in excess of approximately £150 million or the vendor and the purchaser together enjoy 5 per cent or more of the total market for the relevant goods or services in the area of the common market affected by their agreement and one of the parties, normally the vendor, is accepting restrictive covenants.
Article 85(1) prohibits agreements which restrict competition.
Article 85(2) provides that agreements prohibited by Article 85(1) are automatically void unless exempted under Article 85(3).
Furthermore, the Commission has power to impose fines on parties in breach of Article 85(1).
Article 85(1) stipulates that: the following shall be prohibited as incompatible with the common market: all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices which may affect trade between Member States and which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the common market…
The definition of "undertaking" is extremely wide and was defined in the Propylene case (86/398/EEC)[1988]4 CMLR 347 as"any entity engaged in commercial activities…
"
As a general rule Article 85 does not apply to an agreement between a parent and its subsidiary "which although having separate legal personality, enjoys no economic independence" .
Article 85 of the EEC Treaty 1957—The Control of Anti-Competitive Practices
To fall within Article 85 an agreement must have as its effect or object the restriction of competition in the EC or a substantial part of it and there must be effect on trade between Member States.
In La Technique Minière v Maschinenbau Ulm (Case 56/65 [1966]ECR 935) the European Court of Justice stated that for Article 85 to apply "it must be possible to foresee with a sufficient degree of probability on the basis of a set of objective factors of law or of fact that the agreement in question may have an influence, direct or indirect, actual or potential, on the pattern of trade between Member States" .
For Article 85(1) to be triggered the impact of the agreement on competition or inter-state trade must be "appreciable" .
The Commission issues guidelines from time to time on its views on appreciability.
The main provision of the most recent guidelines issued in 1986 provides that the prohibition in Article 85(1) will not apply to  agreements where the parties together do not enjoy more than 5 per cent of the total market for the goods or services in the area of the common market affected by their agreement and the parties do not have a combined annual turnover exceeding 200,000,000 ECU (approximately £140-150m).
Article 85(1) does not apply to total or partial concentrations as such unless they contain clauses giving rise to restrictions on competition.
Concentrations are dealt with under Article 86 or the Merger Regulation.
In an asset sale the provisions most likely to restrict competition are non-competition covenants given by the vendor to the purchaser or any arrangement purporting to divide up geographic or product markets.
An undertaking not to compete with the business transferred for a specific period within a specific geographical area will commonly be given by the vendor to the purchaser (see Clause 15 of the Standard Sale Agreement—Appendix III).
The aim of such covenants is to protect the goodwill of the transferred business and to stop the vendor from using its privileged position to compete with the purchaser in a way likely to damage the value of the business transferred.
Such protection must not be excessive if it is not to infringe Article 85.
Where it is only specific individual assets of a business that are transferred, a prohibition on competition on the vendor will not usually be required to protect the purchaser and is likely to infringe Article 85(1).
However, where the transfer includes goodwill and/or know-how, a non-competition clause will be permissible provided it goes no further than is necessary to protect the value of the business transferred.
In deciding whether a restrictive covenant is permissible under Article 85(1) three questions must be considered.
First, is the restraint on the business activities that the vendor may carry on wider than is necessary to protect the value of the business transferred?
Second, is the geographic area over which the restraint operates wider than is necessary?
Third, does the restraint operate for longer than is necessary?
If the answer to any of these three questions is that the restraint goes further than required, the restrictive covenant is likely to infringe Article 85(1).
In respect of duration, the EC Commisssion has suggested that, as a general rule, five years will be a reasonable period where both goodwill and know-how are transferred but that two years is more appropriate where goodwill alone is transferred.
Of course, the Commission will determine each case in the light of the particular circumstances.
If a non-competition covenant appears likely to infringe Article 85(1) exemption is possible under Article 85(3) although such an exemption is unlikely to be granted in respect of restrictive covenants because of the difficulty of showing that such provisions fulfil the four  requirements set out in Article 85(3) that must be satisfied if an exemption is to be available.
Exemptions are only available if four requirements, two positive and two negative, are fulfilled.
The two positive requirements are that the agreement must first contribute to improving the production or distribution of goods or to promoting technical or economic progress and second allow consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit.
The two negative requirements are that the agreement must not impose on the undertakings concerned restrictions which are not indispensable to the attainment of the first two criteria and that it must not afford the undertakings concerned the possibility of eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the products in question.
If a covenant goes further than necessary to protect the value of the transferred business, it is conceptually very difficult to see how there will be scope for exemption under Article 85(3).
Article 86 provides that: any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the common market or a substantial part of it shall be prohibited as incompatible with the common market insofar as it may affect trade between Member States.
An undertaking which abuses its dominant position on a particular product and geographic market may be fined by the EC Commission or sued in reliance on Article 86 for damages and/or an injunction in a national court by a party that has suffered damage.
Article 86 of the EEC Treaty 1957—The Control of Dominant Positions
In the past it has been held that Article 86 may be infringed where a company holding a dominant position within the EC strengthens that position, by acquiring control of another company or business in the same market, to such an extent that it practically eliminates effective competition in that market.
However, since the Merger Regulations (Reg 4064/89/EEC) came into force the Commission no longer has power to apply Article 86 to such transactions although Article 86 remans applicable for the purposes of private motions before national courts.
Since 21 September 1990 mergers having a "Community Dimension" have been regulated by the Merger Regulation.
Mergers have a Community Dimension where:(1) The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of all the parties involved is at least 5,000,000,000 (5 billion) ECU.
The turnover is not just that of the companies involved but of the groups to  which they belong.
For this purpose a group includes both holding companies and subsidiaries.
(2) The aggregate Community turnover of each of at least two of the parties concerned is more than 250,000,000 (two hundred and fifty million) ECU.
As an exception the Merger Regulation does not apply if a merger has its primary impact within one Member State.
This is the case where more than two thirds of the Community turnover of each party concerned in the merger is in one and the same Member State.
In such circumstances the provisions of national merger control will apply.
There are special provisions for banks and other financial institutions, for which turnover is replaced by a calculation based on the ratio of assets to loans and for insurance companies, for which turnover is replaced by gross premiums.
The Merger Regulation
The Merger Regulation is mainly applied to "concentrations" .
A concentration may occur in one of two ways: first, two or more parties that were previously independent may merge so as to become one new independent business or secondly, one or more persons who already control one business may acquire direct or indirect control of another business.
A party is regarded as acquiring control if it has the possibility of exercising "decisive influence" on another party in particular by ownership or the right to use all or part of the assets of the other party, or rights which confer decisive influence on the composition, voting or decisions of the other party's board of directors or of its shareholders' meetings.
The Commission is concerned to assess the impact of a merger on competition in the EC.
The Commission will prohibit a merger if it concludes that the merger would create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the common market or in a substantial part of it.
The Commission's first step is to identify the relevant product and geographic markets in which the parties might be regarded as dominant.
Having identified the relevant markets, the Commission will then consider:(a) whether either of the parties already enjoys a dominant position in any such market which will be strengthened by the merger; or (b) whether the concentration will create a dominant position in any such market; and (c) whether (if a dominant position will be created or strengthened) that will significantly impede effective competition in the common market or a substantial part of it.
It is not clear precisely how the Commission will apply these tests.
However, it is suggested that market share is normally the most  important indicator of dominance though not the only factor.
The Merger Regulation indicates in its recitals that if the parties' combined market share does not exceed 25 per cent in the EC or in a substantial part of it a merger between them is unlikely to impede effective competition.
In examining a merger the Commission is required to take account of the need to maintain and develop effective competition with the EC and of actual or potential competition, whether from inside or outside the EC.
It must also take account of:(1) the market position and economic and financial strength of the parties to the merger;(2) the availability of alternative products;(3) barriers to entry;(4) the interests of consumers; and (5) the development of technical and economic progress as long as it is to consumers' advantage and does not form an obstacle to competition.
A transaction to which the Merger Regulation applies must be notified to the Commission on the prescribed form (Form CO) within one week after announcing a bid, reaching an agreement or acquiring control, whichever occurs first.
20 copies of the notification have to be provided.
Parties must not give effect to a merger before they notify it to the Commission and for three weeks thereafter.
Unless the Commission extends this period, parties may conclude a merger after the three week period has expired.
In the case of a public bid, the suspensory requirement does not prevent a bidder from acquiring shares in the target as long as the bidder does not exercise the voting rights attaching to the shares.
The Commission has power to waive the suspensory requirement (conditionally or unconditionally) if a party would otherwise suffer serious damage.
Within one month of receiving the notification, the Commission has to decide whether to approve the merger or to open proceedings.
The Commission is only likely to open proceedings if it has serious concerns about the impact of the merger on competition in the EC.
The one-month period will be extended if the Commission considers that the information supplied with the notification is materially incomplete.
Where the Commission opens proceedings, it then has a further four months in which to issue a final decision.
During this period the Commission carries out a detailed appraisal of the merger.
It has power to request further information from the parties and to inspect documents at the parties' premises and failure by the parties to provide the information required or to co-operate in an inspection may cause the four month period to be extended.
The Commission issues a written Statement of Objections to the parties, to which they can provide a written response, and holds oral hearings for the parties and for interested third parties.
The Commission liaises with interested Member States throughout the proceedings.
It is open to parties to try to avoid a prohibition decision by  offering appropriate undertakings to the Commission.
The Commission has power to accept undertakings (and subsequently enforce them) if it is satisfied that they meet its concerns about the merger.
An undertaking might involve, for example, modifying the scope of the original agreement or selling off one or more overlapping businesses to a third party.
The Commission can prohibit a merger or order divestiture (or other appropriate action) if a merger has been completed.
It can impose substantial fines (of up to 10 per cent of turnover) on parties who give effect to a merger either during the suspensory period or after the Commission has issued a decision prohibiting it; and on parties who fail to divest businesses (or take other action) where the Commission has ordered them to do so.
It can also impose smaller fines on parties who fail to comply with certain procedural requirements.
The Purchase Price
HOW IS THE PRICE ESTABLISHED?
There is no golden rule as to what is the appropriate price to pay for a particular business.
It is debatable whether calculating the price is an art or a science.
It is often a combination of the two.
There are formulae and ratios that purchasers use as guides such as basing the price on a multiple of earnings or net assets.
Such formulae only give an indication.
The adjustment to the indicative price is an art in that the purchaser takes account of the cost saving benefits it can bring to the vendor's business, potential profit increases arising from market synergies and identified liabilities which may affect future profitability.
Ultimately the price is quite simply that which the purchaser is prepared to pay for the particular business and which the vendor is prepared to accept.
The simplest method of valuing the business is to agree a fixed price to be paid in full by the purchaser in cash on completion.
Alternatively the purchaser and vendor may agree that some or all of the price is to be based on the net book value of the assets or by reference to earnings.
The standard sale agreement (see Appendix III) envisages a price based on a fixed cash sum plus net asset value.
Where the price is based on net asset value or on earnings, the appropriate value is normally determined by accounts prepared as at completion or such other effective transfer date as the parties have chosen and subsequently agreed by the purchaser and vendor through their accountants.
To simplify preparation of the accounts the parties may agree it appropriate for the completion date to be at the end of a month.
Completion accounts
Completion accounts will usually be needed if the price is to be based on earnings or net asset values.
The sale agreement should  contain a detailed set of rules governing preparation and agreement of the completion accounts.
The purchaser's and the vendor's accountants are normally the people who are asked to agree the completion accounts and their advice must be sought.
If the purchaser's and the vendor's accountants are to be involved, and it is strongly recommended that they are, it is imperative that they should be involved as early as possible in negotiating this part of the sale agreement.
The rules in the sale agreement governing the completion accounts should cover the main areas listed below.
The list is not definitive and must be adapted to the circumstances:(1) What is the balance sheet date and, if appropriate, what period is the profit and loss account to cover?(2) Who is to prepare the first draft of the completion accounts?(3) On what basis are the accounts to be prepared and what form are they to take?(4) What is the mechanism for the other party to agree or dispute the draft accounts?(5) What if the parties cannot agree?
The first two areas are relatively uncontentious.
Whether it is the purchaser's accountants or the vendor's accountants who prepare the first draft, the other party's accountants should have access to their working papers if the rules are properly negotiated.
The most difficult area is agreeing the basis on which the completion accounts are to be prepared and the form they are to take.
The form may be a simple balance sheet or alternatively it may be necessary to prepare something equivalent to annual statutory accounts including details such as a cash flow statement complying with Financial Reporting Standard No 1 which replaces statements of source and application of funds provided under SSAP No 10.
Prices based on a multiple of earnings tend to require more detailed and thorough completion accounts than net asset value based prices.
The rules in the sale agreement need to specify carefully, and in order of priority, the accounting rules and practices to be used in preparing the completion accounts.
The rules would normally specify that the completion accounts are to be prepared in accordance with:(a) generally accepted accounting practices or the statements of standard accounting practice (SSAPs) in order to give a true and fair view;(b) the same accounting practices as used consistently in previous accounts of the business, normally over a period of several years;(c) specific accounting rules legislated for in the sale agreement.
In order to avoid disputes, the sale agreement should specify the  priority to be given to each of these rules.
It has been common practice to prioritise the need to prepare the accounts in accordance with SSAPs.
However, accounting practices are changing constantly and SSAPs are in the process of being replaced by Financial Reporting Standards.
For the sake of clarity, one possible solution is to provide that the SSAPs to be used are those that applied at a specified date even if changed subsequently between exchange and completion.
For a purchaser there are dangers in relying on accounting practices used in previous accounts of the business unless the purchaser's accountants have a clear and thorough understanding of what these practices were.
For example, the purchaser may object to the practices used by the vendor in accounting for work in progress and obsolete stock.
It is possible that previous accounting practices, although not objected to by the vendor's auditors, may produce a disadvantageous result for the purchaser in completion accounts.
The purchaser will wish to avoid any such disadvantageous practices.
To avoid potential disputes the parties should set out in a letter, preferably attached to the sale agreement, any specific adjustments that will need to be made for the purpose of the completion statement.
It is also often useful to include in the side letter, by way of illustration only, a worked example of a pro forma completion statement to which both sets of accountants agree and to which they can refer back when the actual accounts are to be prepared.
The greater the thought and attention given by both parties to developing the completion account rules, the less likely that the parties will be unable to agree the actual completion accounts.
Again, it must be stressed that the purchaser and vendor should involve their respective accountants in the negotiation of the rules as early as possible.
In any event, the rules should provide a means of resolving any impasse that does arise.
Normal practice is to refer the matters in dispute to an independent accountant.
This is an additional cost for one or more of the parties and is in itself a reason for ensuring that disputes are resolved wherever possible before referring to a third party for resolution.
The vendor should ensure that the sale agreement provides that the purchaser is obliged to pay that part of the price that is not disputed as soon as possible and that interest is paid on the additional amount if any that the purchaser is subsequently required to pay.
It is perhaps worth mentioning the importance of the sale agreement stating that the independent accountant will act as an expert rather than as an arbitrator.
The decisions of an arbitrator are subject to rights of appeal to a court on a point of law under the Arbitration Act 1979, whereas there is no right of appeal against the  decision of an expert even if the decision was negligent.
This was affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Baber v Kenwood Manufacturing Co Ltd and Whinney Murray & Co [1978]1 Lloyd's Rep 175.
However, the major disadvantage of an arbitrator is that, unlike an expert, he cannot be sued for negligence in respect of loss or damage arising out of his decisions.
As between themselves, the purchaser and the vendor are bound under the terms of the sale agreement by the decisions of the expert, but the provisions in the sale agreement do not prevent the aggrieved party, whether it be the purchaser or the vendor, from attempting to bring a claim against the expert if it can be shown that such party has suffered loss under the normal principles of the law of negligence (see Arenson v Casson Bechman Rutley & Co [1977]AC 405).
Earn outs are a means of linking the price to the future performance of the business in the hands of the purchaser after completion.
Earn outs were particularly popular in the 1980s especially where the vendor worked as an employee of the purchaser in a service-based business after completion as it is a means of providing an incentive to the vendor where the profits may depend heavily on the skills of the employees.
As earn outs are based on future performance and are only payable in the future, they enable the purchaser to agree to a price it may not be able to afford at completion and which it will not be obliged to pay unless profits are generated.
All vendors should seek specialist tax advice if considering deferring consideration through an earn out as there may be adverse capital gains tax consequences particularly if the earn out is not achieved.
Earn outs
Earn outs are becoming less and less popular as the disadvantages often outweigh the advantages.
The main disadvantages are caused by the fact that the earn out distorts the way in which the business would otherwise be managed.
Employees will understandably be more concerned as to short-term profit rather than long-term growth as part of the purchaser's group.
The basis of calculating an earn out is generally the same as for completion accounts.
However, the emphasis has shifted in that the business is now controlled by the purchaser rather than the vendor and the earn out will be calculated over a period of perhaps several years following completion.
The vendor will wish to protect their ability to maximise payments under the earn out.
Ideally the vendor will wish to retain absolute control over the way in which the business is managed.
Purchasers, not surprisingly, are unwilling to permit this.
Instead, the vendor will normally seek undertakings from the purchaser only to operate the business in the same or a similar manner  to the way it was operated before the sale.
Such undertakings will normally be unacceptable to the purchaser who may wish to dispose of part of the assets or reduce inherent costs by utilising existing central services such as its own accounts department.
Even if at the time of sale the purchaser does not intend such rationalisation, it will not wish to fetter its discretion to do so in the future and to be able to adapt the business as it wishes to changing market circumstances.
The vendor will also wish to impose restrictions on the ability of the purchaser to extract dividends or to levy management charges and revalue assets.
Furthermore, earn outs encourage the vendor to concentrate on short-term profitability whereas the purchaser's concern is more likely to be the long-term prospects of the business.
The purchaser should also consider what is to happen to the business after the earn out period as it will be extremely difficult to motivate the vendor if he is still a key employee.
In summary, earn outs should only be used where the purchaser intends to allow the vendor to operate the business after completion on a very similar basis to the way the vendor operated it previously and as a separate entity.
Earn outs are impractical if the business will be operated as a division of the purchaser rather than a stand alone subsidiary.
In any event, the vendor will want some assurance guaranteeing the basis on which central charges will be allocated to the business.
If an earn out is to be used, it is recommended that it does not form too significant a part of the purchase price as this will distort priorities.
The purchaser is likely to impose a cap or limit on the maximum amount payable under the earn out.
The limit will be relevant for calculating stamp duty as the Inland Revenue will look to the maximum price payable and how this has been allocated.
The vendor should resist assuming that the full earn out will eventually be paid and concentrate instead on the formula and past performance to consider the realistic expectation.
The vendor should also take advice on the tax implications of identifying the maximum price payable as the Inland Revenue will at the time of sale assume that the maximum price is payable and tax the vendor accordingly.
APPORTIONMENT OF THE PRICE
The apportionment of the price between the respective assets has complicated tax consequences which are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
The apportionment will affect the corporation tax liabilities of the parties (particularly in relation to chargeable gains and capital allowances) and the stamp duty to be paid by the purchaser.
The interests of the vendor and the purchaser are largely opposed and it is sensible for the matter to be resolved by stipulating  the apportionment in the sale agreement.
This is envisaged in the second column of Schedule 1 of the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III).
If completion accounts are required, it is common practice to require the relevant accountants to agree the apportionment at the time they agree the completion statement as the price will not be finalised at the time of contract.
HOW IS THE PRICE TO BE PAID?
The purchaser and vendor need to agree:(a) the form of the payment; and (b) the timing of the payment.
The form of the payment
The most popular form of payment is cash.
It is the simplest form and does not require complicated provisions or professional advice both of which will add to the purchase costs.
Other main forms of payment involve the issue of shares or loan stock by the purchaser.
Alternatively assets of one business may themselves be used to buy the assets of another business.
This is rare in the United Kingdom but is relatively common in Eastern Europe particularly in joint ventures where one party, normally from part of the old Soviet Union, simply does not have hard currency available but may have valuable commodities.
The main concern with cash is to ensure that the method and arrangements for payment are clearly stated in the sale agreement and that the purchaser has adequate notice of whether a banker's draft or telegraphic transfer is required.
If some or all of the payment is to be satisfied by the issue of shares, the purchaser must check whether it has sufficient authorised and issued share capital and whether the directors have adequate existing authority under CA 1985, s80.
The purchaser may need to convene an extraordinary general meeting of the shareholders if insufficient share capital or authority exists and consider the need to disapply any pre-emption rights.
The purchaser will also need to file a duly stamped copy of the asset sale agreement with the Registrar of Companies within one month of the allotment of the shares (CA 1985, s88).
Furthermore, if the purchaser is a public company, whether or not its shares are quoted, it is prevented by CA 1985, s102 from allotting the consideration shares to the vendor unless the consideration for the allotment has been independently valued pursuant to CA 1985, s108 and a report regarding the value has been made to the purchaser by an independent person within the six months preceding  the allotment.
The preparation of the valuation and report will of course involve the purchaser in further cost and expense and the purchaser will also be required to send a copy of the report to the vendor (see CA 1985, s103(1) (c)).
In the case of an unquoted company, the vendor is primarily concerned as to the marketability of the shares and this should not be underestimated.
Also, the vendor should consider the need for warranties similar to those it would seek on a share purchase.
In particular the vendor should seek assurances that the current shareholders have waived any rights of first call they have on the new shares and, if necessary, are prepared to enter into a shareholder's agreement with the vendor.
All of these involve cost for the purchaser and may discourage the purchaser from using shares.
If the purchaser is a listed company it may need to apply for a listing of the consideration shares.
The purchaser will need to prepare listing particulars unless listing particulars have been issued in the last year or the consideration shares will comprise less than 10 per cent of the listed shares after they have been issued.
In the case of a purchaser issuing quoted shares, the difficulties of knowing whether the 10 per cent threshold is exceeded and whether class tests are appropriate are compounded if the total consideration has not been determined and depends on completion accounts or an earn out.
Care must also be taken to ensure that, if the price of the consideration shares falls, the total shares to be issued do not exceed 30 per cent of the purchaser's share capital as the vendor may then be obliged to make an offer to purchase the remainder of the purchaser's share capital under rule 9 of the City Code.
Perhaps most importantly the vendor should remember that the value of the consideration shares can go down as well as up and the purchaser may require the vendor to agree to restrictions on the manner and timing of subsequent sales of the shares by the vendor.
Where the vendor insists on receiving cash for the consideration, it may still be possible for the purchaser to raise the cash by issuing shares rather than by increasing borrowings.
If the purchaser is a listed company, it is likely to prefer to issue shares, as increasing its borrowings will increase its gearing ratios as seen by the market.
Alternatively, the purchaser may simply not be prepared to face the cost of borrowing.
There are two main methods by which the purchaser can raise the cash: through a share issue namely a rights issue or a cash placing.
In a rights issue the purchaser offers to its existing shareholders the right to subscribe in cash for such number of shares in proportion to their existing holdings as will raise a sum (after deduction of the rights issue costs) equal to the consideration needed for the acquisition.
As with any other share issue, the purchaser may need to seek approval of its shareholders to increase the authorised share capital and to authorise the directors to allot the shares pursuant to CA 1985, s80.
A special resolution of the shareholders may also be needed if the statutory pre-emption rights granted by CA 1985, s89 are to be disapplied.
The purchaser will need to remember that a minimum delay of between 14 and 21 clear days may be needed in between exchange and completion if either an ordinary resolution or special resolution of shareholders is needed.
Rights issue
Assuming the purchaser obtains the relevant authorities from its shareholders, it will make the offer to the shareholders to subscribe for shares by issuing a provisional nil paid allotment letter which under Stock Exchange rules must be open for acceptance for a period of at least 21 days.
As it is possible for the allotment letters to be dealt with in this 21 day period, rights issues are attractive to institutional shareholders as they may be able to sell the rights to subscribe.
A rights issue is normally underwritten in order to ensure that the purchaser is guaranteed that it will receive the necessary funds.
Underwriting can be expensive, representing sometimes up to two per cent of the issue proceeds, and the underwriting costs normally depend on the length of the time period from the date of the announcement of the rights issue until such time as the offer closes.
Occasionally, rather than face the underwriting costs, purchasers may make the rights issue at a deep discount.
The risk of a deep discount rights issue is that the purchaser cannot guarantee that the proceeds of the issue will be sufficient to meet the acquisition in the asset sale but it does avoid the underwriting costs.
A cash placing is one in which the subscription offer is made to investment clients of the purchaser's merchant bank or broker rather than to its existing shareholders.
The merchant bank or broker will charge a commission for procuring the subscribers and may agree to subscribe itself for the balance if it fails to procure sufficient interest from its clients.
Cash placings are normally cheaper than rights issues.
However, the problem with a cash placing is that existing institutional shareholders may not be willing to consent to the disapplication of pre-emption rights.
Cash placing
The timing of payment
Naturally the vendor will want the price to be paid in full on completion.
If part of the price is determined by completion accounts, the vendor will want the price to be paid as soon as it is determined, or as soon as part of it is determined if the balance is disputed.
The purchaser will wish to consider the timing of payment in the context of the whole transaction.
It may be appropriate for the purchaser to pay only part of the price on completion and make a retention of the balance or defer the balance.
A retention will normally be made where the purchaser is concerned about specific liabilities identified in the due diligence or disclosure exercises.
Alternatively, the purchaser may simply consider that there is a high probability of claims arising under the warranties and is unsure as to the financial ability of the vendor to pay for future claims or its ability to locate an individual vendor who for example, may emigrate.
The retention may also be used as a means of securing a vendor's future obligations under the sale agreement or ancillary document such as not competing with the business or continuing to provide stocks and materials to the business.
Whether or not a retention is made is a matter of negotiation.
The vendor's concern is to ensure that the monies retained do eventually become available provided the relevant liability has not crystallised.
The vendor is unlikely to grant the purchaser much freedom in its use of the retention.
Instead, the vendor will prefer to see the retention monies placed into an escrow account out of the purchaser's control.
The account can either be a joint deposit account requiring the signature of both the vendor and the purchaser to release money or it can be placed in an account with an independent trustee.
The trustee will want the vendor and purchaser to specify the trust rules before consenting to act.
One issue will be what interest is to be payable on the retention monies.
As the retention represents deferred payment, it is reasonable for the vendor to be paid interest on the monies eventually received.
Normal arrangements are for the purchaser to be entitled to the interest on the monies subsequently released to it from the retention accounts.
The other main issue will be defining the precise circumstances when part or all of the retention is released to the purchaser.
The retention will normally be released to satisfy a claim against the vendor.
The purchaser will incorporate an express right of set-off in the sale agreement.
The difficulty comes in identifying what constitutes a valid claim.
Neither party is likely to want to wait until the matter has been decided on by a court.
A suitable compromise is for both parties to rely on the opinion of a leading Queen's Counsel as to whether or not and to what extent the purchaser's claim is likely to succeed.
The vendor may be prepared to accept some of the risk of not having the retention placed into a dedicated account or simply facing  deferred instalments rather than a retention.
In such circumstances, the vendor should consider the need for security and the risk that the purchaser may fail to make or be unable to make the appropriate payment.
One possibility is to seek a parent company or preferably a bank guarantee, though this will involve the purchaser in some expense and may require a deposit to be made with the bank.
In addition, the vendor may wish to take a charge over the assets being sold.
Unlike a share sale, where this would be financial assistance (CA 1985, s151) there are no company law objections to such security.
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE TRANSFER
The parties may sometimes want the transfer to be effective from a date before the completion date, particularly if there is likely to be a long delay while consents are sought.
The sale agreement itself cannot be back-dated.
Rather its provisions will deem the transfer to be treated as if it took place on an earlier specified date.
There are numerous complications that need to be addressed if an earlier transfer date is to deemed to apply and the complications will outweigh the advantages unless there are exceptional circumstances.
The main complications relate to:(a) taxation in the interim period;(b) VAT;(c) liability; and (d) rescission.
Taxation in the interim period
Despite the fact that the sale agreement will treat income arising after the transfer date as belonging to the purchaser, the Inland Revenue are likely to treat it as income of the vendor.
The vendor should only account to the purchaser for post-taxation income earned during the interim stage.
The purchaser will not necessarily wish to be paid as if the income had been taxed.
The vendor's taxation for the interim period will be difficult to calculate and may not be determinable until the end of the financial year at the earliest, particularly if the business sold comprises one division of the vendor's overall business.
Furthermore, it may be difficult to allocate expenditure and income for the period.
Value Added Tax
During the interim period the vendor will have charged and paid Value Added Tax as principal.
It will not be possible subsequently to  replace the VAT accounting procedures to reflect what the state of affairs was intended to be.
Liability
The deeming provisions will mean that during the interim period the vendor will be treated as acting as agent for the purchaser yet the purchaser will have no control over the vendor's actions.
The purchaser is unlikely to want to accept liability for the vendor's actions when it has had no control.
At the very most a purchaser may be prepared to accept responsibility only for liabilities arising in the ordinary course of the business.
Rescission
If the purchaser requires the right of rescission to be available between exchange and completion, the vendor is unlikely to agree to the transfer being deemed to occur during the interim period.
CAN THE PURCHASE PRICE EVER BE TOO LOW?
Naturally the objective of all purchasers is to pay as little as possible for the business.
However, it is suggested there are some instances, albeit rare, where the purchaser should become cautious if, in reality, the purchase price appears too low particularly if the purchaser is concerned about the vendor's state of solvency.
For such instances to be relevant, the purchase price for the assets must be significantly less than market value.
The situations that are relevant are:(a) breaches by the directors of the vendor of their duties of good faith;(b) the vendor becoming insolvent within two years after the transaction;(c) transfers within a group of companies.
The duty of good faith
The director of a company has a duty to carry on the business of that company in all respects in good faith for the benefit of that company and not for the benefit of other group companies.
Generally the directors owe this duty to their shareholders but as insolvency approaches the duty is owed to creditors (see West Mercia Safetywear v Dodd [1988]BCLC 250).
Furthermore, the director has a duty not to make a secret profit out of transactions with the company.
Any asset  sale which is not commercially justifiable as being in the interests of the vendor as a whole will, on the face of it, be a breach of the duties of the directors of the vendor.
If the purchaser has actual knowledge that the asset sale carried out by the directors is in breach of their fiduciary duty, the transaction is voidable at the instance of the vendor and the purchaser will hold the proceeds of the sale as a constructive trustee.
It is suggested that as a result of CA 1985, s35 the main difficulties will only arise where the purchaser knows or should have known that the directors of the vendor were abusing their powers, for example, by committing a fraud on the vendor's creditors.
Furthermore, any act which falls within the express or implied powers of the vendor contained in its memorandum of association, whether or not a breach of duty on the part of the vendor's directors, will be binding on the vendor if it is approved or subsequently ratified by the shareholders.
Transactions at an under value
Where the purchase price is particularly low, the purchaser may be at risk if the acquisition from the vendor is considered to be a transaction at an under value within the meaning of the Insolvency Act (IA) 1986, s238.
In such circumstances the court has the power to make such order as it thinks fit (IA 1986, s238(3)) including the right to set aside the transaction.
A transaction is at an under value if the transaction constitutes a gift or if the value of the consideration (in money or money's worth) received by the vendor is significantly less than that of the consideration the vendor provides.
Section 238 only applies to transactions entered into at an under value within two years prior to the onset of the vendor's insolvency and does not apply to sales by a liquidator as, amongst other things, this is a sale after the onset of insolvency.
The onset of insolvency is the date of presentation of an administration petition or the date of commencement of winding up by the presentation of a winding up petition or a resolution by the company to go into liquidation.
It should be noted that for s238 to apply, the value of consideration received must be significantly less than the consideration provided by the vendor.
If a purchaser is concerned, it is suggested that it may be appropriate to seek one or more independent valuations of the business though this will of course increase the acquisition costs.
Furthermore, a valuation merely provides assurance that the transaction was not at an under value but is not a defence.
A further risk that may be relevant where a purchaser acquires assets and assumes responsibility for some but not all of the creditors, is that the sale may be seen as a preferential treatment of creditors under IA 1986, s239.
This enables a liquidator or administrator to  apply to the court where, within two years before insolvency, the vendor has given preferential treatment to creditors.
The court can make such order as it thinks fit to restore the position to what it would have been if the company had not given that preference.
A preference consists of anything done or suffered to be done by the vendor which has the effect of putting one of its creditors, or any surety or guarantor, into a position which, in the event of the vendor going into insolvent liquidiation, would be better than the position which such person would have been in if that thing had not been done.
It has to be shown that, in assuming responsibility for some but not all creditors, the vendor was influenced by a desire to prefer some creditors against others.
Where the purchaser is connected with a vendor (connected is defined in IA 1986, s249) the standard of proof on the vendor is higher in two ways.
Firstly, in the case of preferential treatment, s239 relates to transactions within two years before the onset of solvency rather than six months and the vendor is presumed to have been influenced by a desire to prefer creditors unless the contrary is shown.
Secondly, in the case of transaction at an undervalue, it is presumed that the vendor was not solvent at the time the acquisition agreement was exchanged.
One problem sometimes overlooked arises under IA 1986, s216 and relates to the use of the name of a company which is subsequently insolvent.
With effect from the start of an insolvent liquidation of the vendor, unless the court grants leave, the vendor's company name may not be used by the purchaser if the purchaser or directors of the purchaser have been directors or shadow directors of the vendor during the twelve months preceding the liquidation.
The restriction on the use of the name extends for five years from the insolvency and breach of s216 is a criminal offence.
Inter-group transfers
Problems will arise on an asset sale where the vendor and purchaser are members of the same group of companies and the assets are transferred at an under value.
Under TA 1988, s209(4), a transfer of assets between a company and its member at an under value is treated as a distribution.
The transfer will be at an under value if the market value of the benefit received by the purchaser exceeds the amount of value of any consideration given by the member.
The surplus of market value over consideration given is treated as a distribution and advanced corporation tax will be payable.
The position has been further complicated by the recent case of Aveling Barford v Perion Limited and others [1989]BCLC 626.
The effect of the decision in Aveling Barford is that where a company has  no retained earnings, a transfer by it to a sister company which is known to be at an under value may be treated as an unauthorised return of capital.
Therefore, where the vendor and purchaser are both wholly owned subsidiaries of a third company and the vendor sells assets to the purchaser at an under value, it is suggested that to the extent the value conferred on the purchaser comes out of the vendor's capital as opposed to distributable profits, then this is treated as an unlawful return of capital by the vendor to the third party holding company.
It is suggested that this is an addition to a breach of CA 1985, s263 which provides that the vendor can only make a distribution out of profits available for the purpose.
In his judgment, Hoffman J considered that "the court looks at the substance rather than the outward appearance" .
The court looks at the whole circumstance of the transaction and considers whether the true nature of the transaction when viewed as a whole is that it is a disguised dividend.
It is suggested this is comparable to the manner in which the Inland Revenue will use the decision in Furniss v Dawson [1984]1 ALL ER to view a transaction as a whole rather than each separate step individually.
The consequences for a purchaser of receiving an unlawful distribution are provided by CA 1985, s277 and will essentially require a purchaser, who at the time of distribution, knew or had reasonable grounds for believing that it was an unlawful distribution sale, to be made liable to repay the distribution to the vendor.
The consequences for the vendor are that it will need to account for unpaid advanced corporation tax on the entire amount of the distribution unless there is a group income election in place.
Purchaser Protection
INTRODUCTION
There are three levels of protection that a purchaser will require.
Firstly, during the negotiations the purchaser will naturally be concerned to be reassured as to what it saw at the outset as being the merits of the proposed acquisition.
This will involve identifying the liabilities and risks to be assumed and the state of the assets being acquired.
Secondly, the purchaser will wish to protect itself in the sale agreement against any risks which it was unable to identify during the negotiations but which are discovered after completion and to ensure it is compensated against these by the vendor.
Thirdly, the purchaser will be concerned to ensure that once completion has taken place, the vendor does not establish or participate in a competing business.
Normally, purchasers will achieve these three levels of protection by using the methods described below:(1) Due diligence. (2) Warranties and indemnities. (3) Restrictive covenants.
The relative importance of due diligence and of warranties and indemnities will, to a large extent, depend on the purchaser'sassessment of the vendor's current and future financial stature.
The warranties and indemnities give the purchaser the right to claim against the vendor after completion.
If the purchaser has little confidence in the vendor's ability to pay compensation for breach of warranty, the purchaser will rely heavily on the due diligence exercise.
This should enable the purchaser to identify and deal with risks before contract rather than seeking redress from the vendor after completion.
DUE DILIGENCE
Due diligence is the investigation of the vendor's business by the purchaser and its advisers before contracts are executed.
The purchaser will have conducted its own investigation of the vendor's business in the negotiations which lead up to either an agreement in principle or a more formal acknowledgement of agreement by the use of heads of terms (see Chapter 1, page 9).
During negotiation of the contract, the purchaser will continue to investigate the business but more thoroughly than before and will often instruct both lawyers and accountants to investigate and prepare reports on the business.
If concurrent investigations are to take place, the purchaser should meet its advisers as early as possible to ensure there is no duplication in the areas to be investigated and, more importantly, that all significant areas are covered in the investigation process.
The time of the advisers costs money and due diligence will be expensive if its scope and content is not carefully controlled.
Due diligence for asset sales is generally cheaper and quicker than for share sales as the investigation covers the specific assets that have been selected rather than investigating hidden liabilities.
At this initial stage, the purchaser should discuss carefully with its advisers the scope, aims and objectives of the investigation.
The instructions should either be given or confirmed in writing.
One way of reducing the cost is to investigate a cross-section of the main assets rather than each separate asset.
For example, if the business is heavily dependent on numerous long-term contracts, a purchaser may decide to investigate the contracts equating to a specified percentage of the turnover of the business plus one or two minor contracts.
This will give the purchaser assurance as to the main assets and an overview on the minor assets.
The purchaser's lawyers will usually proceed by gathering all information already given to the purchaser and then issuing an information questionnaire to the vendor similar to that set out in Appendix II.
It is good practice for the vendor to keep an index and central store of all documents sent in response to the information questionnaire.
The vendor will subsequently wish to disclose all such documents against the warranties.
Depending on the volume of material and negotiating strength, the purchaser may argue that the vendor can only disclose specific documents against specific warranties.
In any event, the vendor will be asked to warrant that all documents and responses supplied are true and accurate.
Warranty A1 in the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III) is the sort of warranty a purchaser will normally ask for.
Where the purchaser has commissioned an accountants' report, it is normal practice to request that the vendor warrants the accuracy of  the report.
Such a warranty, depending on its content, may shorten the warranties that the purchaser requires on specific matters.
The purchaser will normally require the vendor to warrant that the report is accurate in all material respects and that there are no facts omitted which make the report misleading.
The vendor is likely to resist any warranty as to the accuracy of any expressions of opinion or forecasts contained in the report.
At best, the vendor may be willing to warrant that such forecasts and opinions are reasonable.
Alternatively, rather than warranting the accuracy of opinions, the vendor may be prepared to warrant that they do not disagree with the opinion.
If the matter was not dealt with at an earlier stage, the vendor is likely to ask the purchaser and perhaps its advisers to enter a confidentiality agreement before the investigations start.
A standard confidentiality agreement is set out in Appendix I and discussed in more detail in Chapter 1.
WARRANTIES
Is there any need for warranties?
The purchaser should reject outright any suggestion by any vendor other than a liquidator, administrator or receiver that, unlike a share sale, there is no need to give warranties in an asset sale.
There are two reasons that the vendor may give and which the purchaser should not accept.
Firstly, a vendor may argue that, unlike a share sale, the purchaser does not inherit the liabilities of the business.
This is true to a large extent in that the liabilities prior to completion remain with the vendor unless the purchaser agrees to accept them.
However there are notable exceptions.
For example, the purchaser will inherit the employment liabilities if the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981 (SI 1981/1794) apply (see Chapter 5).
Also the purchaser is likely to assume responsibility for past liabilities through the assignment or novation of contracts (see Chapter 4), subject to an appropriate indemnity from the vendor.
Furthermore, the vendor is being asked not merely to warrant the absence of liabilities but also to warrant the state and adequacy of the assets being sold.
Inadequate assets will carry inherent liabilities and the state of the assets therefore requires warranting.
The purchaser will also insist that the vendor warrants title to its assets.
In addition, the warranties encourage the vendor to make disclosures which relate to the quality of the assets.
Basic warranties are contained in the standard sale agreement and discussed throughout this book.
Secondly, the vendor may attempt to argue that sufficient warranties are implied by statutes, such as the Sale of Goods Act 1979, to obviate the need for warranties.
The purchaser should not accept any argument that implied warranties are adequate.
Although warranties may be implied by statute, not only may they be inadequate, but the vendor will want the purchaser to acknowledge it has not relied on any warranty, representation or undertaking unless expressly set out in the sale agreement.
Furthermore, in the absence of express warranties, the common law rule of caveat emptor(buyer beware) will apply.
Even if implied warranties did apply, they would not address all the purchaser's concerns as can be seen by the fact that the main warranties implied by the Sale of Goods Act 1979 are dealt with within warranties A3 and A4 in the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III).
The remainder of the warranties in the standard sale agreement (of which there are many) address the purchaser's other concerns in relation to the business.
Dual purpose of warranties
Warranties serve two purposes.
The first is to encourage the vendor to disclose exceptions to the general nature of the warranties.
This enables the parties to address the problem areas identified by the disclosures.
It is better that the purchaser is aware of the difficulties before contracts are executed as this reduces the possibility of disputes for breach of warranty arising once the transaction is completed.
The second and more important reason is to impose liability on the vendor in the event that the assets are inadequate or defective or the vendor does not have adequate title.
The warranties serve as a means of allocating business risk between the vendor and the purchaser.
The vendor will seek to reduce the risk by making disclosures and limiting its liability for breach of warranty.
The value of warranties
A breach of warranty will give the purchaser the right to claim damages from the vendor.
During negotiations the purchaser should assess the likelihood of a claim arising and the vendor's ability to compensate the purchaser if a claim is successful.
The likelihood of a claim arising is a judgment decision which will be influenced by the results of the due diligence exercise.
Purchasers are less fearful of the potential for claims if the vendor appears well-managed and well-organised.
The assessment of the vendor's ability to pay will depend on the current financial status of the vendor and its plans for the  coming years including its use of the sale proceeds.
The purchaser should also consider the need for a parent company guarantee.
Depending on these factors a purchaser should consider whether to:(a) rely solely on its right to claim damages for breach of warranty; or (b) make a retention of part of the purchase price to deal with identified liabilities; or (c) reduce the price.
The resulting solution will depend on the relative negotiating strengths of the parties.
The purchaser is usually only justified in reducing the price if the due diligence exercise has revealed material inaccuracies in the assumptions used in calculating the initial offer price.
For example, the actual profits of the business during the due diligence period may be significantly lower than those forecast.
A retention is often used as a means of resolving a specific difficulty identified by the due diligence exercise (see also Chapter 2, page 51).
For example, the purchaser may consider that only 60 per cent of customer contracts expiring in the first year will be renewed, whereas the vendor believes 90 per cent to be a more likely renewal rate.
The purchaser will only be willing to pay the price originally agreed if the forecast renewal rate is achieved.
Therefore a negotiated sum is retained out of the purchase price and some or all will be released to the purchaser once the actual renewal rate is known.
The parties will need to negotiate the period of the retention and define precisely the circumstances in which the retention is released.
During the retention period the money should be held in a deposit account.
The interest earned is normally paid at the end of the period to the respective parties in proportion to the amount of the retention received by them.
An appropriate compromise is for payments from the designated deposit account to require the signature of both the vendor's and the purchaser's lawyers.
Alternatively, an independent trustee may be appointed to apply the trust rules negotiated by the parties.
Rescission is one remedy available for misrepresentation under the Misrepresentation Act 1967, s1.
It is not within the scope of this book to discuss in detail the circumstances when the purchaser will be entitled to rescind the sale agreement.
In principle, rescission may be available if the vendor made a false statement of fact and that statement became a term of the sale agreement.
The statement need  only be oral and would not need to be expressly repeated in the sale agreement.
For this reason it is normal for the vendor to define precisely which documents comprise the sale agreement and to ensure the purchaser acknowledges that it is not relying on any statements of fact unless contained in these documents.
The parties should then state that these documents constitute the entire agreement between them.
Basis of claims under the warranties
Rescission
Even though the vendor may have taken this basic protection, the vendor should be aware of the decision of the Chancery Division in Goff v Gauthier 62 P & CR [1991]388.
Mr JAD Gilliland QC (sitting as a deputy judge) permitted the defendants to rescind a contract for the sale of land as a result of a misrepresentation made before contract, despite the fact that clause 10 of the sale agreement provided that the agreement contained all the terms of the contract between the vendor and the purchaser and that the purchaser did not enter into the agreement in reliance on any warranty or representation made or purported to have been made by or on behalf of the vendor other than the vendor's solicitor's written replies to enquiries raised by the purchaser's solicitor.
It was held that it was not fair for the plaintiff to rely upon clause 10 to enable him to escape from the consequences of a clear misrepresentation on an important matter which had induced the defendants to exchange contracts even though the representation was not repeated in the contract.
It should be stressed that in the Goff v Gauthier case, the misrepresentation was of fundamental importance in inducing the defendant to enter the contract and was not a minor misrepresentation which it was suggested that clause 10 would have excluded.
From a commercial point of view rescission as a remedy is more theoretical than practical.
It will only be ordered if the purchaser and vendor are capable of being returned to the position they were in before the sale agreement was executed.
For this reason rescission is unlikely to be ordered after completion as the purchaser is likely to have affirmed the contract by conduct and third parties may be prejudiced if rescission takes place.
Too much may have happened within a matter of days after completion for it to be practical to reverse the sale.
However, rescission is an important remedy for the period between exchange and completion.
To avoid scope for argument, the purchaser should ensure it is expressly stated in the sale agreement that rescission is available as a remedy for the period between exchange and completion (see clause 13.8 of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
The purchaser should also include a statement that failure to exercise its right to rescind shall not be a waiver of its right to claim damages.
The alternative remedy for the purchaser is to claim damages.
The purchaser may elect to claim damages for misrepresentation (whether innocent, negligent or fraudulent) and complete rather than rescind the sale.
If this is proposed, it is strongly recommended that the purchaser either negotiates and settles the claim before completion or makes a retention.
Damages
Under the common law, the measure of damages for a breach of warranty will be to put the purchaser in the position it would have been in if all the warranties had been true.
There are many books dedicated to explaining in detail the basis on which damages would be calculated under the common law.
Rather than rely on common law, it is normal practice for purchasers to specify in the sale agreement the basis on which damages will be calculated.
This is less important than in a share sale where the difficulty of the purchaser, without an express damage statement, is to show that the shares are worth less than the purchaser paid for them, as a reduction in the assets or increase in the liabilities does not necessarily reduce the price of the shares.
A purchaser of assets is more likely to recover the reduction in value of the assets and the consequential reduction in the value of goodwill.
In determining whether to negotiate a specific damages clause such as that in clause 13.3 of the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III), the purchaser should consider the basis on which the price was calculated.
If the price is based on net assets, a reduction in assets should be directly reflected in a reduction in price.
However, if there is a significant element of goodwill or the price is based on a multiple of earnings, this should be reflected in a formula similar to that used by the purchaser for calculating the price.
Purchasers may negotiate alternative formulae and should reserve the right to select the most advantageous formula at the time the claim is brought.
The vendor will resist allowing the purchaser such an option.
In rare circumstances a purchaser may seek to argue that the vendor has breached a warranty to such an extent that it considers the vendor to have repudiated the contract.
The purchaser may wish to accept repudiation and sue for damages.
Reducing the vendor's liability
The two ways in which the vendor seeks to reduce its potential liability under the warranties are firstly by producing a disclosure letter and secondly by incorporating a limitation of liability clause in the sale agreement.
The draft warranties sought by the purchaser will be in general terms.
This is dictated by the fact that the purchaser knows little real detail about the business at the time the draft agreement is prepared.
For example, the warranty may state that there are and have been no disputes with employees in the last three years.
The disclosure letter is then used by the vendor to describe any specific exceptions to the general statement, for example, two claims for unfair dismissal having been brought in the last six months.
Traditionally, and to simplify the drafting of the warranties, these exceptions are contained in the disclosure letter generated by the vendor, or its lawyer on its behalf, rather than as amendments to the warranties.
Disclosure letter
The purchaser should be careful to ensure that the disclosures do not wholly undermine the warranties.
The purchaser will want the vendor to warrant that its disclosures are true and accurate and are not misleading and should reject any general disclosures.
For example, a statement by the vendor that there have been various disputes by the employees completely undermines the warranty.
The purchaser would thereby be deemed to have full knowledge of all disputes.
Instead, the vendor should be encouraged to identify, describe and quantify the actual and contingent liabilities arising from these disputes.
It is normal practice for the vendor to disclose various documents to the purchaser as part of the disclosure exercise.
As a matter of good practice copies of the documents should either be attached to the disclosure letter or placed in a file of documents delivered with the letter.
If claims do arise, it is in everyone's interest to be able to identify easily all the matters that were disclosed.
The vendor should be required to refer in the disclosure letter to the reason why the documents have been disclosed.
The purchaser should reject at all costs any attempt by the vendor to disclose any other documents which are referred to in the documents presented with the disclosure letter.
The vendor will frequently be tempted to make its disclosure as wide as possible and include all sources of information which the purchaser inspected or could have inspected during negotiations.
The clear aim of the vendor is to disclose as much as possible thereby reducing the potential for claims under the warranties.
However, it is suggested that the vendor should not adopt this "scatter gun" approach but instead disclose specific information and salient points expressly or by reference.
In Levison v Farin [1978]2 All ER 1149 it was held that it would not normally be enough "to make known the means of knowledge which may or do enable the other party to work out certain facts and conclusions" .
Clearly the disclosure letter is important as it potentially undermines the warranties.
A preliminary draft of the disclosure letter and all relevant documents should be requested as early as possible in the negotiations for, in many respects, it is as important as the sale agreement.
Any attempt to produce the letter for the first time at completion should be resisted and completion delayed until the purchaser has had adequate time to consider the disclosures.
It is particularly important and common for the vendor to incorporate provisions into the sale agreement limiting its liability under the agreement, and in particular its liability for breach of warranty.
Vendors should not rely on the possibility that protection may be available under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
Vendors would do well to remember the principle illustrated in Finney Lock Seeds Ltd v Mitchell (George)(Chesterhall) Ltd [1983]1 All ER 108 in that the damages incurred and awarded (in that case nearly £100,000) can be far in excess of the purchase price paid for the assets (in that case approximately £100) if the loss is a consequence of a defective asset.
Limitation of liability
Basic limitation has been included in clause 14 of the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III).
Many purchasers will acknowledge that the vendor will wish to limit its liability and incorporate these basic provisions in the initial draft.
Common ways of seeking to limit liability are:(a) agreeing an upper limit on the amount the vendor will pay if the claim is successful (see clause 14.3 of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
This is normally set at the purchase price or the upper limit of the price if this cannot be determined at completion.
Whether or not the purchase price is an appropriate or indeed adequate upper limit is arguable but it is only in rare circumstances that a vendor will agree to a higher limit.
One such situation is a sale under which the purchaser pays nominal consideration but assumes significant liabilities;(b) imposing a time limit beyond which, except in cases of fraud and dishonesty, the purchaser is time-barred from bringing a claim (see clause 14.1 of the standard sale agreementAppendix III).
Time limits normally negotiated vary between six months and four years.
As a matter of practice most claims come to light within the first two audits of the business by the purchaser;(c) to set a minimum value which the purchaser's claim must exceed in order for the claim to be brought (see clause 14.2 of  the standard sale agreement) —Appendix III.
This is described as the de minimis and serves as confirmation that the vendor will not be troubled by small claims.
In large transactions vendors may also negotiate a lower limit for individual items.
For example, the purchaser may agree to ignore all claims of less than £5,000 and not to bring a claim until the aggregate value of all claims over £5,000 exceeds £30,000.
The purchaser should reject any suggestion by the vendor that it may then only recover the amount of the claim exceeding the de minimis.
This implies that the vendor is representing itself as an insurer whereas the real claim is the full value of the damages suffered by the breach of contract;(d) ensuring the purchaser acknowledges it has not relied on any representation other than those incorporated in the sale agreement and that it shall not have any right to rescind the sale agreement.
The case of Goff v Gauthier (1991) 62 P & CR 388 has shown that it must be fair and reasonable for the vendor to rely on this exclusion (see page 62);(e) to state that the vendor will not be liable to the extent that any claim arises out of or is increased by the acts or omissions of the purchaser after completion;(f) to provide that the purchaser must give credit for the amount by which assets are found to have been understated, or liabilities have been over-provided for in the accounts;(g) to ensure that the purchaser pays to the vendor all amounts subsequently recovered from third parties relating to claims that have been paid by the vendor.
Alternatively, the vendor may require the purchaser to assign to it all rights against third parties but the purchaser will wish to restrict the vendor's ability to commence proceeding against customers as this may affect the goodwill of the business;(h) to limit some of the warranties to the best of the vendor's knowledge, information and belief.
To the extent that the purchaser is willing to accept this reduction of the absolute nature of warranties, it should be on the basis the vendor acknowledges that in all circumstances it has made full and proper enquiries and investigations (see clause 13.6 of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III);(i) to provide that the vendor shall not be liable if the purchaser completed the sale at the full purchase price despite the fact that it had knowledge of a particular breach of warranty.
In the absence of an express statement, it is uncertain whether the purchaser's prior knowledge is a defence available to the vendor.
The recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Eurocopy  v Teesdale and others (1992) BCLC 1067 supports the argument that it is a defence whereas Goff v Gauthier P & Ch [1991]388 supports the contrary view.
It is in everyone's interest that the sale agreement contains an express statement as to whether prior knowledge is a defence or whether prior knowledge will not prejudice the purchaser's ability to claim for breach of warranty if the material fact is not disclosed in the disclosure letter (see clause 13.4 of the standard sale agreementAppendix III).
If it is accepted as a defence, the purchaser should limit it to the actual knowledge of specific key individuals involved in negotiating the purchase rather than the knowledge of all its employees and advisers.
Ultimately it is for the vendor to prove that the purchaser had such knowledge.
It is suggested that the decision of the Court of Appeal in the Eurocopy case is the more equitable solution, particularly in circumstances where a disclosure is expressly brought to the attention of the vendor before completion but is not actually incorporated in the final disclosure letter.
In the Eurocopy case, the plaintiff and the defendants were the purchaser and the warrantors respectively in a share sale and purchase agreement.
The defendants sought to argue that the plaintiff was prevented from claiming breach of warranty since the material fact constituting the breach had been disclosed to the plaintiff at a meeting prior to signing the disclosure letter but had not been eventually contained in that letter.
The plaintiff argued that the prior disclosure was irrelevant as the share sale agreement contained clauses stating that the warranties were given subject to the matters set out in the disclosure letter but that no other information whether actual, constructive or imputed would affect any claim made by the plaintiff or reduce any amount recoverable.
A further clause provided that the plaintiff would not be entitled to claim for breach of warranty if the material matter had been fairly disclosed to the plaintiff in the disclosure letter but that no other information of which the plaintiff had knowledge would prejudice any claim by the plaintiff under the warranties.
In his judgment, Nourse LJ relied on the defendant's argument that the plaintiff had actual knowledge of the position and that the plaintiff had led the defendant to believe that it considered the fact not to be material.
The disclosure letter had been drawn up by the defendant on this belief and by its actions the plaintiff was estopped from complaining that the fact should have been included in the disclosure letter.
Nourse LJ considered it would be arguable that the defendants were "entitled to escape literal  application of the agreement" .
Nourse LJ also considered it was arguable that the plaintiff could not seek to rely on the literal clauses of the agreement when it had known that the disclosure letter was incomplete as to do so would be dishonest.
Although Nourse LJ does not categorically state what the law is in this situation, his decision indicates and points towards the view that the defendants may be able to escape the restrictions of the sale agreement where it would be inequitable to allow the plaintiff to rely on the strict wording.
Joint and several liability
Where there are multiple vendors, such as members of a partnership selling their business, purchasers will invariably insist that the vendors give warranties on a joint and several basis.
The effect is to enable the purchaser to recover its loss under a breach against any one or more of the vendors and leave the vendor paying the claim to seek compensation from his fellow vendors.
There is in fact no need to state in the sale agreement that liability is joint and several (although it is invariably the practice to do so) as this is implied by the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978, s1(1) and the ability to recover from fellow vendors and their estates is extended by s6(1) of that Act.
It is helpful for the purchaser and the vendors to understand the implications of both joint liability and several liability.
Joint liability is the liability undertaken together by two or more vendors.
Although the position has been modified by statute, traditionally a joint liability can only be enforced by bringing the claim at the same time against all the vendors undertaking the liability.
A purchaser would have to locate and commence proceedings against all vendors.
This is fraught with logistical difficulties for the purchaser.
A several liability is a liability undertaken by the vendors independently of each other and enforceable by the purchaser against each of the vendors independent of the others.
Several liability gives the purchaser the choice of which vendor to sue.
Once the vendor has been sued successfully it is then up to that vendor to try to recover a proportion of the cost incurred from the other vendors under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978.
Clearly several liability favours the purchaser whereas joint liability favours the vendors.
Joint and several liability is a suitable compromise.
If joint and several liability is accepted, there is nothing to prevent the vendors from settling between themselves in a private agreement the basis on which they would each be required to contribute if a successful claim is brought against any one vendor.
This will mean the vendors bear the financial risk of not being able to locate fellow vendors or finding that they have inadequate funds.
In the absence  of an express agreement, under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 the court will apportion the contributions between the vendors in such a manner as it considers to be just and equitable.
Alternatively, the purchaser may accept that the vendors have limited joint and several liability in that it can only recover limited accounts from each vendor.
The purchaser then bears the risk of non-recovery against one or more vendors.
Warranty insurance
A notable development in the last ten years is the availability of insurance cover to protect vendors against possible liability for claims for breach of warranty.
The purpose of such insurance is to provide cover against those types of warranty claims which arise out of simple errors made by vendors acting in good faith.
The insurance is only intended to cover vendors who at the time of contract had no knowledge of circumstances which eventually give rise to a claim or of the likelihood of claims being made under the warranties.
If insurance is to be sought, the vendor should identify and contact the insurers as early as possible in the negotiations as they will need sufficient time to review the draft documentation and consider the vendor's requirements.
The purpose of warranty insurance is not to provide general cover for all possible liabilities under the warranties but to provide cover for specific risks under the warranties.
To this end the insurer will require copies of the negotiated transaction documents including, in particular, the sale agreement, the disclosure letter, any side agreements, a copy of the investigating accountant's report (if any) and the last audited accounts for the target business.
The vendor will also be required to answer a detailed questionnaire covering not only the vendor's knowledge of claims under the warranties but also explaining the nature of the transaction, the sale price and the basis on which the sale price has been calculated.
The insurers will then review the scope of the warranties and the depth and content of the disclosures being made against the warranties.
The insurer will be concerned to see that the vendor has negotiated realistic limitations on its liability including a limit on the aggregate liability.
As with any other policy the insurers will commonly require exclusions against the following:(1) The adequacy of insurance arrangements The view of the insurers is that it should be for the purchaser to determine whether existing insurance cover for the business is adequate and if it is not to increase the level of cover with effect from completion.
(2) The adequacy of pension funding Whether or not an insurer  will wish to exclude warranties relating to funding adequacy will depend on whether a recent valuation is available from the managers of the fund and whether the vendor can claim against the valuation if the funding is shown subsequently to be inadequate.
If cover for funding adequacy is to be offered the insurer will normally require an additional premium.
(3) Bad debts Insurers normally exclude liability for claims under a bad debt warranty on the basis that cover is available in the conventional insurance market and therefore this risk can be dealt with by other means.
(4) Defects in goods or services sold or supplied As with bad debt liability cover is available in the conventional insurance market in policies for areas such as public liability, product liability and professional indemnity.
(5) The fraud or dishonesty of the vendor In addition to fraud and dishonesty insurers will specifically exclude liability for the wilful failure by the vendor to disclose matters of which it had actual knowledge.
Such exclusions may also cover matters of which the vendor ought to have had knowledge and should have disclosed.
(6) Forecasts The insurance policies are only really intended to cover liability for accident or misstatement of fact by the vendor.
Consequently, policies will not cover and will exclude forecasts and statements of intention or opinion as opposed to statements of fact.
(7) Acts or omissions of the vendor after completion The exclusions will normally cover liabilities for claims arising due to the failure of the vendor to meet an obligation for which it is primarily liable or which have arisen due to any act or omission of the vendor occuring after completion.
As with any other policy the insurers will always require an excess.
The minimum excess is normally £10,000.
This may be in addition to any de minimis provisions negotiated by the vendor in the sale agreement.
Finally, the insurer will be concerned to see that the vendor has not waived or limited its rights of subrogation.
If a warranty claim does materialise and the policy is called upon, the insurers will wish to have all rights to pursue claims against third parties.
These would include claims against the vendor's professional advisers if they had been negligent in advising on the negotiation of the transaction.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS
One of the purchaser's main concerns is to ensure that, after the sale, the vendor does not immediately re-enter the market in competition  with the business that has been sold.
This would detract from the goodwill for which the purchaser has usually paid a premium.
In order to protect the goodwill, the purchaser should take restrictive covenants from the vendor whereby the vendor undertakes not to compete with the business for a limited period.
A purchaser seeking restrictive covenants must consider whether, as a result of the covenants, any prior clearance or approval needs to be sought from the OFT or the European Commission.
This is discussed in Chapter 1 at page 31.
As a general rule a restrictive covenant restricts competition and is presumed to be void and unenforceable because such restrictions are contrary to public policy.
Despite the general rule, restrictive covenants will be held valid if they are reasonable.
They must be considered reasonable by the parties to them at the time of entering into the contract and they must also be seen as reasonable from an objective point of view.
In Allied Dunbar (Frank Weisinger) Limited v Weisinger [1988]IRLR 60 it was held that ultimately the parties that negotiated the covenants are the best judges of the reasonableness of the terms they have negotiated.
The price attributed to the goodwill being protected was considered as being a relevant factor (see also Alec Lobb Limited v Total Oil GB Limited [1985]1 WLR 173, CA).
If a covenant is contested it is for the party seeking to rely on the covenant to prove its reasonableness (see Rex Stewart Jeffries Parker Ginsberg v Parker [1988]IRLR 483).
Therefore if a purchaser is in a strong negotiating position, it should remember not to demand excessive restrictions at the time of contract despite its relative negotiating strength.
On the other hand, the covenants need to be sufficiently strong to prevent the vendor from re-entering the market place shortly after completion.
It cannot be overstressed that in every sale the reasonableness of the restrictive covenants must be considered in the particular circumstances.
Past cases are only helpful in so far as they act as a guide and some of the main points arising from them are discussed below.
Clause 15 of the standard sale agreement (Appendix III) provides a common example of covenants sought by a vendor.
Again, it is a starting point for negotiations and should not be seen as a definitive version.
Clause 15.1 adopts the common practice of distinguishing in the covenant the separate means by which the purchaser will protect the goodwill.
Not only will the vendor covenant not to compete with the business, but it will also covenant separately not to solicit customers or solicit employees.
The purchaser hopes that if ever a court considers any one level of protection to be unreasonable, it may sever this from the agreement and leave the other covenants untouched or impose a more reasonable amended form.
The parties declare that this is their intention (see clause 15.2) and in clause 15.3  acknowledge that they consider the restrictions to be reasonable.
The main areas to be considered in determining reasonableness tend to be the restrictions on business activities, the territorial extent of the restrictions and the duration of the restrictions.
As to business activities, a covenant is likely to be unreasonable if it covers activities which are not relevant to the business sold.
For this reason the purchaser should take considerable care in defining the restricted business.
It should be no more and no less than the business carried on at the time of completion.
As to the territorial extent, again the restrictive covenant should not cover an area greater than that reasonably necessary to protect the business.
It is common practice not to extend the covenant beyond the territory in which the business being sold operates at the time of completion.
This was the view taken in Nutricia v Zuid-Hollandse Conservenfabriek (OJL 376/22) and was confirmed by the European Court of Justice in Remia & Nutricia v Commission (Case 42/84 [1987]1 CMLR 1).
As to the duration of the restrictions, what constitutes a reasonable period depends largely on the nature of the business sold.
It is common to take account of the duration of customer contracts and to allow the purchaser a period that extends beyond the contract renewal point.
In the Nutricia case the court laid down various guidelines.
These involved considering:(a) how long it will take the purchaser to build up further clientele;(b) how frequently customers in the market change between the various competitors;(c) how quickly new products come on to the market and are taken up by customers;(d) how long it will take the vendor to re-establish itself in the market if there is no restrictive covenant.
As a general warning vendors should not place too much reliance on employment cases.
The restrictive covenant in a sale agreement protects goodwill whereas restrictive covenants given by employees protect the employer and employee relationship.
A court will also give greater importance to ensuring employees are not prevented from earning a living.
In the Allied Dunbar (Frank Weisinger) case it was confirmed that sale purchase covenants will be construed less stringently than employee's covenants.
Contracts, Creditors and Debtors
CONTRACTS
One of the common problems encountered in assets sales is determining how the customer and supplier contracts entered into by the vendor are to be transferred to the purchaser.
The transfer of such contracts raises problems which, by and large, are not present in share sales because in share sales the party to the contract with the customer or supplier is not changing.
In share sales it is the ownership of the contracting party that is changing rather than the identity of the contracting party.
Nevertheless, in share sales problems may still exist if there are change of control clauses in contracts to which the target is a party.
Change of control clauses (commonly found in software licences) entitle one party to a contract to terminate the contract if there is a change in ownership of the other contracting party or sometimes a change in ownership of the holding company of that contracting party.
In determining how to transfer contracts pursuant to an asset sale, it is important firstly to understand the legal issues involved in transferring contracts before considering the practical consequences for the vendor and purchaser.
The legal issues are best understood by distinguishing between the benefit of a contract and the burden of a contract, or between the rights and entitlements of a contract and the obligations to be performed under a contract.
For this reason this section addresses the following three areas:(1) Transferring the burden of the contract.
(2) Transferring the benefit of the contract.
(3) Practical consequences.
Transferring the burden of the contract
The difficulty in transferring contracts arises because the basic rule is that the vendor cannot be excused from the burden of its  contractual obligations by assigning or otherwise purporting to transfer to the purchaser the obligation to perform the duties it has undertaken under a particular contract.
However, there are two common alternative legal structures by which the purchaser can assume the vendor's obligation to perform a contract namely:(a) novation; or (b) sub-contracting or agency arrangements.
Novation is the means by which, with the consent of the customer under a specific contract, that contract is replaced by a new contract made between that customer and the purchaser.
The old contract between the customer and the vendor is extinguished.
The new contract between the customer or supplier and the purchaser must comply with the normal requirements for formation of a contract including intention and consideration.
In a novation, the purchaser will assume and be liable for all the obligations of the vendor under the original contract and the vendor will be relieved of its obligations to the customer under the original contract.
Novation
The most important fact to note is that novation requires the consent or acceptance of all parties to the relevant contract.
Such consent need not be expressed but can be implied by conduct depending upon the circumstances (see Bilbrough v Holmes [1876]5 Ch D 255).
Rather than create a new contract by novation, it may be possible for the purchaser to perform the obligations vicariously on behalf of the vendor under the existing contract.
This is normally done by the vendor appointing the purchaser as sub-contractor or as agent.
The important point to note is that under such vicarious arrangements the vendor remains responsible directly to the customer and will still be sued by the customer for non-performance or for breach of the contract if the work has not been undertaken in accordance with the terms of the contract.
The vendor would then need to recover against the purchaser pursuant to provisions, including indemnities, incorporated in the standard sale agreement.
Sub-contracting or agency arrangements
Such sub-contracting or agency arrangements will not work where the performance by the vendor of its obligations to the customer are of a "personal" nature.
Vicarious performance of a personal contract will not discharge the vendor nor bind the customer.
The essence of a personal contract is the significance of the identities of the parties.
Is it clear that the parties intended that no one but the actual party in the contract should have the benefit of the contract or the right to call for its performance?
Whether or not a contract is of a personal nature is  determined on objective grounds and depends on all the circumstances having regard to the nature of the contract and the subject matter of the rights to be assigned and there is no general rule.
In the words of Lord Greene in Davies v Collins [1945]1 All ER 247: Whether or not in any given contract performance can properly be carried out by the employment of a sub-contractor, must depend on the proper inference to be drawn from the contract itself, the subject matter of it and other material surrounding circumstances.
Contracts for services are commonly personal as in such circumstances the customer is likely to have relied upon the individual skill and identity of the vendor.
Transferring the benefit of the contract
The transfer of the benefit of the contract is most commonly dealt with by way of an assignment unless the contract is being novated, in which case the benefit will be dealt with alongside the burden in the novation agreement.
In understanding assignment it is important to distinguish assignment from novation.
In a novation the old contract is extinguished and the old obligations are assumed in a new contract.
Unlike novation, assignment involves the transfer of property namely the rights in relation to a contract which continues to exist and is not extinguished.
There are two methods of assignment: assignment under statute and assignment under common law.
For the purchaser, it is important to consider whether as a result of the assignment the purchaser will be able to enforce the benefit of the contract directly against the supplier or whether such benefit can only be enforced with the co-operation of the vendor.
Generally only a statutory assignment gives the purchaser a direct right.
The main question is whether the assignment binds the supplier as well as the vendor.
Assignment by statute is governed by the Law of Property Act 1925, s136 which provides that: Any absolute assignment by writing under the hand of the assignor (not purporting to be by way of charge only) of any debt or other legal thing in action, of which express notice in writing has been given to the debtor, trustee or other person from the assignor would have been entitled to claim such debt or thing in action, is effectual in law (subject to equities having priority over the right of the assignee) to pass and transfer from the date of such notice:(a) the legal right to such debt or thing in action;(b) all legal and other remedies for the same; and (c) the power to give a good discharge for the same without the concurrence of the assignor.
What is important to note is that there are three main conditions which must be fulfilled to accomplish an assignment under statute:(a) the assignment must be absolute;(b) the assignment must be in writing; and (c) written notice must be given to the debtor or the supplier as appropriate.
The most important condition for the purchaser to consider is the need for written notice of the assignment to be given to the debtor or supplier.
If any of the three conditions are not fulfilled, the purported assignment under statute will not necessarily be ineffective, as it may constitute an equitable assignment.
The disadvantage of an equitable assignment is that if the purchaser is to enforce the contract against the supplier or debtor, the vendor must be joined as a party (see Performing Rights Society Limited v London Theatre of Varieties Limited [1924]AC 1).
At common law the assignment gives the purchaser a right against the vendor but not an independent right of action against the debtor or supplier.
One distinction between an assignment at equity and under statute is that, for an equitable assignment to be valid, written notice does not need to be given to the supplier whereas it is an essential part of the statutory transfer (see above).
Despite the fact that formal notice is not needed, there are two important reasons why the purchaser may wish to give notice of an equitable assignment.
Firstly, the purchaser is bound by any payments which a debtor makes to the vendor if it has no knowledge of the assignment (see Warner Brothers Records Inc v Rollgreen Limited [1976]QB 430).
In such circumstances the purchaser will then need to rely upon the terms of the sale agreement to recover from the vendor.
Secondly, the giving of notice will establish the priority of the purchaser against the debtor ahead of any other assignee of the vendor who has failed to give notice of assignment to the debtor (see Dearl v Hall [1828]3 RUS 1).
Provided that the purchaser did not have actual or constructive notice of the prior assignment at the time the asset sale agreement was completed, the purchaser is not prejudiced, if between completion and giving notice to the debtor, the purchaser discovers the existence of a prior assignment by the vendor (see Mutual Life Assurance Society v Langley [1886]32 Ch D 460).
The main exception to the procedures for statutory and common law assignments is where the benefit to be assigned relates to a personal contract (see above).
If the contract is personal, the benefit of that contract must be novated, it cannot be transferred by way of assignment.
An express prohibition on assignment does not in itself render the contract personal.
It is a matter of construction of the contract and the surrounding circumstances as to whether the prohibition is intended merely to place the vendor in breach of  contract and exposed to a claim for damages or whether the prohibition is intended to render the assignment ineffective and make it clear that the contract is personal.
If the contract is not personal but contains an express prohibition on assignment, such prohibition will only prevent an assignment of the benefit if on its wording it is clear and precise.
If there is an express prohibition on assigning the benefit it is important to distinguish between the benefit of the contract, namely the right of each party to have a contract performed in accordance with its terms, and the benefits which arise under the contract, namely those rights which arise incidentally from the performance of the contract and are sometimes known as the fruits of performance such as the right to claim for damages under the contract.
The fruits of performance are proprietary rights and choses in action assignable under statute even if the contract is personal (Linden Gardens Trust Limited v Lenesta Sludge Disposals Ltd and St Martins Property Corporation Ltd and Another v Sir Robert McAlpine and Sons Ltd 57 BLR 57, both cases have been joined and are being heard in an appeal to the House of Lords at the time of writing).
The benefit of the contract is only assignable if it makes no difference to the person on whom the obligation lies as to whether the obligation is discharged to the vendor or to the purchaser.
Practical consequences
The level of complexity with which the sale agreement addresses transferring the vendor's contracts to the purchaser will vary enormously depending upon the nature of the vendor's business and the parties' relative negotiating strengths.
Understandably, despite such possible complexity, the purchaser will not be interested in the legal semantics of how the contracts are to be transferred but will be interested in two main practical concerns: firstly, in receiving the benefit of the contracts in return for performing the burden and secondly, in not paying for a contract if the purchaser cannot benefit from it.
The simplest situation to deal with is where the benefit of the vendor's contracts is freely assignable.
The main concern of the purchaser will be whether to rely on the sale and purchase contract as constituting the assignment between the purchaser and the vendor or whether to issue notices of assignment to each party to the contracts after completion and so achieve a statutory assignment rather than an equitable assignment.
The statutory assignment has the advantage of enabling the purchaser to enforce the contracts directly against the supplier rather than through the vendor.
The purchaser should  ensure that it is not restricted from issuing notices of assignment by any of the announcement or confidentiality restrictions in the sale and purchase agreement.
The difficulty occurs where consent to the transfer of contracts is needed, whether it be consent to transfer of the benefit or of the burden.
Consent will be needed where there is a clear express prohibition in a relevant contract or where that contract is "personal" .
If consent is needed any purported transfer by the vendor may be a repudiatory breach of that contract by the vendor exposing the vendor to a claim for damages from its customer and possibly a claim by the purchaser against the vendor if the customer treats the contract as terminated particularly if the vendor warranted that no consents were needed.
To avoid such problems, where a consent is needed, the normal practice is for the sale agreement to provide that the vendor will hold the benefit of such contract on trust for the purchaser and pay any sums which the vendor receives after completion to the purchaser immediately upon receipt (see clause 8.2(a) of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
In return the purchaser will undertake to perform the vendor's obligations under such contract.
However, the purchaser should ensure that this only applies to obligations to the extent that they have been disclosed and ensure that it will not be required to perform the obligations if such vicarious performance would be a breach of the relevant contract (see clause 8.2(b) of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
The purchaser should also ensure that the vendor is under an obligation to provide all necessary assistance and co-operation in obtaining the consents after completion either by relying on the general further assurance clause or by incorporating a dedicated further assurance clause such as that in clause 8.4 of the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III).
Problems arise where consent to an assignment or agreement to novation is sought but is refused.
In such circumstances the purchaser will wish to absolve itself of any responsibilty to perform obligations under the relevant contract and will seek an indemnity from the vendor for any liability in respect of such contract (see clause 8.3 of the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
Whether this is acceptable to the vendor is a matter of commercial negotiation and depends on who agrees to bear the risk that a consent is refused or not forthcoming within a specified period.
The difficulty for the vendor is that, as a result of the sale, the vendor may be left with no facilities to perform obligations under such contract and may face a claim from the party to that contract for breach.
The contracts for which consents are required are likely to have been revealed by the purchaser's due diligence exercise and by the vendor's disclosures.
The vendor will be required to disclose such  contracts against the warranty that no consents to transfer are required (see warranty F1 in the standard sale agreement—Appendix III).
In an ideal world, the purchaser will wish to receive formal consent from every customer and supplier before completing the acquisition.
This will normally be impractical and it is suggested that the purchaser may wish to distinguish between the following three levels of consent:(a) critical consents;(b) material consents;(c) ancillary consents.
Critical consents are those which it is essential for the purchaser to obtain if it is to conduct the business after completion.
An example of such consent is the transfer of the vendor's contracts with its main suppliers particularly if the business cannot operate without an assurance of a constant supply of products.
In such circumstances the purchaser is likely to insist that the obtaining of these critical consents is a condition precedent to completion of the acquisition and it is difficult for the vendor to oppose this if the consents are truly critical.
The main concern of the vendor will be the commercial effect upon its business in approaching individuals for critical consents if completion does not take place because one or more have withheld their consent.
The further risk both the vendor and purchaser will wish to minimise is alerting the particular customer or supplier as to how significant they are in relation to the business.
In extreme circumstances the customer or supplier may seek to use its strong position and extract personal benefits in return for giving its consent.
Alternatively, the customer or supplier may look on the purported transfer as an opportunity to terminate or renegotiate the contract.
A less important category is those contracts which are material to the continuing conduct of the vendor's business but without which the business can still be operated after completion, albeit on a smaller scale.
Material consents relate to those contracts, normally the vendor's customer contracts, which the purchaser would like to receive formal consent for and if such contracts are not transferred failure to take over such contracts may materially reduce the value of the business acquired.
One possibility is for the purchaser to provide that part of the purchase price will be reduced and repaid to the purchaser if certain material consents are not received or if only a proportion of material consents are received.
Ideally, the purchaser would prefer to make a retention of part of the purchase price and  only pay this to the vendor once certain levels of material consents have been received.
The vendor may not be willing to agree to a retention particularly if the purchaser is unable to offer adequate security for the future payment or is unable to pay retention monies into a joint account pending receipt of the consents.
The vendor may simply refuse to consider a retention or deferred payment since after completion it will simply not have the facilities to perform any remaining contractual obligations and vicarious performance by the purchaser is not possible or is inappropriate.
Ultimately, it is a question of who, commercially, is to take the risk that a consent may be refused.
Ancillary consents are those which technically require formal consent but which the purchaser does not consider as being significant to the business.
In such circumstances the purchaser may be willing either to take the risk that consent is refused or withheld or alternatively to proceed without obtaining formal consent and if necessary argue that the relevant party to the contract has consented by its conduct after completion.
Such conduct may include regular payments which are clearly made by the purchaser after completion for invoices submitted by the other party to the contract to the vendor.
It may also be possible to argue that where the party has failed to respond to a notice of assignment from the purchaser, such lack of action over a long period is an implied consent where that party has dealt with the purchaser after completion.
Critical consents
Material consents
Ancillary consents
DEBTORS AND CREDITORS
One of the issues to be resolved between the vendor and purchaser is the question of whether the purchaser is willing to take over either of the debtors or creditors of the business or whether one or both of these will remain with the vendor after completion of the sale.
The issue is not dissimilar to the general question of identifying what assets are included in the sale and what are excluded.
However, the issue is discussed here as it does to a certain extent relate to customer and supplier contracts that are being assigned.
For example, the purchaser may consider that certain supplier contracts are essential to the business but at the same time is not willing to accept responsibility for the vendor's debts to the supplier.
It is worth examining separately:(1) The reasons for excluding debtors and creditors.
(2) The reasons for including debtors and creditors.
(3) Common solutions for the issue.
The reasons for excluding debtors and creditors
The following are the main reasons that the vendor will wish to exclude both debtors and creditors and will normally outweigh the reasons for including debtors and creditors in the sale.
The purchaser will have to pay ad valorem duty at the rate of one per cent on the gross value of the debtors (Stamp Act 1891, s57) and at one per cent on the total value of the liabilities to creditors assumed.
The important point is that stamp duty is payable not on the net position (ie debtors less creditors) but on the value of debtors plus the value of liabilities.
Furthermore, duty is payable on the gross value of the debtors and ignores the possibility of any bad debts and the purchaser will be paying stamp duty on an asset for which he has received no benefit.
If debtors are to be transferred, the purchaser should seek a warranty in the sale agreement that all the debts will be realised in full within a fixed period after completion and that none of the debts is subject to any counter-claim or is disputed.
An appropriate warranty is included as warranty A.7 in the standard sale agreement, see Appendix III.
In addition, the purchaser should seek from the vendor a specific indemnity against bad debts but on the basis the purchaser acknowledges that it will not be able to recover twice for both breach of warranty and under the bad debt indemnity.
The disadvantage of a bad debt warranty and indemnity is that all it does is provide a remedy for the purchaser.
Ideally, the purchaser would prefer to leave the risk of bad debts with the vendor, after all, the vendor is the person best able to assess the position.
The risk for the purchaser is that the vendor may have understated the scope and extent of the creditors.
As with bad debts, the purchaser will insist on warranties covering the scope and extent of creditors and the fact that all creditors have been paid in accordance with usual practice in the ordinary course of business and that the vendor has not delayed payment of the creditors as completion approaches.
The purchaser should also impose a financial limit on the value of the creditors that it assumes.
Although a limit can be imposed, it is difficult to know how as a matter of practice what limit can be operated.
Furthermore, the protection of warranties and imposing a limit is only the second best option.
Ideally the purchaser would prefer to leave the risk of creditors with the vendor.
The purchaser and vendor will need to negotiate how the assumption of debtors and creditors is to be reflected in the price paid for the business.
The purchaser is unlikely to be willing to pay for the gross value of debtors less gross creditors in full on completion.
There are three main reasons.
Firstly, there is no reason why the purchaser should pay for items which eventually materialise into bad debts.
Secondly, there is no reason why the vendor should receive payment from the purchaser for the debtors earlier than the vendor would have received such payment from the debtors themselves.
This would put the vendor in a better position than it would have otherwise been in had the sale not taken place.
Thirdly, there will be considerable cash flow implications for the purchaser, particularly if the creditors fall due to be paid before the debts are collected from the debtors.
There is no reason why the purchaser should bank roll the vendor's cash flow position.
Stamp duty
Bad debts
Creditors
Price and cash flow
Reasons for including debtors and creditors
The following are the main reasons for including the debtors and creditors in the asset sale: It is probable that the purchaser will have taken over all the books and records of the vendor relating to the business and the purchaser may have also taken over all of the vendor's accounting staff.
In such a situation the vendor is left without the means to discharge the creditors and pursue the debtors.
It is easier for the purchaser to deal with the creditors and debtors as they are likely to continue to be customers and suppliers of the business after completion.
Excluding the creditors and debtors may cause confusion amongst them as they will be uncertain as to whether they are meant to be dealing with the vendor or the purchaser for particular debts and liabilities.
It is far easier from their point of view if they only need to deal with one entity and they will probably prefer that to be the purchaser as it is the purchaser that has taken over the business.
If debtors and creditors are excluded the natural inclination of the vendor will be to pursue the debtors and delay paying the creditors for as long as possible.
Irrespective of the fact that the business has changed hands, creditors may associate the delay in payment with the  business itself rather than the identity of the vendor.
Furthermore, if the vendor commences debt recovery proceedings against debtors who continue to be customers of the business this may jeopardise goodwill.
The availability of staff, books and records
Continuity
Goodwill
Common solution
The common solution is for both creditors and debtors to be excluded from the sale and to remain with the vendor as this is to the clear advantage of the purchaser.
As a compromise, the purchaser is normally willing to act as agent for the vendor both in collecting the debts and paying creditors.
By adopting this solution the purchaser avoids the risk of bad debts and understated creditor liability and will not incur stamp duty costs.
By acting as agent the purchaser will overcome the problem that the vendor no longer has the books and records of the business and may no longer have any accounting staff.
The risk to the purchaser in this solution is that the vendor may still wish to pursue debtors.
For the purchaser, it is important to establish in the asset sale agreement an undertaking by the vendor not to pursue debtors without the consent of the purchaser.
The vendor is only likely to be willing to accept this restraint in respect of debtors that continue to be significant customers of the business after completion.
The vendor will also be concerned to know how quickly the cash will be returned to it by the purchaser.
At the same time, the purchaser will not wish to return cash to the vendor that he has not yet collected from debtors, nor will the purchaser be willing to use its own funds to satisfy creditors on behalf of the vendor.
A practical solution is for the purchaser to pay all debts collected on behalf of the vendor into a designated deposit account and to satisfy the excluded creditors out of the proceeds of that account.
The vendor should be entitled to any interest that is earned on the balance and should receive either weekly or monthly statements from the purchaser or from the bank.
Alternatively, where it is likely that the creditors will need to be paid before the debts can be collected, the purchaser may wish to make a retention out of part of the purchase price which it then uses for satisfying the creditors.
The purchaser should reserve the express right to pay the creditors directly out of the retention on behalf of the vendor.
A formula can be developed which may be complicated but under which the purchase price is paid in instalments and the precise amount of the instalments will decrease depending on the extent to which the purchaser has had to satisfy the debts to creditors on behalf of the vendor.
Where the excluded creditors continue to be customers of the business, the purchaser would understandably prefer to use monies  received from that creditor to satisfy invoices that the purchaser has issued rather than those which were issued previously by the vendor.
Ignoring the bargaining strengths of both parties, there is no clear reason why a vendor should be willing to agree to this and as a matter of practice should establish the order of priority of satisfaction of liabilities within the terms and conditions of the sale agreement.
The vendor should insist that monies received are used to satisfy the oldest liabilities first.
Employment
THE GENERAL RULE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
As a general rule the liabilities associated with persons employed in a business being sold are normally governed by the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981 (SI 1981/1794—the Transfer Regulations).
The Transfer Regulations, which were enacted to give effect to the EC Acquired Rights Directive 77/187, will usually apply to a business sale if the vendor's business is transferred to the purchaser "as a going concern" .
This is the position adopted in the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III).
Broadly speaking, although it is discussed in more detail below, a business is transferred as a going concern if the purchaser carries on that business in succession to the vendor as distinct from the purchaser selectively choosing specific assets of the vendor for use in the purchaser's own business.
In other words, as a result of the sale, the vendor's business has been taken over by and is being conducted by the purchaser to the exclusion of the vendor.
If the business is not transferred as a going concern the common law position will apply, and the employees will remain with the vendor if the purchaser does not wish to employ them.
The effect of the Transfer Regulations is that the contracts of employment of the persons working in the business immediately before it is transferred are novated automatically to the purchaser on completion of the transfer.
The Transfer Regulations reverse the common law position which is that persons employed in that business will be redundant unless the vendor has other business in which they can be redeployed.
If the common law position applies, the purchaser is free to offer employment, but upon whatever terms he chooses and to whomever he chooses.
Instead, by virtue of the automatic novation when the Transfer Regulations apply, the contracts of employment continue to have effect after the transfer as if they were originally made between the purchaser and the employee.
This is a particularly important consequence for all purchasers.
The general advantage of asset sales over share sales is that the purchaser can be selective as to which assets and liabilities he buys or assumes.
The Transfer Regulations reverse the position with respect to employees.
Due to the Transfer Regulations, the purchaser is in much the same and in no better a position than if he had bought the shares of the vendor company.
As a result of the Transfer Regulations the purchaser becomes responsible for all the rights, obligations and liabilities of the vendor under the employment contracts for all persons employed in the business transferred.
Moreover, if the purchaser wishes to rationalise the workforce he runs the risk of becoming liable for automatically unfair dismissals where employees are dismissed as a result of the transfer of the business.
The purchaser takes over each employee subject to that employee's accumulated statutory rights.
Due to the statutory novation it is normal practice for the vendor to indemnify the purchaser against all liabilities concerning the employees up to the time of completion.
This approach, which is reflected in clause 9 of the standard sale agreement (see Appendix III) attempts to reinstate the advantage of an asset sale.
The indemnity is, of course, only as good as the vendor and, if appropriate, its guarantor.
THE NEED FOR INFORMATION AT AN EARLY STAGE
Since the purchaser is to assume the liabilities for all persons employed in the business (including any claim by the employees against the vendor) it is important for him to collect, as early as possible, full details of all employees.
This is particularly important if the purchaser is buying a service business and one of the main assets (or possibly liabilities) is the vendor's employees.
Points which the purchaser may wish to raise with the vendor are set out in the information questionnaire (see Appendix II).
The terms of employment may have an impact on the purchaser's assessment of the merits of the transaction.
For example, the employees that he takes over may have more generous terms of employment than his existing staff, or the vendor may have a collective agreement with or have recognised a trade union.
To reduce the benefits of the new staff may be constructive dismissal yet to have staff doing similar work but on different terms will cause friction within the purchaser's workforce.
Alternatively, the purchaser may decide that he can operate the business more efficiently than the vendor either by a general reorganisation of job responsibilities or by his existing staff taking on  a greater workload.
Either way the purchaser will need full details of the vendor's employees in order to assess the costs of redundancies, wrongful and unfair dismissal claims and identify which of the vendor's employees he may prefer to retain.
Depending on the likely cost of redundancies and the scale or likelihood of claims by the vendor's employees relating to their past relations with the vendor, the purchaser may wish to negotiate a contribution from the vendor or a reduction in the price.
The purchaser may also wish to ensure that the vendor's important employees will be transferred with the business.
Further, the purchaser will wish to consider carefully the position of any person described by the vendor as an independent contractor (see below).
PENSION ENTITLEMENT
Until very recently it was commonly thought to be a peculiar anomaly of the Transfer Regulations that reg 7 specifically excludes from the statutory novation the rights of employees in respect of occupational pension schemes.
It was thought that the purchaser automatically took on board liability for all of the employees' rights except those in respect of pension schemes, save in the case of contractual rights to receive payments into personal schemes which would be unaffected.
Pension entitlements are dealt with separately in Chapter 6.
However, the effect of the recent tribunal decisions in Warrener v Walden Engineering Co Ltd (Case No 22672/91, Hull 21 October 1991) and in Perry v Intec Colleges Ltd [1993]IRLR 56 is that there is a major risk for a purchaser that he is now obliged to provide occupational pension benefits to the employees equivalent to those enjoyed by them while employed by the vendor.
Warrener and Perry are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
What remains to be answered, even if pension rights are capable of transfer, is what are the precise obligations of the purchaser in this regard, and how should compensation be calculated in the event of a breach by the purchaser of these obligations?
It is suggested that if there is a breach, an employee is under a duty to mitigate the loss and this would probably involve joining the purchaser's existing pension scheme even if the benefits are not as generous as under the vendor's scheme.
It would be a matter of negotiation as to whether the employee consented to the resulting change in employment benefits at the same time as agreeing to participate in the purchaser's scheme.
THE TRANSFER REGULATIONS
When do the Transfer Regulations apply?
Subject to the important exceptions below, the Transfer Regulations apply to the "transfer from one person to another of an undertaking situated immediately before the transfer in the United Kingdom or a part of one which is so situated" .
An undertaking is defined in reg 3 of the Transfer Regulations as including any trade or business, and as a result of a series of cases (Kenmir Ltd v Frizzell [1968]1 All ER 414; Batchelor v Premier Motors (Romford) Ltd COIT 1359/181 19.11.82; Premier Motors (Medway) Ltd v Total Oil (GB) Ltd [1984]ICR 58; Spijkers v Gebr Benedik Abattoir CV [1986]2 CMLR 296) it is well established that there will be a transfer of an undertaking for the purpose of the Transfer Regulations only if "the business concerned is transferred as a going concern" .
What is the transfer of a business as a going concern?
There is no hard and fast rule as to what constitutes the transfer of a business as a going concern.
However, it must be stressed that it is a question of fact in each individual transaction, and the question one has to ask objectively in every single situation is whether the purchaser is merely selecting specific assets for the use in his own business or whether he is buying assets in order that he can carry on the business in succession to and in place of the vendor.
The former is an asset sale whereas the latter is the transfer of a business as a going concern.
There are many cases (noted below) on whether a business is transferred as a going concern.
All the cases should be used with care and should always be related to their unique facts.
However, as a result of past cases, several factors have now evolved as being helpful guidelines in answering the question.
The factors which, if present, indicate the transfer as a going concern largely relate to intangible assets.
The transfer of goodwill is generally considered to be the single most important factor (see Luckey v Hockley [1966]2 KIR 17; Douglas v Merchants Facilities (Glasgow) Ltd [1966]1 ITR 374; Seymour v Barber and Heron [1970]5 ITR 65; Bonser v Patara [1967]2 ITR 76), but not an overriding one, in support of the transfer as a going concern.
Where many of the other factors below are missing from a sale, the exclusion of goodwill from the sale will almost certainly make the transfer not a going concern.
Again, a customer list is not a conclusive factor but is a helpful factor (see Rencoule v Hunt [1967]2 ITR 475 and MacDonald v Bull and Patterson [1966]1 KIR 734) particularly if the vendor assists in the transfer of its customers to the purchaser.
Work in progress must be the genuine transfer of the vendor's work in progress to the purchaser.
It is unlikely to be the transfer of a business as a going concern if the purchaser merely completes work for the vendor after completion under a specific contract with the vendor (Melon v Hector Powe Ltd [1981]1 All ER 313).
Covenants by the vendor not to compete with the purchaser, particularly in respect of the business, support the fact that the purchaser bought the business as a going concern (Robert Seligman v Baker [1983]ICR 770).
This factor tends to be linked with goodwill as it would be unusual for a purchaser not to take restrictive covenants to protect any goodwill he has purchased.
The transfer to the purchaser of the trade names and trade marks used in the business sold by the vendor is synonymous with the succession by the purchaser to the vendor's business.
Goodwill
Customer list
Work in progress
Restrictive covenants
Trading names and trade marks
Irrelevant factors
It is also helpful to bear in mind that the following factors tend to be of little or no relevance in determining whether a business is transferred as a going concern.
As it is a question of fact, a statement in the sale agreement by the purchaser and the vendor that they consider the transaction to be the transfer of a business as a going concern is of little relevance.
Such a statement merely indicates that the vendor and purchaser agree as between themselves that the Transfer Regulations should apply.
To the extent that an industrial tribunal disagrees as a matter of fact and considers that the common law position applies instead, to the warranties and indemnities, will adjust the position between the vendor and the purchaser accordingly.
The fact that a transaction includes the transfer of machinery, factory or office premises, stock, plant and equipment, tools and other tangible assets is not relevant if no intangible assets are transferred (Woodhouse v Peter Brotherhood Ltd [1972]2 QB 520).
It is irrelevant that, so far as the employees are concerned, they are working in the same premises with the same equipment and on the same job as before the sale and perhaps have not even been informed that a sale has taken place (Woodhouse v Peter Brotherhood Ltd [1972]2 QB 520; Woodcock v Committee for the Time Being of the Friends School Wigton and Genwise Ltd [1987]IRLR 98, CA).
It is not conclusive that the purchaser carries on work similar to or the same as that previously carried on by the vendor, especially if this work is undertaken pursuant to a contract between them.
Statement by the purchaser and the vendor
Tangible assets
The opinion of the employees
Similarity of work
Specific situations when the Transfer Regulations do not apply
Even if a sale clearly appears to involve the transfer of a business as a going concern, it is still important to consider whether the Transfer Regulations are relevant.
The following are common situations in which the Transfer Regulations will not apply.
In these situations the position will be governed either by the common law or the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
A detailed analysis of the sale of businesses operated under licence or franchise is outside the scope of this book.
Common examples of such businesses include petrol stations, public houses, fast-food restaurants and shops within shops often found in department stores.
The basic difficulty is that although the vendor is usually the employer and owns the assets used in the business being sold, the right to conduct the business is not his to transfer.
The Transfer Regulations only apply to those persons employed by the vendor in the undertaking transferred by the vendor.
In the case of franchises and licences the business is not transferred by the vendor and the vendor will normally have to arrange for a new licence or franchise to be granted to the purchaser by the licensor or franchisor on the surrender of the vendor's licence or franchise.
Business operated under franchise or licence
However, it is important to note that following the recent decision of the European Court of Justice in Rask and Christensen v ISS Kantineservice A/S (1992) 12 November, ECJ No: C-209/91 there is an increasing risk that the Transfer Regulations will apply to  businesses operated under a franchise or licence.
The Kantineservice case did not cover franchise or licence businesses but covered the contracting out of services by a customer to an independent contractor.
The European Court of Justice said that the Acquired Rights Directive applies whenever there is a change in the person or legal entity responsible for running the undertaking and who, as a result of the change, enters into the obligations of employer in relation to the employees of the undertaking.
The European Court of Justice held that it was not relevant whether the ownership of the undertaking was transferred.
The risk of the Kantineservice decision is that, although there is no true transfer of an undertaking when the franchisor is changed, the person acquiring the franchise may be seen as taking over responsibility for running the undertaking and will normally retain the original employees.
In such circumstances a tribunal may chose to construe the Transfer Regulations purposively and decide that they apply.
However, the situation is not clear at present.
The Transfer Regulations only protect employees and not independent contractors.
Clearly there is always the danger that a vendor may describe people as independent contractors solely in order to avoid national insurance contributions, settling PAYE and difficulties in eventually dismissing such people.
A purchaser should always make careful enquiries to satisfy himself that persons described by the vendor as independent contractors are not in fact employees.
If the purchaser does not take on such persons and they are subsequently shown to be employees, they will be protected by the Transfer Regulations and the purchaser will be liable for any costs of redundancy or dismissal.
If the persons are found to be employees, the vendor will be liable to the Inland Revenue and Department of Social Security (DSS) for PAYE and national insurance contributions due in respect of emoluments paid to the employees before the date of the transfer.
On the sale, the purchaser should not assume any such liabilities as they are not liabilities to the employees.
Independent contractors
National insurance—consequence of incorrect categorisation
All payments made will be treated as earnings and will be assessed to primary and secondary class 1 contributions.
The vendor is liable for the full amount of the assessment subject to credit being given, at the DSS's discretion for any class 2 contributions paid by those persons.
The employer cannot recover the secondary class 1 nor indeed the primary class 1 contributions from the employee.
The Transfer Regulations only apply where there is a transfer of an undertaking situated inside the United Kingdom.
If an employee of an undertaking situated inside the United Kingdom is located overseas (for example a salesman based in Sweden for an English business) notwithstanding the application of the Transfer Regulations to the sale, the employee may be unable to bring a claim due to being employed abroad.
It is now thought that the Transfer Regulations will apply to undertakings or parts of undertakings that are not in the nature of commercial ventures.
This is a peculiar anomaly in that the Transfer Regulations currently exclude undertakings in the nature of commercial ventures.
However the Trade Union Reform and Employee Rights Bill currently before Parliament will reverse this position.
Indeed the European Court of Justice has recently held in Dr Sophie Redmond Stichting v Bartol [1992]IRLR 366 that the "fact that…the transaction arises out of the grant of subsidies to foundations or associations whose services are not remunerated does not exclude the transaction from the scope of the EC Acquired Rights Directive" .
Therefore the exclusion of non-commercial ventures currently contained in the Transfer Regulations is in conflict with the EC Acquired Rights Directive and the exception is likely to be meaningless.
Care should be taken where the vendor is a member of a group of companies.
The Transfer Regulations only apply to persons employed by the vendor in the undertaking transferred by the vendor.
It is sometimes the case that all persons within a group are employed by one service company set up specifically for providing services such as staff and property to all other group companies.
If the parties want the Transfer Regulations to apply to these persons, the vendor will need to become their employer prior to the sale, or the service company will have to become a party to the transaction.
The substitution of the vendor before the sale would need the consent of each affected employee.
The persons transferred automatically to the purchaser are all persons employed within the business being sold at or immediately before the time of sale whose contracts would otherwise (at common  law) have been terminated by the sale.
The Transfer Regulations apply to all employees irrespective of their length of service in the business or whether they are full-time or part-time.
However, purchasers should not be concerned about part-time employees (less than eight hours per week) as they cannot claim unfair dismissal rights.
Employees based overseas
Non-commercial ventures
Group service companies and group reorganisations
Who transfers?
Dismissals under the Transfer Regulations
If there are to be dismissals in connection with a sale, and there often are, the key questions that the parties will want answered are:(1) What are the liabilities in respect of any dismissals?(2) Who bears the cost, the vendor or the purchaser?(3) How can the liability be avoided?
The three main liabilities are for unfair dismissal, redundancy and wrongful dismissal.
Any dismissal (either express or constructive) which is in connection with a sale governed by the Transfer Regulations is, as a result of reg 8(1) of the Transfer Regulations, automatically presumed to be an unfair dismissal.
Only employees with two or more years' continuous service qualify for unfair dismissal rights.
The automatic presumption is rebutted if the dismissal is for an "economic, technical or organisational reason entailing changes in the work force" (see reg 8(2) of the Transfer Regulations).
Notwithstanding the rebuttal of the presumption, the employer must still show that he acted reasonably in dismissing the employee and that the dismissals were fair under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, s57(3).
It is particularly important to note that redundancies may, therefore, be deemed to be unfair dismissals, thereby increasing considerably the question of compensation payable.
What are the liabilities for dismissal?
Unfair dismissal
The words "economic, technical or organisational" are given a wide interpretation and can, to a degree, be interrelated.
 "Economic" suggests the saving of money in the management of the business and does not mean the economic value of the sale to the vendor.
It does not cover the dismissal by the vendor prior to the sale for the reason that the purchaser will either not buy the business if it contains certain employees or alternatively will pay a lower price (see Wheeler v Patel [1987]ICR 631).
There do not appear to be any significant decisions on the word "technical" , but it is not difficult to contemplate circumstances where the purchaser may wish to absorb his purchase  into an existing business which operates with different technology.
 "Organisational" reasons appear to overlap with "economic" reasons and tend to be where the purchaser, in merging his work force with the vendors, dismisses a person because the purchaser will have too many people doing the same job.
It is these horizontal economies of scale that are sometimes of key benefit to the purchaser.
Even if the reason is economic, technical or organisational the employer must still act reasonably in selecting and dismissing each employee.
If employees are to be dismissed during negotiations, the purchaser and probably the vendor will want to quantify the potential cost of the dismissals.
It is assumed that a tribunal will not be willing to make an order for reinstatement or re-engagement.
For this, the purchaser will need detailed information as to the age, length of employment, salary and benefits for each employee.
There are four statutory awards which an employee may possibly claim under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
The levels of compensation are subject to statutory limits which are usually increased annually.
The limits set out below are as at 1 June 1993.
There are factors outside the scope of this book which a tribunal may consider and thereby reduce the amount the employee is awarded.
Such factors relate to the conduct of the employee and the total compensation received.
Ultimately a tribunal will award what they consider to be just and equitable on the facts of each case.
(i) Basic award The maximum basic award is £6,150.
The basic award for each employee is calculated as one and a half week's pay for each year of continuous employment over the age of 41, one week's pay for each such year between the ages of 22 and 40, and half a week's pay for each year between the ages of 18 and 21.
The calculation is limited to the 20 most recent years of continuous employment subject to a maximum week's pay of £205. (ii) Compensatory award The maximum compensatory award is £11,000.
A tribunal must make a compensatory award if it has made a basic award.
The award compensates the employee for any loss sustained as a result of the dismissal itself and the employer's actions but each employee is under a duty to mitigate the loss and the tribunal will make a deduction if the employee's actions contributed to the dismissal.
(iii) Additional award The maximum additional award is either £5,330 for ordinary cases or £10,660 for discriminatory cases.
Additional awards are not common as they are only made on top of the basic and compensatory awards in cases where the employer has failed to comply with earlier orders either to reinstate or re-engage an employee.
The award is higher where the employer is found to have discriminated against the employee under the Rehabilitation of  Offenders Act 1974, the Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986 and the Race Relations Act 1976. (iv) Special award Special awards are made where a dismissal relates to trade union membership.
The provisions are complex and specialist advice should be sought.
In general, the maximum special award is £26,800.
If the employer failed to comply with an order to reinstate, the maximum special award is the greater of £20,100 or 156 weeks' pay without there being any limit on a week's pay.
The concept of redundancy is defined in the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, s81(2).
In the context of a business sale an employee will be redundant if his dismissal was wholly or mainly attributable either to the change in location of the business or to the fact that fewer employees are now required for the business.
This latter ground is usually inevitable if the purchaser combines the vendor's workforce with his own.
Redundancy
An employee will not be eligible for a redundancy payment unless he has had two years' continuous employment.
The maximum payment is the same as the basic award for unfair dismissal, namely £6,150.
The payment is calculated as one and a half week's pay for each year of continuous employment over the age of 40 up to 65 for a man and 60 for a woman, one week's pay for each year between the ages of 22 and 40, and half a week's pay for each year between the ages of 18 and 21.
The calculation is limited to the 20 most recent years with the employer and subject to a maximum week's pay of £205.
The payment will be reduced under statutory provisions if the employee is approaching retirement age.
Whereas redundancy and unfair dismissal are statutory claims, wrongful dismissal is a contractual claim where the employer terminates the contract of employment without giving proper notice.
It is of greatest significance for persons employed under fixed-term contracts where the term has not expired at the time of the sale but the purchaser does not wish to take them on, and for employees with long notice periods such as three to six months.
They are normally the senior employees and therefore the high earners of the business and it is important for the purchaser to assess the cost at an early stage.
However, a degree of sensitivity is required as the purchaser may need their assistance in any due diligence exercise it is undertaking, and to effect a smooth handover of the business.
Wrongful dismissal
The damages will be based on the amount the employee would or could have otherwise earned and the benefits he would have otherwise  received during the unexpired term of his contract if he had not been dismissed.
Allowance will be made for the early payment of a lump sum to the employer which he would have earned over a period of time.
Naturally the employee is under a duty to mitigate his loss by finding suitable alternative employment.
Purchasers should be aware that the recent House of Lords' decision in Litster v Forth Dry Dock Engineering Company Ltd [1989]IRLR 161 has radically altered the position of purchasers for liability where persons are dismissed in connection with a business transfer.
The new position as a result of Litster is that the purchaser can be liable for any dismissal in connection with a sale irrespective of whether the dismissals take place before, on or after completion.
Who is liable for the dismissal?
It is important to understand the position before Litster.
Under the old law, the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for Employment v Spence [1987]QB 179 gave a strict literal interpretation to reg 5 of the Transfer Regulations.
Regulation 5 provides that the Transfer Regulations only apply to those persons employed within the undertaking "at the time of transfer or immediately before it" .
The Court of Appeal decided that the Transfer Regulations did not cover employees employed in the undertaking but dismissed shortly prior to completion.
Therefore, a purchaser would avoid automatically assuming liabilities by requiring a vendor to dismiss all or some employees prior to completion.
The purchaser could then select employees on its own terms and conditions.
The position is particularly sensitive in the case of an insolvent vendor, without assets to compensate the employees.
In Litster the House of Lords reversed the old law.
As a result, the purchaser can now be held responsible for all dismissal claims by employees dismissed in connection with the sale even if the dismissals took place at a time earlier than literally "immediately before" the transfer.
The Transfer Regulations were an enactment of the EC Acquired Rights Directive 77/187.
In order to give effect to the original intention of the Directive, the House of Lords held that the Regulations should be construed purposively and read as if after the words "immediately before the transfer" the following words were added "or would have been so employed at the time of the transfer if he had not been unfairly dismissed in the circumstances described in reg 8(1)" ,(ie for a reason in connection with the transfer).
It is important to note that the House of Lords in Litster approved Spence.
The distinction between Spence and Litster is that in Spence the dismissals had nothing to do with any transfer of a business.
In Spence the deadline stipulated by the purchaser for the sale of the business by a receiver had passed and the receiver ceased trading and  dismissed the employees.
Later the same day, the receiver successfully completed a sale agreement with the same purchaser.
In Litster, even though the sale was by a receiver, it was clear that the employees had been dismissed immediately prior to completing the sale of a business solely to avoid the effect of the Transfer Regulations on the sale.
A purchaser is only likely to avoid liability for dismissals before completion if either the dismissal was for a reason unconnected with the sale (eg gross misconduct) or the dismissal was sufficiently far in advance of completion that it was not connected with the sale.
Quite how far in advance a dismissal must be no one yet knows.
It is in the purchaser's interests for dismissals to be as early as possible but the vendor runs the clear risk that the sale may not complete.
How can the liability be avoided?
SALES WHEN THE TRANSFER REGULATIONS DO NOT APPLY
The common law
If the Transfer Regulations do not apply, but it is the transfer of a business as a going concern, the position is governed by the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 (although a discussion of this Act is outside the scope of this book).
However, if the Transfer Regulations do not apply and it is not the transfer of a business as a going concern, the position is governed by the common law.
Under common law, an employment contract is by its nature a contract for personal services.
Due to the personal nature of the contract several problems will arise:(1) A vendor cannot transfer an employee unilaterally against his will.
(2) If an employee does consent to being transferred to the purchaser he will lose all accrued statutory rights.
(3) The transfer of an employee is a constructive dismissal of that employee by the vendor (Nokes v Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd [1940]3 All ER 549; Lee v Barry High Ltd [1970]3 All ER 1040).
All claims by the employee, whether they be for unfair dismissal, wrongful dismissal or redundancy are claims against the vendor.
Consultation
Under reg 10 of the Transfer Regulations, the vendor is under a duty to give recognised trade unions certain information about the  business sale and the vendor is under a duty to consult with the unions if either the vendor or the purchaser envisages he will take "measures" in relation to the transfer.
The Transfer Regulations do not impose a duty to consult employees in general if there is no recognised trade union.
There is no specified consultation period but the employer must give the specified information to the union "long enough" before the sale to enable consultations to take place.
However, the vendor will wish to delay consultation until as near to completion as possible or he will risk affecting the morale of his workforce if completion does not take place.
Once a vendor has consulted he may find himself under moral pressure from his employees to complete as soon as possible and hopefully re-establish certainty for them over their future.
If a union complains to an industrial tribunal of failure by the employer to consult, the employer may be liable for a compensation award of up to two weeks' pay per employee affected with a week's salary being limited to £184.
If it is proposed to make employees redundant, it is suggested that the vendor should commence consultation with the unions no later than the same time as the statutory consultation period imposed upon him by the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, s188.
This period will vary depending upon the number of redundancies.
There is an obligation to notify employees within one month of the change of the identity of the employer.
What should the warranties cover?
The following are the main areas the vendor will be asked to warrant and are covered in the main sale agreement (see Appendix III) though not in the same order as they appear below.
Given the effect of the Transfer Regulations, the purchaser will be particularly concerned to ensure the vendor warrants that it has disclosed accurate details of all the terms of employment of all the employees.
The terms include not only basic matters such as salary, bonus entitlement, company car and medical insurance but also the date of commencement of employment, age and a description of the function of each employee in the business.
The vendor will be required to warrant that it is not in breach of any of the contracts of employment nor, so far as the vendor is aware, are any of the employees.
The vendor will be required to warrant that no industrial action has been taken or threatened in the last few years.
The vendor will be required to warrant that no trade unions have been recognised and that there are no collective agreements.
The purchaser will be concerned to ensure that the vendor has given full and accurate details of all independent contractors used by the business and to warrant that no such person is an employee.
Terms of employment
Breach of contract
Industrial action
Trade unions
Independent contractors