

The Players
Introduction
The phenomenon of the management buy-out first emerged in Britain in the early 1980s when the economy was in deep recession.
During the "boom" period almost any management team with a half-decent business plan and a succession of rising profit forecasts was guaranteed financial backing.
Yet in the race to complete as many transactions as possible, the fundamentals were often neglected, with resultant problems later.
Nevertheless many lessons have been learned over the past decade.
One of the benefits to emerge from the recent recession is that all the players in management buy-outs—vendors, management teams, financial backers and advisers—are far more experienced and sophisticated in their approach.
This is now being reflected in all parts of a transaction, including the legal documentation, and legal advisers are expected to respond accordingly.
A number of ingredients are required to make a buy-out a possibility.
In addition to the willingness of the vendors to sell, managers must be willing to buy, bankers to supply debt and investors to provide equity.
There must also be the prospect of a profitable exit for the investors, and a target company that is able to generate enough cash to service its debt.
Where these factors come together a management buy-out is possible.
The parties
The vendors
Before a buy-out can take place the vendors must be willing to sell.
During the recession some larger companies recognised a need to dispose of peripheral interests and apply the proceeds to their core businesses.
Other companies found themselves over-borrowed and were encouraged by their bankers and shareholders to consider asset disposals as the simplest way to reduce debt.
Some of those unwilling to follow this route have quickly found themselves passing into the hands of the ultimate willing vendor, the receiver.
Clearly, the vendor will seek as large a consideration as possible, with as few contingent liabilities as possible.
The management
A management buy-out can be time-consuming, frustrating and stressful.
It is essential therefore that the managers are highly motivated.
Such motivation may derive from the wish to control their own destinies; the wish to break free from the shackles of group ownership and bureaucratic constraints; or from a desire to save their own jobs and the jobs of their workforce.
Equity providers will back management teams because of the strength of character and entrepreneurial skills of their members, who, as a general rule, will:(a) have a high degree of commitment to the new business;(b) have strong entrepreneurial instincts;(c) have confidence in their ability to take control of the business and run it without the assistance of inter-group services;(d) be able to take personal risks without adverse effect on their decision making;(e) have the strength of character to cope with the frustrations and successes of the negotiation process;(f) be few in number and therefore able to make decisions quickly;(g) have strong family support.
It is essential that the management has support during the negotiation process—not only from their families, but from their professional advisers, both financial and legal.
The advisers must not only provide good financial and legal advice, but give continuing support to the managers during the ebb and flow of the buy-out.
The equity provider
Though the management team is central, it is likely (particularly in a large transaction) that the equity provider or venture capitalist will play the most critical role in ensuring that the buy-out reaches fruition.
The equity provider—often a bank or investment company, although it may be an individual—is the major investor and, in effect, the ultimate purchaser of the business.
It will be involved from the outset, either because the management approached it; or—and this is occurring more frequently—it may itself have approached the parent company and suggested the possibility of a management buy-out of the subsidiary.
The equity provider will undertake a number of sizeable tasks such as:(1) Assessing the target.
Venture capitalists examine numerous  opportunities, assessing whether or not they have the potential for successful buy-outs. (2) Negotiating with the vendor.
Often, the vendor will prefer to deal directly with the venture capitalist rather than with the management.
Generally, this also helps the management team, enabling them to avoid face-to-face negotiation with their superiors.
The negotiating role may be handled by the financier or accountant, or by the lawyer.
(3) Arranging the finance.
Bank funding will need to be put in place to support the equity funding provided by the venture capitalist.
The arrangements can be time-consuming and complicated.
The venture capitalist usually has relevant experience, and, with the support of management, will take on this task.
(4) Due diligence.
Having assessed the possibilities of the transaction, the financiers will then wish to evaluate in detail the risks that they are likely to take.
This can be a long and painstaking task and is usually undertaken by the venture capitalists themselves, supported by accountants and lawyers.
(5) Once the buy-out is complete, the management can settle into running the business.
At this stage, most venture capitalists will take a back seat, assuming a role appropriate to the position of a non-executive director.
The debt provider
In a management buy-out, the relationship between the banker and the management team differs from a normal corporate relationship in that the banker has a special need to understand the new business and its ability to pay back the monies lent.
The banker must ensure that there is an acceptable balance of risk and reward, and that any loan advanced is clearly capable of being repaid.
Future cash flow is critical, and the due diligence investigations are designed to address the ability of the new venture to generate cash.
The bank usually seeks to protect its position by financial covenants from the managers.
The details will be the subject of much negotiation, but will usually enable the bank to detect, as early as possible, any difficulty or potential difficulty of the company in meeting its debt obligations.
Following the buy-out, the bank will monitor its investment, examining monthly management accounts for compliance with the agreed financial covenants.
The relationship between the management team and the bank will extend beyond the usual banker/customer relationship, and it is essential that they feel comfortable with each other, although, of course , the bankers should not deny the managers freedom to run the business.
The advisers
Professional advisers play an essential role in the management buy-out process.
They should be instructed at an early stage, and informed promptly of developments.
Even though the initial buy-out offer will be subject to contract, it is important that the advisers have this early opportunity to consider the interaction of the commercial issues with the legal, accounting and tax considerations.
The lawyers should explain to the management team the conflicts of interest they face as members of the selling team as well as members of the buying team.
Failure to do so may put the management team at risk of losing their jobs if the buy-out attempt is not successful.
Initial Responsibilities
Introduction
The law places on a director onerous responsibilities concerning his company.
When contemplating a buy-out of the company or part of its business, he will also be considering his position as a future shareholder.
This can create a conflict of interest which needs careful management.
Similarly, the board of the selling company must consider its responsibilities to the company, its shareholders, its employees and, where insolvency is a possibility, its creditors.
Duties of the management
Fiduciary duties
The fiduciary duties which a director owes to his company are founded on the simple concept that a director must act not only honestly, but in the interests of his company and not in his own interest.
Such duties derive from decisions of the Courts of Chancery in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, intended to ensure that persons/trustees who held assets or provided services for the benefit of others did so in good faith and for the benefit of those they represented.
It was in the nineteenth century that fiduciary duties were extended to company directors.
Sir George Jessel MR in Re Forest of Dean Coal Mining Co (1878) 10 Ch D 450 said:
Directors have sometimes been called trustees, or commercial trustees, sometimes they have been called managing partners; it does not matter much what you call them as long as you understand what their true position is, which is really that they are commercial men managing a trading concern for the benefit of themselves and all the other shareholders…they are bound to use fair and reasonable diligence in the management of the company's affairs and to act honestly.
As a consequence, fiduciary duties continue to apply to the directors of a company and to 'shadow"directors (persons whose instructions or directions often determine the decision of the board of directors).
It is unlikely that employees (who are not shadow directors) owe such a high level of duty to the company, though they are still subject to a lower duty of good faith and of confidentiality.
Conflicts of interest
One of a director's fiduciary duties of particular relevance in management buy-outs is that he must not put himself in a position where his duty to the company may conflict with his personal interest.
The duty arises from the real concern that management may benefit from an opportunity which properly belongs to the company and its shareholders.
Lord Herschell, in Bray v Ford (1896) AC 44 (p51) said:
a person in a fiduciary position…is not…entitled to make a profit; he is not allowed to put himself in a position where his interest and duty conflict.
The breach of duty consists not of allowing the conflict of interest to arise because that is often outside the control of the director, but of the director's preferring his own personal interests to those of persons for whom he acts as fiduciary, or of taking advantage of such a position.
For example, the director must take care not to withhold from the company's shareholders information that would, if provided to them, enable them to negotiate a fairer price for the company.
It is not unusual to see management prepare one business plan and profit projections for the benefit of the company's owners, to be used by them in determining the price at which they will be prepared to sell; and another more optimistic plan and projections for themselves.
Secret profits
The obligation of directors to account for profits made as a result of abusing (in the sense of taking advantage of) their position as directors is often described as the principle that directors must not make a secret profit.
It arises directly out of the "no conflict" rule, of which it is a logical consequence; if a director cannot keep the benefit he would obtain were he to take advantage of his position, he will not be tempted to take advantage.
Thus, a director must account to the company for any commissions he receives on company contracts, because he receives them only by virtue of his position as a director, and he could have been induced to encourage the company to enter into a contract which is not in its best interest.
A director may, however, use for his own benefit opportunities arising  outside the scope of his duties as a director of the company, as in the case of an opportunity provided by a personal friend.
The use of all other opportunities for a director's own benefit must first be approved by the company's shareholders in a general meeting, with full disclosure of all material facts.
Despite the general principles set out above, a director may participate in investment opportunities and transactions in which his company is participating, provided that the articles of association of the company permit, and provided that the board has independently decided upon the amount of its investment, and the amount being raised requires the participation of other persons on terms no more favourable than those offered to his company.
In short, the directors are not legally restrained from appearing on both sides of the bargaining table, but they must observe the necessary processes.
Statutory duties
In addition to fiduciary duties, a director is also subject to a number of statutory constraints and obligations.
Disposals to directors
Section 320 Companies Act 1985 provides that if a director of a company or its parent or holding company, or a person connected with him, enters into a contract with the company, under which the director or person connected with him agrees to purchase the company or assets (other than cash) of the company exceeding a certain value, then the contract must be approved in a general meeting by ordinary resolution.
Moreover if the director is a director of the company's parent company, then again, the contract must be approved in a general meeting of the parent company by ordinary resolution.
A person "connected" with a director is defined in s346 Companies Act 1985 and includes a body corporate in which the director and other persons connected with him are interested in at least one-fifth of the nominal value of the equity share capital or control more than one-fifth of the voting power of the company at any general meeting.
In a management buy-out, the ownership of the share capital of the (usually newly incorporated) acquiring company, at the time of the acquisition of the target company or its assets, will determine whether or not s320 comes into play.
In most management buy-outs s320 will not be a problem, but the circumstances must be reviewed in the light of the legislation.
If s320 is considered to apply, then, in the case of a buy-out from a private company, the requisite resolutions should not be difficult to obtain.
In the case of a listed company, it is likely that shareholders' consent will be required in any event as the transaction is likely to be a "Class 4 transaction" (acquisitions by director) requiring Stock Exchange approval.
If the transaction goes ahead in contravention of s320, or if shareholder approval is not obtained within a reasonable time afterwards, the company may rescind the contract and recover any assets transferred under it.
Disclosure requirements
Section 317 Companies Act 1985 provides that it is the duty of a director of a company who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, interested in a contract or proposed contract with the company to declare at a meeting of the directors the nature of his interest.
In the case of a buy-out, disclosure should be made at the first board meeting at which the proposed buy-out is considered, and should be made to the full board and not to a committee of it.
In Guinness plc v Saunders and Another [1990]AC 663, a director claimed a payment was due to him as a result of an agreement between him and a committee of the board, but not authorised by the board of directors.
The House of Lords held that the board alone, and not a committee of the board, could grant special payments to a director so as to bind Guinness.
This was so despite a provision in the Articles of the company defining "the board" as including "any committee authorised by the board to act on its behalf" .
Accordingly there was never an agreement to make a special payment and therefore s317 was irrelevant.
The requirements of this section are generally reflected in the Articles of Association of a private company.
Articles 85 and 86 of Table A (prescribed pursuant to the Companies Act 1985) provide that so long as a director has disclosed his interest to the company, he may be a party to or interested in any transaction, and shall not by reason of his office be accountable to the company for any benefit he receives from such a transaction.
Nevertheless, whatever the Articles of Association say, the director still owes fiduciary duties to his beneficiary; these include the duty to make full and frank disclosure, and the duty to put his company's interests before his own where there is a conflict.
Section 310 Companies Act 1985 renders any modification of these rights void.
Director's compensation
Section 312 Companies Act 1985 makes it unlawful for any compensation for loss of office to be made to a director of a company in connection with the transfer of all or any part of the company, unless the nature and particulars of the proposed payment have been disclosed to the members of the company and have been approved by the company.
Exempted from the above are payments by way of pension in recognition of past services and genuine payments by way of damages for breach of contract (s316(3).
Duties under a service agreement
Most executive directors have service agreements with their companies.
Such a contract usually emphasises the director's duty to act in the best interests of the company.
It may expand the common law duties of the director and add other responsibilities.
If no service contract exists, then the director will hold office on the terms set out in the company's Articles of Association, including any alterations made after the director's appointment.
(Shuttleworth v Cox Bros & Co (Maidenhead) Ltd [1927]2 KB 9).
It follows, of course, that service contracts are ineffective if they conflict with the Articles of Association of the company.
Before embarking on a management buy-out, the advisers to the management team must read carefully the provisions of the directors' service contracts, bearing in mind that if the buy-out attempt fails, the members of the team may well wish to continue working for the company as before.
If the vendor does not know of the proposed management buy-out, or is aware but has not given approval, then the members of the management team almost certainly risk action against them for breach of their service agreements.
If the employer becomes aware of any breach of service contract, it can seek an injunction from the High Court preventing the director(s) in question from committing further breaches, and in the long term, if it can show financial loss, the company may seek damages.
More likely will be the dismissal of the members of the buy-out team.
This could be justified on a number of grounds.
For example, the service agreement will almost certainly require the director to spend all his working hours working for the business.
Speaking to venture capitalists, accountants or lawyers about business plans or any other aspect of a buy-out does not amount to working for the business and if done in working hours, may be a breach of service contract.
Secondly, a director is likely to be restricted by his service contract from competing with his employer at any time while employed by the company, and probably for a short period afterwards.
Such a provision would prevent him from making, while still employed, preparations for competing after the termination of his service agreement (Thomas Marshall (Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1979]Ch 227).
The duty of confidentiality
The venture capitalist will need to spend a considerable amount of time with the management team before an offer is made to the vendor.
In order to make his calculations, he will need access to financial information available to the management but not publicly available, as well as management's projections for the future.
Information of this nature is confidential and is the property of the company.
Management accounts, trade secrets of the business, plans or opportunities for the future cannot be released without the approval of the vendor.
To do so would put the  management team at risk of losing their employment, and even facing a claim for damages if the release of the information caused financial loss to the business.
They would also risk breach of their fiduciary duties to act in the best interests of the company rather than in their own.
A company can protect information of this kind only so long as it is confidential to the business and not in the public domain.
In Coco v A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd [1969]RPC 41, the company had made available to 43% of its shareholders information concerning a takeover proposal.
It was decided that the information was no longer confidential so as to prevent other parties making use of it.
The duties of the vendor company's board of directors
A number of duties applying to directors in their capacity as directors of the vendor company need to be kept in mind.
Duties to shareholders
The interests of the company need not be the same as those of the shareholders.
Although in law there is a clear distinction between the duties owed to the company and those owed to the shareholders, in practice the distinction is blurred.
The position is perhaps best described by saying that the directors owe their duties to the present and the future shareholders, rather than simply to the particular persons who are shareholders at the relevant time.
So, for example, directors may weigh the long-term interests of the company against the short-term interests of the present shareholders.
In particular circumstances a director may owe a duty directly to shareholders; that duty will not derive from his status as a director but from particular responsibilities he has voluntarily taken on.
An example is where a director has agreed to try to sell shares on behalf of the shareholders, in which case he is acting as their agent and not as a director of the company.
The board of the vendor company also has a duty to deal fairly between all shareholders of the same class, although it does not need to treat them exactly the same if there are particular reasons for different treatment, as in the case of regulatory or exchange control requirements applying to overseas shareholders.
Generally speaking a shareholding director can vote in his own interests without regard to those of the company; he is acting in the capacity of shareholder and not as director.
However, where the directors are together the majority shareholders, they must not abuse their voting control to discriminate against the minority.
Any disregard of this may provide the minority shareholders with a claim under s459 Companies Act 1985, under which they may complain against resolutions of the company which are for  the benefit not of the company as a whole, but of the majority shareholders alone.
A typical example is the adoption of an expropriation Article allowing the holders of, say, 90% of the shares to buy out the minority shareholders against their will.
Another example is where the director shareholders form a new company and divert into it business previously destined for the old company.
Duties to employees
Directors have a duty to take into account the interests of the employees of the company but not of other companies in the same group (s309 Companies Act 1985).
This duty is owed to the company, and is not enforceable by individual employees against individual directors.
Executive directors, however, should not promote the interests of the employees to the detriment of all the various interests of the company.
This is particularly true with listed companies involved in take-overs, where the City Code on Take-overs and Mergers enjoins directors to act in the interests of shareholders generally.
Duties to creditors
Once a company is insolvent, or in danger of becoming so, the directors must also take account of the creditors' interests.
Dillon LJ quoted in West Mercia Safetywear Ltd (in liq) v Dodd [1988]BCLC 250 the following passage from Kinsela v Russell Kinsela Pty Ltd (in liq)(1986) 4 NSWLR 722: where a company is insolvent the interests of the creditors intrude.
They become prospectively entitled, through the mechanism of liquidation, to displace the power of the shareholders and directors to deal with the company's assets.
It is in a practical sense their assets and not the shareholders' assets that, through the medium of the company, are under the management of the directors pending either liquidation, return to insolvency, or the imposition of some alternative administration.
Moreover, as a consequence of s214 Insolvency Act 1986, the board of directors will, if insolvency is imminent, be well advised to put the interests of creditors (including those of employees) before those of shareholders to avoid personal liability for wrongful trading.
Accordingly, the board of the vendor company has a duty to act in the best interests of the company, its shareholders and its employees, and cannot therefore reject a management buy-out without due consideration.
Where the vendor company is a subsidiary or closely controlled, it would be bound to consult its owners or controllers on any bona fide offer.
If, following such consultation, the board of a private company did not agree to the proposed buy-out, there would be little point in proceeding further in the absence of a willing vendor.
Key points
As soon as a director decides to take active steps towards a management buy-out of his company, he should approach the board.
To proceed without doing so would give rise to conflicts of interest which could impede the proper performance of his duties.
If the board is willing to contemplate a management buy-out, it should form a committee of the board (excluding the directors involved in the buy-out but including non-executive directors).
The committee may need independent professional advice.
It should agree with the management team what information about the company they may disclose to potential backers; and about their future conduct and voting at board meetings.
The management team must appreciate the potential conflicts.
Thus, without prior agreement, they may not disclose confidential information to their backers as this could damage the business of the company and affect the price which the vendors may be able to obtain for their shares; they may not be able to vote at board meetings on major issues affecting the company if those issues might adversely affect a possible management buy-out; and they cannot involve any of their colleagues in the buy-out or persuade staff to become involved.
The proposed investors in the management buy-out could be liable with the buy-out team if they acquire and misuse confidential information, when they knew or ought reasonably to have known that it was obtained in breach of the director's duties.
Likewise, the financiers could be responsible to the company if they actively induce executives of the company to breach their contracts of employment, by encouraging them, for example, to release confidential information.
The Companies Act 1985 provides that the consent of shareholders is required for the sale of 10% or more of a company's net tangible assets, or of assets valued at £100,000 or more, to a director of the company or of its holding company.
Consent is not required of the shareholders of any company which is a wholly owned subsidiary.
If the company or its ultimate holding company is a quoted company, the sale of such assets may also constitute a Class 4 transaction for which the shareholders' approval is required under Stock Exchange rules.
Due Diligence
Introduction
In view of the substantial amount of time and effort involved in a buy-out, it is essential that, wherever possible, the commitment of the vendor is obtained as soon as possible.
One method of obtaining at least a moral commitment is by a heads of agreement or offer letter, signed by both parties.
Occasionally it is even proposed that these be made legally binding.
However, an agreement can be void for uncertainty if major terms are not agreed, and so unless the offer letter contains sufficient detail of all the terms, including the wording of warranties, indemnities and disclosures, the offer letter will not be binding.
Heads of agreement which are not legally binding can be as detailed or as brief as the parties wish.
In general, although offer letters are not legally binding, the buyer's solicitors will insist that at least those clauses discussed below are not subject to contract, but are legally binding obligations on the parties.
This will be achieved by including in the offer letter a clause similar to that set out below: Please confirm your acceptance of the above offer by signing and returning to us the enclosed copy of this letter within the next seven days.
Such acceptance will be subject to contract save in respect of the provisions of paragraphs…,…and…in respect of which there shall be a legally binding obligation between the Managers [on behalf of themselves and [name of company incorporated to effect acquisition]]and yourselves.
The offer letter
The offer letter is written by the management, often with considerable help from the financier, or principal financier, and, sometimes, from the financier's advisers.
It is the offer letter which starts the process moving.
There are three areas which need to be covered: the position of management; exclusivity; and costs.
The position of management
In order to consider the proposal put to them by the management, the prospective providers of equity finance, and/or the providers of debt, and indeed the management in a management buy-in, will wish to see as much information as possible about the target.
It is unlikely that the management will be able to provide such information without breaching their implied or express contractual duties to the company (see Chapter 2).
The release of this information therefore depends on the co-operation of the vendor.
The vendor is likely to agree to the target's providing this information only if the purchaser enters into a confidentiality undertaking.
This is to be expected, and it is reasonable for the vendor to request that the receivers of confidential information enter into such agreements, confirming that they will make no use of it other than for the specific purpose of evaluating the proposed buy-out.
In fact it is becoming increasingly common to request a confidentiality undertaking not only from the prospective purchaser, but also from the proposed equity investors and their advisers.
As long as the clause is sensible, and is to fall away when the sale and purchase agreement is signed, neither the investors nor their advisers should have any objection.
A clause similar to the following should be included: In order for our investors to proceed with their due diligence, we would ask for your consent to the following:(a) that senior management within the [Group]can be made aware of the proposed management buy-out and that we can be allowed to provide information to the investors and their advisers, subject to satisfactory letters of confidentiality on both sides;(b) that the investor can instruct [investigating accountants]to commence work on producing an accountant's report on the [Group];(c) that [investigating accountants]can contact [existing auditors]to obtain historical financial information in respect of the [Group]and shall be entitled to have access to the existing auditors' working papers;(d) that our advisers can contact you in order to progress this transaction.
Exclusivity
The parties should agree a period of time during which they can continue negotiations and the investors can undertake investigations without fear that the target may be sold to a third party.
As well as providing time to construct the transaction, this clause gives the management certainty that the business will not be sold over their heads during this period.
While the  prospects for the buy-out team may be extremely attractive, they should be aware of the possible outcome if the bid fails.
For example, the business may be sold to someone else who decides they have no use for the present management.
The management should be aware that once it is known that a business is for sale, it is likely that it will be bought by someone, if not themselves.
Until recently, the validity of exclusivity or "lock-out" clauses was uncertain as a result of a 1990 Court of Appeal decision (Walford and others v Miles [1992]AC 128).
This was clarified in a subsequent appeal to the House of Lords.
In short, the House of Lords distinguished "lock-in" agreements from "lock-out" agreements.
Lock-in agreements, where parties expressly agree to negotiate with each other, are unenforceable because they are merely "agreements to agree" and so lack certainty; lock-out agreements, under which a vendor agrees not to negotiate with third parties, can, on the other hand, constitute valid binding contracts.
Exclusivity periods can raise issues concerning the fiduciary duties of directors.
There will be a clear conflict of interest if members of the buy-out team are also participants in the decision-making process of the vendor.
This problem does not arise if there are independent directors on the board of the vendor company who are responsible for making decisions.
Alternatively, if the target is a company which is not listed, or is not part of a listed group, then it is likely that the shareholders will be limited in number, accessible and able to agree to proceed.
In practice, this is unlikely to prove a problem for directors of private companies who are probably also the shareholders, but directors of public companies do have to consider whether it is in the interests of the company and the shareholders to agree to a lock-out clause at a figure which may not be the highest obtainable.
An example of an exclusivity clause is given below: For the period of [3]months from the date hereof neither you [the vendor]nor the subsidiaries (and their management) will approach or enter into discussions with any other prospective purchasers for the sale of your shareholding in the [Company]or a disposal of any of the business and/or assets of any part of the [Group].
Costs
Another matter to be considered when formulating the offer letter is that of fees.
The preliminary costs of a buy-out can be high.
Extensive investigations into the business are normally required by the financial institutions, giving rise to charges by accountants, management consultants, actuaries, lawyers and other professional advisers.
The assumption of responsibility for fees is a matter for agreement between the vendor and the management, recognising that the management costs, in view of the requirements of the financial advisers, are likely to be greater than those of the vendor.
The investors are unlikely to underwrite these fees until the transaction has been completed, when they can be met out of the funding provided.
One possibility is that the vendor underwrites the fees in the event that the transaction aborts, subject to an agreed maximum.
If the vendor does not agree to this, and sometimes even if it does, some advisers will require fees, perhaps of small amounts only, to be met by management, as evidence of their commitment to the project.
Even if the vendor agrees to underwrite some of the costs if the buy-out attempt fails, it will probably wish to limit its exposure to the case where it is directly responsible for the breakdown of negotiations.
Much time can be spent negotiating for fees, and in the end the various advisers may have to take a risk that their fees may be irrecoverable if the buy-out does not take place.
The buy-out team may consider negotiating variable fees with its advisers.
Accountants, merchant bankers and some lawyers may agree to a success-related fee which would take into account the risk that the transaction may not proceed.
In addition to the fees of the professional advisers, financiers are likely to ask for a commitment or arrangement fee, based on a percentage of monies advanced.
Buy-out teams often resist this on the ground that the financiers would obtain their reward from participation in the buy-out.
If such a fee is unavoidable, it may be agreed that it should be based on time spent.
There follows a specimen clause as to costs: In the event of the proposed acquisition not proceeding, either because you withdraw from the transaction or because management or their financiers withdraw because of some material item coming to light of which they were not previously aware, or because contract details cannot be reasonably agreed; then you will reimburse management for all reasonable costs incurred by them with their advisers and financiers.
The arrangements
Provision for due diligence
As well as the matters referred to above, the offer letter will also set out the proposed commercial agreement.
However, this will be made subject to contract, and to the results of the "due diligence" exercise that the investors will undertake, as a result of which the offer may be modified.
The equity investors will wish to commission a thorough investigation of the business— "due diligence" —before committing themselves to the purchase.
It is therefore usual for the offer letter to contain a clause permitting the investor, its accountants and other professional advisers to conduct due  diligence in relation to the target business.
Because of the cost involved, it is rare for an investor to instruct its accountants or lawyers actually to proceed with this exercise until the main terms of the acquisition and investment have been agreed and the offer letter signed.
Since the vendor may choose not to proceed after the due diligence report has been finalised, the prospective purchaser's advisers may argue that the investigation should not begin until after contracts have been exchanged.
The contract would be conditional upon the report being satisfactory to the investors.
On the face of it this is unlikely to be acceptable to the vendor since in effect it gives an option to purchase, though it may be more acceptable if the period allowed for preparing the report is short.
A more normal way of satisfying the prospective buyer's concern that the vendor may not proceed is for the vendor to agree to pay or contribute towards the cost of the report if the matter does not proceed to completion for any reason not involving fault by the prospective buyer.
This should be addressed in the offer letter given to the vendor.
Purposes
It is essential for an investor to decide at the outset what it expects to obtain from the due diligence exercise.
The main aims will be to:(a) identify particular commercial/legal problems of such magnitude as to cause the investor to withdraw or adjust its terms, including the price, either directly or indirectly through indemnities;(b) flush out any unknown or understated liabilities and ensure the vendor will deliver good title (free from encumbrances) to the assets;(c) ascertain more precisely the worth of the target business to the buyer and to provide an effective means of valuing the shares or the assets; and (d) provide a clear understanding of how the business functions, including the operation of its financial and management systems.
Typically, a thorough investigation will lead to a requirement for specific warranties and indemnities; the imposition of further conditions precedent to the completion of the buy-out; and the rectification of particular problems after the buy-out is completed.
In serious cases, a price renegotiation or withdrawal may ensue.
The advisers
Where the due diligence is to be on a major scale, then along with the accountants and solicitors involved, there may be other professionals, including insurance brokers, chartered surveyors, management consultants, patent and trade-mark agents, environmental consultants, actuaries, credit reference agencies, and even a merchant banker.
The terms of appointment and objectives of any such advisers, and the division of functions between them, should be clearly set out, in order to produce material of the greatest utility and so as not to duplicate work and inflate costs.
This would also serve to separate the lines of responsibility if claims for damages in negligence should subsequently arise.
An acquisition investigation could cover the whole range of business of the target, and so the accountants will usually hold an early meeting with the investor to discuss the scope of their report.
At this meeting, the accountants should be made aware of any particular aspects of the target business with which the investors are already satisfied, in order not to duplicate work, and should be forewarned of areas which require special attention.
If other professional advisers are to be involved in the due diligence exercise, then it is advisable that they participate in these early discussions, so that they can liaise and prevent unnecessary duplication of work.
For instance, accountants and solicitors would normally both enquire into the terms of any leases or major contracts held by the target, and it is obviously not in the investor's interest to retain both these advisers to carry out the same examination.
On the other hand, accountants can often assist solicitors by gathering information from a target's premises, and a cross-fertilisation of ideas and experience between the professionals can highlight areas that require specific attention.
As well as the lawyers to the investor, lawyers will have been appointed by the buy-out team and by the main debt providers.
The lawyers for the buy-out team may also represent the company which has been incorporated to effect the purchase—for brevity here called "Newco" .
To avoid duplication, where Newco's lawyers are undertaking their own investigations, it may be appropriate for them to prepare a report and address it to the investors, provided the investors' lawyers review the work carried out by the Newco's lawyers; however, it is unlikely that such a course would be acceptable to the bank.
Reporting back to the investors on a regular basis rather than at the end of the process is likely to be advantageous to the investors, and is essential in larger transactions as interim action may be required as a result of the investigation process.
Too often, fundamental points are not raised until the reports are complete.
If the transaction is not likely to proceed, much of the advisers' expensive time may be lost and unnecessary costs incurred.
Some findings may prompt the investors to terminate negotiations and so should be reported as soon as discovered.
Most importantly, all professional advisers should be required to provide their reports well before the desired date for completing the buy-out, so that the reports can be studied and salient points brought into the negotiation of the sale and purchase agreement.
Relationship with warranties
Extent of warranties
Although Newco will seek from the vendor warranties which may provide redress if a problem arises after completion, it is preferable to identify any serious problem before the purchase and negotiate a reduction in price, rather than to litigate a warranty claim afterwards.
Where no warranties, or only limited warranties, are likely, for example, on a purchase from a receiver, Newco will wish to make a particularly thorough investigation.
Obviously, the more thorough the investigation, the more likely it is that the vendor will resist giving warranties, on the basis that no reliance will or need be placed on them.
In any event, in a management buy-out, the vendor will often rightly insist that the management knows more about the business than the vendor, so that any warranties should be minimal.
However, as a result of a recent Court of Appeal case (Eurocopy plc v Teasdale, reported only in the November 1991 edition of the journal PLC) there is at least a risk that the purchaser will be deprived of a remedy for breach of warranty where it is aware of the breach following a disclosure or otherwise, and despite any provisions in the sale and purchase agreement that no actual or constructive knowledge on the part of the purchaser would prejudice a claim.
This was a Court of Appeal decision not on the substantive issues, and merely established that there was an arguable case, but it does mean that purchasers and investors alike should be cautious about relying on warranties if they have actual knowledge of breach at the time the contract is made.
This would be particularly relevant in a management buy-out where it can easily be argued that management has as much knowledge of the business as the vendor.
Disclosures
As well as resisting the imposition of warranties according to the thoroughness of the investigation, the vendor will also seek to make a series of general disclosures against any warranties obtained.
The effect is that matters disclosed in this way may not later be the subject of warranty claims.
The disclosure letter is just as important a part of the negotiations as the sale and purchase agreement, and it would be a mistake for extensive work to go into the due diligence exercise and subsequent negotiations of the sale and purchase agreement, only to be undone by an inadequate disclosure letter.
Newco's solicitors should insist that any disclosures are made in precise terms, and specifically by reference to particular warranty statements, to ensure the full impact is understood.
It is also common practice to disclose the contents and effects of extensive documents.
To prevent wholesale avoidance of the warranties, only those matters which are  specifically referred to in the disclosure letter should be permitted as disclosures.
Practice varies as to whether the investor should disclose the due diligence report to the vendor.
Accountants often attempt to discourage this, probably to reduce the risk of claims of negligence arising from the report.
The investor may not be happy for the vendor to see the report for different reasons.
If the report is complimentary about the target and its business, then there is a risk that the vendor will wish to renegotiate the terms.
The counter-argument is that where the vendor has co-operated fully, it is not appropriate for the investor to deny the vendor the benefit of information which has been supplied by the target or the vendor.
A common compromise is to make available to the vendor the bulk of the information but to exclude any sensitive material.
If the investor chooses to make the report available to the vendor, then it should only do so after agreeing whether any of the contents should operate as disclosures.
This can often give rise to dispute and requires careful thought.
References to those parts of the report which are to serve as disclosures should be quite specific, to avoid unintended disclosures.
Investigation
Information to be sought
Although the precise information sought by Newco's solicitors will depend on all the circumstances and on the roles taken by other advisers, Newco or its solicitors will generally request its accountants to obtain information and copies of documents in relation to the target business (or if appropriate, in relation to each group company) in the following areas:(a) constitution: memorandum and Articles of Association and other constitutional documents; reports and audited accounts for the past three years and subsequent unaudited management accounts; shareholders' resolutions required to be filed;(b) borrowings: details of all borrowings, bank accounts and facilities; copies of all guarantees and indemnities and details of any intra-group arrangements;(c) litigation: particulars of any pending or threatened legal proceedings;(d) employees: terms of employment of and fees paid to all directors and senior executives and information about other employees' standard terms and conditions of employment; details of any trade union or collective agreements and codes of conduct or practice; details of any current or proposed pension, death or disability benefit schemes and any recent actuarial reports;(e) licences: details of all licences and consents necessary for the carrying on of the business;(f) tax: details of all tax and VAT Returns made; particulars of any PAYE, VAT or other audits; details of any matters under discussion with the Inland Revenue; details of any stamp duty exemptions, tax clearances or Treasury Consents; details of any group asset transfers or arrangements for transfer; details of any bonus issues, reductions of capital or other capital reorganisations; group relief;(g) arrangements with the vendor: details of any loans, agreements or contracts between the vendor and any connected persons;(h) title to the assets: details of any encumbrances on property, any factoring agreements, hire purchase, leasing agreements; list of debtors and details of standard discount and credit terms;(i) contracts: details of material capital commitments, major agreements with suppliers and customers, contracts entered into otherwise than in the ordinary course of business.
Details of any agreements which should be registered under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act or notified to the Commission of the European Communities under Article 85(1) or Article 86 of the Treaty of Rome; details of joint ventures, agency or distribution agreements;(j) insurance: details of all insurances and any insurance claims outstanding;(k) intellectual property: details of all UK and foreign patents, registered designs and copyrights, trade marks and trading names and other intellectual property rights;(l) properties: details of all properties owned, used or occupied, specifying short particulars, such as nature of title, principal terms, lease arrangements, tenancies, licences, any mortgages, charges etc affecting any of the properties.
At the same time, Newco's solicitors will undertake various investigations of their own, including company searches, bankruptcy searches, Land Registry searches and searches of intellectual property registers.
Once the information has been collected it should be reviewed by Newco's solicitors to enable them to address any potential problem as quickly as possible.
Newco should keep an accurate record of all documentation and information disclosed by the vendor during the due diligence process, as this will form the basis of the formal disclosures against the warranties to be given by Newco and the management.
Particular areas that often require attention are discussed below.
Assets
The investors or Newco's lawyers will obviously wish to examine any documents of title to the assets.
Unfortunately, legal title rarely evidences  an absolute right of ownership but only indicates an entitlement better than that of the next person.
It is, therefore, impossible to provide an absolute guarantee in relation to most of the target's assets, and so the purchaser should not accept any qualifications to the title warranties in the sale and purchase agreement.
Searches in connection with equipment such as motor vehicles may be carried out to see whether they are subject to credit agreements but these are of limited value since a negative search does not guarantee the target's absolute title.
The most that can be achieved by such searches is to reveal cases where title is suspect and allow the necessary action to be taken.
Liabilities
Close consideration of all of the target's liabilities and commitments will be required.
In particular:(1) All contracts of the target business relating to key business areas should be reviewed for undisclosed obligations and liabilities.
(2) Serious litigation or disputes in which the target is involved and which could have a serious effect on the business should be considered.
(3) All intra-group transactions should be carefully analysed to ensure the target business does not retain liabilities.
Often subsidiaries are required to guarantee or give charges in support of borrowings by the parent company or other companies in the group.
Newco will insist that all charges are removed and all guarantees released.
(4) The board minutes of the company, or the minutes of internal committees (such as health and safety committees and audit committees) in larger companies may reveal particular problems that the target has faced in the past and which may recur or continue to have an impact.
Property
It is essential to establish at an early stage the significance of the properties to the operations and overall value of the target business.
Newco's options depend on these factors, as well as on the time available and the financial strength of the vendor.
Newco may decide:(a) to instruct its own solicitors to undertake a full investigation of title;(b) to seek a certificate of title from the vendor's solicitors; or (c) if the properties are not important to the business, to carry out no investigations and rely on the property warranties for protection.
Obviously, if there are many short-leasehold properties and none is  significant for the carrying on of the business, as in the case of a large chain of small retail outlets, then no investigation would normally be made.
However, a full investigation would be appropriate where the value of the target arises out of its properties or where they are important to the business; where it would be time-consuming and difficult to find new premises; and where damages for breach of warranty would be inadequate compensation.
An investigation or report on title by the purchaser's solicitors is always the ideal option, though costly.
It is also likely to take some time because of delays of up to eight weeks in obtaining replies to local authority searches.
As a result, it is often the case that a certificate of title, drafted by Newco's solicitors, is obtained from the vendor's solicitors.
Newco should be conscious that the vendor's solicitors may seek to limit their exposure by diluting the certificate.
Moreover, if it is later called upon, the value of the certificate of title may depend on the solicitor's insurance policy; in larger transactions it may be appropriate to enquire whether the vendor's solicitor's insurance policy is sufficient to cover any liability under the certificate of title.
In addition, the purchaser may ask the vendor to warrant the certificate of title.
Following an investigation of title, Newco's solicitors (or the vendor's solicitors in their certificate of title) should be able say whether there is good and marketable title to the relevant property; whether there are mortgages, charges, unusual liabilities or third-party rights affecting the property; whether the property is served by all the usual main services and whether the roads are maintained at public expense; and whether there are any outstanding disputes in respect of the property or any neighbouring property.
Where the property is leasehold the purchaser may also require confirmation that the landlord's title is satisfactory; that appropriate consents for assignments have been obtained; that there are no material breaches of covenant or restrictions in the lease; and that the lease does not contain any unusual or objectionable covenant.
Change of control
It is important that the lawyers consider carefully the effect that a change of control will have on the ongoing business.
One of the reasons for acquiring shares rather than assets is to ensure that all the target's assets will be acquired with the business.
However, there are some instances where a change of control can affect the underlying assets.
This may be a result of a contractual term agreed by the target, some legislative requirement, or a requirement of a voluntary or self-regulatory body such as a trade organisation.
Thus, all important contracts, service agreements, licences, approvals, grants and relevant legislation need to be considered carefully.
Employees
Information about the employees will be requested either by the accountants in compiling their report, or by the lawyers in their pre-contract enquiries and disclosure against warranties.
This information should enable the investor to decide:(a) if the size of the workforce is to be reduced, at what cost, bearing in mind the notice periods, age and length of service of the employees;(b) if the workforce is to be increased, at what cost;(c) whether the existing terms of employment, benefits and so on are appropriate, or too great a burden for the target business;(d) the importance of key individuals and whether any action should be taken to ensure their loyalty or protect the company's position by, for example, keyman insurance (particularly important in service industries); and (e) action to be taken in respect of any share option arrangements, incentive schemes, or the funding (or under-funding) of pension schemes.
Insurance
A thorough review of the vendor's risk management and insurance arrangements, both past and present, is essential in any sizeable transaction.
 "Insurance archaeology" , as it is known, is becoming increasingly important on acquisitions.
An acquiring company may burden itself with responsibility for pollution, product liability and employers' liability, where the liability accrued perhaps twenty or thirty years ago, but the claims are only now beginning.
Old liability insurance policies that were in effect at the time of the relevant incidents can be valuable.
Typically, old policies provided broader cover than their modern counterparts.
They are less likely to have exclusions and more likely to have low or zero deductibles.
Specific areas that should be considered are:(1) Pollution and environmental liabilities.
There is very limited cover on the market today, and any cover there is will not be retrospective.
The vendor's past and present activities should be reviewed and any possibly hazardous substances used should be identified.
(2) Employer's liability.
This is another area where liability may not emerge for several years, as in the case of industrial disease.
Office workers can suffer from work-related ill-health such as repetitive strain injury.
Newco and its advisers should consider how the target has taken care of the well-being of its employees, and whether it has conformed to health and safety legislation.
(3) Disaster liability.
Physical site surveys may be required to identify  the quality of protection against risks such as fire or explosion, and any dependency on key plant which if lost would have a significant impact on the target.
If the target has a captive insurance company this must have an adequate capital base, sufficient reserves to pay its outstanding liabilities, and adequate reinsurance.
Intra-group trading
In most cases intra-group trading will not be appropriate following the sale of the target to Newco.
However, in some cases the members of the target's group may be the most important clients of the target and both the vendor and Newco will be keen to continue this relationship.
The investors, with the help of their solicitors, will obviously wish to consider carefully the effect of such arrangements, and may wish to renegotiate the terms.
Another matter to be considered in detail will be any continuing services that are required by Newco.
In many groups of companies, financial, banking, legal, computer and other services are provided centrally to the whole group.
Newco needs to decide how to obtain the services, the cost of establishing new systems and whether an interim period, during which services will continue to be supplied by the vendor, is required.
Licences and consents
Generally, the owners of a business are free to decide whether to buy or sell, but there are certain situations where this is not the case, perhaps because of the size and nature of the transaction, or the industry sector.
Some examples are:(1) Statutory licences.
Consent to a change of control is often required if a company has authorisation under statute, such as the Banking Act 1987, Consumer Credit Act 1974, Financial Services Act 1986 and the Civil Aviation Act 1982. (2) Government grants.
Newco's solicitor should find out whether any government grant to the target business is repayable on a change of control.
(3) Trade associations.
Consent to a change of control may be required by virtue of membership of a trade association or a self-regulatory organisation.
(4) Merger control.
Close consideration should be given to the monopolies and mergers legislation governing both the UK and the EC (see Chapter 9).
The management
One of the crucial features in any management buy-out is the quality of the managers themselves.
The importance of this cannot be underestimated and a qualitative assessment by the investors is essential before the lawyers and accountants become involved.
Thus the lawyers' input is limited, but the investors may require questionnaires to be completed and warranted by management, to flush out any past problems.
An example questionnaire is given in Appendix 2.
The solicitors should also carry out various formal searches against the individuals, including searches for bankruptcy, directors' disqualifications, and county court judgments.
In difficult economic times, solicitors may also inquire about the general creditworthiness of individuals.
How far this is taken, given the expense involved, is a matter for discussion.
It is inexpensive, for example, to make a search for county court judgments.
Key points
The parties will want a commitment to the buy-out as soon as possible after the commercial negotiations have been completed.
As a result, Newco will prepare an offer letter which the vendor will be asked to sign.
The letter will be subject to contract.
However, Newco's solicitors should carefully consider any points covered in the letter which should become legally binding obligations on the parties at this stage.
It will be necessary for the management to provide information to the investors, and they will need the consent of the vendor before doing so.
Once a commercial consensus has been reached between the parties, there will be a period of time before the agreements are negotiated and completion takes place.
During that period the investors will wish to undertake a proper investigation of the company and confirm the assumptions on which the offer has been made.
In order to prevent the company from being sold beneath the management's feet, it is essential that the parties agree an exclusive period of time during which the vendor agrees not to negotiate with third parties.
The costs incurred before completion of a management buy-out can be high.
There is generally no problem in meeting these fees if the transaction is successful.
However, parties should consider at the outset the payment of their advisers' fees in the event that the transaction aborts.
The advisers should discuss with the investors at the outset the extent of the due diligence to be undertaken and the precise purpose of the exercise.
Due diligence will be undertaken by a number of different  advisers to Newco and the investors, and in certain transactions it is advisable for these parties to meet before the exercise in order not to duplicate work and to provide for cross-fertilisation of ideas.
The advisers involved in any due diligence exercise should report to the investors regularly, outlining any problems that they are encountering; they should not wait until the final publication of their report.
Taxation
Introduction
This chapter and Chapter 5 focus on the structuring of a management buy-out, the taxation issues, and financing.
For brevity, the team of managers bidding to acquire the business is called "management" or "the managers" ; the business being acquired, "Target" ; and, as before, the company incorporated to effect the purchase, "Newco" .
A buy-out usually involves some form of leverage, in that financing is provided by banks and investment institutions.
The buy-out vehicle, usually a new company which the managers form for the purpose ( "Newco" ), will therefore often have a fairly complex share and loan capital structure, the reason for which will in part be tax driven.
The financing and tax structure adopted must accommodate the commercial requirements of all the parties involved, as well as the reasons for the buy-out.
For example, management may be buying a specific business out of a larger group of companies because they perceive it to have greater value as a single concern than its (often) discounted value as part of the vendor's group.
Alternatively they may effect a leveraged buy-out of a number of businesses with a view to later reconstruction to realise "hidden" reserves which will effectively finance the acquisition of the core business they wish to retain, and enable the borrowings to be redeemed.
Different commercial requirements will throw up different tax considerations, not all of which can be covered comprehensively here, though it is hoped there is sufficient to indicate what further research will be required.
The tax aspects of a management buy-out must of course be considered in the light of company law, accounting and financing requirements, so there should be discussion amongst the various advisers acting for management, the banks and institutional investors.
The vendors will have their own requirements, which will often conflict with those of the managers and Newco, so compromise is often necessary.
Because the vendors and management know each other, a management buy-out is often a "friendly deal" .
As has been mentioned (Chapter 3, 3.3.1), because management knows the business (some of them will usually have operated it at board  level), the vendors may expect to provide Newco with less warranty and indemnity protection than on an "arm's-length" sale.
This is not to say that a management buy-out is not arm's length in most respects.
Both sides will want the best achievable price.
Management may argue that, with less warranty and other protection, they should pay less than an "arm's-length" purchaser, and that the price they pay does not involve any element of benefit chargeable to income tax under Schedule E (see below, 4.3).
They may argue that they are the only viable purchaser of what may be an ailing business of no interest to third parties.
Obviously such arguments go to the question of price.
Where tax is concerned, the other interested party is of course the Inland Revenue.
The vendors and management will be on the same side in their desire to minimise the Revenue's slice of the deal and, though the doctrine in Ramsay and Furniss v Dawson [1984]AC 474 may now preclude the insertion into the transaction of "last-minute" artificial tax-avoidance steps, there is still room for adopting a tax-minimising strategy, as this too can be highly relevant to the price each side is willing to accept.
Indeed, both management and the vendors will usually be under a fiduciary duty to ensure that the commercial purpose inherent in minimising the tax bill is achieved.
Structures
Since the expression "management buy-out" is not a term of art, it does not imply any particular transactional structure.
Management may wish to acquire the assets and business or they may wish to buy the shares of Target.
Partnership
Usually management will form a company, Newco, to make the acquisition.
But if they wish to exploit s381 Taxes Act 1988 ( "TA 1988" ), which enables losses of a trade sustained in the first three or four years to be carried back to entitle individuals to repayments of income tax paid in preceding years, they may instead form a partnership to acquire the assets and business.
Because of the way in which this relief is given, the managers would wish to "front load" the losses sustained into the first year of trading, which they may be able to achieve by incurring expenditure for which capital allowances are available.
The disadvantage of using a partnership is that it is an unincorporated business, although tax-neutral mechanisms exist to enable it to be incorporated at a later date (see s162 Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992 ( "TCGA 1992" ) and s343 TA 1988).
Use of a partnership may also make it easier for management to obtain interest relief on their borrowings  to invest in the business (see s362 TA 1988 and Inland Revenue Concession A43, as compared with ss13A and 360 in connection with a loan to buy an interest in a close company).
If institutional investors are involved, the buy-out vehicle could be a limited partnership, to afford the institutions limited liability.
It is conceivable that a partnership could be used as the buy-out vehicle where the managers wish to acquire the shares in Target rather than its business and assets, on the principle that the fewer the corporate layers in the structure, the easier it is to fund borrowings and extract profits.
This problem is usually solved by having a "hive-up" (or transfer) of the business from Target to Newco after the acquisition, Newco thus starting life as an investment company and becoming a trading company; but a hive-up creates its own tax complications.
Management would not be entitled to interest relief on loans to contribute capital to a partnership which acquires a company because the loans would not be "used wholly for the purposes of a trade carried on by the partnership" (see s362 (1)(b)).
Limited company
It is common practice to use a company to make the acquisition for reasons of limited liability (where assets and business are being acquired), and because the procedure is well understood.
Another reason may be that some of the management team who are already shareholders in Target, or other vendor shareholders, will wish to exchange their Target shares for Newco shares without triggering a disposal for capital gains tax purposes (see ss135, 137 and 138 TCGA 1992).
Certainly this is desirable if the Target shares have accrued a substantial gain.
Where, however, there is an unrealised loss in the Target shares, the deferral treatment may be undesirable because the allowable loss will not be realised.
However, the management and Newco may be "connected persons" within the meaning of s286(7) TCGA 1992 if they act together to secure "control" of Newco or Target, so that a manager's ability to utilise a realised capital loss will be restricted.
It may therefore be preferable to defer realisation of the loss (see s18 TCGA 1992).
If there is not to be a substantial gain realised on the sale of Target, it may be advantageous if management vendors sell for cash and obtain interest relief on new borrowings to invest in the buy-out (see 4.4 below), rather than effect a share-for-share or share-for-debenture exchange.
Partnership and limited company
Where management are not borrowing and so do not need to obtain interest relief, and vendor shareholders wish to obtain capital gains tax deferral and are offered debentures in Newco for their Target shares, it may be  possible to use a partnership to acquire control of Target but also incorporate a Newco (owned by the partnership) to issue the debentures.
The partnership would capitalise Newco sufficiently to meet the redemption obligations on the debentures and, if Newco became the beneficial owner of more than 25% of the ordinary share capital of Target, prima facie s135 TCGA 1992 would apply so as to preclude a disposal on the exchange of Target shares for Newco debentures, though it would be advisable to obtain from the Inland Revenue advance clearance for this sort of structure under s138.
Newco might even be incorporated and resident in a tax haven jurisdiction so that a disposal of its holding in Target at a gain would not trigger any capital gains tax liability so long as there was a capital distribution of the proceeds of disposal within two years under s13 TCGA 1992, or an avoidance mechanism could be found to prevent s13 from applying (see the short article entitled "The Off-Shore Envelope Trick" by Kevin Prosser in Vol 3 1992/93 Issue 2 of the Off-shore Tax Planning Review).
However, an off-shore company would not be entitled to a repayment of the tax credit attaching to dividends paid by Target; this would be disadvantageous compared with a direct acquisition of Target by the partnership, where dividends and tax credits would flow through to investors (and tax-exempt institutional investors could claim a repayment of the tax credit).
An alternative would therefore be to use a UK-resident Newco for the share/debenture exchange and, to circumvent the capital gains tax disadvantage of this, it could soon after the acquisition transfer its stake in Target to the partnership by way of a capital distribution, leaving it with the loan-note obligations to the vendor shareholders and the cash to meet such obligations.
Once Newco had satisfied its loan-note obligations it could be liquidated.
This assumes that the period of Newco's ownership of shares in Target would be sufficiently short for there to have been no increase in their value, so that when the capital distribution takes place, there is no capital gains tax liability on the partners under s122 TCGA 1992, nor a distribution for the purposes of s209 TA 1988.
This sort of structure could be adapted to the situation where the departing shareholders of Target are willing to accept deferred consideration (the debentures), the managers become or remain shareholders in Target and a venture capital partnership wishes to invest directly in Target.
Common structures
The more common structures for a management buy-out, on which the remainder of this chapter concentrates, consist of one or more of the following:(a) a straightforward acquisition by Newco of Target's business and assets (see 5.1);(b) an acquisition by Newco of Target's share capital (see 5.2);(c) an acquisition by management or Newco of shares in a company to which the targeted business and assets are first hived down (see 5.2.5);(d) a buy-in of the vendor shareholders' shares in Target, usually combined with an issue of new shares in Target to management (see 5.3.1);(e) a buy-out effected by way of a de-merger (see 5.3.2).
As mentioned, where the share capital of Target is acquired by Newco there will often be a hive-up of Target's business to Newco after the acquisition (see 5.2.6).
Schedule E tax considerations for management
Potential liabilities
Management have several concerns as far as Schedule E income tax liability is concerned.
When management acquire shares in Newco, it is relevant for tax purposes whether they acquire these qua directors and employees, or in their capacity as "independent" entrepreneurs.
There is the separate question of whether the opportunity to acquire Target or its business derives from management's status as directors and employees.
Capacity in which shares are acquired
It is usually argued that the managers do not acquire their Newco shares pursuant to a right conferred on them or an opportunity offered to them by Newco by virtue of their employment (see s77 Finance Act 1988).
Newco is certainly not in a position to confer any benefit on management, but rather the managers create their own opportunity by forming Newco and subscribing the initial shares in it.
When they subscribe further shares (the reason for the managers' subscription being in two tranches is explained in 4.3.2) their right to do so derives from their holding of the initial shares rather than from their employment or directorship of Target or Newco.
However, it is not known whether the courts would accept this argument, because it can perhaps be said that the shares management acquire in Newco are acquired pursuant to(though not causally connected to) an opportunity offered to management (namely to buy Target or its business) by reason of their employment/directorships with the vendor or Target.
Because the position is not clear, it is necessary to consider the provisions of the "unapproved employee share schemes" regime in ss77 to 88 Finance Act 1988.
Unapprovedd employee share schemes
This legislation can be triggered in two entirely separate ways, depending on whether or not Newco is a "dependent subsidiary" within the meaning of s86.
A dependent subsidiary is any "51% subsidiary" unless, in effect, there is little or no intra-group trading between the subsidiary and its holding company on other than arm's length terms, and the compliance procedure set out in s86(1) is followed year by year.
These provisions will therefore be relevant, although avoidable, where Newco is a 51% subsidiary of one of the institutional investors.
If the vehicle for the institutional investors is a limited partnership, it is likely each underlying investor will have only a small share of Newco, which will be insufficient to make Newco its 51% subsidiary.
 "Fifty-one per cent subsidiary" is defined in s838(1) TA 1988 as a company more than 50% of the ordinary share capital of which is owned directly or indirectly by another company, so it is possible for Newco to be a 51% subsidiary of one of the institutional investors while also remaining a close company under the control of management within the meaning of s416(2) (a), since the two tests are different.
If the dependent subsidiary provisions are triggered then any "chargeable increase in the value of the shares" within s79 Finance Act 1988 can give management a Schedule E income tax charge, at a time when management will not have realised any cash from the increased value in the shares to pay the tax.
However, because these provisions are avoidable where there is no intra-group trading, they are in that sense preferable to the alternative, and mutually exclusive, provisions in s78 Finance Act 1988.
Here, a charge under Schedule E can arise where a manager has acquired shares in respect of which a "chargeable event" occurs while he is the beneficial owner of them and the manager is a director or employee of Newco or Target or an associated company of either of them at some time during the period of seven years ending with the date on which the chargeable event occurs.
The following are chargeable events:(i) the removal or a variation of a restriction to which the shares are subject;(ii) the creation or variation of a right relating to the shares;(iii) the imposition of a restriction on other shares in Newco or the variation of a restriction to which such other shares are subject; or (iv) the removal or a variation of a right relating to other shares in Newco.
The following are not chargeable events for these purposes:(i) the removal or variation of a restriction relating to all shares of the same class;(ii) the creation or variation of a right relating to all shares of the same class;(iii) the imposition of a restriction on all shares of the same class; or (iv) the removal of a right relating to all shares of a class from all those shares, so long as:(a) a majority of Newco's shares of that class are not held by directors or employees of Newco or by any associated company of Newco, or by directors or employees of any such associated company; or (b) a majority of the shares of that class confer control of Newco on the shareholders, who are employees or directors; or (c) at the time of the event Newco is a subsidiary (but not a dependent subsidiary) and has a single class of shares.
For reasons described in 4.7 below, Newco will usually have more than one class of shares, so condition (c) will not be satisfied.
 "Control" for these purposes is defined by s840 TA 1988 and it is likely that, though management has control for close company purposes within the meaning of s416, they will not have control within the meaning of s840 while the institutional investors remain in place, because there will be powers conferred by Newco's Articles of Association, or in the subscription agreement, that enable the institutions to control Newco within s840.
This means condition (b) will not be satisfied.
Clearly condition (a) will not be satisfied in relation to the class of shares held by management.
Care therefore needs to be taken to ensure that increases in value in management's shares do not derive from a chargeable event as described above.
This is achieved by what is usually known as the "ratchet" , namely characteristics built into the shares in Newco.
The operation of the usual "ratchet" provisions attaching to management's ordinary shares, whereby the percentage holding of Newco conferred by their shares, or the value of those shares, will automatically increase in accordance with profitability or performance targets of the underlying business, will not usually constitute a "chargeable event" for the purposes of s78.
This is because the ratchet entitlement is inherent in the shares themselves from when they are first issued and affects the price or value of those shares at the time of issue.
Accordingly, the increase in value of the shares does not derive from the removal or variation of a restriction, or the creation or variation of a right, relating to the shares, ie there is no novus actus interveniens which gives rise to the increase in value.
This view has been confirmed in an Inland Revenue press release dated 14 April 1988.
In contrast, if, for example, shares are issued to management with no voting rights and subsequently, with no prior agreement, it is resolved to add voting rights to these shares, this would be a chargeable event since it would be the removal of a restriction or the creation of a new right relating  to the shares.
But if, at the time the shares are subscribed they carry no voting rights for, say, the first five years, this does not give rise to a chargeable event when the five years have elapsed, because the entitlement to vote after five years exists from the outset.
If management's shares confer a right to assets on a winding-up which will be doubled upon profits reaching £x million, this is not a chargeable event as it derives from the ratchet and not from any subsequent event.
Arguably, the operation of the ratchet confers a 'special benefit"within s80 Finance Act 1988.
For this reason, inverse ratchets have been used in the past, to give management the maximum proportion of Newco's equity at the outset, which reduces if the business does not achieve defined profit targets.
In this scenario, no benefit is conferred that could trigger a Schedule E liability under s80; the managers either maintain their maximum share of Newco or lose something.
In the light of the Revenue's press release of 14 April 1988 such mechanisms are usually not necessary since the press release confirms there should be no tax charge under ss77 to 87 provided there is no manipulation of share rights or restrictions in consequence of which value is shifted into management's shares.
The Revenue will however seek assurance that the price management pays to subscribe their shares reflects their true value, taking account of whatever "ratchet" mechanism is adopted.
With careful planning, and careful drafting of the documentation relating to Newco, therefore, these provisions can usually be avoided.
Acquisition of shares at less than full market value
It can be seen from the above that the Finance Act 1988 regime seeks to tax increases in value arising in management's (and indeed employees') shares in Newco after those shares are acquired.
The next issue is whether the managers benefit from their position as directors or employees so as to acquire something for less than its full market value.
This is best illustrated by taking a hypothetical example.
Say, objectively speaking, Target is worth £1,000.
Newco acquires it for £900, and 50% of this is provided by management who subscribe, with their £450, a 51% stake in Newco.
Various issues arise:(1) In simple terms, management's controlling stake in Newco will be worth more than half the total value of Newco.
Let us say it is worth 60% of Newco. (2) Newco is worth £1,000 (ignoring discounts inherent in the cost of unlocking the value of Target from Newco) so management's shares in Newco are worth £600.
Indeed this could be their base value for capital gains tax purposes by virtue of s17 TCGA 1992 if there has been an acquisition by management in consideration for or in  recognition of their services in any office or employment, though usually management will resist any such argument.
(3) But because Newco has paid only £900 instead of £1,000 for Target, and because the managers have put up only half the cost but acquired a controlling interest in, and consequently more than half the value of, Newco, can management be liable for Schedule E income tax on the difference between what they have paid (£450) and the value of what they have acquired (£600)?
The provisions that make this £150 "discrepancy" potentially chargeable are:(i) s 19 TA 1988, the Schedule E income tax charging provision; and (ii) s 162 TA 1988, which can apply the "notional loan" provisions of s160 to a situation where Newco acquires shares in Target and persons "connected" with Newco, namely management, are or have been employed by Target and/or are about to be employed by Newco, and the Target shares are acquired at an under-value in pursuance of a right or opportunity available by reason of management's employment.
It is ss839(7) and 416 of the Taxes Act which mean that management could be "connected" with Newco for these purposes.
It follows that if the managers do not satisfy the s416 definition of control (they do not need to if, for example, they are not borrowing to acquire their shares) then Newco and management will not be connected and the notional loan provisions in s162 should not be triggered.
Where s19 applies, there is simply a Schedule E income tax charge on the managers to the extent of the benefit they have received, on the basis that this constitutes an emolument from their office or employment.
If s19 applies, ss160 and 162 will not (see s162(11)).
If ss160 and 162 apply, their effect is to treat the "beneficial element" of the Newco shares as if it were an interest-free loan to the managers, and tax them under Schedule E on the "cash equivalent" of the beneficial loan, ie tax on notional interest charged at the official rate while the "loan" remains outstanding.
A further Schedule E income tax charge can arise when the shares are disposed of "by surrender or otherwise" so that the manager concerned no longer has any beneficial interest in them.
Such a disposal is treated as if the outstanding amount of the notional loan had been released or written off.
There should be no element of double charge when the manager disposes of his shares because the "notional loan" element should not also be liable to capital gains tax (see s37 TCGA 1992).
Under s162, the right in pursuance of which a manager or employee may acquire shares at under-value can include an option, though not an option granted pursuant to a Revenue-approved share option scheme under s185  and Sch 9 to the Taxes Act.
It should be noted, however, that the provisions of Sch 9 are often impossible to satisfy in the case of the ordinary share capital of a buy-out company such as Newco, because of the way in which the Inland Revenue interprets para 12(1) (c) of Sch 9.
This provides that the option scheme shares must not be subject to restrictions other than restrictions attaching to all shares of the same class.
The class of shares in respect of which employees and directors are granted options will usually provide for a mandatory sale upon cessation of employment, which strictly amounts to a uniform restriction across the whole of that class of shares.
However, because this requirement will apply only to an employee-holder of such shares, and not other holders, the Revenue usually refuses approval of a scheme where the scheme shares attach such a restriction, unless para 12(3) can be satisfied.
This requires that Newco's Articles impose the same terms of sale on non-employee shareholders of the scheme shares as they do on employee shareholders.
This is not usually the case.
Further difficulty can arise from the requirements of para 14 Sch 9, where Newco has more than one class of shares.
Avoiding a Schedule E charge
Where Newco and management are connected under s839(7), the managers need to show that no benefit has been conferred on them indirectly by virtue of Newco's acquisition of Target, and accordingly the managers need to be able to demonstrate that the price paid by Newco for Target constitutes market value.
In this regard, evidence of alternative third party offers for Target should be sought, as well as formal valuations.
Even where there is no under-value to Newco in its acquisition of Target, the managers need to show either that they have paid full value for their shares in Newco, or that any benefit to them does not derive from their office or employment.
Often, however, the amount subscribed for a particular class of shares by management is less per share than the amount subscribed for the same shares by the institutions.
Because the institutions will generally be taking a greater commercial risk (by subscribing or lending much larger amounts than management) one would expect to see the institutions paying less per share.
The usual answer to this is to advise the managers to subscribe their shares as early as possible in the arrangements preceding the buy-out, so it can be demonstrated that, at the time they subscribe, there is no commitment from the institutions to invest, and therefore no certainty that the buy-out will proceed.
It follows that management's shares cannot be worth more than par value at the date they subscribe.
As will be seen in 4.4 below, however, where Newco is to acquire Target rather than its business and assets, management strictly need to subscribe their shares in Newco once Newco has acquired control of Target.
The compromise solution is therefore for management to subscribe  a nominal number of shares in Newco early in the proceedings.
It is with these shares that one is concerned to ensure that the Schedule E charge cannot be triggered.
These initial shares may then carry a priority right to a further issue of shares to management, should a buy-out proceed.
It is for this second tranche of shares that management will probably require loans to subscribe, and, to qualify for interest relief, these shares must be subscribed at a time when Newco controls Target.
However, the right to these shares, so it can be argued, derives not from a right or opportunity available by reason of employment but from the rights attaching to management's initial shares.
If possible, the institutional investors should subscribe a separate class of preferred ordinary shares at the same price (or less) per share as the management's ordinary shares.
It is also helpful if it can be shown there have been arm's length negotiations between management and the institutions and that the price benefit to management (ie the fact that management acquire control of Newco but pay no more per share than the institutions and/or pay less than 50% of the price for more than 50% of the equity) derives from those negotiations, rather than from management's employment by Target.
It follows from this that the institutions must be willing to risk a proportion of their investment on the basis of the business plan presented to them by management, and because of their view of the management team.
Helpfully, this is usually the commercial reality.
It is also helpful if the managers' shares carry rights which, initially, are less beneficial than the rights attaching to the institutions' shares but which, in accordance with pre-determined ratchet formulae in the Articles of Newco, can increase in value (as a result of profitability targets being met) at a rate faster than can the institutions' shares.
This has a dual benefit in that:(a) the increase in value should not be caught by the unapproved share schemes legislation because it derives from entrenched rights of the ratchet variety described above; and (b) it provides a justification for the managers paying less per share than the institutions at the outset, since the ratchet characteristics of the shares, and the possibility that Newco may never achieve the profitability targets, would be relevant in valuing that class of shares.
The main disadvantage of a Schedule E income tax charge is that it arises before the managers realise any cash from their shares to pay the tax, and that the benefit of indexation, which would apply were the gains to be subject to capital gains tax rather than income tax, will not be available.
Gains in respect of which an income tax liability arises will not also fall into the charge to capital gains tax (see s37(1) TCGA 1992).
In other respects, now that the rates of income tax and capital gains tax are equalised, the impact of the Schedule E provisions has been lessened.
Interest relief for management on loans to acquire their shares in Newco
The relevant relief is contained in s360 TA 1988, which cross-refers to ss13A and 353.
In order for management to obtain interest relief on loans taken out to subscribe shares in Newco, Newco must be a close company within the meaning of s414 TA 1988.
Where Newco is acquiring shares in Target rather than its trade, Newco must also satisfy the purposive test in s13A(2) (c) of existing "for the purpose of holding shares in a qualifying company which is under its control" at the time the managers subscribe their shares.
Accordingly, strictly, it must be ensured that Target is already under the control of Newco, and that Newco is close, when management subscribe.
This can be achieved as follows:(1) Management form Newco and hold all its issued share capital (which will be nominal in amount and subscribed as early as possible for reasons described in 4.3.2 above).
(2) They then carry out the structuring of Newco's capital as described in 4.7 below, in conjunction with the funding banks and institutions who are proposing to invest.
(3) Both management and institutions commit to fund Newco by executing the subscription documents.
(4) Newco exchanges contracts for the acquisition of Target, and thereby obtains control of Target, by virtue of its contractual entitlement to acquire control as determined by s416(2) Taxes Act.
(5) Management and institutions then subscribe their shares (in management's case, their further shares) in Newco, and Newco completes the acquisition of Target.
The first point to note is that management should retain the majority by reference to nominal value of Newco's issued share capital, after the institutions have invested, so that notwithstanding the equity investment by the institutions, management retains control of Newco within the meaning of s416(2) (a).
This is a matter of correctly structuring the share capital of Newco, with the class of shares subscribed by management having a much higher par value than the classes of shares subscribed by the institutions.
(It is important to realise that even where management controls Newco within s416 the institutions investing in Newco may also control it under s416.)
Secondly, step (4) above should be implemented before step (5) so that at the time management subscribes the substantial part of their shares in Newco, in respect of which they have taken out loans to defray the cost of acquisition, Newco will already control Target by virtue of its contractual entitlement to acquire it; if, in practice, steps (3) to (5) occur on the same day, board minutes and other records should show that events took place in the correct order.
To obtain interest relief on loans to subscribe shares in a Newco which is to purchase the business of, rather than shares in, Target, it appears that management no longer has the difficulty of persuading the Revenue that Newco "exists wholly or mainly for the purpose of carrying on a trade…" , as required by s13A(2) (a).
This is because of the recent case of Lord v Tustain, reported in The Times.
An appeal is likely, however, so the decision should be treated with caution.
There the Revenue argued that, at the time the tax payers subscribed their shares, Newco did not exist for the purpose of carrying on a trade; its only identifiable purpose was to acquire a business.
By the time it did satisfy the relevant purpose test (by having acquired the business) it had ceased to be close by virtue of the institutions' investment.
This argument was rejected on the basis that, from its formation, Newco's wider purpose was to carry on a trade and that was why it was acquiring the business.
Also, where Newco is acquiring a business, it seems it is no longer strictly necessary to ensure that the shares the managers subscribe in Newco confer control after the institutions have invested, so long as they confer control before then, assuming in this scenario that the managers invest well before the institutions and before the institutions are committed to investing.
This is because all that is needed is for Newco to be a close company and satisfy the relevant purpose test at the time when the managers subscribe their shares.
Following the Tustain decision both limbs of this test are satisfied before the institutions invest, and it is no longer necessary to show that Newco remains close after it has actually acquired the business and commenced trading.
The purpose test in s13A(2) (a) must continue to be satisfied when interest is paid by the managers on their shares, but the "control by management" test need not be.
For the other conditions that need to be satisfied for management to obtain interest relief, reference should be made to s360.
Briefly these can be summarised as follows:(1) The management individuals must take out loans; an overdraft is not sufficient.
(2) The loans must be to defray expenditure incurred in acquiring ordinary share capital of a close company complying with s13A(2) as described above, or in lending to such a close company where the money loaned is used wholly and exclusively for the purpose of its business or the business of any of its associated companies provided the latter are also close companies satisfying the conditions of s13A(2). (3) When interest is paid on the manager's loan, Newco must continue to comply with s13A(2)—this means it must continue to satisfy the relevant purpose test rather than that it should continue to remain a close company; in the case of a purchase of shares in Target, the reason why Newco should be close after the institutions commit to invest is to ensure that institutions and management can invest at the  same time and that, at that time, Newco is both close and satisfies the relevant purpose test, ie already controls Target; management cannot commit Newco to acquiring Target until the institutions have committed to funding Newco, and once they have so committed the institutions are likely to control Newco under s416, so a structure is needed whereby management also controls Newco at this point.
(4) Each manager must hold at least one ordinary share in Newco and work for more than half his time in the "management or conduct of the company" or an associated company; alternatively he must own more than 5% of the ordinary share capital of Newco (the "material interest" test); for these purposes, the shareholdings of any associate of an individual manager are aggregated with his holding; "management or conduct of the company" (rather than its business) connotes the function of directors and senior managers, so other employees and middle management will not be able to obtain relief, since they are unlikely to have a sufficient holding in Newco to satisfy the material interest test.
Because the purpose tests outlined above need to be satisfied throughout Newco's accounting period, it should be ensured that Newco's objects clause in its Memorandum of Association clearly states that its purpose is either to trade, or to be a holding company of shares in a company or companies which it controls.
An added precautionary measure is to form Newco specially for the management buy-out rather than acquire a shelf company, because a shelf company's accounting period may have commenced at a time when its Memorandum of Association does not reflect the relevant purpose test, for example, where a general trading company is purchased and turned into a holding company.
Note that under s363, relief can be reduced or cancelled where the individual "recovers" capital from Newco, whether or not he uses it to repay his loan.
In particular, a gift of his shares (to a family trust for instance ) is treated as a recovery of capital for these purposes.
Exits
The time will come when the managers wish to realise their investment in Newco.
Tax-efficient methods for doing so include:(i) retirement relief;(ii) the new "relief for entrepreneurs" provided for in the 1993 Finance Act;(iii) a buy-in of shares by the company—see 5.3.1;(iv) a share for debenture exchange—see 5.2.4;(v) disposals by non-UK resident trusts which are not caught by the Sch 5 TCGA 1992 regime—this is dealt with in 4.6.4 and 5.2.2 below.
Retirement relief
To obtain this relief, a disposal of shares must be a material disposal in relation to the "personal company" of the person making the disposal.
Schedule 7 to the Finance Act 1993 replaces the old concept of "family company" with this new concept of "personal company" .
Previously the disposal had to be by an individual entitled to at least 25% of the voting rights, or at least 5% of the voting rights together with more than 50% of the voting rights being exercisable by the individual's family collectively.
Under the new rule, any company wherein the individual can exercise at least 5% of the voting rights will qualify the individual for retirement relief, subject to satisfaction of all the other conditions.
There is also a new provision which treats voting rights exercisable by trustees as voting rights exercisable by a member of the individual's family.
A further change has been made to replace the concept of "full-time working director" .
To be eligible for relief, the individual must now be a full-time working "officer or employee" .
This means he must still work full time in a technical or managerial capacity for the company, but need no longer be a director.
Relief for entrepreneurs
Schedule 7, para 3 to the 1993 Finance Act inserts ss164A to 164N into TCGA 1992 and provides a new form of roll-over relief where an individual makes a "material disposal" of shares in an unquoted company and, within "the qualifying period" , makes a "qualifying investment" .
The idea is similar to existing roll-over relief on replacement of business assets and, broadly, a material disposal occurs where there is a disposal which would attract retirement relief if the individual were aged over 55.
Some of the retirement relief concepts are used for this relief.
Broadly, a qualifying investment is a holding of at least 5% in an unquoted company.
The relief enables an individual to sell out of one company and reinvest the proceeds in a new company.
There is then a no gain/no loss disposal of his investment in the old company, and the gain that would have arisen goes to reduce the base cost of the qualifying investment.
The base cost of the qualifying investment cannot be reduced to less than zero by the rolled-over chargeable gain.
The old company must be a trading company or the holding company of a trading group, and must be the "personal company" of the person making  the disposal, of which he must be a full-time working "officer or employee" (adopting the revised definitions for the new retirement relief).
The qualifying investment must consist of ordinary shares with no preferential rights which are not eligible shares under the Business Expansion Scheme ( "BEs" ) provisions.
The new company must be an unquoted company carrying on a trade, or the holding company of one or more trading subsidiaries.
It must be a different company from the old company.
The person making the disposal does not have to be an officer or employee of the new company, nor need it be a UK-incorporated company.
It must not be controlled by another company or by "another company and persons connected with that other company" (a BES concept).
Its subsidiaries must be members of the same capital gains tax group as the qualifying company.
The company cannot hold interests in land worth more than half its total chargeable assets (a modified version of one of the BES rules).
Care must be taken to ensure that the new company, or its qualifying subsidiaries, carry on qualifying trades and, notably, film production companies and research and development companies qualify, so long as their activities are being carried on on a commercial basis with a view to profit.
Oil-extraction activities are also permitted, but dealing in financial instruments is not.
In these last two respects, the excluded activities are different from those excluded under the BES provisions.
There are numerous anti-avoidance provisions to ensure that this new relief is tightly controlled.
It seems to be the view of practitioners that the Revenue are unduly concerned with exploitation of these forms of relief for avoidance purposes.
The tax position of employees
The importance of planning
The recent case of Collins v Addies [1992]STC 746 provides a good illustration of why, in tax planning matters, short cuts should not be taken.
The tax payers were director-shareholders in a close company; they agreed to sell their shares in consideration for some cash and a novation to the purchaser of their liability to repay loans made to them by the company.
When a close company makes a loan to a participator, s419 TA 1988 makes the company liable to corporation tax at the rate of Advance Corporation Tax ( "ACT" ) in force at the time.
The tax is not in fact ACT, so cannot be set against the company's mainstream corporation tax liability.
However, when the loan is repaid, the company is entitled to a refund of the corporation tax.
In this case, the loans were not repaid but released, whereupon the corporation tax became an unrefundable real cost to the company.
Where a close company releases such a loan, the amount released  is treated as income of the debtor which has suffered income tax at the basic rate.
Consequently, it must be grossed up to establish the debtor's higher rate liability (see s421 TA 1988).
Furthermore, if the loans were "beneficial" loans within the meaning of s160 TA 1988, as is likely, then the tax payers may also have been liable to income tax under Schedule E (probably only at basic rate) on the amount released.
If, instead, the tax payers had sold their shares for a larger amount, sufficient to enable them to repay the loans, they are likely to have been personally better off, because of indexation allowance to reduce the additional gain deriving from the sale of the shares, and because they would not have suffered an income tax charge under either ss421 or 160.
The company would also have been entitled to a refund of its corporation tax.
Alternatively, the company may have been able to use its entitlement to a refund of corporation tax to make an ex gratia payment, or payment as compensation for loss of office, to the directors (as they were departing directors in the buy-out) of up to £30,000 per director.
This would have been exempt from income tax under s188 and could have been used by the director to repay his loan.
A note of warning is necessary here, as the Revenue can sometimes seek to deny the £30,000 exemption under s188 where a departing executive is also a vendor shareholder, on the basis that the sum paid as compensation for loss of office is in reality attributable to the sale of his shares, and they may also challenge the deductibility by Target of such payments, especially if these are effectively funded by a reduced acquisition price for Target.
The Revenue may argue that the payments are part of the capital cost to Newco of acquiring the business (see James Snook v Blasdale [1952]33 TC 244).
If the payments are ex gratia rather than to compensate the individual for loss of a contractual entitlement, they may amount to distributions within s209 or "other benefits or facilities of whatever nature" which are treated as distributions by s418 of the Taxes Act when paid by a close company.
Contracts of employment
Where Newco acquires Target, this does not of itself terminate any contract of employment between Target and its employees, but it is with a view to rationalising the business after it has been bought out that Target may decide to terminate certain contracts of employment; Newco may also be seeking to vary the terms of employment of certain directors and employees.
Accordingly, payments made in consideration or in consequence of, or otherwise in connection with, the termination of the holding of an employee's office or employment, or any change in its functions, may be eligible for relief from income tax up to the first £30,000, provided such payments are not otherwise chargeable to tax under Schedule E (see ss148 and 188 TA 1988).
However, in order to ensure deductibility by Target of  such payments, the termination payments must be "wholly untrammelled by the terms of the bargain [that the vendor]shareholders [have]struck with [Newco]and [that Target]come to a decision to pay solely in the interests of the trade" (see the James Snook case, above).
A payment which has a dual purpose (ie is part of the price arrangements between the vendor shareholders and Newco, rather than being a payment incurred wholly and exclusively by Target for the purposes of its trade) may not be deductible (see Watney Combe and Co v Pike [1982]STC 733).
Where Newco acquires the business and assets directly, then prima facie the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981 will "preserve" employees' contracts of employment on the same terms and conditions, with Newco becoming the new employer.
If the terms and conditions are altered as part of Newco's rationalisation of the business, employees may be entitled to resign and claim constructive dismissal.
This claim will be against Newco rather than the vendor, and the employees may also have claims for compensation for loss of office, taxable (subject to the £30,000 exemption) within the regime in ss148 and 188.
The Regulations derive from EC law, but it is accepted by UK practitioners that an employee is required to acquiesce in the transfer of his employment to Newco, provided the terms and conditions remain materially the same.
A refusal to do so would amount to a resignation, and the employee would prima facie not be entitled to any compensation payment, unless, for example, he were prevented from working out his notice period.
In this situation, a tax-free payment of up to £30,000 could be achieved only if paid ex gratia and in circumstances not amounting to the receipt of relevant benefits under an unapproved retirement benefits scheme (see Inland Revenue Statement of Practice 13/91).
Payments made ex gratia or as compensation for loss of office by the vendor of the business will not usually be deductible by the vendor because they are made in connection with the discontinuance of the trade and not for the purpose of enabling the company to carry on its trade.
Employee-controlled companies
It should be noted that s361(3) TA 1988 provides interest relief for employees on loans they take out to acquire ordinary shares in an employee-controlled company.
The company must be an unquoted UK-resident company, and a trading company or the holding company of a trading group.
The shares must be acquired before, or within twelve months after, the company becomes an employee-controlled company.
The company need not be a close company.
A company is employee controlled if more than half its issued ordinary share capital and voting power is beneficially owned by full-time employees, namely individuals who work for the greater part of their time as employees or directors of the company or its 51% subsidiaries.
In the  context of a management buy-out, Newco would need to satisfy the holding company test, namely its business must consist of the holding of shares or securities of its 75% subsidiaries.
The difficulty with this relief is that, throughout the period beginning when the employee acquires his shares and ending on the date on which the interest is paid, Newco must be a trading company or the holding company of a trading group, rather than merely in existence for one of these purposes.
In this sense, therefore, it is narrower than the purposive test for interest relief for management described in s4.4 above.
Timing is therefore important.
Management may be able to establish Newco, obtain commitments to subscribe share capital from the employees and collect in their money, which could support a bridging loan to enable Newco to acquire Target and thus become a holding company.
The employees would then subscribe their shares to enable Newco to redeem its bridging loan and become employee controlled.
In practice it is difficult to comply with the added condition that the company be employee controlled in each year of assessment in which interest is paid, so this relief is not often used in management buy-outs.
Employee trusts
Employee trusts have increased in popularity over the past decade or so as a method of providing incentives for employees.
They can also perform a limited corporate finance function, and provide a mechanism for marketing shares in an unquoted company (Newco), where otherwise the benefit to an employee of holding shares is somewhat illusory, in that he cannot realise his shares for cash, unless he remains a shareholder of the company and (usually) an employee or director, until there is a sale of Newco or it obtains a listing.
If a method can be devised of enabling employees to acquire and sell shares in an unquoted company, and benefit from the increase in value of those shares over the employee's period of ownership, then it is perceived that employees will wish to participate in the share capital and growth of their employing company and will be motivated to work to increase the value of the business.
This is the purpose of an employee trust.
Because it provides a market for shares that are already in issue, the trust is also a good alternative or adjunct to a share option scheme.
Institutional shareholders prefer an employee trust to an option scheme, as it will not dilute their equity in the company; this is because an option scheme established by a company usually provides for options to subscribe shares, whereas an employee trust can be empowered to grant options over shares already in issue and which come to be held by the trust, as where an employee leaves and sells his shares to the trustees.
Where Newco is not a close company, an employee trust may have  advantages in the context of the capital gains tax regime in s86 and Sch 5 TCGA 1992.
This regime makes the settlor of a non-UK resident trust liable to capital gains tax on gains made by the trustees where the settlor has an interest, or is treated as having an interest, in the trust (the trustees themselves being outside the UK capital gains tax net if a majority of them are neither resident nor ordinarily resident in the UK and the general administration of the trust is carried on outside the UK—see s69 TCGA 1992).
Let us say the only settlors of the trust are Newco and Target, and both are excluded from benefiting under the trust, as they would have to be for the trust to qualify as an "employees share scheme" for the purposes of the Companies Act 1985, and come within s75(6) Financial Services Act 1986.
Assume also that the trustee of the trust is a wholly owned subsidiary of Newco resident for tax purposes in the Channel Islands, so as to fall outside the definition of a collective investment scheme for the purposes of the Financial Services Act.
The trust can then acquire shares in Newco and hold these for the benefit of employees of Newco and Target.
It can distribute shares to employees for no payment.
Alternatively it can realise the shares without paying capital gains tax and without rendering either settlor company liable to capital gains tax.
It can reinvest the gross proceeds of a disposal of shares in other investments, including further shares in Newco, which may be acquired from departing managers or shareholding employees.
There is therefore potential for such trusts to build up a stake in Newco for the benefit of employees on a much more tax-efficient basis than if employees themselves used their after-tax earnings to acquire shares and then had to pay income tax or capital gains tax when they disposed of them.
At the very least, the trust acts as a tax-deferring fund.
When employees receive benefits from the trust, these are unarguably acquired by virtue of employment and give rise to a Schedule E income tax charge, unless they are granted options structured so as to avoid a Schedule E charge on grant (see s135 Taxes Act).
Even if these benefits take the form of cash realised by the disposal of shares, the extent of the benefit will correlate with the increased value of Newco's shares so as to achieve the desired incentive effect.
There is a trap for the unwary where Newco is a close company and lends money to the trustees of an employee trust which holds shares in Newco, for example where funding is required to enable the trust to acquire further Newco shares.
The trustees are shareholders and participators in Newco and a loan to a participator gives rise to a corporation tax charge on Newco under s419 TA 1988.
A better alternative is for the trust to borrow from an external source, with a guarantee provided by Newco, and Newco then makes tax-deductible payments to the trustees to enable them to meet the instalments on their borrowings.
Although the trustees themselves will not be eligible for interest relief on such borrowings, Newco should obtain tax relief for its contributions to the trust.
To illustrate, if Newco borrows and lends the cash raised to the the trust, it will suffer a corporation tax cash-flow  cost under s419 until the trustees repay the borrowings.
Assuming the trustees use the loan to acquire Newco shares which they then distribute to employees (relying on the Revenue's press release of 5 December 1990 to ensure the trust does not suffer a capital gains tax charge), they will not be able to repay the borrowings, in which case Newco might as well have made a gift of the necessary funds to the trustees at the outset.
However, Newco will not be eligible for a corporation tax deduction for a one-off gift of a capital sum unless the trust is a "qualifying employee share ownership trust" within s74 and Sch 5 Finance Act 1989, and the conditions in s67 of that Act are satisfied.
Assuming Newco will not wish to establish a qualifying trust, the most tax-efficient funding mechanism is achieved if the trust borrows funds from a third party source and Newco uses its tax-deductible contributions to fund the trust's interest payments on such borrowings.
A corporation tax deduction will be available to Newco for contributions made to a non-qualifying employee trust provided that:(a) the contributions are regular and of a revenue nature;(b) the contributions are voluntary (so as not to constitute annual payments within s337(2) (b) TA 1988);(c) the class of beneficiaries under the trust is confined to employees of the settlor company, so there will need to be multiple settlors if all the employees in a group of companies are to benefit and the various companies in the group that are contributing wish to ensure corporation tax deductions; and (d) the companies themselves are entirely excluded from benefiting under the terms of the trust.
A summary of the requirements for establishing a qualifying employee share ownership trust to obtain a corporation tax deduction under s67 Finance Act 1989 is beyond the scope of this work.
Reference should be made to ss67 to 74 and Sch 5 Finance Act 1989 to illustrate why these vehicles have not proved at all popular.
Funding the buy-out vehicle
General considerations
It is usually a requirement of the banks and institutional investors that a new company is formed to effect the management buy-out.
This is to enable the banks, institutions and management to tailor the share and loan capital structure, and bank borrowings, to the circumstances of the transaction.
The following issues are relevant:(a) providing management with the opportunity to subscribe their shares early, if possible, to optimise their Schedule E position (see 4.3);(b) agreeing the ratchet mechanism to be contained in Newco's Articles; for example, management may take deferred shares which will convert into ordinary shares when performance targets are reached, or the institutional investors may have ordinary or preferred ordinary shares which convert into deferred shares when performance targets are reached (see 4.3.1);(c) agreeing the relative proportions of ordinary share capital (ie ordinary shares and preferred ordinary shares) and fixed dividend preference share capital.
The latter is subscribed by institutions and is, in commercial terms, more in the nature of a loan carrying a fixed rate of interest than equity, though it constitutes share capital for company law and tax purposes.
Preference shares may carry the right to conversion into ordinary shares and will usually be redeemable to provide the institutions with an exit equating to repayment of a loan;(d) determining the amount of loan finance required from the banks, taking into account the provisions of ss338 and 349 TA 1988, which require annual interest payable by Newco to be subject to deduction of basic rate income tax at source unless it is paid to a bank carrying on a bona fide banking business in the United Kingdom and is in respect of an "advance" .
It is considered that loan stock instruments are usually not issued in consideration of an advance and "advance" therefore usually connotes 'simple debt"rather than debt represented by a loan stock instrument or other security.
In respect of yearly interest paid to "foreign banks" not carrying on a bona fide banking business in the UK, Newco will not be entitled to deduct its interest payments as charges on income (and will therefore not be eligible for group relief for them) unless it complies with the withholding tax requirements of s349 or applies to do so pursuant to a relevant double tax treaty (see s338(4));(e) deciding on the method which Newco will adopt to meet its obligations to pay interest on its borrowings and dividends on its share capital, and agreeing distribution policies in respect of the ordinary and preferred ordinary shares;(f) deciding on the type of debt securities which Newco will issue.
For example, if Newco issues deep discount securities under Sch 4 TA 1988, no or little interest is paid to the lender, but when they are redeemed the discount element becomes payable (representing, effectively, rolled-up interest).
This has two advantages.
The discount does not attract withholding tax under s349, whereas interest payable to the institutional holder usually would.
Secondly, Newco should be entitled to a deduction of the discount, as a charge on income, on an accruals basis, ie year on year, in advance of the discount actually being paid.
This benefit is not available if, as will  often be the case, Newco is a close company (see s13A and Sch 4 para 10 TA 1988).
Deep discount securities have a repayment profile entirely different from that of ordinary loans, since the discount is payable only on redemption.
The Inland Revenue have been known to accept that a series of deep discount securities redeemable at intervals to equate to the profile of ordinary loans will carry discount rather than interest, but this position should not be relied upon without further investigation.
Financing Newco's capital
A group income election under s247 TA 1988 will usually be put in place between Newco and Target as soon as possible after completion.
This will enable dividends to be paid by Target to Newco without Target being liable to pay ACT and charges on income (such as interest payments) to be paid by Target to Newco without deduction of basic rate income tax under s349 TA 1988.
Target will also have the flexibility of choosing which dividend payments should, or should not, be paid under the group income election, which is important in the context of a buy-out.
The way in which tax relief is obtained for interest paid by Newco on its borrowings can best be described by way of illustration.
Suppose Target makes £200 profits from trading activities and, in the same accounting period, Newco is liable to pay £100 of interest gross to its bank lenders.
Assuming Newco has no taxable profit in this accounting period, it will have excess charges on income within the meaning of s403(4) TA 1988 of £100 which it can surrender by way of group relief to Target under s402.
This will reduce Target's profits that are subject to corporation tax to £100, providing Target with an economic benefit of £33 (assuming that it pays corporation tax at the full rate rather than at the small company's rate under s13).
In the absence of a distribution, loan or other payment from Target, Newco will have no funds out of which to pay the interest.
There are various options available for providing Newco with funds.
First, s402(6) allows Target to pay up to £100 as consideration for the surrender to it of the £100 group relief, which would be sufficient to meet Newco's interest obligation.
It is suggested in Bramwell on Taxation of Companies and Company Reconstructions that this might constitute a value-shifting arrangement entitling the Revenue to adjust the consideration on a disposal of Target's shares, though the Revenue have indicated that payments for group relief would not usually constitute value shifting—see the Institute of Chartered Accountants' Technical Release TR 291.
The possibility of value shifting derives from the fact that, in the above example, Target is paying Newco more than the economic value of the losses so, unless this is value shifting, it is also a tax-efficient way of "distributing" profits from Target to Newco, and need not be done out of Target's distributable reserves.
While Newco remains an investment company (and to do so it must receive income, other than payments for group relief) it can carry forward any excess interest which is not surrendered to Target against its future income.
If Target pays Newco only the economic value of the group relief, £33, then the remaining interest of £67 must be funded by payments of dividends from Target to Newco.
A company is not generally liable to tax on distributions, which includes dividends, so prima facie a distribution will not go to reduce Newco's group relievable losses (see s208 Taxes Act) unless it makes an election under s242.
However, if Target pays dividends to Newco outside the group income election, Newco can elect to set off its losses against such dividends as if they were taxable income (see s242).
This entitles Newco to repayments of tax credits attaching to the dividends, deriving from Target's liability to pay ACT in respect of such dividends.
It should be noted that the group relief mechanism described above is more tax efficient than the franked investment income method, though they are not mutually exclusive.
This is because, taking account of the reduction in the rate of ACT to 25% (ignoring the transitional rate payable until 31 March 1994), setting Newco's losses against its surplus franked investment income equates to tax relief of £20 for each £100 of interest payable, whereas group relief is worth £33.
Alternatively, it may be possible for Newco's loan capital obligations to be novated to Target, so that Target becomes directly responsible for financing interest payments.
In this regard, it is worth considering the requirements to enable a company to pay interest gross under s349(3) on an advance from a bank carrying on a bona fide banking business in the United Kingdom.
Unless this provision is satisfied, any yearly interest paid by a company must be paid subject to deduction of basic rate income tax, and Target will need to comply with paras 2 to 4 of Sch 16 to the Taxes Act 1988 and account to the Revenue for the tax it is liable to withhold; the lender will suffer the cash-flow disadvantage of receiving interest payments with tax withheld at source (although it would be entitled to offset the withholding tax suffered against its corporation tax liability for the same accounting period under s7(2) TA 1988).
Care is needed to ensure that, following any novation, the interest payments which Target makes will still relate to an "advance" as required by s349(3).
It is necessary to structure the novation to ensure that there is, effectively, a new advance to Target and that Target is contractually obliged to make interest payments on such advance to the original bank to enable it to pay interest gross.
Yet another course is for assets of Target's trade to be transferred to Newco in return for cash left outstanding on non-interest-bearing inter-company loan account.
Where assets are transferred between members of the same capital gains tax group, this should not realise any chargeable gain or allowable loss (see s171 TCGA 1992).
Sections 157 and 158 Capital  Allowances Act 1990 should also apply so that assets in respect of which Target has been claiming capital allowances are treated as being transferred to Newco at their tax written down value.
Newco can then lease the assets back to Target in return for rental payments from Target, against which Newco can set any available writing down allowances in respect of the expenditure incurred in acquiring the assets and interest payments on its borrowings.
The final possibility is to "hive up" the trade from Target to Newco, so that Newco commences trading and generates trading income out of which to fund its interest payments directly.
This possibility is dealt with in 5.2.6.
Immediately after the buy-out Newco will be paying interest on its loan finance in priority to dividends on its shares.
Once Newco commences paying dividends, these should be funded by payments of dividends from Target outside the group income election, so that Target must account for ACT, but Newco will receive franked investment income, the tax credit attaching to which can be used to frank its own ACT liability when it pays dividends to its shareholders.
This is preferable in cash-flow terms to Newco's receiving group income from Target and having to pay ACT with no mainstream corporation tax of its own to absorb the ACT.
Preference shares usually carry a right to fixed dividends, but if on any dividend payment date Newco has insufficient distributable profits to meet these, they are rolled forward so that the shares may accrue a right to a premium, representing rolled-up dividends, payable on redemption.
Accordingly a premium payable on redemption of preference shares usually constitutes a distribution for tax purposes (see s210 TA 1988).
Payment of dividends on Newco's preference shares should be funded from dividends received from Target, again outside the group income election.
When the preference shares are redeemed, the amount payable on redemption, less any premium, will not amount to a distribution.
If, however, instead of being redeemed, the preference shares are converted into ordinary shares and the number of ordinary shares issued takes into account the accrued premium, no premium becomes payable and, accordingly, there is no distribution.
Thus, a subsequent bonus issue payable out of the share premium account which arises on conversion of the preference shares (from the premium element) is taxed as a distribution.
Furthermore, the amount of any distribution received on such ordinary shares which will be treated as an income distribution rather than a return of capital will be increased to take account of the deferred repayment of premium accrued at the date of conversion (see s210 TA 1988).
Key points
The tax requirements of all parties need to be considered with a view to establishing the best method of effecting the buy-out.
Whether the  buy-out will be of the business assets of the target, or of shares in the target company, is significant for tax purposes.
The buy-out team will need to decide whether or not to form a new company ( "Newco" ) to make the acquisition.
If so, there is the question of whether it should be newly formed or whether a shelf company will suffice.
A decision must be made about whether Newco will itself trade or whether it will remain a holding/investment company.
Care needs to be taken to ensure, if possible, that the members of the management team will be eligible for tax relief on loans taken out to finance the buy-out.
The Schedule E implications for management need to be examined.
Should the management team invest early?
At what price are they being offered the business?
What are they paying for their shares in Newco?
How Newco is to be funded, and the instititional investors' and banks' requirements in connection with the funding, must be addressed early in the buy-out process.
The Buy-out—Assets or Shares?
Acquisition of business and assets
Introduction
Although, structurally, the acquisition by Newco of Target's business and assets is the simplest way of effecting a management buy-out, it gives rise to a number of tax issues.
Newco will usually be acquiring a trade and will therefore be a trading company rather than an investment company from the outset.
There will be no need for a "hive-up" of the trade to Newco after completion.
Newco will not acquire the trading losses, surplus franked investment income nor surplus ACT of the vendor company's business.
If the nature or conduct of the trade is to be changed following the acquisition, s768 TA 1988, which can disallow the carrying forward of trading losses, will have no relevance.
Changes in the carrying on of the trade after completion could, however, be relevant for VAT purposes (see art 5 VAT (Special Provisions) Order 1992).
Interest relief for management
This has been dealt with in more detail in 4.4 above.
Management will want to ensure that Newco is a company which "exists for the purpose of carrying on a trade or trades on a commercial basis" within s13A(2) TA 1988, and that this purpose test is satisfied from the commencement of its first accounting period.
The significance of this is that, if Newco is also a close company and the various conditions in ss13A, 353 and 360 of the Taxes Act are satisfied, management should be entitled to interest relief on loans they take out to acquire ordinary shares in Newco.
Value Added Tax
Transfer of a going concern
The disposal of the business will usually be a "transfer of a going concern" ( "TOGC" ) for VAT purposes, so that it will be treated as neither a supply of  goods nor a supply of services, provided the requirements of art 5 VAT (Special Provisions) Order 1992 are satisfied.
The target assets may include business premises and reversionary interests in leased property.
If the vendor has elected to waive the exemption from VAT under para 2 Sch 6A VAT Act 1983 in respect of any of them, Newco must also elect to waive the exemption to obtain TOGC treatment, and must notify Customs of its election on or before completion.
Where a deposit is paid on exchange of contracts for the purchase of such properties and is held as "agent" rather than 'stakeholder", Newco's election and notification to Customs must be made on or before exchange of contracts.
If the vendor company has not itself elected, but is bound by an election to waive exemption made by any "relevant associate" within the meaning of para 3(8) 6A VAT Act 1983, it is treated as having made an election, so Newco will have to elect and notify Customs to ensure that TOGC treatment is obtained.
The vendor will want an undertaking or warranty that Newco has complied with this procedure.
The benefit of TOGC treatment to Newco is that it will not be invoiced for VAT by the vendor on the purchase of the business.
Newco will want confirmation that the vendor is registered for VAT and details of property interests in respect of which the vendor is bound by an election to waive exemption.
The business sale agreement will usually provide that, if a VAT liability arises from a supply which the parties expected to be outside the scope of VAT, the consideration will be VAT exclusive where this is caused by a breach of warranty by Newco (for example, that it will carry on the same kind of business as the vendor after completion).
Accordingly, Newco would be liable to pay the VAT in addition to the purchase price for the asset or property concerned.
Although it is currently the practice of Customs to allow the vendor to deduct input tax attributable to a TOGC (which is an "outside-the-scope" supply), it appears this practice might be changing in view of changes to s15(2) VAT Act 1983 and Reg 32 of the VAT (General) Regulations 1985; the changes are intended to put the right to deduct input tax in respect of certain outside-the-scope supplies onto a statutory footing.
As TOGCs are not included, it might follow that input tax attributable to a TOGC will cease to be allowable.
On the other hand, this might be evidence of an emerging principle that input VAT attributable to any outside-the-scope supply should be allowable.
Such questions are best dealt with by talking direct to Customs.
Registration
If the vendor is disposing of his entire business, he should deregister for VAT purposes otherwise he will continue to receive and be required to file VAT returns.
Newco should check whether the vendor has agreed any  special method with Customs of accounting for VAT and, if advantageous to Newco, obtain agreement to continuation.
Newco should apply to be registered for VAT before it contracts to purchase the business.
It will be allocated a new registration number once Customs have confirmation that the buy-out has taken place, so Newco will, for VAT purposes, constitute an entity distinct from the vendor, even though, commercially, there is continuity of the business.
It is not usually advisable for Newco to adopt the vendor's VAT registration number.
On a TOGC, the vendor's VAT records must be delivered to Newco under s33 VAT Act 1983, unless Customs consent to the vendor's retaining them.
Capital goods scheme
The capital goods scheme is dealt with in Part VA of the VAT (General) Regulations 1985.
Ideally, Newco should require the vendor to disclose any items in the assets to be sold which are subject to the capital goods scheme.
In brief, this regime means Newco may be liable to VAT if the vendor's use of (inter alia ) certain business premises or computer equipment before completion has changed from taxable use to exempt use.
Conversely Newco may be entitled to deductions of VAT if the change of use has been from exempt use to taxable use.
The parties might agree that, as against the vendor, Newco will take the benefit and burden of any deductions and payments under the capital goods regime which relate to intervals ending on the date of transfer of the capital items under the business sale agreement.
The effect is that the vendor must account to Newco for any deductions it receives from Customs, and Newco must indemnify the vendor for any payments due to Customs.
The vendor should allow Newco access to documents so it can establish whether a deduction or payment arises, and the amount of it.
Apportioning consideration
There will often be negotiation between the vendor and Newco/management about how the aggregate consideration for the sale of the business should be apportioned amongst the various assets.
The main considerations are as follows.
Capital allowances
Newco will want to attribute maximum consideration to those assets expenditure on which will be eligible for capital allowances, namely industrial buildings, qualifying hotels, plant and machinery, know-how, patent rights and capital sums incurred on software licences.
However, this  will often conflict with the vendor's desire to ensure that such assets are not sold for more than their tax written down value, otherwise the vendor may be liable to a balancing charge (see, eg, s4 Capital Allowances Act 1990 regarding industrial buildings and s24 regarding plant and machinery).
If the vendor attempts to avoid a balancing charge in respect of an industrial building by granting a long lease at a premium out of the "relevant interest" which he owns, Newco will not be entitled to industrial buildings allowances on the premium (see s20 Capital Allowances Act 1990).
The amount of the vendor's balancing charge on the sale of industrial buildings, which will constitute taxable income, will be the difference between the tax written down value and the lower of cost or the proceeds of sale received from Newco.
Newco can claim industrial buildings allowances in equal annual instalments of 4% over 25 years, on the lower of the purchase price and the vendor's original cost.
Care should be taken in attributing consideration to industrial buildings in view of the anti-avoidance provisions in s157(1) (b) and (4) Capital Allowances Act 1990.
Plant and machinery will also usually be sold at its tax written down value to avoid any balancing charge to the vendor, though the mechanism is different.
Here, allowances are available in respect of the vendor's net pool of expenditure, so unless the value of this falls below zero as a result of the disposal, the vendor will not have a balancing charge, though his ongoing allowances will be reduced.
Newco can claim writing down allowances for plant and machinery of 25% on a reducing balance basis over whatever number of years reduces the expenditure to a negligible amount.
In respect of cars, there is a cap on the amount per annum for which Newco can claim allowances.
Note that where assets are acquired not as part of a TOGC and VAT is payable, the VAT liability may be treated as capital expenditure for the purpose of writing down allowances for plant and machinery.
The above summary does not take account of the enhanced capital allowances mentioned in 4.2.1 above.
Know-how
In the absence of a joint election by the vendor and Newco under s531(3) TA 1988, "know-how" which has been used in the trade and which is disposed of is treated as part of goodwill.
With such an election, Newco's expenditure on know-how should be eligible for 25% writing down allowances under s530, and the proceeds of sale will usually be chargeable to tax in the hands of the vendor under Schedule D Case VI, though with a deduction under s31(5) for expenditure incurred in the acquisition or disposal of the know-how.
 "Know-how" for these purposes is defined in s533(7) TA 1988.
Expenditure incurred by Newco on "patent rights" is eligible for 25% writing down allowances under s520 TA 1988.
The term "patent rights" is defined in s533(1).
The allowance is given either as a trading expense or as a deduction from patent licence income (see s528).
Patent rights
Special rules under s524 apply to capital sums received from the sale of patent rights, assuming the vendor is resident in the United Kingdom.
In brief, the consideration is split into six equal portions and one-sixth is taxed as the vendor's income under Schedule D Case VI in each year for six years, unless the vendor elects, within two years, for the whole sum to be taxed in the year in which it is received.
If the patent is a UK patent and Newco acquires it from a non-UK-resident person, he must deduct 25% withholding tax from the capital sum consideration.
Royalties paid by Newco for patent user are subject to deduction of basic rate income tax at source whoever the recipient may be (see s349(1) TA 1988).
Software licences
Where Newco is carrying on a trade and incurs capital expenditure after 9 March 1992 in acquiring user rights to computer software, plant and machinery, capital allowances are available for such expenditure (see s67A Capital Allowances Act 1990).
Computer software licence fees should be deductible as trading expenses if of a revenue nature and incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the trade.
Base cost and capital gains tax
The price paid by Newco will establish its base cost in the target assets for capital gains tax purposes, unless s17 TCGA 1992 applies to impute market value as a result of the transaction's not being a bargain at arm's length.
This will very rarely be the case in a management buy-out and it should be noted that s18(2) TCGA 1992 will not usually apply to a management buy-out of a business to impute a non-arm's-length transaction.
Contrast the situation described in 4.3.1 above where, on a share sale, those of the management who are vendor shareholders can be "connected" with Newco.
Newco will wish to attribute as much of the purchase price as possible to those of the assets which are likely to increase in value, but which Newco may be intending to dispose of at a later date, so as to minimise the gain arising on the disposal (and to maximise the amount of base cost which can be indexed for capital gains tax purposes, again to reduce the ultimate gain).
This may conflict with the vendor's desire to minimise the amount of gain realised on the disposal of such assets to Newco, especially if the vendor is a company which has been bought and sold with no realisation of the underlying assets, which will therefore have a low historical cost.
This is less  of a concern now that acquisition cost is re-based to 31 March 1982 for capital gains tax purposes, especially with the benefit of indexation since that date to reduce the gain.
In addition, the assets may constitute "new assets" from a previous roll-over relief claim under s152 TCGA 1992, so that the vendor will have a "lowered" base cost in them than their actual purchase price.
The difference between the total amount paid for the business and the book value of its net assets will represent goodwill, which is an asset for capital gains tax purposes.
Goodwill will usually have a zero base cost because it will have been created during the vendor's running of the business (contrast purchased goodwill which must be written off).
The vendor may therefore be keen to minimise the amount attributable to goodwill.
Here the desires of the vendor and Newco may converge because the problem for Newco in acquiring goodwill is that it will reduce Newco's distributable profits as it must be written off in the profit and loss account, unless it can be written off against the share premium account.
Roll-over relief on replacement of business assets
The principal assets for which roll-over relief is available under ss152-160 TCGA 1992 are land and buildings occupied and used for the purposes of the vendor's trade, fixed plant and machinery and goodwill.
Even if the vendor is selling the whole of his trade, it seems from Inland Revenue Statement of Practice 8/81 that he can invest the proceeds of sale in acquiring new qualifying assets, as part of a new trade, and this will count as the same trade for roll-over relief purposes, so that his gain on the sale of the assets of the old trade is deferred.
Usually, the whole of the consideration deriving from the disposal of the "old assets" must be used to acquire the "new assets" .
This is because, assuming not all the proceeds of disposal are capital gain (some will be base cost), that part of the proceeds that is not applied in acquiring the new assets will constitute gain in priority to base cost.
For example, if half the proceeds of disposal of the old assets constitute gain and only half is applied in acquiring the new assets, roll-over relief will not be available at all .
The relief must be claimed.
Cessation of trade
As far as the vendor is concerned, the sale of his entire business and assets will mean a discontinuance of his trade, with the following potential tax consequences to consider.
Trading losses
As trading losses can be carried forward only against profits of the same trade, they will cease to be available for carry-forward if the trade is  discontinued.
There is a statutory discontinuance of a trade when it is transferred from one company to another (see s337(1) TA 1988).
Even the sale of part of a trade can cause a discontinuance of the retained part, though this depends on the extent of the charge (see Rolls Royce Limited v Bamford [1976]STC 162).
Under s393(9), excess charges on income arising in the final accounting period of a vendor company can be deducted as if they were trading losses for the purpose of carry-back or carry-across of losses, whereas charges on income can usually be deducted only in the accounting period in which they are paid (though excess charges on income can be group relieved where the vendor is a member of a group of companies within s402 TA 1988).
Under s393A TA 1988, Case I trading losses may be set against profits of whatever description (including chargeable gains), in the accounting period in which the losses are sustained and against profits from accounting periods falling within the preceding three years.
Brought-forward trading losses can be set against balancing charges arising on the disposal of the target assets.
Group relief
The group-relievable items specifically defined in s403 TA 1988 can be surrendered by the vendor company to a claimant company in the same group relief group.
Capital losses
Any assets in respect of which significant allowable losses will arise on disposal to Newco should, before the sale to Newco, be transferred on an intra-group basis within the vendor's capital gains tax group to a group company with chargeable gains against which to set the losses.
The intra-group transfer should be possible to achieve on a no gain/no loss basis for capital gains tax purposes under s171 TCGA 1992; it should be exempt from stamp duty under s42 Finance Act 1930 (as amended) provided transferor and transferee companies are "associated" within the meaning of Finance Act 1967 when the asset is transferred; and outside the scope of VAT under section 29 VAT Act 1983 where the transferor and transferee companies are members of a VAT group.
Hive-down?
On an assets purchase, Newco will not acquire any of the vendor's trading losses or unutilised capital allowances, and they may not be usable by the vendor, for example where Newco is taking over the liabilities which reduce the aggregate value of the target business down to a nominal amount.
This  situation often obtains when the vendor is in receivership.
If there is a hive-down of the target assets and business to a newly formed Target subsidiary of the vendor, followed by a sale of shares in the new target company, as an alternative to an assets sale, these "tax assets" can be preserved in Target.
This possibility is dealt with in more detail in 5.2 below.
Note that on a hive-down of assets to Target, the vendor's surplus franked investment income and ACT are not "inherited" by Target, so for these to be preserved for Newco's benefit a direct purchase of shares in the vendor company would be required.
Trade debtors and stamp duty
Rather than the benefit of trade debts being sold to Newco, a mechanism can be inserted in the business sale agreement whereby the vendor retains ownership of these and Newco collects them in as undisclosed agent for the vendor, so that there is no conveyance on sale of the debts for stamp duty purposes.
This will reduce Newco's stamp duty bill.
Newco will then use amounts it receives from debtors to satisfy an interest-free loan from the vendor, and the overall purchase price for the business will be correspondingly reduced.
This agency arrangement will terminate after a defined period of time, at which point Newco will be required to buy the uncollected trade debts for the amount of the interest-free loan which remains outstanding.
Corporate bonds, the assignment of which is exempt from stamp duty under s79 Finance Act 1986, need not be included in this mechanism.
Within one month after completing the acquisition, Newco must file Stamps Form 22 with the Inland Revenue, together with the original business sale agreement, for adjudication and stamping.
Stamp duty is payable at 1% on the consideration except the consideration which is attributable to assets transferable by delivery.
 "Consideration" for stamp duty purposes may include liabilities which Newco takes over from the vendor (see s57 Stamp Act 1891).
Lease finance
Where assets are to be acquired, Newco has the opportunity to finance these by way of rental payments under finance leases rather than by direct acquisition.
Warranties
The giving of warranties by the vendor is not confined to a share sale, though where a target company, rather than assets, is being acquired Newco needs a great deal more warranty protection, as Target's liabilities  may not be easily determinable and, unlike an assets sale, Newco will "acquire" all Target's liabilities (ie, the net asset value of Target, on which the purchase price payable by Newco is likely to be based, could be reduced because of undisclosed and unforeseen liabilities which crystallise after completion).
On a business sale, there are usually warranties about VAT, the capital goods scheme, PAYE and national insurance.
Conclusion
Although, from a tax point of view, an assets purchase is relatively straightforward, there are many commercial reasons why an acquisition of Target may be preferred by both vendor and Newco, even though Target may have unquantified liabilities.
Principally, a purchase of the business will involve detailed arrangements with customers, suppliers, creditors, the Inland Revenue and DSS (with respect to PAYE and national insurance) and Customs & Excise (with respect to VAT), all of whom will either need to be notified of the change or consent to it.
Furthermore, if Newco is taking over certain liabilities of the business, these may need to be novated and there may be a substantial amount of conveyancing of freehold and leasehold properties to Newco.
It should, though, be noted that there is no longer any loss of Uniform Business Rate transitional relief deriving from a change of occupier of business premises on a business sale.
Acquisition of shares
Formation of Newco
The reason Newco is formed to make the acquisition, rather than management acquiring Target direct, is that the incorporation of the company facilitates the creation of gearing in the form of fixed-dividend preference shares; various forms of debt security issued by Newco; and bank borrowing, to enable Newco to acquire Target.
Funding mechanisms are then required so that the profits of Target can be used to 'service"Newco's debt (see 4.7 above).
The ordinary shares held by management, which may confer control of Newco, will be a small proportion of the total share and loan capital of Newco, so that the amount management needs to borrow to acquire their stake in Newco is affordable, and can be serviced by dividends and earnings, with, it is to be hoped, the additional benefit of interest relief on their borrowings (see 4.4 above).
Newco can then acquire the whole of the issued share capital of Target which management would not otherwise have been able to afford, provided the underlying profitability of Target is sufficient to finance Newco's debt and share capital structure.
Reference should be made to Chapter 7 regarding the security which the banks will require in this type of "leveraging" arrangement.
Advantages of a share sale
The vendor shareholders will usually wish to sell Target itself, rather than its assets and business, to Newco.
This is to enable the shareholders to receive the sale proceeds directly, as there is likely to be an additional tax cost if the proceeds of sale need to be extracted from Target after the transaction.
Furthermore, if any of the vendor shareholders are non-UK-resident trusts established before 19 March 1991, which have not since then become "qualifying settlements" within the meaning of para 9 Sch 5 TCGA 1992, or otherwise s86 TCGA 1992 does not apply, the trustees will wish to dispose of their shares rather than receive a distribution.
This is because there will be an opportunity to shelter the resulting "trust gains" from capital gains tax until such time as capital payments are made by the trustees to UK-resident beneficiaries (see s97 TCGA 1992).
Capital payments (such as interest-free loans) can then be made in a tax-efficient manner to the trust beneficiaries, or the gross proceeds of disposal can be reinvested within the "umbrella" of the trust, thus deferring the capital gains tax liability indefinitely.
Under s91 TCGA 1992 "surcharge" can apply where capital payments are made to trust beneficiaries on or after 6 April 1992; this can increase the capital gains tax payable to 64% when trust gains are "repatriated" , increasing the capital gains tax charge by 10% of the tax paid per year for six years.
However, if gains are kept offshore for a sufficiently long period of time, the return on investment may exceed the increased capital gains tax liability.
A further reason why trustees of non-UK-resident trusts will prefer to have a disposal of shares rather than receive a distribution derives from s79(1) of and Sch 6 to the 1993 Finance Act, which brings the rate of income tax payable by certain non-UK-resident trustees in line with the rate applicable to UK-resident trustees, namely 35% of the grossed-up amount of the distribution received.
If there is an assets sale to Newco, the vendor company will be liable to tax.
If the shareholders subsequently liquidate the vendor company, there will be a capital distribution within s122 TCGA 1992, so an additional "layer" of tax will have become payable.
If, instead, the proceeds of sale are distributed without a liquidation then, although the shareholders will receive a tax credit for the ACT payable by the company, and assuming this ACT is absorbed by its mainstream corporation tax liability deriving from the sale of the business, the shareholders will nevertheless have an additional income tax liability at an effective rate of 25%.
To illustrate, if (after 31 March 1994) the company distributes £80, it must pay ACT of £20.
The shareholders are treated as having received a distribution of £100 on which tax of £20 has been paid and, assuming they will be liable for income tax at the higher rate, will have a further £20 of income tax to pay (see s14 TA 1988 and sections 77 to 79 of the 1993 Finance Act).
A further incentive for a share sale rather than an assets sale is that, if the  target company has recently been acquired, the shares will have a much higher base cost than the historical cost of the assets and the business.
Even where the base cost of the shares in Target is reduced, for example if there is a claim for breach of warranty made by Newco against the vendors which goes to reduce the overall price which Newco pays for the shares, the position can be restored if the amount Newco receives in settlement of the claim is invested in the target company in return for an issue of further shares to Newco.
An acquisition of newly issued shares does not constitute a disposal by the issuing company—in this instance Target—and the cost to Newco of subscribing the shares is added to its base cost in the "pool" of total shares in Target.
Purchasing Target for a nominal sum
A capital injection into Target after it has been acquired is often used to increase Newco's base cost in the Target shares where, for example, Target is acquired for a nominal consideration because the value of its assets is matched by corresponding liabilities.
Such liabilities may include repayment of inter-company loans owed to the vendor company.
If any such liabilities are debts incurred for the purposes of Target's trade in respect of which a deduction has been allowed in computing the profits of the trade within s94 TA 1988, and the vendor releases or procures the release of Target from its obligation to repay so as to increase the price Newco pays for Target, Target could be treated for tax purposes as receiving a substantial amount of taxable income.
Target is therefore usually sold for a nominal sum and is then capitalised after the acquisition by Newco to enable it to repay the inter-company loans.
There is then no "release" within s94.
Target should, as far as possible, be capitalised by way of new shares or securities which do not constitute qualifying corporate bonds within s117 TCGA 1992, so that any subsequent loss realised on Newco's investment in Target will be allowable for capital gains tax purposes.
Consideration
The common types of consideration paid for the acquisition of Target will be cash, debentures in Newco, shares in Newco, or the right to future shares or debentures in Newco (perhaps as part of an "earn-out" arrangement or deferred consideration).
The capital gains tax deferral implications of consideration shares and debentures are discussed below, as is the question whether there should be any "hive-up" of Target's business to Newco after completion.
The capital structure of Newco in the context of institutional investment and bank borrowings has been considered in 4.7 above.
Obviously the position is modified if vendor shareholders of Target are to take shares or loan notes in Newco.
Cash realisation
Managers who are selling shares to Newco may of course also invest further cash in Newco as they are likely to be increasing their investment in the business.
Further, the managers may wish to dispose of their Target shares for cash in order to free their resources and obtain tax-efficient borrowings to acquire their shares in Newco.
The proceeds of sale can be used to pay off less tax-efficient borrowings, such as a mortgage on a private residence.
A balance must then be struck between the size of the capital gains tax charge triggered by the sale of the Target shares for cash and the value of the tax relief obtained on the new investment in Newco.
If the sale of the Target shares produces an allowable loss for capital gains tax purposes, this may be set off only against gains arising on a subsequent disposal by the manager concerned to Newco, if he and Newco are "connected persons" for the purpose of s286(6) (7) TCGA 1992, as is likely to be the case if management needs to have control of Newco in order to obtain interest relief on its borrowings (see 4.4 above).
This is because both the close company regime in Part XI of the Taxes Act and the "connected persons" rules for capital gains tax purposes rely on the definition of "control" in s416 TA 1988.
It should also be noted that the "connected persons" test for capital gains tax purposes is different from that imposed by s839 TA 1988 in the context of the notional loan provisions of s162 (discussed in 4.3 above), though s839 also relies on the s416 definition of control.
Share exchange
If the managers, or some of them, own shares in Target, these could be exchanged for Newco shares and, provided the conditions of s135 TCGA 1992 are satisfied, and clearance under s138, to the effect that the transaction is bona fide commercial, is obtained, this should be treated as neither a disposal of the Target shares nor an acquisition of the consideration shares in Newco, so that a manager's base cost in his Newco shares will equate to his base cost in the Target shares.
Note that Newco should achieve a full market value base cost in the shares it acquires in Target.
Share/debenture exchange
What is perhaps more common than a share-for-share exchange is for part of the consideration to consist of debentures issued by Newco to vendor shareholders.
If the vendor shareholders are willing to accept this form of deferred consideration, with the debentures carrying less than an arm's-length interest rate, there is obviously a funding advantage to Newco.
The reason the vendor shareholders may be willing to accept this is that they can defer their capital gains tax liability deriving from the disposal of their  Target shares if s135 TCGA 1992 is satisfied and clearance under s138 is obtained.
There was lengthy correspondence in November 1986 and February 1987 between the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and the Inland Revenue, about the requirements to be satisfied to obtain clearance under s138.
Inter alia, the Inland Revenue are reluctant to grant clearance where the consideration is loan stock and is redeemable within a relatively short period, and clearance is usually given only if the loan notes cannot be redeemed within the first six months after issue.
A clearance under s138 is usually limited to a statement that the Revenue does not consider that s137 will apply to deny the benefit of capital gains tax deferral.
It does not provide confirmation that the various conditions of s135 are satisfied.
The application for clearance must be made, somewhat anomalously, by Target or Newco rather than by the vendor shareholders who wish to benefit from the capital gains tax deferral.
Although clearance under s138 is advisable, it is not essential to the operation of s135, though some tax inspectors seem to assume that where clearance has not been obtained the anti-avoidance provision in s137 will automatically apply to deny capital gains tax deferral.
It is worth noting, in this context, that when the advance clearance procedure was originally introduced in early 1977, the following ministerial assurance was given: "We are seeking to stop major tax avoidance schemes.
That is all we are about.
We are not seeking to catch the innocent taxpayer."
Most share-for-share exchanges are self-evidently bona fide commercial.
Share-for-debenture exchanges can be more problematic.
Vendor shareholders may receive a right to future shares or debentures in Newco as part of the consideration for the sale of Target.
Typically the right crystallises if Target meets certain defined profitability targets after the acquisition.
By concession, the Inland Revenue treat such rights as if they are "securities" within the meaning of s132 TCGA 1992.
This means the proportion of Target's shares sold in consideration of such rights will be treated as not disposed of, so will not realise a gain, provided s135 TCGA is in all other respects satisfied.
When the right crystallises and the further shares or securities are issued, this will be treated as a conversion of securities within s132, so again no capital gain will be realised (see Extra Statutory Concession D27).
Whether a capital gains tax liability subsequently arises when the further securities are disposed of or redeemed will depend upon whether or not they are "qualifying corporate bonds" within s117 TCGA 1992.
Qualifying corporate bonds
Where Newco issues debentures in exchange for Target shares, an attempt is usually made to structure these so that they do not constitute "qualifying corporate bonds" as defined in s117 TCGA 1992.
If they are qualifying corporate bonds, the gain that would have arisen had the Target shares  been disposed of is calculated, then suspended, and falls into charge on a subsequent disposal of the bonds even if they have by then become valueless (see s116 TCGA 1992).
This should be contrasted with the position where the debenture are not qualifying corporate bonds, where the base cost of the shares in Target is rolled into the base cost of the debentures, so that no gain falls into charge unless the debentures are in fact redeemed for more than their (lowered) base cost.
Following the enactment of the Finance Act 1993, it is now more difficult to create debentures which do not constitute qualifying corporate bonds for these purposes.
Section 84 brings into the category of qualifying corporate bonds certain debentures which previously fell outside the regime because they were not "securities" as defined in s132 TCGA 1992.
Without this provision it was possible to have a share-for-debenture exchange which fell within s127 TCGA 1992 and did not amount to a disposal even though the debenture was an exempt simple debt, rather than a security.
As a result, the gain on the original shares fell out of charge entirely rather than merely being deferred.
The second anti-avoidance provision is "hidden" in the new exchange gains and losses regime in Sch 17 of the Finance Act 1993.
It is currently a prerequisite of a qualifying corporate bond that it is expressed in sterling and contains no provision for conversion into, or redemption in, a currency other than sterling.
If the bond instrument is drafted so it is convertible into or redeemable in non-sterling currency, therefore, it is not a qualifying corporate bond and falls outside the regime which can bring the suspended gain on redemption of the bond into charge notwithstanding that the bond is valueless when redeemed.
Paragraph 5(1) to Sch 17 of the Act seeks to remove this possibility.
Although Schedule 17 comes into force only on a day still to be appointed, when it does come into force it seems it will apply in relation to debt instruments already in existence.
To fall outside the qualifying corporate bond regime, debentures should now be convertible into shares.
There is usually no disadvantage in this, in that interest payments on share-convertible securities will not be treated as distributions within s209(2) (e)(ii) TA 1988 because of the "let out" provisions of s212 where the holder of the security is a company within the charge to corporation tax.
Newco should thus be entitled to deduct interest payments as charges on income where they are paid to UK tax-paying corporate holders of share-convertible securities.
Purchase of Target out of a group of companies
Extraction of profits by vendor
If Target is being acquired out of a corporate group, it is likely that its immediate parent company will wish to extract value from it by way of a  pre-acquisition dividend paid under a group income election, as this will preclude any charge to ACT on Target and will not be a taxable receipt for the parent company (see ss208 and 247 Taxes Act 1988).
This extraction should be by way of a dividend, not a buy-in of any of the parent company's shares, as the latter would not be a dividend which could be made under a group income election and would be a part-disposal of the parent company's shares for capital gains tax purposes.
The price Newco then pays for Target will be reduced accordingly.
The purpose of this is to reduce the parent company's chargeable gain, though this mechanism cannot be used to create an allowable loss for the parent company (see s176 TCGA 1992).
Dividend stripping is to some extent considered legitimate tax planning by the Inland Revenue, provided it is done within the confines of s176 and provided also that reserves out of which to pay a dividend are not "artificially" created.
The manufacturing of dividends can trigger the value-shifting provisions in ss29 to 33 TCGA 1992, though s31(1) seems to confirm that a reduction in value of Target attributable to the payment of an intra-group dividend will prima facie not constitute value shifting.
For company law purposes, only realised profits can (in the absence of a capital reduction) be used to make distributions, so upward valuations of assets to create a revaluation reserve cannot be used to create a dividend-stripping opportunity.
Care is needed to ensure that at the time the group dividend is paid:(a) no "arrangements" or "option arrangements" exist whereby the parent company could cease to be beneficially entitled to more than 50% of both profits for distribution and assets on a winding up available to "equity holders" of Target (see Sch 18 Taxes Act); and (b) Target is beneficially owned by its parent when the dividend is declared and paid.
The case of J Sainsbury v O "Connor [1991]1 WLR 963 is helpful on the question of what is needed to break the parent company's beneficial ownership of Target, but on the question of whether" arrangements "exist so as to preclude the operation of the group income election the Sainsbury case has been superseded by the new" option arrangements"provisions in para 5B Sch 18 Taxes Act 1988.
These provisions are an example of the recent trend of legislating against tax avoidance in an arcane and difficult fashion, leaving the Revenue to publish Practice Statements or press releases giving their interpretations (though the Revenue has not been particularly forthcoming regarding "options arrangements" in Statement of Practice 3/93 which supersedes Statement of Practice 5/80).
Sections 178 and 179 Taxes and Capital Gains Act 1992
When Target is acquired out of the vendor group by Newco, s178 or 179 TCGA 1992 (whichever is relevant) needs to be considered.
Under s178, which applies to accounting periods ending on or before 30 September 1993, when Target leaves the vendor's capital gains tax group it will be treated as having disposed of and reacquired any assets it has acquired intra-group within the six-year period preceding the date it leaves the group.
Gains or losses from this notional disposal are treated as accruing at the time of the intra-group transfer.
Under s179, which applies to accounting periods ending on or after 1 October 1993, Target is again treated as disposing of assets acquired intra-group in the preceding six years, but the gain or loss accrues at the beginning of the accounting period in which Target leaves the vendor group (see s179 TCGA and s89 Finance Act 1993).
This difference can be relevant in the calculation of Target's profits attributable to the notional accounting period which comes to an end for group relief purposes when the buy-out occurs, which in turn will be relevant in calculating the amount of Target's profits against which other members of the vendor group can surrender group relief.
Group relief
The group relief position between the various members of the vendor group, including Target, needs to be considered by both Newco and the vendor, because it will have a bearing on:(a) what the parties to the buy-out agree should be paid by Target for group relief to be surrendered to it by other members of the vendor group or, conversely, what payment Target should receive for losses and other group relief items which are available for surrender from Target to other members of the vendor group;(b) whether adjustments need to be made to inter-company loan accounts; for example if it has been assumed that in the accounting period of Target in which the buy-out occurs it will achieve a certain level of profitability which will enable it to claim group relief from other group companies and that those other companies will accordingly be able to write off £x of inter-company debt due to Target, the fact that Target leaves the vendor group, say, half-way through that accounting period, will prima facie reduce the amount of group relief it can claim to half of £x; furthermore Newco may not be willing to pay as much as half of £x out of Target unless this represents a discount on the amount of corporation tax Target would otherwise have to pay on such profits; additionally, the notional disposals which Target makes under s179 TCGA when it leaves the group may either increase its profits (if a gain arises) or decrease them (if a loss arises);(c) what the parties agree in terms of indemnity cover for Newco for tax charges crystallising in Target; for example, the vendor goup may agree to surrender sufficient group relief to Target free of charge to  preclude any charge to corporation tax arising from the operation of s179 when Target leaves the group.
Until recently, it was the Revenue's view that group relief was not available between the vendor and Target in respect of the accounting period during which the acquisition of Target occurred or during which "arrangements" for the disposal of Target came into existence, though the basis for this view has always been unclear.
Following the case of Shepherd v Law Land plc [1990]STC 795 it is now clear that group relief for that proportion of Target's current accounting period which falls before the date it leaves the group remains available.
It would be usual for Target's accounting period to "correspond" to the rest of the vendor group's accounting periods for s409 purposes.
Note that, following completion of the buy-out, both Newco and Target's accounting periods must also correspond, especially if group relief is being relied upon to fund Newco's liability to meet interest payments to its investors and provide it with tax-efficient servicing of interest on its debt.
This is most easily dealt with by ensuring that when Newco is formed it elects to have the same accounting year-end date as Target.
Capital losses
If the sale of Target will generate an allowable loss there may need to be an intra-group transfer of beneficial ownership of Target before the management buy-out, so that the loss can be utilised by a group company which will, in the same accounting period, realise gains from the the disposal of other assets.
This is because there is no equivalent of group relief for capital losses, that is to say although group relievable items as defined in s403 TA 1988 can be set against a claimant company's profits, including chargeable gains, there is no facility, in the inverse situation, for surrendering capital losses against profits of another group company.
New rules in s88 and Sch 8 Finance Act 1993 now restrict the usefulness of capital losses carried forward in a target company which is acquired by a capital gains tax group.
The losses are effectively "ring-fenced" so they cannot be used to offset gains arising on the disposal of the purchasing group's assets.
This will not usually be a concern where a newly formed company acquires Target containing capital losses, as on a buy-out.
Intra-group hive-down to target company
Often there will be a conflict between what the vendor company and Newco want from the transaction.
Newco may not be willing to acquire the company which owns the targeted assets and business, preferring to buy the business direct, so that it does not acquire unquantified liabilities, especially where the vendor cannot provide Newco with satisfactory warranties and  indemnities.
However, the vendor company may prefer a share sale preceded by an extraction of dividends to depress the value of Target down to the net value of its assets less liabilities.
Although these sorts of depreciatory arrangements cannot be used to create allowable losses in the hands of the vendor company (s 176 TCGA), they can within limits be used to reduce the vendor's chargeable gain without the vendor's having to realise the assets and business which may have a very low historical value.
A compromise solution may be for the vendor to hive the Target business and assets down to a newly formed target company in its group and for Newco then to acquire Target, in the knowledge that only specified liabilities have been taken over by the new Target.
Indeed, where the vendor can provide Newco with no warranty protection at all(for example where the business is being bought from a receiver), it is common practice for the vendor to transfer the targeted assets and specified liabilities on an intra-group basis to a newly formed target company, which is then sold to Newco.
Newco then knows precisely what it is purchasing.
Although prima facie s343 TA 1988 will apply to a hive-down so as to preserve the transferor company's carried-forward trading losses and capital allowances position, s343(4) can restrict the amount of the tax losses and allowances transferred, where the liabilities remaining with the transferor company exceed its remaining assets (including the consideration for the hive-down of the trade).
To mitigate this problem, the transferor company may have to be re-financed before the hive-down, for example by the elimination of intra-group indebtedness, followed by the purchase of Target shares at a nominal value, coupled with the re-financing of Target and the repayment of the loan due to the former parent company.
The value-shifting provisions described in 5.2.6 below can be of particular relevance in this context, in determining the price (and therefore the amount of the inter-company loan account) at which the targeted assets are transferred to Target.
Generally this must be not lower than cost or market value.
When Target is sold to Newco, a capital gains tax liability may be triggered under s178 or 179 TCGA 1992 if the business contains an inherent gain (for example, in respect of goodwill), or if any of the assets have a depressed base cost resulting from a historical roll-over relief claim, because the hive-down should occur on a no gain/no loss basis under s171 TCGA.
If the s178/179 liability can be quantified with any degree of certainty then this can be taken into account in determining the price which Newco will pay for Target.
Alternatively, the targeted assets can be hived down to Target and all the other assets and liabilities of the transferor company can be extracted from it into a company which is to stay in the vendor group.
Both the transferor and Target can then be sold to Newco so as to avoid a charge by virtue of s178(2) or 179(2), which provide that where two or more "associated companies" cease to be members of the group at the  same time there is no deemed disposal and re-acquisition of the assets transferred between them.
For stamp duty purposes, it is often not possible to hive down the business to Target before "arrangements" come into existence within the meaning of s27(3) Finance Act 1967 whereby the transferor and Target will cease to be associated by virtue of a reduction of the transferor's holding of shares in Target.
In this case, Target will be liable for stamp duty on the hive-down agreement unless this can be deferred by executing and retaining the hive-down agreement outside the UK or otherwise mitigating the amount of stamp duty that becomes payable.
The stampable consideration will be increased by the amount of the liabilities which Target takes over from the transferor company (see s57 Stamp Act 1891).
If the new target company is included in the transferor company's VAT group under s29 VAT Act 1983, the business and assets can be transferred to Target without there being a supply for VAT purposes.
However, this will render Target jointly and severally liable for the transferor group's VAT for the prescribed accounting period in which it joins the group registration and the next following prescribed accounting period, and Newco should therefore request an indemnity for any resulting VAT liability of Target.
Conversely, the vendor may ask Newco to provide a counter-indemnity for VAT attributable to Target's supplies (and acquisitions of goods from other EC member states) for which the vendor or another vendor group company will be liable to account as representative member of the vendor's VAT group.
Alternatively, no VAT will be charged to Target if the hive-down of the business is a transfer of a going concern as described in 5.1.3 above and the requirements of Art 5 VAT (Special Provisions) Order 1992 are satisfied.
Post-acquisition "hive-up" 
Purpose
There are various reasons why it might be desirable to transfer Target's business to Newco after the acquisition.
If this is not done and a future purchaser of the business wishes to buy assets rather than Target's shares, it will be necessary to distribute the proceeds of disposal of those assets to Newco with an onward distribution to management.
This will not in fact give rise to a greater tax cost, if correctly arranged, than if, following a hive-up, Newco were to sell assets and distribute the proceeds to management, assuming the ACT payable on the distribution by Target were fully offset against its mainstream corporation tax, and the franked investment income received by Newco was matched by a franked payment to management.
However, if the future purchaser were willing to buy shares, it would be preferable that he buy shares in Newco from management (with Newco  having acquired the business from Target) than that he buys Target from Newco, because the additional tax cost to management is then avoided (as illustrated in 5.2.2 above).
Furthermore, if Newco remains a holding company of Target, the group relief funding arrangements described in 5.2.5 will be necessary, and can prove inflexible.
Change in nature or conduct of trade
If Target hives up its business to Newco, Newco will become a trading company and will cease to be an "investment company" within the meaning of s130 TA 1988.
Charges on income of a company which are not incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of its trade (for example, interest payments by Newco while it is an investment company) cannot be carried forward against Newco's profits once it becomes a trading company, so there is some significance in the timing of the hive-up from Target to Newco.
Where there is to be a major change in the nature or conduct of the trade, this, in combination with Target's change of ownership, can mean Target's carried-forward losses being disallowed under s768, and can also disallow carry-forward or carry-back of Target's unutilised ACT (see s245 TA 1988 and s81 Finance Act 1993).
It is considered, however, that the effect of s768(5) is to preserve the carried-forward trading losses where there is a hive-up of Target's business under s343 to Newco, followed by a major change in the nature or conduct of the trade.
It is, though, advisable to consider the Furniss v Dawson [1984]AC 474 implications of a pre-ordained series of transactions, one of which is the intended hive-up of Target's business after the acquisition by Newco so as to "escape" the effect of s768.
However, as described above, there are usually good commercial reasons for a hive-up, although most of these have related tax motivations.
If there is a risk of Target's carried-forward losses being disallowed following the acquisition by Newco, an alternative is for Target to disclaim any element of the losses which arise by virtue of claims for capital allowances in pre-completion accounting periods, to enable such capital allowances to be claimed in subsequent accounting periods rather than being carried forward as losses.
If management does decide to hive up Target's trade to Newco, it will have tax implications as follows.
Capital gains tax
The hive-up should occur on a no gain/no loss basis for capital gains tax purposes under s171 TCGA 1992, since Target will usually be both a "75% subsidiary" and an "effective 51% subsidiary" of Newco, within s170.
The  value-shifting and depreciatory transactions provisions in ss32 and 176 TCGA 1992 should be considered, and for these purposes it is necessary to distinguish two possible scenarios.
The first is where Target has been acquired by Newco at a discount from the market value of its assets and business.
This means that a disposal of shares in Target by Newco would realise a gain.
Accordingly, if the business is hived up from Target to Newco at less than both its cost and market value, this will depress the value of Newco's shares in Target, so that a subsequent disposal of Target would, in the absence of s32 TCGA, not realise a gain.
Section 32 enables the Inland Revenue to adjust the value at which Target's shares are disposed of to counteract the depressant effect of this sort of arrangement, while s176 ensures that a hive-up cannot be used to realise an artificial loss on the disposal of Target's shares (eg, when it is liquidated).
The second scenario is where Target has been acquired by Newco at a premium on the market value of its assets and business.
If the business is subsequently hived up to Newco at less than both cost and market value, this will depress the value of Target's shares, so that a subsequent disposal of them would realise a loss.
Again s176 would prevent this loss being allowable.
Distribution
The hive-up will not usually amount to a distribution (see s209(4),(5),(7) TA 1988).
Section 343 Taxes Act 1988
Target's entitlement to capital allowances and carried-forward trading losses should be preserved in Newco under s343, although s343(4) contains a requirement to ensure that "relevant liabilities" are also transferred (strictly speaking, novated) to Newco.
Stamp duty
Exemption from stamp duty should be available in respect of the hive-up under s42 Finance Act 1930 (as amended).
The "arrangements" provisions in s27 Finance Act 1967 should not apply to prevent the exemption being available.
Timing
It is inadvisable for the hive-up to be effected as part of Newco's acquisition of Target.
This is because the Inland Revenue could then argue that Target  did not beneficially own the trade at completion of Newco's acquisition of Target, so as to be able to dispose of it to Newco and fulfil the conditions of s343.
Accordingly, it is best if the hive-up is deferred until, say, the end of the month in which the acquisition occurred at the earliest (using a month-end will make the accounting treatment easier).
Accordingly, any proposals to change the nature or conduct of the trade should not be implemented until the hive-up has been completed.
Strictly, the Revenue can argue that s343 does not apply until the hive-up agreement has become unconditional and been completed in accordance with its terms (for example, the novating of liabilities and obtaining of third party consents), since s343 requires Newco to carry on the trade in succession to the transferor, not merely beneficially own it.
For this reason, wording is sometimes inserted in the hive-up agreement to the effect that Target will carry on the trade as "undisclosed agent" of Newco until the hive-up is completed.
The argument is that if Target is acting as agent for Newco, then Newco is carrying on a trade as principal through the agency of Target.
Consideration
A hive-up of the business from Target to Newco is normally in consideration of payment by Newco to Target, which will usually be loaned back to Newco and left outstanding on inter-company loan account.
It is the amount of this payment which determines whether the business is being hived up at less or more than cost or market value for the purposes of the value-shifting provisions described above.
VAT
The hive-up of the business will be a transfer of a going concern for VAT purposes provided, in the case of reversionary interests in property and property used for the purposes of the business, the procedure in para 5 VAT (Special Provisions) Order 1992 is adhered to (see 5.1.3 above); alternatively, if Newco and Target have been grouped for VAT purposes under s29 VAT Act 1983, the hive-up of the business will be treated as neither a supply of goods nor of services.
Other methods of effecting a management buy-out
Buy-in of shares
Advantages
A buy-in of shares may be the appropriate method of effecting a management buy-out where certain shareholders wish to realise their investment in a business which they have been running for some time, or  they wish to retire, and there is a management team willing to continue with the business and become the new shareholders.
If there is no need for new financing and restructuring, the departing shareholders could simply sell their shares to management.
However, a buy-in by the company of their shares may have a lower tax cost to the departing shareholders than a straightforward disposal, as illustrated below.
Unless there is to be a capital reduction of Target, the buy-in of shares must for company law purposes be effected out of Target's distributable profits or from the proceeds of the issue of new shares.
A new issue of shares provides management and institutions with the opportunity to achieve the leveraging effect described in 5.2.
If the vendor shareholders are entitled to a substantial element of indexation allowance to reduce the gain deriving from a disposal of their shares, or have allowable losses or other available reliefs to reduce their gains, then despite the fact that they will usually suffer tax at 40% on the gain, this may be less than the effective 25% rate of income tax if the buy-in is treated as a distribution, in which case the buy-in may be able to proceed under the tax regime provided for in ss219 to 229 TA 1988.
Taxation implications
On a buy-in of shares there will not be the opportunity for Target to defer the payment of consideration to departing shareholders in a tax-efficient manner, whereas on an acquisition of Target by Newco there can be a share-for-debenture exchange as described in 5.2.4 above.
Furthermore, it is more advantageous for management to subscribe shares than to acquire them by transfer, because they may then be entitled to income tax relief pursuant to s574 Taxes Act 1988 if the venture fails.
This is usually more valuable than generating an allowable loss for capital gains tax purposes.
Following a share buy-in, a capitalisation issue may trigger a distribution for tax purposes under s210.
It is necessary to distinguish between distributable profits for company law purposes and what will be treated as a distribution for tax purposes under s209 TA 1988.
The element of the purchase price on the buy-in which constitutes a distribution on which the company must pay ACT, and on which the shareholders will be liable to income tax, is the amount by which the price being paid exceeds the subscription price for the shares (usually the nominal value plus any share premium) —see s211(5).
The alternative regime in ss219 to 229 applies if:(a) Target is an unquoted trading company or the holding company of a trading group (an unquoted company will include one whose shares are traded on the Unlisted Securities Market);(b) the purchase of own shares is wholly or mainly for the benefit of  Target's trade or any of its 75% subsidiaries;(c) the purchase does not form part of a scheme or arrangement the main purpose of which is to avoid tax or enable shareholders to participate in the company's profits without being taxed on dividends (there is a clearance procedure under s225);(d) the vendor shareholders are resident and ordinarily resident in the UK in the tax year in which the buy-in occurs; any nominee shareholder must also be so resident, so if the distribution treatment is desirable it can be achieved by interposing non-UK-resident nominees;(e) the shareholder has held his shares for at least five years;(f) the shareholder's shareholding immediately after the buy-in has been substantially reduced (ie, by 25% or more, and his entitlement to profits must be similarly reduced); for these purposes the shareholder must include the shareholdings of his "associates" as determined in accordance with s227;(g) the shareholder must not be connected with the company following the buy-in, and for these purposes he will be connected if he is entitled to acquire more than 30% of the share capital or voting rights in the company or assets on a winding up.
If all the statutory conditions are satisfied, the shareholder is treated as disposing of his shares for capital gains tax purposes and not as receiving a distribution, and this treatment is mandatory.
It means the shareholder can utilise his annual exemption and indexation allowance for capital gains tax purposes, and the company will not have to account for ACT.
Where a listed company promotes an on-market "buy-in" of its shares, where the shareholders usually sell to an intermediary and the intermediary sells back to the company, the capital gains tax rules, rather than the ACT/distribution regime, will also apply as far as the vendor shareholders are concerned.
Whichever buy-in regime applies, stamp duty is payable by Target at one-half per cent on the return of the cancelled shares.
As a rule of thumb, if Target has sufficient distributable reserves to effect the purchase of its own shares, it will also have sufficient capacity to carry back against the preceding six years' mainstream corporation tax all the ACT incurred on the distribution, so this should not be a real cost.
Where, on a buy-in, the purchase price of Target's shares is equal to or less than the subscription price (ie, nominal value plus any share premium), there will not be any distribution within s209 so no ACT will be payable, but there will be a capital gains tax disposal by the shareholders.
Note that because of the word "that" in s254(5), the Revenue are known to hold the view that a distribution out of share premium account is nevertheless a distribution on which ACT is payable, in relation to shares other than those originally giving rise to the creation of the share premium account.
A group income election under s247 TA 1988 applies to dividends only, not other distributions, and therefore a buy-in of shares from a corporate shareholder in the same group income group as the company cannot be effected without Target's incurring an ACT liability.
There is also usually a disposal for capital gains tax purposes by the corporate shareholder, and reference should be made to Statement of Practice 4/89 in this regard.
Were this not the case, the buy-in would be tax free to a corporate shareholder because, by virtue of s208, the corporate shareholder would not be liable to corporation tax on the distribution, unless it is taken into account in the shareholder's capital gains tax computation (the latter not being precluded by s208).
De-merger
A management buy-out can in theory be effected by way of a de-merger, for example where the managers are already shareholders in the holding company of Target.
There would need to be a reorganisation of share capital, so that management's shares entitle them exclusively to receive an in specie distribution of the shares in Target, following which their shares in the holding company would become worthless deferred shares (which could then be bought in by the holding company for a nominal price).
If the provisions of s213 can be satisfied, management would incur no income tax charge or capital gains tax charge; Target should have no liability to capital gains tax under s178 or 179, even though it would be leaving a capital gains tax group as a result of the de-merger and may have had assets transferred to it on a no gain/no loss basis within the preceding six years.
However, on a de-merger there is a disposal by the holding company of Target and if Target has increased in value since it was acquired by the holding company, the holding company may incur a corporation tax charge.
This charge can be deferred where the shares in Target are distributed to a newly formed company in exchange for the issue of shares in the Newco to management (see s139 TCGA 1992), instead of being distributed directly to management.
A clearance procedure is provided for in s213 TA 1988 and s138 TCGA 1992.
There are various other methods of effecting a de-merger, but the advantage of the statutory basis under s213 TA 1988 is that it treats the transaction as if there has been no distribution by the company and no liability to income tax or capital gains tax on the part of the recipient shareholders.
Nor, as mentioned, can s178 or 179 be triggered.
However, there is no statutory exclusion of corporation tax on chargeable gains deriving from the distributing company's disposal of the shares in Target, unless a "triangular" distribution is effected whereby the shares in target are  distributed to a Newco in exchange for the issue of shares in Newco to the distributing company shareholders, under s139 TCGA 1992.
An alternative is for the distributing company to form a Newco within its group and capitalise it sufficiently to reflect the value of the Target business.
The distributing company then transfers the target business to this Newco on a no gain/no loss basis under s171 TCGA 1992.
Newco is then distributed by the distributing company without triggering any chargeable gain, and the historical unrealised gain moves with Newco out of the group so that any subsequent disposal by Newco of the target assets would realise the historical unrealised gain.
In this scenario also, it seems, s178/179 is avoided.
There has been debate in the past about whether de-mergers which result in a deferral of this capital gains tax charge are permitted, and the details of this type of structure are outside the scope of this chapter.
Key points
Advisers should identify whether or not any Inland Revenue clearance is needed under s138 TCGA 1992, s707 TA 1988 or s215 TA 1988.
If so, applications for clearance should be made as soon as possible.
The nature of the consideration—cash, shares, debentures, bonds, exchanges or a combination of these—being offered by Newco must be considered carefully and the various tax consequences identified.
In the case of a buy-out of assets rather than shares, the apportionment of the consideration to each of the assets may itself have tax implications.
Any necessary elections for tax purposes must be identified and made at the optimum times.
The parties must come to decisions about whether or not there are any VAT implications in the transaction and proceed accordingly.
Any Inland Revenue concessions or practice statements relied on should be identified and care taken to be aware of any changes in the law or practice which might affect the buy-out.
Management's plans for the business once it has acquired it must be taken into account at the planning stages, for they too will have tax implications which need to be accommodated.
It may be necessary to restructure the business before it is acquired; the tax liabilities involved need to be assessed, and the position of management protected as far as possible.
The Agreements
Introduction
This chapter is devoted to the main legal documents relevant to an equity investment in Newco before a management buy-out; and, in particular, examines certain significant provisions commonly required in such documentation.
The principal documents relevant to the equity transaction are the subscription and shareholders' agreement and the Articles of Association of Newco.
These provide for the constitution of the board of directors of the company and the decision-making process; the right to appoint a non-executive director; negative pledges in favour of the investing institutions; the flow of regular financial management information to the investors; the giving of warranties by the management team and Newco; and the granting of restrictive covenants.
Also briefly discussed are the sale and purchase agreement in so far as it is inconsistent with that for a normal corporate acquisition, and the managers' service agreements.
Subscription and shareholders' agreement
Main provisions
The subscription and shareholders' agreement, sometimes known as the investment agreement, is entered into by the management, the other providers of the equity finance and the buy-out company, "Newco" .
It will cover, amongst other matters, the investors' undertaking to subscribe, and possibly to procure subscribers, for shares in Newco.
Subscription will be subject to a number of conditions precedent, including the completion of the investors' due diligence and the putting in place of satisfactory loan arrangements and working capital facilities.
The agreement will also deal with the fees and expenses payable to the institutional providers of equity finance and the professional advisers.
It will deal with the obligations of Newco and the management team to provide continuing financial information to shareholders.
It will require  certain matters to be approved by the full board of Newco, which will include representatives of the institutional investors.
These matters will, inter alia, include major acquisitions, budgets and contracts in which the directors have a personal interest.
Warranties will almost certainly be given by the management individuals themselves.
These warranties are likely to be given both to the equity institutional investors and to Newco.
The warranties that are obtained from the vendors are much less wide ranging than is the case in an "arms'-length" transaction.
The vendor will almost certainly say that no one knows more about the business than the management.
Indeed, it is often the ability of management to agree the deal with much less protection in the way of warranties than a trade purchaser would accept that helps management to win the deal from the vendor.
The management will also be asked to give certain non-competition undertakings, of a type often found in service agreements, but which are more likely to be enforceable if incorporated in an investment agreement.
There may also be provisions between the institutional investors and management about plans for future flotation.
They may provide for the position of the institutional equity investors in respect of warranties on a flotation, in particular, whether or not they would give warranties in the offer for sale agreement to the merchant bank leading the flotation.
The argument against so doing is that the institutions will wish to disseminate the proceeds of the flotation to their various funds and cannot cater for contingent liabilities such as warranty claims.
Although it may be beneficial to address this point at this stage rather than leave it to the flotation, the alternative argument is that such matters can only be decided at the time of flotation when the parties are better able to assess what is commercially necessary to achieve an optimum result.
Conditions precedent
Where there is to be a separate exchange and completion, which can be for a multitude of reasons, or where there are conditions which need to be satisfied before completion of the subscription can take place, then the subscription and shareholders' agreement will set out the various conditions precedent and how they are to be satisfied.
If exchange and completion is to be simultaneous, conditions precedent are often included as a checklist for all parties.
The equity investors will set out as conditions the terms and assumptions upon which their investment will be made.
They are likely to include the following:(a) the execution and exchange of the acquisition agreement (by which Newco will buy the business from the vendor);(b) the managers having subscribed in cash for ordinary shares in Newco;(c) the passing of any necessary shareholders' resolutions;(d) receipt by the investors of a satisfactory accountants' report, audited accounts and management accounts;(e) the managers having entered into service agreements;(f) receipt by the investors of certificates of title;(g) the investors being satisfied with the loan and banking facilities being provided to Newco;(h) keyman insurance having been taken out for the benefit of the company over the lives of each of the managers.
The legal advisers to the managers should agree with the investors' lawyers at an early stage exactly what is required to satisfy the conditions.
Keyman insurance, for example, can often take longer than may be expected to organise, particularly in view of the now obligatory AIDS test.
Keyman insurance
It is likely to be a condition of the investment that Newco takes out keyman insurance on the lives and health of the managers.
However, this can raise a number of tax issues.
If the investors do not themselves take out the keyman insurance cover but instead Newco does so and assigns the benefit of the policy to the investors, then Newco will not, in general, obtain a deduction from tax liability for the premiums paid because they will not have been "wholly and exclusively" incurred for the purposes of its trade.
Moreover, an investor would only obtain a deduction in respect of premiums if it is a financial institution holding its interest as trading stock.
In order therefore to ensure that the investors qualify not only for a deduction of premium, but also to receive the proceeds of any claim under the policy, there must be a provision obliging Newco to pay the proceeds of any claim by way of dividend.
Such a dividend will have its usual tax consequences.
A clause similar to the following can be included to achieve this:(a) The parties agree to procure that the amount(s) of any payment(s) (net of corporation tax to the extent that this is not franked by the payment of advance corporation tax payable on the distribution to be made pursuant to this clause (a)) received by the Company pursuant to any claim(s) made under the keyman insurance effected by the Company pursuant to clause…shall as soon as practicable following receipt of such amount(s) by the Company be distributed to the Investor by way of dividend net of any advance corporation tax payable.
(b) Each of the parties (other than the Investor) hereby agrees to waive their rights in respect of any dividend declared pursuant to clause…above.
Warranties
The equity investors will be closely involved with the negotiation of the acquisition agreement, partly to lend their experience to the buy-out team, but more importantly to protect their future investment.
This will include determining the warranties they require from the management.
If they obtain a strong set of warranties from the vendor, then they are likely to seek less from management.
However, the vendors are likely to resist giving extensive warranties since it is the managers, not they, who have been involved in the day-to-day running of the company.
At its extreme, they may even be reluctant to warrant the audited accounts on the basis that the auditors could certify them only following representations from management.
Whatever the parties negotiate in respect of the warranties, if any of the managers makes a false statement of fact which is material in inducing the investor(s) to enter the agreement, a right of rescission will arise, whether the statement is written into the agreement or not, either at common law if the misrepresentation is fraudulent, or under the Misrepresentation Act 1967 if it is negligent or innocent.
It is normal in a sale and purchase agreement to exclude liability for representations made in pre-contractual negotiations, but this is unlikely to be acceptable in the investment agreement as investors will have relied heavily on input from management before agreeing to proceed.
In any event a disclaimer of responsibility is not effective in respect of fraudulent misrepresentation.
Moreover, it is a criminal offence under s47(1) Financial Services Act 1986 to induce a person to buy or sell shares by a fraudulent statement or the concealment of material facts.
The equity investors will always seek certain specific warranties.
These will include warranties in respect of Newco, often a new "off the shelf" company administered by management's lawyers, and in respect of information contained in the managers' questionnaire concerning the managers themselves (see Appendix 2).
In addition, the investors will be keen to obtain warranties in respect of the business plan and future financial forecasts along the following lines:(a) The Business Plan has been carefully prepared in good faith having regard to the information available and the market conditions prevailing at the time of its preparation and the figures contained therein have been carefully considered and are honestly believed to be reasonable and the Managers have made all reasonable enquiries so as to ascertain all such information and conditions which are relevant to the preparation of the forecasts contained therein.
(b) There is no fact or matter concerning the proposed business or affairs of the Company nor any fact or matter relating to the  financial forecasts which is or may be material for disclosure to any intending subscriber for shares in the Company which has not been disclosed to the Investors and any such fact or matter arising prior to Completion of this agreement will forthwith be disclosed to the Investors.
The provision in (b) above is an unsatisfactory "sweep-up" clause which, though difficult to justify, will be insisted upon by most investors.
It should be resisted as far as possible, or at least amended to remove its subjectivity.
The investors will also request that the managers warrant information contained in the accountants' due diligence report.
It is not unreasonable that the investors should want the managers' views on the accountants' report, but management's advisers should try to restrict this warranty to the facts in the report and exclude any opinions given by the accountants.
This should be dealt with at an early stage, in case management needs to spend much time verifying facts and opinions in the report and making disclosures against them.
The managers will also be asked to warrant to the best of their belief any warranties or indemnities contained in the sale and purchase agreement.
A clause such as the following will be included: To the best of the Managers' knowledge, information and belief no event has occurred or is likely to occur which will or could give rise to any claim under the warranties or indemnities given or to be given under or pursuant to the Sale and Purchase Agreement.
The managers' legal advisers will seek to insert a schedule of limitations to the warranties, which the investors' lawyers will equally naturally resist.
It should be remembered by the advisers that, following completion, the management and the investors will work together as a team and it is not in the investors' interests to antagonise or demoralise their management team at the outset.
The investors do not perceive the warranties as providing them with a course of action, but as a way for management to confirm the business plan and the facts of the accountants' report; and provide as much information as possible about the business to be purchased.
This can be achieved without management's feeling pressured to make unreasonable concessions or commitments, and without damaging the relationship between the managers and the investors.
For example, the investors may accept that the managers be severally liable for the warranties; that the warranties be restricted to their actual knowledge; that the maximum claim to be brought against any of the managers be limited to one or two times salary (significant enough to concentrate minds); that a high de minimis be accepted; and that the time period of warranty claims against management be limited to twelve months after completion.
The managers may also be successful in obtaining from the investors  a clause in the agreement or a side letter, confirming that as a result of their investigations they are not aware of a breach of the warranties at completion.
This is likely to be resisted by the investors on the basis that they may not be aware of the full import of their investigations at this stage.
It was always thought that if an investor (or purchaser) completed an agreement knowing that some of the warranties were untrue and that fact had not been disclosed, then he would not be prevented from bringing an action for breach of warranty, though the equitable remedy of rescission for misrepresentation would not be available as the investor could not satisfy the requirement to come to equity with clean hands.
However, more recently, in Eurocopy plc v Teasdale, reported in the journal PLC in November 1991, the Court of Appeal upheld a first instance decision, and dismissed an application to strike out a defence, that in connection with a sale and purchase agreement, the actual knowledge of the purchaser might still be a defence to a claim for breach of warranty notwithstanding a clause in the sale and purchase agreement which provided that no actual or constructive knowledge on the part of the purchaser would prejudice a claim.
Although the Court of Appeal's decision was obiter dictum, the investors should be made aware that the knowledge gained from their "due diligence" may prohibit any subsequent warranty claim even if it has not been disclosed by the managers.
Investors' directors
An investor is likely to seek the appointment of a director to represent its interests on the board of Newco.
This is usually enshrined in the Articles by attaching the right of appointment to the investors' equity shares.
If there is more than one investor, then more than one director may be appointed.
A fee will be paid by Newco for each appointment.
All directors, whether nominee or non-executive directors or otherwise, must act honestly and use reasonable diligence and skill in the discharge of their duties (See Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co [1925]1 Ch 407).
They must act in what they believe to be the best interests of the company.
This obviously places any nominee director in an invidious position.
He is required to disregard the interests of the institution appointing him in favour of the shareholders as a whole.
On the other hand, if he does do so, he is likely to find that the institution will remove him.
It is therefore wise to consider specifying in the Articles the extent of a nominee director's duty and couple this with an acknowledgement in the subscription and shareholders' agreement that the nominee has been appointed to represent the interests of a particular group of shareholders.
A suggested clause to be included in either the Articles or the subscription and shareholders' agreement is: A director of the company who has been appointed to the board by a member or class of members pursuant to the Articles of Association  to represent the interests of that member or class of members shall, notwithstanding any rule of law or equity to the contrary, not be considered in breach of his fiduciary duty to act in the best interests of the company by reason only that in the performance of his duties and the exercise of his powers, he has regard to the interests and acts upon the wishes of that member or class of members when no honest and reasonable director could have formed the view that in so doing, the director was also promoting the interests of the company as a whole.
A clause such as this deals directly with any conflict.
It is a commercial agreement between the shareholders as to how the company should be operated, and in the event of difficulty, would give the court guidance.
Undertakings
It is likely that most members of the board of Newco will be members of the management team proposing the buy-out.
It is also likely that the investors will not insist on their own presence to constitute a quorum at board meetings.
In view of this "hands off" approach, the investors will be fairly strict in their requirements of Newco and the managers.
Thus, they will probably ask the managers to undertake to provide regular information, including agendas of board meetings; budget and cash-flow forecasts at the end of each accounting reference period; and management accounts, including balance sheets, profit and loss accounts and cash-flow projections.
There is also likely to be an undertaking to allow the investors access to the books, and for the appointment of a firm of accountants, at the company's expense, to verify any figures provided.
Such a clause would be along the following lines: The Managers and the Company covenant with the Investors that they will allow the Investors' director (and if there is none any Director or the Secretary of each of the Investors) to examine and (at the cost of the Company) to authorise a firm of accountants nominated by the Investors to examine the books and accounts of the Company and/or any other company in the Group.
There will also be a number of obligations and restrictions imposed on the management and the shareholders, specifying matters which Newco will not be able to effect without the consent of the investors' director(s).
A process to make the obtaining of such consent quick and straightforward should be agreed.
Restrictions of this kind usually relate to changes to the share capital or constitution of the company; any transactions outside the usual scope of its business or material transactions within the scope of its business; and transactions between the company and management.
They are sometimes reserved in the Articles as class rights attaching to the preference shares or the preferred ordinary shares.
They will include:(i) modification of share rights;(ii) acquisitions or disposals of shares or substantial parts of the business or its assets;(iii) changes in the Memorandum or Articles of Association;(iv) changes to the auditors, bankers, or the accounting reference date;(v) resolutions to wind up the company (or a subsidiary);(vi) payment of dividends or other distributions other than as provided in the Articles of Association;(vii) changes in issued or authorised share capital;(viii) contracts or arrangements by the company with any of the directors;(ix) changes in borrowing powers;(x) changes to the nature of the business;(xi) guarantees or indemnities provided by the company;(xii) limits on capital expenditure;(xiii) creation of mortgages or charges over any of the company's assets.
Obligations of this kind are sometimes found in the Articles, as an alternative, or in addition, to including them in the subscription and shareholders' agreement.
The advisers need to ensure that the obligations do not fetter the company's powers in any way.
In Bushell v Faith [1929]2 Ch 438 at 447, Russell LJ said a company could not "by its articles or otherwise" deprive itself of its power to alter the Articles.
He said such an Article was ineffective, "but a provision as to voting rights which has the effect of making a special resolution incapable of being passed if a particular shareholder…exercises his voting rights against a proposed alternation, is not such a provision" .
This was confirmed in Russell v Northern Bank Development Corporation Limited and others [1992]1 WLR 588, where, in the House of Lords, it was held that a private agreement between shareholders not to increase the capital of the company was an agreement about the manner of voting of the shareholders and did not constitute a restriction on the statutory power of the company to alter its share capital.
In that case, the Northern Bank and its subsidiary lent large sums of money to two brick-making companies in Northern Ireland.
The companies were reorganised under a holding company known as Tyrone Brick Company.
The shareholders of the holding company entered into a shareholders' agreement which stated that it had precedence over the Articles of Association, and clause 3 of that agreement provided that "no further share capital shall be created or issued in the company…without the written consent of each of the parties hereto" .
When an increase of capital was later proposed, the question was whether the provision in the agreement was inconsistent with the statutory power under the Companies Act to increase capital, and therefore an  unlawful and invalid restriction on the power of the company to increase its share capital.
If the restriction had appeared in the Articles, it would have been unlawful, and therefore invalid, if it purported to fetter the rights of the company to increase its capital.
However, this does not affect the power of shareholders by agreement to circumvent the provisions of the Act.
For example, shareholders can have multiple votes attaching to their shares and so block the removal of a director under s303 Companies Act 1985.
This would suggest that shareholders by agreement can bind themselves to vote in a particular way and can then be compelled to vote accordingly.
It is a personal agreement between shareholders which does not fetter the company in the exercise of its statutory powers.
Syndication
It is highly likely, depending on the size of the transaction, that a number of institutional investors will be invited to participate.
If so, special provisions will need to be inserted in the agreement to regulate the arrangements between the investors.
In some cases there may not be sufficient time to bring together a number of financiers at the outset, or, in the case of a bid, considerations of confidentiality may prevent approaches to multiple investors.
Thus, a single institution may initially finance a buy-out, bringing in others after the investment is in place.
Syndication of this kind is known as a "bought deal" .
In such a situation the agreement should allow for the introduction of new investors with a view to ensuring that the warranties and undertakings given, and restrictions imposed, for the benefit of the initial investor apply also for the benefit of the new investors.
The following is an example of a suitable clause: It is hereby agreed that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein or in the Articles of Association the investor shall be entitled at any time after Completion to transfer all or any part of the investor's shares to another investor or investors approved by the Managers (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed) to the intent and effect that any such investors shall be entitled to the benefit of all such provisions of this Agreement and Articles of Association as the investor shall require and the Managers and the Company shall do or procure to be done (insofar as it lies within their respective powers) all such matters and things, including the execution of all such documents as shall be necessary or which the Investors shall reasonably require for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this clause.
The investors will obviously not wish to provide the managers with a veto over any potential syndication partner.
Nevertheless, the managers, having  probably visited several venture capitalists with their business plan at the outset of the buy-out process, may well have their own views about who they want to work with, and will wish to be involved in the syndication process.
This is particularly important where the syndication partner or partners are to be offered a position on the board.
The managers may feel that it is appropriate to insist that the second investor's director bring to the board something additional, such as technical expertise or contacts.
6.3 Articles of Association The purpose of the Articles is to set out the manner in which the Company is to be governed and to regulate the relationship between the directors and the different classes of shareholder.
Frequently, companies adopt standard forms of Articles of Association which are prescribed under the Companies Act 1985.
However, in management buy-outs involving a subscription of equity by institutional shareholders, there will almost invariably be a complex share structure and, as a result, a complex set of Articles of Association.
The Articles will deal with the share rights of the various classes of share, the ratchet provisions and the terms upon which the preference shares become convertible.
They will deal with the voting rights attaching to each class of shares.
They will contain the pre-emption provisions and possibly a list of matters that can be dealt with only if approved by the holders of a certain class of shares (if not included in the subscription and shareholders' agreement).
They may also contain provisions to facilitate an exit for the investor, possibly "forced sale" provisions, and provisions obliging the managers to sell their shares on leaving the company.
Share structure
Different classes of share will be created and issued by the company to the management and the investors in order:(a) to allow a large share capital to be created without unduly diluting the management's interest;(b) to reduce the investors' risk by providing a part of the share capital to be in the form of preference shares, which will enable the company to redeem as quickly as the cash flow and profits allow;(c) to set up a "ratchet" mechanism which will allow for the management shareholding to increase with the success of the company.
The following are the types of share that will ordinarily be seen in a management buy-out:
Redeemable preference shares
Redeemable preference shares carry a preferential right to income and to repayment of capital on a winding up, but usually their participation in dividends and capital is capped at a pre-determined amount.
They fall outside the definition of "equity share capital" in s744 Companies Act 1985, though the holders are members of the company as opposed to creditors.
Nevertheless, in terms of the rights which attach, redeemable preference shares are more akin to debt than shares.
They are sometimes used as a form of 'soft loan"to produce a more attractive gearing ratio, so placing the investee company in a better position to attract external lending.
The rights of the preference shareholders rank behind those of the provider of debt and the creditors, but before those of the ordinary shareholders.
However, while interest on a loan falls due regardless of ability to pay, dividends on redeemable preference shares can be paid only if there are sufficient distributable reserves available.
If that is not the case, then the returns owing to the investors simply accumulate until circumstances permit them to be paid.
By way of contrast, unpaid interest or capital repayments relating to loans usually constitute an "event of default" under the loan documentation with the result that the lender will stop any further loans, and may accelerate repayment of the sums outstanding so that they become immediately due and payable.
Even if the loan is not called in by the investors, there are likely to be other implications.
Creditors of Newco for instance, who hold the benefit of cross-default clauses, may accelerate those payments due from the company.
The shares, as the name implies, are redeemable, either at a particular time, or in accordance with a schedule of redemption dates, or on the occurrence of particular events, such as a sale or flotation.
Frequently, investors also insist that they can trigger the redemption provisions upon a material breach of the subscription and shareholders' agreement.
This is an onerous obligation on the company and is usually resisted by management's lawyers, with a varying amount of success.
In any event, the value of such a provision would depend upon the availability of distributable reserves following the breach.
The law governing the redemption of shares is contained in ss159-161 Companies Act 1985.
No redeemable shares can be issued at a time when there are no issued shares of the company which are not redeemable.
Shares would normally be redeemed out of distributable profits, but the Act does allow for redemption out of a fresh issue of shares, and private companies can redeem out of capital (ss 171–172 Companies Act 1985).
Preference shares normally carry no rights to vote except on a resolution for the winding up of the company, or to modify the rights attaching to the shares.
Nevertheless, it is common that preference shares with a right to a cumulative dividend obtain voting rights if the dividend is in arrears for a specified period.
A clause achieving this would be as follows: As regards voting in general meetings the holders of the Preference Shares shall be entitled to receive notice of, and to attend at, general meetings of the Company but shall not in respect of their holdings of such shares be entitled to vote upon any resolution unless:(A) there shall have been any Arrears on any Preference Shares or Preferred Ordinary Shares for more than two months on the date of the notice convening the meeting; or (B) the Company, on any of the Redemption Dates under sub-paragraph (d)(i) below of this Article 2.2, shall have failed or been unable to redeem all or any of the Preference Shares falling to be redeemed on any such Redemption Date; or (C) the resolution is one which directly or indirectly varies, modifies, alters or abrogates any of the rights, privileges, limitations or restrictions attaching to the Preference Shares or "A" Ordinary Shares; or (D) the resolution is for the winding up of the Company, the reduction of share capital, the approval of the giving of financial assistance or the purchase by it of any of its shares.
Preferred ordinary shares
Preferred ordinary shares will represent the institutional equity, giving rights, in terms of income or on a winding up, in preference to those of management.
The dividend is usually expressed to be cumulative, since in the case of equity share capital there is a presumption that dividends are non-cumulative unless otherwise stated.
The dividends are usually paid in priority to dividends on all other shares except for preference shares.
The shares may entitle the holder(s) to a fixed dividend, but usually there is also a "participating dividend" .
This means a dividend payable by reference to the profit performance of Newco and its subsidiaries.
The definition of "profits" against which the dividend is to be determined should be carefully drafted.
A dividend is usually paid as a percentage of the consolidated profits of Newco, but a number of points require consideration in determining how "profit" should be interpreted:(i) should the dividend be based on pre-or post-tax profits (ii) should the calculation of profit take into account any transfer or proposed transfer to reserves or to general provisions?(iii) should profit include pre- or post-extraordinary items?(iv) how should goodwill be treated?(v) should directors' emoluments in excess of an amount agreed with the investors be added back?(vi) should profit be defined before payment or the provision for payment of dividends?
The audited consolidated accounts for the year in question will be used as the gauge by which to determine the profits.
It may be necessary to provide for the possibility of a sale or flotation.
One method is for the participating dividend to be determined by reference to the profit as shown from the management accounts for that period.
An example of a clause providing for the payment of a participating dividend is: The Company shall after making all necessary provisions for payment of the Preference Dividend (including any Arrears) and the redemption of the Preference Shares but in priority to payment of any dividend to the holders of Ordinary Shares, pay to the holders of the Preferred Ordinary Shares as from(and inclusive of) the accounting period ending…, subject to payment in full of the Preferred Dividend (including any Arrears of the same) pay to the holders of Preferred Ordinary Shares a cumulative cash dividend ( "the Participating Dividend" ) of a sum (net of any advance corporation tax payable by the Company) equal to…% of the Profit After Tax for each accounting period of the Company; the Participating Dividend shall be deemed to accrue from day to day throughout each accounting period and shall become payable and be paid not later than four months immediately following the end of the accounting period to which it relates.
Ordinary shares
The ordinary shares are the equity provided to management and therefore rank last in priority (subject only to the deferred shares, which are often used for the purpose of a ratchet mechanism).
The ordinary shares will not provide the management with a fixed dividend, but usually carry the right to participate pari passu with the holders of the preferred ordinary shares in any additional dividends which may be declared in any year after the fixed and/or participating dividends on the preference shares and preferred ordinary shares have been paid.
The right is non-cumulative.
For example: After payment of the Preference Dividend and the Preferred Dividend payable in respect of each financial year of the Company (including any Arrears of the same) the Company shall [subject to provisions of clause…of the facility agreement]pay to the Ordinary Shareholders out of the balance of any profits available for distribution a non-cumulative dividend of such amount as the Company shall determine (but not exceeding the amount recommended by the Directors such recommendation to include the consent of the Investors' Director) on the capital from time to time paid up or credited as paid up on each Ordinary Share.
Article 102 of Table A gives the directors effective control over the amount of dividends declared.
It is therefore normal to provide in the Articles that the consent of the equity investor or its director will be required before the payment of any dividends.
Management will sometimes request a "catch-up dividend" before further dividends are paid to the preferred ordinary shareholders and ordinary shareholders.
It is possible to issue ordinary shares with a variety of rights, and management may, in certain circumstances, such as upon a proposed amendment to the Articles, request that the shares carry weighted votes to protect their minority position.
Deferred shares
It will be necessary to create deferred shares only if there is a ratchet (see below) in the Articles, where conversion, as opposed to redemption, is essential to the operation of the ratchet.
Deferred shares obviate a reduction of capital, and the rights attaching to them are negligible.
The "ratchet" 
A ratchet is a mechanism by which investors provide management with an incentive, in the form of equity enhanced in proportion to how well they perform.
Specimen provisions are set out in Appendix 4.
It is unlikely to be in the investors' interests to provide the entrepreneurs with as much as 20% or 25% of the equity at the outset.
One reason is that it may not leave sufficient motivation for the individuals to set about increasing the value of the company.
Moreover, if part of the equity were given in this way, it would immediately be subject to Schedule E income tax in the hands of the individuals—Sch30, para 19 Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
This liability would be payable even if the venture failed, and all the capital were lost.
By the use of the ratchet, the investors agree to share success with the management.
Ratchets can operate either upward or downward and can take various forms.
It is the terms for the conversion of the convertible redeemable preference shares that provide the mechanism whereby the interests of the management vary according to the company's performance.
These shares are held by the investors, and on the triggering of the ratchet—the achievement of certain projections or market capitalisation on a flotation, for example—all or some of the convertible redeemable preference shares will be redeemed; but if the results fall short of what is expected then they will be converted into ordinary shares and as a result increase the investor's share of the equity at the expense of the proportion held by management.
The ratchet is invariably geared to the rate of return which the investors  expect to receive on their equity and that usually depends on the expected market capitalisation of the company.
When acting for management, it is important to ensure that the ratchet is not entirely geared to the vagaries of the stock market in the event of a flotation, but also reflects the profitability of the company.
Other complicated structures are possible; these include performance-related options which would permit management to obtain more shares.
Share transfer provisions
Pre-emption rights
The Articles will include rights of pre-emption upon transfer which are appropriate to a private company.
Thus, any shares offered for sale must first be offered to other shareholders before they can be transferred to a third party.
The following supplementary provisions are likely to be included:
(1) Before any third party is registered as the transferee of shares he will be asked to execute a deed of adherence binding him to the terms of the subscription and shareholders' agreement.
This will be included in the subscription and shareholders' agreement as an obligation which the transferor must procure. (2) Exemption from the pre-emption provisions to allow: transfers within corporate groups: transfers to immediate relatives and family trusts; transfers by an investor which is a managed fund to other funds managed by the same investor; "warehousing" (subject to the control of the investor).
This is designed for the situation where it may be necessary to make the shares of a departing employee or director available to attract replacement management.
Mandatory transfer
The Articles usually provide that if an executive director or an employee holding shares ceases to be employed by Newco, he shall be deemed to have served a transfer notice in respect of his shares, effectively forcing him to sell.
This can often be harsh to an employee who may well have contributed fully to enhancing the value of the company and may wish to retain his shares; sometimes exceptions to a provision of this kind can be specified.
For example, management may be allowed to keep a proportion of their shares, such proportion rising as time passes.
Generally, though, the investor will be reluctant to allow the employee to retain the shares, preferring to negotiate the price upon which they are  transferred.
As a result it is common in mandatory transfer notice provisions to see "good and bad leader" provisions, so that management who "walk out" within a specified period after completion are penalised by receiving an amount equal to the lower of market value or the amount they initially subscribed.
This constitutes a penalty to the deserting management by depriving them of any uplift in the market value, and gives comfort to the investors about the level of commitment of the managers.
It can also be argued on behalf of management that transfer notices should not be mandatory if cessation of the executive's employment with the company results from wrongful dismissal, redundancy, retirement at normal age, retirement due to ill-health or disability or death; or if a majority of the non-executive directors and/or the directors so resolve with the investors' approval.
The following is an example of a typical clause: 1 In the event of a Manager ceasing to be either an employee or Director of the Company otherwise than by reason of dismissal, retirement [redundancy][or death], there shall be deemed to have been served a Transfer Notice in respect of his entire holding of shares [NB: should be defined to include all shares held by family trusts or nominees]and the price for such shares shall be the lower of cost and Market Value.
2 In the event of the Manager ceasing to be an employee or Director of the Company as a result of dismissal or retirement [or redundancy][or death]there shall be deemed to have been given a Transfer Notice in respect of his entire holding of shares and the price of such shares shall be:(a) if a dismissal or retirement [or redundancy][or death]shall occur prior to…the lower of cost and Market Value; or (b) if the dismissal or retirement [or death]shall occur at any time after…
Market Value; 3 In the event of the death of a Manager there shall be deemed to have been given a Transfer Notice in respect of his entire holding of shares and the price of such shares shall be the higher of cost and Market Value.
Transfer of control
It is not uncommon to provide in the Articles that if a transfer of a "controlling interest" is in contemplation, the proposed transferee should be obliged to extend to all other shareholders an offer to purchase their shares on like terms.
There is no fixed definition of "controlling interest" and it is usually  determined by negotiation, being either 50% or more or 30%.
Investors will usually agree to a provision of this kind, as most purchasers would in any event wish to purchase the entire company and not be left with minority shareholders.
It is often agreed as a balance against the more controversial "forced sale" provisions (see below) which are more frequently requested by investors.
For example: In the event that any person or persons who was or were not a member or members of the Company on the date of the adoption of these Articles ( "the Acquiring Member" ) either alone or in concert (as such expression is defined in the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers) with any other person(s), shall become beneficially entitled to more than [50]% of the issued Ordinary Share Capital of the Company after the date of adoption of these Articles he shall forthwith be required to serve notice on each of the holders of the Ordinary Share Capital of the Company that he is so beneficially entitled and shall thereupon be bound to offer to purchase the remaining shares in the Ordinary Share Capital of the Company at a price per share ( "the Acquisition Price" ) equal to the highest price per share paid by the Acquiring Member for such shares in the Company acquired by him.
Against the possibility that the acquiring member fails to extend the offer, the following remedy can be provided for: If the Acquiring Member shall fail to serve a notice or make an offer in accordance with Article…(or, if and to the extent that the offer is accepted, the Acquiring Member shall fail to complete the purchase of any shares pursuant to the offer) he (and any member with whom he is acting in concert as provided in Article…) shall cease to have any rights to vote or to dividends in respect of all the shares held by him and the Directors may where relevant refuse to register the transfer of the shares acquired by the Acquiring Member which give rise to the obligations under Article…and may require the Acquiring Member to serve a Transfer Notice in respect of all or any of the shares held by him.
Forced sale
Any would-be future purchaser of Newco is likely to want to acquire the entire issued share capital of the company, and the investor looking for an exit will be reluctant to allow management or any other minority shareholder to frustrate this intention.
Moreover, the presence of unco-operative minority shareholders may well affect the price a purchaser is prepared to offer.
Accordingly, the investor may seek to include a provision whereby if the investor wishes to sell a specified percentage of the equity, then the other shareholders must follow suit and sell at the same price per share.
An example is set out below: 1 If the Majority holder(s) of [Ordinary Share Capital/ "A" Ordinary Shares](for the purposes of this Article ( "the Seller" )) intends to sell [all/part/…%]of its holding of [shares of the Ordinary Share Capital/ "A" Ordinary Shares](or any interest in such shares)(the shares to be sold by the Seller being referred to as "selling Shares" ) the Seller shall give to the Company not less than 14 days' notice in advance before selling the Selling Shares.
That notice ( "the Selling Notice" ) will include details of the Selling Shares and the proposed price for each Selling Share to be paid by the proposed purchaser ( "the Proposed Purchaser" ), details of the Proposed Purchaser, the place, date and time of completion of the proposed purchase being a date not less than 14 days from the date of the Selling Notice ( "Completion" ).
2 Immediately upon receipt of the Selling Notice, the Company shall give notice in writing (a "Compulsory Sale Notice" ) to each of the members (other than the Seller) giving the details contained in the Selling Notice, requiring them each to sell to the Proposed Purchaser at Completion [all of their holdings of [ "A" Ordinary Shares and Ordinary Shares]/[such proportion of their holdings of [ "A" Ordinary Shares and Ordinary Shares]as is equal to the proportion which the Selling Shares bears to the total holding of [shares in the Ordinary Share Capital/ "A" Ordinary Shares]held by the Seller (including the Selling Shares)].
3 Each member who is given a Compulsory Sale Notice shall sell all of his shares referred to in the Compulsory Sale Notice at the highest price for the same class per Selling Share to be sold to the Proposed Purchaser on Completion by the Seller.
4 If any of the member(s) ( "the Defaulting Member(s)" ) fails to comply with the terms of a Compulsory Sale Notice given to him, the Company shall be constituted the agent of each Defaulting Member for the sale of his shares in accordance with the Compulsory Sale Notice (together with all rights then attached thereto) and the Directors may authorise some person to execute and deliver on behalf of each Defaulting Member the necessary transfer(s) and the Company may receive the purchase money in trust for each of the Defaulting Members and cause the Proposed Purchaser to be registered as the holder of such shares.
The receipt of the Company for the purchase money, pursuant to such transfers, shall constitute a good and valid discharge to the Proposed Purchaser (who shall not be bound to see to the application thereof) and after the Proposed Purchaser has been registered in purported exercise of the aforesaid powers the validity  of the proceedings shall not be questioned by any person.
The Company shall not pay the purchase money to a Defaulting Member until he shall in respect of the shares being the subject of the Compulsory Sale Notice have delivered his share certificates or a suitable indemnity and the necessary transfers to the Company.
Provided that all the members comply with each Compulsory Sale Notice, the Seller shall sell the Selling Shares to the Proposed Purchaser on Completion, subject at all times to the Seller being able to withdraw the Selling Notice at any time prior to Completion by giving notice to the Company to that effect, whereupon each Compulsory Transfer Notice shall cease to have effect.
All parties will have been aware from the inception of the management buy-out that the investor would seek to realise its investment as soon after the buy-out as an appropriate return on investment could be achieved.
Nevertheless, a clause of the kind described above offers management little protection should the investor come under unexpected pressure to realise some of its investments early, or if new management at the institution believes that the company does not fit well into its portfolio.
If the management's lawyers are not successful in removing a provision of this kind, then its effect can be mitigated by amendment so that it will apply only after an agreed period of time, for example five years, or with the consent of an agreed percentage of the members; the latter may be appropriate where the investment has been syndicated.
Sale and purchase agreement
It is not within the scope of this book to discuss the sale and purchase agreement in any detail.
The subject is covered extremely well in both W G L Knight's book The Acquisition of Private Companies and I Paterson's Private Company Share Sale Manual.
However, it is worth making a few points that are relevant to acquisitions involving management buy-outs.
Timing
A management buy-out is a good example of cases where it may be advantageous to have a gap between exchange and completion.
This allows a number of things to take place:(a) the investors can progress or complete the syndication of the investment;(b) inter-group accounts and guarantees can be resolved;(c) Newco can set up its own pension scheme or organise the provision of services that have in the past been provided by the vendors.
Inter-group balances
Most management buy-outs involve the purchase of a division of a group of companies.
Almost certainly that division will have been financed by loans from the parent company.
Groups of companies generally organise pooling arrangements with their bankers so that all cash balances are aggregated and interest paid on the net difference only.
Unravelling such arrangements can often be complicated, and would need to be provided for in the sale and purchase agreement.
The difficulty is that the group arrangements may be conducted on a daily basis, making it difficult to calculate an exact balance on the morning of completion.
It may be possible to close the accounts a few days before completion and open separate bank accounts.
The approach varies from transaction to transaction.
Guarantees
Guarantees in favour of third parties given by the vendor on behalf of Target, which Target will wish to transfer to Newco, can give rise to problems.
Newco will have heavy borrowings and a large number of preference shares, which means that its ability to give guarantees is low, and will almost certainly be lower than that of the vendors.
The obvious answer is for the vendors to keep the guarantees in place, with Newco providing a counter-indemnity.
However, vendors rarely find this acceptable, if only because the fact that the guarantee is then given to a third party may mean it has to be dealt with as a separate note in the balance sheet.
Again, the answer varies from transaction to transaction.
The financiers may be willing to step in and provide the requisite guarantees, though at a cost.
Future trading relationships
The Target, if part of a larger group, will have depended on the group for certain services (such as accounting and computer services), which it will now have to provide for itself.
It may be that the vendors and Newco can agree to continue these services until Newco is able to operate independently.
Warranties
One of the purposes of warranties is, as has been seen, to trigger disclosures so that Newco, the management and the investors can see precisely what  they are buying.
Without such warranties, the purchaser will be at risk of liabilities arising out of matters which have not been disclosed.
In addition, in a management buy-out, the institutional investor's due diligence report will have been prepared from information provided by the vendors or the management.
Moreover, it is becoming increasingly common for banks to request, as part of the security package, for an assignment of the warranties given by the vendors.
The vendors' first response to a request for warranties is likely to be that they should not be required to give any because the management knows far more about the day-to-day running of the company than they do.
Even if that problem can be overcome, the vendors often then make a blanket disclosure to the effect that everything known to the management is disclosed against the warranties.
This is obviously unacceptable to the investors.
Warranties are about risk.
Vendors who are selling at a substantial price (including an element for goodwill), which has been agreed between the parties on the basis of certain assumptions made by the purchasers regarding the business, are compensated for any risk that they will be asked to take.
Nevertheless, unless the transaction is a management buy-in, for which it is appropriate to ask for a full set of warranties, a reasonable compromise is for the vendor to give the purchaser a set of warranties shorter than normally appropriate on a share sale.
To ask for more can be counter-productive; management may later be able to make a bargaining point of the fact that Newco has sought only those warranties that are required to satisfy the investors.
Warranties that would normally be required by a purchaser relate to accounts, events since the balance-sheet date, litigation, insurance, employees, intellectual property and the ability of Target to generate future cash flow and profits and protect the goodwill.
These are dealt with in more detail in Chapter 3.
During negotiations, Newco should try to avoid any general qualification that the warranties are given to the best of the vendors' knowledge, as this could be interpreted to the effect that a vendor giving a warranty subject to this qualification has relied on the information given to him by management, and again distances the vendor from the risk.
A detailed discussion of warranties can be found in N Sinclair's book, Warranties and Indemnities on Share Sales.
Service agreements
The purpose of service agreements is to protect both parties.
They protect the managers by giving them some overall security of employment and a remuneration package, usually including a pension, a car and other  benefits.
The managers will wish to negotiate a salary which will allow them to meet interest payments on any borrowings to purchase their equity without reducing their standard of living.
However, salary is a cost to the business and therefore reduces profit.
The ratchet, discussed earlier, is nearly always geared to profit and so if the managers take out too much in the early days, they may adversely affect their interests in the medium term.
The investors are investing in the management and need to be protected against the possibility of their leaving at will.
This is done in the service agreements, the subscription and shareholders' agreement, and in the Articles of Association.
Thus:(1) There will be a "whole time and attention" clause in the service agreement whereby managers agree to spend all their time on the business and, subject to one or two exceptions, not to have any outside business interests during the course of their employment.
(2) The service agreement will include a restrictive covenant against competition after completion.
Present employment law restricts the effect of such a covenant in a service agreement, but if inserted in the subscription and shareholders' agreement, it is more likely to be enforceable. (3) The service agreement will be for a fixed term so that the managers are locked in for that period.
(4) Certain consequences will ensue if the managers choose to leave early of their own volition.
The most important of these will be specified in the Articles of Association, and may well oblige the manager to sell his shares at a price probably less than market value.
Most directors take more interest in the negotiation of the service contract than in any other document, and understandably so.
One of their particular concerns is the procedure for changes in the remuneration package.
The investors' non-executive director will normally have the final say, which is probably appropriate, particularly if there is a large syndicate of institutions.
Alternatively, remuneration changes may be in the remit of a remuneration committee consisting of non-executive directors.
Key points
Time should be spent early in the negotiations concentrating on the conditions precedent and determining how they are to be satisfied.
The tax consequences of any keyman insurance need to be appreciated.
When negotiating on behalf of the management the warranties being requested by the investor, a compromise that gives the investor the comfort it requires, without undue pressure on the management, is to  be sought; the management and the investor will have a continuing relationship following completion of the transaction.
If the investor is to syndicate, the management and its advisers should try to play some part in the selection of additional investors; if an additional director is to be appointed by the syndicate, that director ought to be selected for the experience and talent he can bring to Newco.
Advisers to the managers should consider carefully the conditions attaching to their shareholdings, and the transfer provisions should they leave the company.
A 'sell alongside"clause, whereby any offer made for more than 30% or 50% of the shares should be extended to all members, may be appropriate.
Advisers for an investor should consider introducing a "forced sale" clause.
It may be beneficial to have separate exchange and completion.
When purchasing from a group, arrangements must be made to calculate and clear intra-group accounts.
Newco should consider whether it requires any continuing services to be provided by the vendor.