

Supply of Goods and Services
Basic principles
1.1 Introduction
The first Part of this book deals with standard sets of conditions covering various relationships that can arise in the context of the supply of goods and services in the course of a business, ranging from short form standard conditions for the supply of goods and the provision of services, to a full contract for the supply of a turnkey system.
The negotiation of the contractual terms of such relationships is all too often regarded as a contest in which the supplier attempts to exclude the maximum possible liability to the customer, and the customer to impose the maximum possible liability on the supplier; the only rules are those imposed by the Unfair Contract Terms Act, and the contest is finally decided by the relative bargaining power of the two parties.
From a commercial point of view, this is not the most fruitful way to approach a continuing business relationship, since it normally leaves one of the parties unsatisfied with the deal that was struck.
It is far better to look upon the purpose of such negotiations as to define the risks which each party is willing to accept, and what benefits or rewards he requires from the other party in order to accept those risks.
For instance, at the most basic level, the higher the profit margin the supplier receives for performing a contract, the greater the liability he can reasonably be asked to accept for failure to perform as promised.
Following from these considerations, Chapters 2 and 3 both contain precedents for use in non-consumer transactions, prepared from the point of view of the supplier and the customer respectively, to show examples of the different approaches that each party has in a situation where he has the preponderance of bargaining power, and wishes to use it.
Chapter 4 sets out, by way of contrast, an approach to the allocation of risk and reward between the parties, based on a compromise which attempts to satisfy the reasonable aspirations of both parties.
Such compromises are particularly important where the parties are embarking on the long-term and complicated relationship required for the supply of a turnkey system.
Chapter 5, finally, deals with some aspects of contracting with consumers.
Nevertheless, whether the parties want compromise or a contest, their legal  advisers cannot satisfy them without a thorough knowledge of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 ( "UCTA" ), and of the underlying principles contained in the Sale of Goods Act 1979 ( "SGA" ), and the Supply of Goods And Services Act 1982 ( "SGSA" ).
The latter two Acts will be referred to as necessary in this and the following chapters, and, needless to say, no legal adviser should be without copies of these Acts, as well as a standard reference work on the subject, when drafting conditions or contracts for the supply of goods and services.
However, the UCTA is so intimately connected with the process of negotiation and drafting in the areas covered by the next four chapters that, as a preliminary to detailed analysis of the precedents, it was felt essential to lay out the principles contained in the UCTA and discuss their application in the light of the case law that has evolved in the 15 years or so since the UCTA came into effect.
The UCTA is concerned to regulate the use of clauses which exclude liability for failure to perform, for certain other types of tortious acts, and for failure to comply with certain warranties implied into contracts for the supply of goods and services under the SGA and SGSA (for instance as to good title under the SGA).
The UCTA covers not only clauses which exclude such liability in whole, but also those which exclude or restrict it partially (eg a limitation as to the monetary amount to be paid by way of compensation for such a liability when incurred).
For the purposes of this chapter such clauses are generally called "exemption clauses" and references to "exclusion" of liability include partial exclusion or restriction as well as total exclusion.
1.2 Basic rationale of the UCTA
In dealing with exemption clauses the UCTA has three possible reactions: the imposition of a total ban on all exemption clauses of that category; the imposition of a ban on all such clauses unless in the circumstances the clause satisfies the criterion of "reasonableness" ; and no imposition of a ban at all.
The relevant factors in deciding how the UCTA deals with an exemption clause are: the type of contract, the identity of the parties, the subject matter of the contract, and the presence or absence of a foreign element.
These factors can be broken down into a number of sets for the purposes of different sections of the UCTA, and probably form the most useful framework under which to analyse its effect.
They can be summarised as follows:
(a) Types of contract:
(i) all contracts;
(ii) all contracts where the party ( "businessman" ) seeking to rely on the exemption clause entered into the contract in the course of a business (except those businesses excluded under Sched 1 to the UCTA—basically those which have some other form of statutory regulation such as insurance contracts, contracts for the carriage of goods by sea, or contracts  whose subject matter is specialised, and which therefore have a particular body of law governing them, such as real property or intellectual property).
( "Business contracts" );
(iii) all contracts for sale or hire purchase of goods;
(iv) all business contracts for sale or hire purchase of goods;
(v) all contracts for the hire or barter of goods, and for the supply of labour and materials;
(vi) all business contracts for the hire or barter of goods, and for the supply of labour and materials.
(b) Identity of parties: Party relying on clause Party protected by UCTA
(i) any party any party
(ii) businessman any party
(iii) businessman non-consumer (standard terms)
(iv) businessman non-consumer (negotiated terms)
(v) businessman consumer
(c) Subject matter of the contract:
(i) all goods in general (ii) goods ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption ( "consumer goods" ).
(d) Foreign element:
(i) contracts containing governing law clauses;
(ii) international contracts for the supply of goods;
(iii) contracts regulated by certain international conventions.
In addition to the regulation of exemption clauses, the UCTA also makes some alterations to the general law of contract in relation to the contracts affected by it, and regulates the exclusion of tortious liability, in business situations, for death, personal injury or other damage caused by negligence.
Although this regulation of tortious liability is not of itself a contractual issue, there are some situations where it has great importance for business contracts, for instance in the area of pre-contract negotiations.
1.3 The test of reasonableness under the UCTA
The definition of "reasonableness" applied by the UCTA is the key to understanding its approach to exemption clauses in general.
Section 11(1) applies the test of reasonableness to an exemption clause by asking whether it is a "fair and reasonable [exemption clause]to be included having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made" .
It is for the party who claims that a clause satisfies the test of reasonableness to show that it does (s 11(5)).
Section 11 reverses the previous legislation on the subject in the Misrepresentation Act 1967, and the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, as well as the English Law Commission's initial recommendation on the subject.
There the test to be applied was what was fair and reasonable "in all the circumstances of the case" .
The test now embodied in the UCTA is thus a hypothetical test, which requires the court to put itself in the position of the parties as they were (and with the state of knowledge which they had) at the time when the contract was made.
This prevents the court looking at the actual circumstances surrounding the breach in question.
This hypothetical test was preferred on the grounds that it gave rise to less uncertainty, and avoided the possibility of the court acting on the basis of hindsight.
The Scottish Law Commission, for instance, criticised the previous test as being "a judicial dispensing power exercised possibly in the light of unforeseeable events subsequent in date to the contract" .
In other words "hard cases make bad law" .
The definition of what is "fair and reasonable" has, however, given rise to some problems.
Firstly, it seems that in practice the word "fair" adds little if anything to the definition, and that the courts have tended to focus in practice on what is "reasonable" .
Secondly, there are some express guidelines in the UCTA, but these are far from complete, are only indicative, and impose no restriction on the other matters which the court can take into account.
Section 11(4) requires regard to be had to the financial resources of a party claiming the protection of an exemption clause which limits liability by reference to a specified sum of money, and also to the extent to which he could cover his liability by insurance.
Schedule 2 contains some express guidelines for all contracts relating to the supply of goods, which inevitably have influenced thinking about reasonableness in relation to all types of contracts.
They are:(1) The relative bargaining strength of the parties.
(2) Whether the customer received an inducement to accept the exemption clause.
(3) Whether the customer knew or ought reasonably to have known of the term.
(4) Whether the customer could have found another party who would have contracted without the exemption clause.
(5) Where the term excludes liability if some condition is not complied with, whether it was reasonable at time of contract to expect that such condition could be complied with.
(6) Whether the goods were made or adapted to special order for the customer.
Additional guidelines were also mentioned in the Law Commission Report which led to the enactment of UCTA (Report No 69, pp 71–73), which can be summarised as follows:(1) Which party can most reasonably insure. (2) "Force majeure" clauses are prima facie likely to be reasonable.
(3) When looking at clauses which require compliance with time limits (eg a time limit for notifying a warranty claim after a defect is discovered in goods supplied under the contract) the question to ask is whether the time limit has been imposed from a genuine need to protect the other party's position, or whether it is there to make it difficult, or practically impossible, for the other party to exercise its rights under the clause.
(4) Which party has the most experience in the transaction.
(5) To what extent has one party relied on the other's advice.
It was expected that case law would give rise to sufficient precedents to flesh out the relatively few guidelines available under UCTA, but in fact cases have been few and not very helpful.
The dictum in the Mogul SS case ((1889) 23 QBD 598 CA) equating reasonableness with "the good sense of the tribunal" still seems to come closest to the mark.
The current cases have not resulted in rigid definitions of reasonableness.
The court at first instance can always distinguish except in very similar cases, and appeal is not easy unless a judgment is so unreasonable as to be perverse.
(Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803).
The cases have thus at best produced further guidelines as to the sort of factors to be taken into account.
Firstly, it does seem that consumers are more likely to succeed in an assertion that a clause is unreasonable than a commercial undertaking.
(Cf Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827 and R & B Customs Brokers Ltd v UDT Finance Ltd [1988]1 All ER 847.)
Secondly, in general courts are more favourably disposed to clauses which limit liability rather than those which completely exclude it (Cf Rasbora Ltd v JCL Marine Ltd [1977]1 Lloyd's Rep 645 and RW Green Ltd v Cade Bros Farm [1978]1 Lloyd's Rep 602.)
One of the most useful cases is Geo Mitchell where the limitation of liability was by reference to the purchase price.
It was clear from the type of contract entered into (purchase of seed to grow a commercial crop to be sold for profit) that the likely loss, caused if the defendants supplied defective seed, would exceed the purchase price by such an amount (namely the value of the ultimate crop) that the limitation really amounted to a total exclusion of liability.
The defendants could have found product liability insurance easily,(see also on this point Flamar Interocean Ltd v Denmac [1990]1 Lloyds Rep 434.) and the term was universal in the trade (but had never been negotiated by any trade association) so that the plaintiff had no opportunity of obtaining product on other terms.
Additionally, the defendants had of their own accord not relied on the clause in other customer disputes, which showed that they themselves tended to regard its limitation as unreasonable.
Under these circumstances the House of Lords found the clause unreasonable.
Cases have also been helpful on some points of detail.
Too tight time limits are likely to be unreasonable (see Green, above) as is small print, and unnecessarily convoluted drafting (see Stag Line Ltd v Tyne Ship Repair Group Ltd [1984]2 Lloyd's Rep 211).
Finally, in Harris v Wyre Forest District Council [1989]2 All ER 514, a case concerned with a disclaimer of liability in a surveyor's report, a variety of factors were taken into account in deciding reasonableness.
The main point of the case was that it involved domestic property where the client would suffer (as a private purchaser) a relatively great loss if the report were negligent, while the risk that would have been undertaken by the surveyor, if he had accepted liability for negligence, would have been relatively low, since it was a routine survey of domestic property, and for him, as a businessman, the value of the property in question was not relatively a great amount of money.
In any event, as a businessman, he could have taken out professional indemnity insurance against the risk without difficulty.
The court commented that the situation could have been different if the property concerned was of a very high value, or of an unusual nature,(eg industrial property) so as to impose too great a risk upon the surveyor if he accepted liability.
Again, presumably, the fact that the plaintiff was a consumer also affected the result.
1.4 General effects of the UCTA
The UCTA has, in the area of commercial transactions, had most impact where standard form contracts are in use, and very little in arms-length, one-off negotiated contracts where the parties are presumed to have access to proper legal advice, and to be able to take care of themselves.
However, it is certainly still possible to see many sets of standard terms which contain clauses which could well be either banned or subject to the reasonableness test under the Act.
In part this is due not to ignorance of the Act, but rather to the not unreasonable proposition that, since the Act prescribes no penalty for inserting such clauses, in cases of doubt it is better to have the clause present "in terrorem" , even if, in the ultimate event of legal proceedings, it is held invalid.
The most obvious sign of the Act's influence is the presence of statements along the lines of "this guarantee does not affect your statutory rights" which are now added in close proximity to all consumer guarantees.
The practice in fact originally arose out of the combined effect of the Sale of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 and the Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976 (SI 1976 No 1813) made under the Fair Trading Act 1973.
However, it was the great increase in statutory rights granted to consumers under the UCTA which caused the practice to become so widespread.
These provisions have been one of the major forces responsible for the complete change in standard terms and conditions for dealing with consumers that came in after the passing of the UCTA.
Because of them, unlike the case of business  contracts discussed above, the practice of the insertion of possibly invalid or unreasonable exclusion clauses "in terrorem" is not possible in consumer contracts, since failure to notify a consumer of his statutory rights, or misleading him as to what they are, is a criminal offence.
Thus, as was intended, the Act has had most impact on consumer transactions, and its effect, together with the Consumer Protection Act 1987, has been to make it hardly worthwhile to exclude liability in consumer transactions.
The more fruitful course is not to promise to undertake liability in the first place (to the extent that the law permits this) rather than to make promises and exclude liability for their subsequent breach.
For the rest, the only refuge is in insurance.
The particular approach to consumer contracts for the supply of goods and services will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
1.5 A detailed analysis of the UCTA
Having dealt with the general principles of the UCTA it is now possible to analyse its effect in detail on various contractual relationships using as a framework the definitions and different combinations of the factors set out above in the section devoted to the basic rationale of the UCTA.
1.5.1 Party protected by UCTA: any party.
Category of contract: all contracts.
Section 8 of the UCTA provides that there can be no exclusion of liability for misrepresentation prior to entry into a contract under the Misrepresentation Act 1967, s 3 or the Misrepresentation (Northern Ireland) Act 1967, s 3 unless the exemption clause passes the test of reasonableness.
This provision has most application in the area of whole agreement (or entire agreement) clauses which limit the bounds of the relationship of the parties to the particular contract in question.
Such clauses exclude all prior representations and negotiations, and, usually, ancillary documentation, such as sales literature, as well.
Under the test, the question is how reasonable such clauses are at the time the contract is made.
They should not be put in automatically, but only after consideration as to the circumstances surrounding the formation of the contract.
The situation where such clauses are most likely to be reasonable is one where prior negotiations have been complex, with many oral discussions and lots of paper work passing between the parties, so that it is equally to the advantage of both parties to create certainty by describing all of their rights and liabilities in one defined set of documents and excluding all extraneous issues.
A further factor which would tend to make such clauses reasonable would be adequate protection by warranties in the final express contract documents.
Finally, probably the most decisive factor of all is whether both parties were properly  advised legally, and equally skilled technically and commercially, so that they should have been capable of adequately assessing the risks and rewards they were undertaking in the transactions and of producing a contract document which properly reflected this.
1.5.2Party protected by UCTA: any party.
Category of contract: all business contracts
Section 2(1) of the UCTA imposes a complete ban on any exemption clause giving protection against liability for death or personal injury caused by negligence.
Section 2(2) prevents the use of an exemption clause to escape liability for other loss or damage (in general this is taken to refer to property damage and economic loss) caused by negligence, unless the clause can satisfy the test of reasonableness.
There is some question as to the true extent of s 2.
First of all it is necessary to decide the type of party whose attempts to exclude liability are regulated by the section.
Here s 1, which defines the application of various parts of the UCTA, must be looked at.
Sections 2! 5 of the UCTA apply only to "business liability" , which is defined by s 1(3) as "liability for breach of obligations or duties arising (a) from things done or to be done by a person in the course of a business (whether his own or another's); and (b) from the occupation of premises used for business purposes of the occupier" .
This sort of liability can obviously only be incurred by someone acting in the course of a business (a "businessman" ).
Where the contract is between a businessman and a party who is not a businessman, usually a consumer, it seems from s 1(3) (a) that the businessman will incur "business liability" (and hence is caught by s 2(1)), while the other party cannot incur "business liability" , since by definition he is not acting in the course of a business, and therefore will not be caught by the section.
Obviously where no party to the contract is acting as a businessman,(eg sale of a secondhand car between two natural persons by way of private treaty) the contract cannot be a business contract (as defined above), neither party can incur "business liability" , and both parties can exclude liability without reference to the section.
However, where both parties are acting as businessmen, both parties could in theory incur "business liability" , and thus become subject to s 2(1).
Take installation of machinery at a factory.
The installer is caught under s 1(3) (a).
The factory owner may possibly be caught under the same provision, and he can certainly be caught in respect of occupier's liability for business premises under s 1(3) (b).
The second problem is to decide whether a particular exemption clause relating to liability for death or personal injury is to be dealt with under s 2(1) or 2(2).
Where the exemption clause seeks to exclude such liability suffered by a party to the contract (the "innocent party" ) who is a natural person (most usually, but not always, a consumer), because of the negligence of the other party (the "party in default" )(whether or not a natural person), then s 2(1) clearly applies, and the exemption clause will be regarded as void for the benefit of the innocent party should he suffer such personal injury or death.
However, the other category of liability for personal injury or death which the party in default can seek to pass on to the innocent party is that relating to claims made against the party in default by third parties, who have suffered death or personal injury by reason of the negligence of the party in default.
Exemption clauses shifting liability,(from the party in default to the innocent party) for third party claims of this nature relate in fact (as between the parties to the contract, and whether or not they are natural persons) to economic loss, so that s 2(2) will apply rather than s 2(1).
Here the basic question is who (as between the parties to the contract) will indemnify the third party.
Such clauses have no effect on the primary liability to the third party for the death or personal injury he has suffered.
This liability is owed to the third party in tort by the party in default, and the terms of the contract between the party in default and the innocent party can have no effect on it.
Some case law was required in this area to supplement the bare provisions of the UCTA.
First, the simple clause which seeks to exclude liability for death or personal injury caused by the party in default to the innocent party can only have applic ation where the innocent party is a natural person.
Such a clause is clearly banned under s 2(1).
The only other type of clause which operates to shift liability is a counter-indemnity whereby the innocent party ( "indemnifier" ) indemnifies the party in default ( "indemnitee" ) for any claim made in respect of death or personal injury caused by the indemnitee's own negligence.
Here two cases are possible.
If the indemnifier is a natural person, the death or personal injury in question could either be suffered by the indemnifier himself, or by a third party who has suffered it by reason of the indemnitee's negligence and is claiming against the indemnitee in tort.
If the indemnifier is not a natural person, only the situation relating to third party claims can arise.
Section 4 of the UCTA subjects any such counter-indemnity granted by a consumer to the test of reasonableness, so that in cases other than death or personal injury the situation is identical to that subsisting under s 2(2) but this left the operation of s 2 (1) unclear in relation to a counter-indemnity granted by a consumer in respect of death or personal injury suffered by himself.
It was not settled whether the indemnity be void under s 2(1) or only subject to a reasonableness test under s 4.
The general situation with regard to such counter-indemnities granted by businessmen was also unclear.
Were they somehow caught by s 2, or, because s 4 had no application, did they fall outside the Act?
Phillips Products Ltd v Hyland [1978]2 All ER 620 solved the problem in respect of all such counter-indemnities, where the loss or damage was suffered personally by the indemnifier, whether or not a consumer.
They were to be treated as exclusion clauses.
Their effect was to cause the indemnifier to suffer the loss or damage caused by the indemnitee's negligence towards the indemnifier.
This was tantamount to an exclusion of the liability otherwise owed by the indemnitee to the indemnifier in respect of the indemnitee's negligence.
Therefore, counter-indemnities relating to death or personal injury suffered by the indemnifier were void under s 2(1), without the need to consider s 4, and all counter-indemnities relating to other loss or damage suffered directly by the indemnifier were subject to the reasonableness test under s 2(2), and/or s 4 if the indemnifier was a consumer.
However, where the indemnifier grants an indemnity to the indemnitee (under a contract between them) in respect of third party claims made against the indemnitee by reason of the indemnitee's own negligence, different considerations arise.
First, if the indemnifier is a consumer, then s 4 (which regulates all indemnities granted by consumers, whoever the indemnitee) subjects the clause to the test of reasonableness.
In the case of an indemnifier who is not a consumer, the question to be asked is whether, in the absence of the indemnity, the indemnitee would have been obliged at common law to compensate the indemnifier for the economic loss suffered as a result of having to pay out on the third party claim.
If no such obligation existed then the indemnity is not transferring liability, and falls outside the Act (See Thompson v T Lohan (Plant Hire) Ltd (J W Hurdiss Ltd third party)[1987]2 All ER 631.)
The situation is otherwise where there is an underlying liability owed by the indemnitee to the indemnifier, so that in the absence of the indemnity the indemnitee would be legally obliged to compensate the indemnifier for the economic loss suffered as a result of the third party claim.
A good example is a manufacturer who sells to a reseller and requires the reseller to grant him an indemnity in respect of third party claims for product liability made against the manufacturer arising in relation to the products of the manufacturer that are sold on by the reseller.
In the absence of such an indemnity, the manufacturer would be legally obliged to compensate the reseller for product liability claims made by the reseller's customers as a result of products which were defective due to the manufacturer's negligent workmanship.
Section 2(1) can have no application in these circumstances, since any liability owed to a third party victim who suffers the death or personal injury remains unaffected by the indemnity (Thompson).
Nevertheless, such an indemnity, whether relating to third party claims based on death, personal injury or damage, still acts to shift liability for economic loss, thus acts as an exclusion clause, and should therefore be controlled under s 2(2) (Phillips).
Leaving aside the position of the consumer who is party to a business contract, who clearly needs some special protection, the question of exemption clauses under s 2 is not merely one of regulating an unfair desire on the part of a party to exclude liability for his own negligence.
It is much more concerned with the question, as between two businessmen, and their insurers, as to which side shall accept liability and insure for a particular risk.
As an example, property insurance is cheaper than liability insurance, so that it makes more sense, for instance, for a site-owner to insure against the fire risk  of a fire caused by an installer, under fire insurance, than it does for the installer to insure against liability for causing the same risk, under a public liability or contractor's all risks policy.
In any case, since the site-owner and his insurer will never be sure they can prove the liability of the installer, the existence of the installer's liability cover will not reduce the fire premium, so that the only alternative to the site-owner bearing the risk will be double insurance, which benefits neither side.
(Also, just because of the difficulty of proving who caused the damage, fire insurers generally find it easier to give the necessary consent to waiver of their subrogation rights, without which the arrangements could not work.)
Where only death or personal injury are concerned, the need for counter-indemnities in the context of insurance is not as great.
Each side will probably already be covered under appropriate employers', occupiers' and public liability policies, and, since the liability to be covered in each side's case is the same type, the shift from one side to the other will not result in an overall increase of premiums.
Indeed, in most cases there is no effect at all on the premium as these sort of policies give cover of a type that will not result in a reduced premium just because a few people more or less are covered at any one time in a particular situation.
Insurance considerations will not be very relevant in deciding whether to exclude liability (for loss or damage other than death or personal injury) to a consumer to the extent that it is regarded as reasonable under s 4 and permitted under s 2(2).
Even if the consumer can cover the risk by insurance, the position is much more complicated for him, and his insurers are going to be less likely to waive their rights of subrogation, without which his assumption of liability and his taking on of the insurance for the risk will not work.
Finally, s 2(3) should be noted.
It provides for a partial abolition of the rule "volenti non fit injuria" , without which ss 2(1) and 2(2) could not properly operate.
The rule states that willing, knowledgeable assumption of a risk, freely undertaken, bars the right to compensation if damage is suffered as a result.
The rule is used basically in tort, but it can also apply in contract (Chapman v Ellesmere [1932]2 KB 431).
The point of s 2(3) is to spell out clearly the restrictions on the operation of the doctrine.
At common law awareness plus action which implied consent was often enough (Smith v Baker [1891]AC 325).
Section 2(3) seems to go further by saying that just because a party has entered into a contract with a term imposing risk on him, this "is not of itself to be taken as indicating his voluntary acceptance" of that risk.
This, of course, would be particularly applicable in standard term contracts, or where there was a marked inequality in bargaining power.
There is some argument that the UCTA is doing no more than spell out a rule about what is really voluntary acceptance, which is already in the common law (ICI v Shatwell [1965]AC 656).
The provision as drafted is not entirely clear, and the use of the words "is not of itself to be taken" might be construed to imply that some other type of truly  voluntary acceptance could override s 2(1) or 2(2) by the operation of the rule.
The Law Commission's original suggested draft sections (para 132-135 of Report No 69) were clearer in that they specifically stated the purpose of preventing the enforcement of clauses, invalid under the preceding sub-sections, by calling in the rule.
1.5.3 Party protected by UCTA: consumers.
Category of contract: all business contracts
Sections 3(1) and 3(2) of the UCTA prevent the use of an exemption clause to exclude liability for breach, deviation or failure to perform a contract, in whole or part, unless it satisfies the test of reasonableness.
Section 3(2) (a) restricts the exclusion of liability for breach when the party relying on the clause is actually in breach.
Therefore this section cannot catch clauses which define the obligations to be performed under the contract in a restrictive way.
As an example, contrast a contract to paint the whole of a house, but containing a clause exempting the contractor from liability if he fails to paint certain parts (caught under s 3(2) (a)), and a contract to paint a whole house with the exception of certain parts (not caught).
Section 3(2) (b)(ii) restricts clauses permitting a party to render no performance in respect of contractual obligations.
The same points apply as to s 3(2) (a).
The really important provision is s 3(2) (b)(i), restricting exclusion of liability to perform what is reasonably expected of the party concerned under the contract.
The Law Commission said (Report No 69, p175) "In [this]case the terms of the contract will not be decisive—regard will be had to all the circumstances" .
The strict construction of the contract is thus not the conclusive factor.
Again, as an example, take two parties agreeing to the painting of a house, where, in law, the contract finally made amounts only to an obligation to exercise reasonable endeavours to paint the house.
The question to be answered is what was the consumer reasonably expecting, not what are his strict legal rights.
For instance, if the clause imposing the obligation only to exercise reasonable endeavours were hidden away in a set of standard terms on the back of a quotation offering in unequivocal terms to paint the house, and the job was otherwise obviously a straightforward one, it is hard to see how reliance on the clause would be reasonable.
However, where the job was a very difficult one involving areas where it might be impossible to gain access even with scaffolding, and the reservation had been specifically drawn to the consumer's attention, then it would seem reasonable to rely on the clause.
Before discussing in more detail the types of exclusion clauses that are likely to pass the reasonableness test under s 3, one preliminary point must be made.
Before the court even has to consider the reasonableness of an exclusion clause, the party relying on the clause has to convince the court that the clause is drafted in such a way that it covers the breach in question.
Liability for any type of breach arising from any cause, including total failure to perform caused by wilful default, can (leaving aside the impact of s 3 of the UCTA) be excluded, provided the clause is drafted widely enough.
Section 9 of the UCTA provides for the partial abolition of the doctrine of fundamental breach in relation to contract terms which have to satisfy the element of reasonableness under the UCTA, such as exclusion clauses governed by s 3.
In such cases the doctrine no longer exists.
Even if the contract is terminated, the offending party can still rely on the clause if reasonable to do so, but even if the contract is affirmed, he cannot rely on the term unless it is reasonable to do so.
This has reversed the rule in Harbutts Plasticine Ltd v Wayne Tank and Pump Co Ltd [1970]1 QB 447, but it has not affected the rule in the Suisse Atlantique case [1967]1 AC 61 that exemption clauses cannot be construed to apply to fundamental breach unless clearly stated to do so (See also the Securicor case mentioned above, where an exclusion clause was found to be drafted so widely as to exclude liability for a wilful default which was also a fundamental breach of the contract.)
Once the party seeking the protection of the exclusion clause has established that it applies to the type of breach in question, and the cause from which the breach arose, he th en has to satisfy the court of its reasonableness under s 3.
Here, there are three factors to take into account: the seriousness of the type of breach in question, the cause of that breach, and the extent of the exclusion of liability.
Clearly, total exclusion of liability for failure to perform a contract at all because of wilful default will not be reasonable under s 3.
Equally, total exclusion of liability for failure to perform a contract at all because of circumstances beyond the control of the party in default (ie reasons of force majeure or an act of the other party) will conversely be reasonable in nearly all circumstances.
Total exclusion of liability for failure to perform a contract at all is unlikely to be reasonable where it occurs because of acts or omissions within the control of the party in default, which are caused by negligence, incompetence or inadvertence but not wilful default ( "inadvertent default" ).
Where the breach is of a less serious type, a clause which totally excludes liability for it is still likely to be reasonable where the breach is caused by force majeure and unreasonable if the breach is caused by wilful default.
Where the breach is caused by inadvertent default the more serious the type of breach covered by the clause, the less likely it is to be reasonable.
Some exclusion clauses do not totally exclude liability for a breach but only restrict it.
Such clauses are of three main types: liquidated damages clauses, clauses excluding liability for pure economic loss, and clauses capping liability for the breach by reference to a monetary figure.
True liquidated damages clauses should by definition be reasonable under s 3 of the UCTA, since they are a genuine pre-estimate of the damage suffered as a result of the type of breach in question.
If they are not, then they are regarded as penalty clauses which are unenforceable at common law, so that the question of the applicability of s 3 of the UCTA never arises.
In this case, the question of  the cause and the seriousness of the type of breach should have little relevance.
Clauses which limit liability for a particular type of breach, by excluding any liability for pure economic loss, such as loss of profit or business,(often loosely called consequential loss clauses) should in most cases pass the test of reasonableness, whatever the cause of the breach, where the transaction is a non-consumer transaction.
This is because economic loss can be of unforeseen proportions, can far exceed, in many cases the total contract value, and thus be a risk which it is for all practical purposes beyond the financial strength of most businessmen to assume, particularly if they were to accept such risks routinely in all their business dealings.
It is also difficult to obtain insurance cover in substantial amounts to cover this type of liability.
However, it could be that, in some transactions, where economic loss is suffered because of a breach caused by wilful default (or perhaps even inadvertent default), such clauses would not be regarded as reasonable where a consumer suffered economic loss.
The amount of loss suffered by the consumer could be very large in relation to his financial resources, while not serious for the businessman who caused the breach, and in any event the businessman could (in cases of breach caused by inadvertent default, at any rate) possibly obtain insurance cover for such liability, since it is likely to be of a very low level (see Harris v Wyre Forest District Council [1989]2 All ER 514).
The remaining type of clause is that which limits liability by reference to an overall monetary figure.
The reasonableness of such clauses depends mainly upon the questions raised by s 11(4) of the UCTA"is the amount a reasonable one having regard to the financial resources of the party seeking its protection, and the extent to which he could insure against the relevant liabilities?
Here the question of the seriousness of the type of breach, and its cause, seems less relevant.
If the amount passes the test of s 11(4), then that amount is all that the party in breach can reasonably be expected to pay, however much loss the other party suffers, and even for total failure to perform caused by wilful default.
Nevertheless, the insertion of a trivial amount to restrict liability for a serious breach (for wilful or inadvertent default) is unlikely to be regarded as reasonable.
A final point on this type of clause: if what is regarded as an initially reasonable figure is inserted in standard conditions and remains unchanged for a number of years it may well have become unreasonable through the impact of inflation, either in an absolute sense, or because average contract values have increased.
Alternatively, applying one standard figure to a variety of contract values may in itself be unreasonable.
What is appropriate for a contract worth £1000 will be unreasonable for one worth £1,000,000 (see the George Mitchell case).
The safest course is to limit liability to a monetary figure which seems generally reasonable in the light of the business concerned or the value of the contract, whichever is the higher.
Limiting liability to a figure or the contract value whichever is the lower is unlikely to be reasonable.
In any event the relevant  figure should be reviewed regularly to take account of inflation.
So far we have looked at exclusion clauses which exclude or restrict liability for a particular type of breach arising from a particular cause.
Such clauses are common in contracts, but equally common are general exclusion clauses which exclude or restrict liability for all breaches however caused ( "general exclusion clauses" ).
General exclusion clauses will obviously be effective, if they are drafted properly, subject only to s 3 of the UCTA.
However, because of their wide scope, when judging such clauses under s 3 of the UCTA, one has to treat them on the basis that they exclude or restrict liability for total failure to perform by reason of wilful default.
A general exclusion clause which excludes liability altogether is thus very unlikely to be reasonable under s 3.
A general exclusion clause which restricts liability to a monetary figure, or by reference to a liquidated damages formula, could well be reasonable, depending upon the actual figure or formula, which should be judged on the criteria relating to such limitations of liability discussed above.
The same would be true of a general exclusion clause which excluded liability for economic loss, where, again, one would have to consider the issues as to reasonableness discussed above.
Lastly, it should be said that the most common practice, because of the uncertainties surrounding the reasonableness of general exclusion clauses, is to include two general exclusion clauses covering liability for any breach of contract (however caused and whatever its seriousness), one excluding liability for economic loss in respect of such breaches, and the other limiting liability by reference to a fixed amount for any one breach and/or for all breaches under the contract.
Coupled with these two general exclusion clauses, it is usual to find an exclusion clause which excludes completely all liability for all breaches (including total non-performance) caused by force majeure.
With the inclusion of all three clauses, the force majeure clause should be regarded as reasonable in nearly all cases, and if the court finds one of the other two clauses unreasonable under s 3, then the other should at least provide some protection.
1.5.4 Party protected by UCTA: non-consumers contracting on other party's standard terms and conditions.
Category of contract: all business contracts
The provisions of s 3 of the UCTA apply equally in these circumstances, and the protected party is placed in the same position as a consumer, even if he is acting as a businessman.
The justification for protection in these circumstances is that a businessman who is willing to deal on the other party's standard terms and conditions is probably unable to negotiate a special deal due to an inequality of bargaining power.
The problem is to decide when one party is dealing on the other party's standard terms and conditions.
There is no definition in the UCTA of the phrase used in s 3(1) "written standard terms of business" .
The Law Commission was  against one, on the grounds that a rigid definition could be more easily evaded, and that, in individual cases, the courts and legal advisers would recognise standard terms and conditions when they saw them.
Standard contracts issued by trade or professional associations for the use of their members will be caught (RIBA contracts for example) as will individual standard conditions of the type often printed on the back of quotation forms or invoices.
The hallmarks seem to be conditions which are not drafted with any particular parties or transaction in mind, that are used for a series of contracts, and in respect of which the person who puts them forward does not expect much, if any, negotiation to take place.
Nevertheless, all these matters are only indicative, and cannot be said to be conclusive.
A recent case which dealt with the issues is Chester Grosvenor Hotel v Alfred Mcalpine Management (1993) 56 BLR 115.
1.5.5 Party protected by UCTA: non-consumers not contracting on other party's standard terms and conditions.
Category of contract: all business contracts
This heading comprises the vast majority of commercial contracts, where the parties have presumably an equality of bargaining power and have freely entered into properly negotiated contracts.
In these circumstances, s 3 has no application, and the parties (subject to the caveats surrounding the exclusion of liability for death, personal injury and other loss caused by negligence, as regulated under s 2) are free to make whatever bargain as to liability for breach, non-performance or failure to perform as they choose.
Here the problem is to decide when a party is not dealing on the others standard terms.
The indicia of a set of standard terms and conditions has been discussed in the previous section.
It is now necessary to consider when a commercial transaction is so structured that it cannot be said that the parties are dealing on standard terms at all.
This is a question of strict definition.
Thus when determining what contracts fall within or outside the ambit of s 3, issues of reasonableness, equality of bargaining power and the possibility of negotiation are in fact not very relevant, except in so far as they could move a judge to finding that terms were standard or not in borderline cases.
First, an oral contract can never be caught, since s 3 (1) specifies dealing on "written standard terms of business" .
Oral contracts are possibilities in situations where well-established trade customs can be proved, and contain principles of exemption from liability upon which the party in default can rely.
Second, a unique situation, with a unique typed or manuscript contract would be outside the provision.
Even using the same terms on more than one occasion with the same customer would seem not to amount of itself to trading on standard terms.
However, the matter is less clear cut where a party uses typed precedents  drawn up by its lawyers as a basis for starting negotiations.
For instance, a businessman could habitually send customers a typed standard contract and then negotiate on that, or, having had his lawyers draw up a special contract on one occasion, he could start to use this on subsequent occasions as if it were a precedent.
Whether such a use results in the businessman trading on written standard terms and conditions, is probably a matter of degree.
Critical factors here would be the number of times such documents were sent out, and the amount of negotiation that took place in the relevant case.
A great many contract negotiations that started from a written set of terms and conditions sent with an offer to negotiate, which in fact produced mainly contracts upon the original terms offered, with little evidence of variations introduced by negotiation, would seem likely to be caught.
Trifling variations of printed conditions, or an expressed as opposed to an actual willingness to negotiate, will not avoid the section.
The conclusions seem to be that printing in general is fatal, draft standard conditions sent for negotiation are very often caught, but there is not a problem with the unique situation, or one where there is genuine negotiation—even if the starting point is a set of standard terms and conditions.
From this it follows that far more transactions could well be caught under the section than at first appears.
Third, the parties may have started with the contract or conditions of the party who is now seeking the protection of the UCTA against an exemption clause.
They may have then negotiated from these to produce a final contract in which the other party introduced the exemption clause in question through negotiation.
Here it seems hard to say that the party seeking to rely on the exemption clause is contracting on his own written standard terms.
Fourth, if the standard terms upon which the contract was made were put forward by the party seeking protection, then he has no protection under s 3 against an exclusion clause which he himself has put in his conditions, if the other party chooses to rely on it.
This is of course because the party seeking protection is not dealing on the other party's standard terms and conditions and the section can therefore have no application.
Lastly, the question as to whose standard terms govern the contract, or even if there is a contract at all, is a difficult one to solve under English law where the parties exchange standard form contracts and then do not negotiate on them.
This so-called"battle of the forms' is discussed further in Chapter 2.
1.5.6 Party protected by UCTA: any party.
Category of contract: all contracts for sale or hire purchase of goods.
Subject matter of contract: all goods.
Having dealt with the question of exclusion clauses in general, the UCTA then deals with the question of the extent to which liability for breach of certain warranties implied into contracts for the supply of goods and services under the SGA, the SGSA and the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 can be excluded by express provision in the relevant contract.
It will be recalled that by and large this body of legislation provides that such warranties are to be implied into the relevant contracts unless the contract itself expresses a contrary intention.
Sections 6 and 7 of the UCTA override these provisions, and, in effect, provide for mandatory inclusion of such warranties in the contracts covered by these sections, since the easiest way to exclude liability for breach of such warranties is to exclude them altogether from the terms of the contract.
However, the effect of ss 6 and 7 goes further because their wording is also wide enough to regulate contracts which permit the inclusion of such warranties, but then seek to nullify that inclusion by excluding liability for breach of the warranties so included.
Section 6(1) of the UCTA states that (under any contract for the sale or hire purchase of goods, not merely business contracts—see s 6(4)) liability for breach of the obligations arising from the warranties as to title and quiet possession implied under SGA 1979, s 12 (in relation to sale of goods) and s 8 of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 (in relation to goods disposed of on hire purchase) cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to any contract term.
In some cases (for instance distress sales by receivers, in situations of insolvency) both parties may know there is a doubt as to title but want to take the chance anyway.
The correct approach here is to cut down the obligation to perform undertaken under the contract, rather than attempt to impose an exemption clause covering the liability for a breach committed.
This has already been discussed when considering s 3 of the UCTA.
Thus one could contract to pass a restricted title, or whatever title one has in the goods.
This is envisaged by SGA 1979, s 12(3), although even here SGA 1979, s 12 (4) and (5) imply a warranty that the seller has disclosed known encumbrances, and warranties promising no disturbance of quiet possession by the seller or the person on whose behalf he is selling, or by third parties claiming through them (except by reason of an encumbrance disclosed to the buyer).
These warranties are also covered by the UCTA 1979, s 6(1).
Section 6(1) of the UCTA gives rise to particular problems in the area of infringement of third party intellectual property rights, and in relation to clauses which attempt to exclude by blanket wording all warranties implied by the SGA, or which provide for exclusion of liability generally (such as those excluding liability for economic loss or capping total liability under the contract by reference to a monetary amount).
These issues are discussed in Chapter 2 in relation to the clauses in the precedent s in that chapter which are affected by this issue.
1.5.7Party protected by UCTA: consumers.
Category of contract: business contracts for sale or hire purchase of goods.
Subject matter of contract: consumer goods.
Section 6(2) of the UCTA prevents exclusion of liability for breach of the warranties relating to conformance to description, conformance to sample, merchantable quality, and fitness for purpose which are implied by ss 13, 14 and  15 of SGA, for sale of goods contracts, and ss 9, 10 and 11 of the Sale of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, for hire purchase contracts.
UCTA s 30, which prevents exclusion of obligations relating to safety under consumer safety legislation should also be noted in this context.
Although UCTA does not say so, the section must here only be dealing with sales or hire purchase of goods made to the consumer in the course of a business, because s 6(2) only protects persons dealing as consumers, and a person can only deal as a consumer if the person with whom he is dealing deals in his turn in the course of a business.
(See s 12(1) (b).)
Under this provision, the same points about stating limited obligations (subject to UCTA s 3(2) (b)(i)), as opposed to restricting liability for breach, will apply.
The most usual examples of this are the sales of secondhand or shopsoiled goods where the vendor clearly states their condition and sells them "as seen" .
This is not really a case of excluding the warranties which would otherwise be implied by the relevant legislation, but rather one of making sure that the warranty given is properly tailored to the subject matter of the contract.
For instance, the standard of merchantable quality of secondhand or shop-soiled goods is clearly less than of brand new goods, and a vendor who spells out that he is selling secondhand or shop-soiled goods is still warranting conformance with description, but it is a different description from the one he would have applied to brand new goods.
The most difficult point about this section is that its application is necessarily limited to goods "of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption" by the operation of s 12(1) (c).
The Law Commission thought that this would exclude products "designed and normally bought for commercial use" , but that there might be borderline cases.
However, this definition does in practice cause some problems.
For instance, some items, such as raw materials like wood, sand and cement, or products such as glass and bricks, clearly can be purchased both for private use and consumption (eg DIY sales) and by businessmen (eg builders).
The same problem can arise with finished products such as tools, or personal computers.
The problem is not helped by the fact that UCTA refers to the type of goods, not the type of outlet they are bought from, or the quantity in which they are bought.
Because of this it is not possible to make a distinction based on the difference between wholesale and retail sales.
In any event some outlets (eg cash and carry or the large DIY chains) are used both by consumers and tradesmen.
The only possible wholesale/retail distinction relating to the type of goods that might have some application would seem to be in the area of packaging for retail as opposed to wholesale sale.
The only really satisfactory way to solve the whole problem is to assume that there are certain types of goods which can at the same time be "ordinarily" for private use and for commercial use.
A standard personal computer which can be used both for business and home purposes (for instance with a standard word processing package) would be a good example.
1.5.8 Party protected by UCTA: persons not dealing as consumers.
Category of contract: all contracts for the sale or hire purchase of goods.
Subject matter of contract: all goods
Section 6 (3) of UCTA prevents exclusion or restriction of liability for breach of the warranties relating to conformance to description, conformance to sample, merchantable quality, and fitness for purpose which are implied by ss 13, 14 and 15 of SGA, for sale of goods, and ss 9, 10 and 11 of the Sale of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, for hire purchase contracts, unless such exclusion or restriction passes the test of reasonableness.
The scope of this section is wide, since there are three reasons why a person may be dealing otherwise than as a consumer: first, because he is a businessman (see s 12(1) (a)); second, because the other party is not a businessman (see s 12(1) (b)); and third, because the goods are not of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption (see s 12(1) (c)).
The first category covers business contracts, the second private contracts, and the third could cover either.
From these categories it is possible to construct a matrix for different combinations of types of parties and classes of goods.
For the purposes of this analysis, goods "ordinarily" supplied for private use or consumption are referred to as "consumer goods" , and all other goods are referred to as "commercial goods" ).
Protected Party Party Relying On Clause Class of Goods Non-consumer Business Commercial Business Non-consumer Consumer/Commercial Non-consumer Non-consumer Consumer/Commercial Business Business Consumer/Commercial Prima facie, it would appear that a court would be likely to find exclusions more reasonable as one proceeds down the matrix, and exclusions relating to consumer goods more reasonable than those relating to commercial goods.
The first category covers a businessman disposing of commercial goods to a private person.
This would be a consumer sale except for the fact that the goods are not consumer goods within the meaning of s 12(1) (c).
Here the exclusion of liability is obviously least likely to be reasonable.
However, since the private person has chosen to deal in commercial goods,(and presumably has some expertise in relation to the subject matter of the contract) such exclusion is more likely to be reasonable than if consumer goods were the subject matter of the contract, and hence the transaction were a consumer transaction governed by s 6(2).
The analysis in relation to the first category shows the correct way of solving the problems, under s 6(2), of the borderline cases as to what are consumer goods.
Where the only disqualifying element under s 6(2) is the type of goods, then the overwhelming likelihood will be that, when considering the transaction under s 6(3), the court will find the exclusion unreasonable.
The second category relates to a transaction whereby a private person disposes of goods to a businessman.
The businessman should be better able to take care of himself in the transaction, and therefore should require little protection.
As for the class of goods, it should make little difference here, since the businessman should be better able than the private party to assess them.
However, in most cases, the private person, even if not acting in the course of a business, is still really entering into a commercial transaction and it seems more likely that there will be more cases than in the first category where it will be reasonable that he accept some liability.
The third category relates to private transactions, where an equality of bargaining power is usually to be presumed.
In any event, in many cases, courts will (in the absence of fraud) be less likely to wish to intervene in non-commercial dealings between private individuals.
As for the class of goods, where commercial goods are concerned the party acquiring them presumably has some expertise in relation to them which gives him the capability to assess their quality or to understand if he needs to call in an expert assessor, so that less protection should be required in this case.
In the final category, both parties to the transaction are acting in the course of business, and are presumably able to take care of themselves.
It seems, prima facie, most reasonable that they deal with the question of liability in this area as they think fit, irrespective of the goods concerned.
For instance a manufacturer and a wholesaler could enter into a contract for the supply of domestic refrigerators (consumer goods) for onward sale by the wholesaler to retailers, while a factory owner could enter into a contract with a manufacturer for the supply of a machine for use in his factory (commercial goods).
In neither case does the category of goods seem likely to affect the reasonableness of any exclusions of liability to be agreed as between the two parties to the relevant contract.
1.5.9 Party protected by UCTA: all parties.
Category of contract: contracts for the barter of goods, and for the supply of labour and materials.
Subject matter of contract: all goods.
The SGSA s 2 implies warranties as to title and quiet possession into all contracts "for the transfer of goods" which are equivalent to those implied into contracts for the sale of goods under s 12 of the SGA.
The SGSA defines such contracts as those "under which one person transfers or agrees to transfer to another person the property in goods" except in pursuance of a contract of sale, a hire purchase contract, and "a contract under which property in goods is transferred in exchange for trading stamps on their redemption" (see s 1).
(Under the SGA and the UCTA "trading" stamp redemption contracts are treated as sale of goods contracts.)
The contracts covered by SGSA, s 2 are thus in practice contracts of exchange or barter, and contracts for the supply of labour and goods or materials (eg building contracts).
It should be noted that the SGSA, s 2 is not limited to business contracts.
Section 17 of the SGSA inserts a new subsection 3A in s 7 of the UCTA, which is equivalent in its operation to s 6(1) of the UCTA, and thus prevents exclusion of liability for breach of the warranties implied by s 2 of the SGSA.
Section 2 of the SGSA applies to all contracts, and the wording of the new s 7(3A) imposes an absolute prohibition on exclusion of liability for breach of the warranties implied by s 2 of the SGSA.
Thus, despite the limitation of s 7 of the UCTA (prior to its amendment by the addition of s 7(3A)) to business contracts (see s 1(3)), the better argument would seem to be that the new s 7(3A), like the old s 6(1), applies to all contracts, not just business contracts.
On this basis, all contracts under which property in goods passes from one party to the other receive the same treatment in relation to prevention of exclusion of liability for breach of warranty of good title and quiet possession.
Section 7(3A) of the UCTA gives rise to the same issues as s 6(1) of the SGA, in relation to infringement of third party intellectual property rights, clauses excluding all implied warranties, and clauses limiting liability under the contract as a whole.
Again these issues are discussed in Chapter 2.
1.5.10 Party protected by UCTA: all parties.
Category of contract: business contracts for the hire, rental, lease or bailment of goods.
Subject matter of contract: all goods.
Prior to the passing of the SGSA, s 7(4) of the UCTA prevented exclusion of liability for breach of warranties of title and quiet possession "arising by implication of law" (see s 7(1)), in business contracts (other than for the sale and hire purchase of goods) under which possession or ownership of goods was transferred, unless such exclusion passed the test of reasonableness.
However, as discussed above, in relation to contracts under which ownership of goods is transferred, so far as such contracts are not governed by s 6 of the UCTA, they are now governed by the new s 7(3A).
Section 7(4) has thus been rendered partially otiose.
This is recognised by s 17(3) of the SGSA which amends s 7(4) of the UCTA so that it applies only in cases where s 7(3A) has no application.
Given the provisions of s 6 of the UCTA and the way in which SGSA, s 17 has dealt with the warranties of title and quiet possession to be implied into other contracts under which property in goods is transferred, there do not in practice seem to be left any other types of contract under which property in goods can be transferred.
Thus s 7(4) is now restricted in practice to business contracts where possession of goods passes, but not title, namely contracts of hire, rental, lease or bailment.
The SGA has no provisions implying warranties as to title or quiet possession into such contracts, but s 7 of the SGSA implies certain warranties as to the right to transfer possession into a "contract for the hire of goods" (which under s 6 of the SGSA is defined as a contract of bailment by way of hire for a consideration of any nature).
The bailor warrants that he has the right to transfer possession for the period of the bailment, and that the bailee will enjoy quiet  possession for the period of the bailment except so far as possession is disturbed by the owner or other person entitled to the benefit of any charge or encumbrance disclosed or known to the bailee before the contract was made.
The definition of "contract for the hire of goods" in s 6 of the SGSA is not all-encompassing, and there may well be some contracts of bailment which fall outside it.
In these cases the general case law must be looked at to decide what warranties are to be implied in this area.
Thus s 7(4) now acts, in respect of these warranties under business bailment contracts alone, to prevent exclusion of liability for their breach unless reasonable.
It should be noted that, although ss 6 and 7 of the SGSA apply to all contracts, not just business ones, there is no provision in s 17 which overrides the restriction of s 7(4) to business contracts only.
1.5.11 Party protected by UCTA: consumers.
Category of contract: business contracts for the barter of goods, for the supply of labour and materials, and for the hire, lease rental or bailment of goods.
Subject matter of contract: all goods.
Section 7(2) prevents the exclusion of liability as against a consumer for breach of warranties arising by implication of law from the form of the contract as to the goods' correspondence to description or sample, or their quality or fitness for any particular purpose.
Prior to the passing of the SGSA what warranties could be implied was the subject only of case law.
The SGSA implies warranties as to conformance with description (ss 3 and 8) and with sample (ss 5 and 10), and (in the case of business contracts only) as to quality and fitness for purpose (ss 4 and 9).
Since s 7(2) applies only to business contracts, the fact that ss 3, 5, 8 and 10 of the SGSA apply to all contracts is of no relevance in this context.
There may still be some other warranties implied at common law in contracts of these types, both those covered by, and those outside the scope of, the SGSA.
However, in the area of quality and fitness for purpose, the SGSA prescribes that any such warranties relating to those matters shall no longer have effect in such contracts to the extent that they fall within the scope of the SGSA.
Finally, it should be noted that the whole of s 7 of the UCTA, and, indeed, the relevant sections of the SGSA discussed above, only apply to contracts under which possession or ownership of the goods passes to the other party.
Where one party to a contract contracts to use certain goods for the purposes of the contract, considerations of title and quiet possession may be irrelevant, but conformity to description, sample, quality and fitness for purpose may well not be.
For instance, quality and fitness for purpose could well be vitally important in a contract whereby, eg a dry cleaner agrees to use particular solvents upon a customer's clothes, or the owner of an art gallery agrees to use special chemicals to restore and clean a painting.
The Law Commission thought that the use of such goods, which operate by chemical action without their substance attaching  to the article cleaned, with no transfer of ownership or possession, should also be caught by s 7.
Section 7 clearly does not cover such contracts, although the SGSA (treating them as contracts for the supply of services) would imply an obligation to use reasonable care and skill under s 13.
It may be arguable that some part of the substance used does attach to the article cleaned, even if the rest is rinsed off, so that ownership in that part passes by adhesion to the article.
If this is so, s 7 may apply in some cases.
However, given the implied term of reasonable care and skill under SGSA s 13, both ss 2 and 3 of the UCTA may well apply in any event to avoid an exclusion of liability if the wrong substance is used, or it does not produce the result contracted for.
1.5.12 Party protected by UCTA: non-consumers.
Category of contract: business contracts for the barter of goods, for the supply of labour and materials, and for the hire, lease rental or bailment of goods.
Subject matter of contract: all goods.
Section 7(3) regulates the same warranties as those covered by s 7(2).
All of the same considerations apply, except that here since the protected parties are non-consumers, the section permits the exclusion of liability to the extent that the exemption clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
1.6Treatment of contracts with a foreign element.
Having analysed the main provisions of the UCTA in relation to specific types of contracts it remains to consider the extent to which contracts with a foreign element are caught by its provisions.
Section 27(1) of the UCTA excludes from its operations contracts which are governed by the law of any part of the UK only because the parties inserted an express governing law clause to that effect.
This provision thus excludes contracts which, apart from such a governing law clause, would, under the general provisions of conflict of laws prevailing under private international law as applied in the UK, be governed by a foreign proper law.
On the other hand, a contract which, under such conflict of laws provisions, would be governed by the laws of any part of the UK, except for the fact that the parties inserted a governing law clause specifying a foreign proper law, may still be caught by the UCTA.
Section 27(2) (a) permits the court or the arbitrator a discretion to ignore the governing law clause if it appears that it has been included only for the purpose of evading the provisions of the UCTA.
Section 27(2) (b) goes further than this by negating absolutely any governing law clause imposing a foreign proper law where the contract was concluded in the UK by a consumer then habitually resident in the UK.
In a sense, this provision simply imposes the result that would have arisen under general conflict  of law principles if the governing law clause had never existed.
By implication all other contracts with a foreign element are exempt.
A contract genuinely governed by a foreign proper law is obviously exempt (whether or not it contains a foreign proper law clause), whether so specifically stated in the UCTA or not.
Also exempt would be a contract which could or should have been governed by one of the systems of law in the UK, where s 27(2) (b) does not apply, and the parties have chosen a foreign proper law for a genuine reason other than evasion of the UCTA (eg because the other party was a foreigner who insisted on using the law of his own jurisdiction as the governing law of the contract).
The conclusion seems to be that where one wishes the UCTA not to apply, one should, where possible, by observing the relevant conflict of law rules, create a contract genuinely governed by a foreign proper law, so that there is no need for an express choice of law clause which can be attacked or negated under s 27(2).
International contracts for the supply of goods, even if prima facie caught under s 27, will be exempt under s 26 of the UCTA, if they fulfil its rather strict requirements.
Although there is no exemption for a contract which consists exclusively of the international supply of services, a mixed contract (eg supply and installation, or supply and supervision of installation, of plant abroad) will come under s 26.
Therefore in such cases, where it is desired that the UCTA not apply, one method is to draft one contract for both goods and services, and not two separate contracts for each element.
International distributorship agreements will also fall under s 26 since they are pure agreements for the sale of goods, and thus fall within the SGA (see SGA s 1(3)).
An arrangement where an agent works on a commission with a consignment stock, is obviously not an agreement for the sale of goods, but is a contract under or in pursuance of which possession of goods passes (UCTA, s 26(3) (a)).
and would also be caught.
Contracts with commission agents, indenting agents and canvassers will not be caught under s 26, as no goods pass between them and their principal.
They merely collect orders and pass them back to their principal who fulfils the orders direct.
Their contract is not one under which possession or ownership of goods passes.
Nor, it is submitted, can it properly be regarded as one in pursuance of which possession or ownership passes either.
Finally, ss 28 and 29 exclude from the UCTA contracts governed by international conventions (eg Athens Convention regulating sea carriage of passengers) and contracts governed by any other statutory scheme of regulation in the UK which perm its specific exclusions of liability.
1.7 General considerations relating to the law of contract
The UCTA also deals with some general considerations relating to the law of contract.
First, evasion of the UCTA by means of secondary contracts, which contract out of rights under the UCTA, is controlled by UCTA, s 10.
Second, s 13(1) of the UCTA prevents a further possibility of evasion by creating an extended definition of exemption clauses.
Another type of evasion would be to create a situation where there was no contract at all, so that only certain liabilities under tort, in accordance with UCTA, s 2, would remain.
The Law Commission admitted that it would be difficult to cope with this, and the UCTA does not do so.
However, the Law Commission expressed the hope that if the practice became widespread, the Office of Fair Trading would prevent it under the powers granted by the Fair Trading Act 1973.
In practice the problem does not seem to have arisen so far, and s 13(1) is still restricted to secondary contracts.
Another problem under s 13(1) is the status of the liquidated damages clause.
This is, by definition, neither a penalty clause, nor a limitation of liability up to a certain amount, because it is supposed to be a genuine pre-estimate of the damage.
In theory, then, and in genuine cases, such clauses should be completely untouched by the UCTA, and by s 13 in particular, since they are only helping the parties to quantify their loss.
In practice, in many industries, particularly the construction industry, such clauses have become standard, and both the courts and the parties have tended to accept them without argument as to their status or the effect of s 13.
In flagrant cases, the best argument open to a party wishing to escape liability is still that such a clause is a penalty and hence unenforceable under general principles of law.
The effect of s 13(1) in relation to set-off was recently discussed in Stewart Gill v Horatio Myer Co [1992]2 All ER 257 CA.
Depending upon the relative bargaining powers of the parties many commercial contracts either contain set-off clauses permitting set-off of cross claims between the parties, or clauses forbidding such set-off.
Although rights of set-off subsist at law, the inclusion of set off clauses is common, and equally common are clauses excluding those rights.
Until Gill v Myers, however, no one doubted clauses preventing set-off were enforceable.
In this case the clause provided that "the customer shall not be entitled to withhold payment of any amount due to the company under the contract by reason of any payment credit set-off or counterclaim" .
The plaintiff tried to obtain collection of a debt under the contract by way of summary judgment, and, when the defendant attempted to raise a counterclaim for breach which would entitle him to defend the case, relied on this clause.
At first instance the court held that such a clause was an exclusion clause within the meaning of s 13 of the UCTA, since it clearly excluded one of the methods by which the defendant could otherwise, at law, have enforced his counterclaim, namely by set-off.
Thus the clause could be considered under s 3 of the Act, since it was contained in the plaintiff's standard conditions upon which the contract was entered into.
The court held that such a clause was prima facie unreasonable under s 3, and that, as he had not discharged the burden of  proof upon him to show that the clause was reasonable under the circumstances, the plaintiff could not rely on it in order to obtain summary judgment.
The Court of Appeal upheld this decision.
Following this judgment, it now seems almost impossible to conceive of a clause preventing set-off which fell within the ambit of s 3 (ie either in a consumer contract, or in written standard conditions) which would be both commercially practical and legally enforceable.
Arbitration clauses are specifically excluded from the ambit of s 13(1) by s 13(2).
In theory,(subject to the general powers of the court to control arbitration in the areas of misconduct) even a very unfair arbitration clause (eg offending party chooses arbitrator, and victim must agree) is not controlled.
However, despite the initial expressions of fear that this practice could cause problems, it does not in fact seem to have become widespread.
In any event, the Consumer Arbitration Agreements Act 1988 now provides that in most domestic consumer contracts any arbitration clause cannot be enforced against a consumer without the leave of the court unless the consumer has consented in writing to submit the contract dispute to arbitration after it has arisen.
Presumably, it was felt that businessmen could take care of themselves in this area, and the fact that such clauses are not in common use in business contracts seems to bear this out.
Finally, s 5 regulates the attempts to evade the UCTA by use of the manufacturer's so-called "guarantee" .
Before the passing of the UCTA such guarantees in theory were supposed to offer the purchaser of defective goods a remedy additional to that of suing the person from whom he bought the goods.
The manufacturer would offer various remedies for defective goods returned direct to him, for instance, repair, replacement or money back at his option.
However, in order to take advantage of such guarantees, the customer would have to sign and return a portion of the guarantee form or certificate to signify that, in consideration of the granting of the guarantee, he would accept that his legal remedies against the manufacturer were limited to the express ones contained in the guarantee.
In practice the express remedies were actually in many cases fairly limited, so that the effect of such guarantees was rather to avoid the manufacturer's liability than to provide an additional remedy.
Section 5 prevents this practice completely, by providing that avoidance of liability for defective goods caused by negligence of the person involved in their manufacture or distribution cannot be excluded by a term or notice in a "guarantee" of goods ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption as against a person who has found the goods to be defective while he was using them, or while they were in his possession, otherwise than exclusively for the purposes of a business.
Section 5 refers to such use or possession as "consumer use" .
The section does not apply to contractual guarantees, as between a seller and a purchaser, as these are obviously caught under the appropriate sections of the UCTA relating to contracts, in so far as they should be caught at all(see s 5(3)).
The section imposes a double test.
First the goods have to be "consumer  goods" within the meaning of s 12(1) (c), with all of the problems that this definition entails.
Even if they pass that test they still have to pass the second hurdle of being "in consumer use" when the defect arises.
The definition of "consumer use" is very wide, and looks at the actual facts of the case, even if the other party did not know them, or could not be expected to know them.
Obviously a person who first acquired consumer goods as a businessman, and then chose to put them into consumer use for his own private uses could take advantage of this section.
1.8 EEC law considerations
In concluding this chapter it is necessary to mention two pieces of EEC law which will be of vital significance in relation to consumer contracts: the General Product Safety Directive (92/59/EEC) and the Unfair Contract Terms Directive.
1.9 General Product Safety Directive (92/59/EEC)
The General Product Safety Directive (92/59/EEC) is designed to ensure that products placed on the market in member states are safe for consumers to use.
Producers and distributors are required to tell consumers relevant information concerning their products, to monitor the safety record of their products while in use, and to take the necessary steps to protect consumers from defective products, including, if necessary by withdrawal.
Member states are obliged to police the Directive and the safety of products put on the market.
This will entail monitoring and sampling activity, and carries with it the power to ban the sale of dangerous products and to organise their withdrawal and destruction.
The Directive prescribes that there should be criminal penalties for its breach, but leaves it to the implementing legislation in each member state to decide what these should be.
The Directive, which member states have to implement by 29 June 1994, will impose a detailed and strict regulatory system on all producers and distributors of consumer products within the EEC.
1.10 The Unfair Contract Terms Directive
The effect of this Directive on drafting consumer contracts will be very far reaching, and no consideration of the general principles of law relating to the drafting of commercial contracts in the UK would be complete without a preliminary examination of its provisions.
In July 1992 the amended proposals for the above Council Directive were  published.
The Council of the European Communities decided in September to accept the text.
The proposal passed its first and second readings in the European Parliament with minimal amendments, and was adopted in March 1993 substantially upon the lines of the text published in July 1992.
The lengthy preamble makes it clear that this Directive is a harmonisation measure requiring member states to equalise the level of protection granted to consumers when they enter into contracts with traders, businessmen or professionals.
The preamble stresses that it is the responsibility of member states to ensure that contracts concluded with consumers do not contain unfair terms.
The intention is that consumers (who generally are unfamiliar with the law in other member states) should be able to buy goods and services as consumers throughout the EEC while feeling confident that whatever laws govern those contracts, the relevant member state will have ensured that such contracts do not contain unfair terms.
The Directive requires the adoption of uniform rules of law by all member states in the matter of unfair terms, which should apply to all contracts between sellers or suppliers, of goods and services, and consumers, whether such contracts are oral or written.
The Directive does make it clear however that other types of contracts such as those relating to employment, family law, company law and partnership, should be excluded from the Directive.
Insurance and financial services contracts are partially but not wholly excluded.
It should be noted that the Directive applies to trades, businesses and professions of both a public and a private nature, so that state owned enterprises are included within its ambit.
The basis of the Directive is to fix in a general way the criteria for assessing the unfair character of contract terms taking into account, in particular, whether the relevant term was individually negotiated, the relevant strength of the bargaining position of the parties, whether the consumer had an inducement to agree to the term, and whether the goods or services were sold or supplied to the special order of the consumer.
The Directive however does not attempt to assess the bargain which the consumer has made under the contract and therefore excludes assessment of the unfair character of terms which relate to "the main subject matter of the contract" and "the quality/price ratio of the goods or services supplied" .
The Directive also provides that contracts must be drafted in "plain intelligible language, the consumer should be given a proper opportunity to examine all the terms" , and any ambiguities in drafting should be interpreted in favour of the consumer.
Article 1 states the purpose of the Directive as approximating the law regulations and administrative provisions of the member states relating to unfair terms in contracts concluded between the seller or supplier and the consumer.
Article 2 defines "consumer" as "any natural person who, in contracts covered by this Directive, is acting for purposes which are outside his trade, business or profession" .
It similarly defines "seller or supplier" as "any natural or  legal person who, in contracts covered by this Directive, is acting for purposes relating to his trade, business or profession, whether publicly owned or privately owned" .
Article 3 provides that a contract term which has not been individually negotiated shall be regarded as unfair if, contrary to the requirements of good faith, it causes significant imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations arising under the contract, to the detriment of the consumer.
A term is always to be regarded as not individually negotiated where it has been drafted in advance and the consumer has therefore not been able to influence the substance of the term, particularly in the context of a pre-formulated standard contract.
The article also states that the burden of proof that a standard term has been individually negotiated falls on the seller or supplier, but given the provisions set out in the previous paragraph, it is hard to see how this burden can ever be discharged, unless there has been an individual negotiation at which both parties actually discussed and wrote out the clause in question for the first time.
Article 4 gives some guidelines for the "unfairness test" as follows: "If necessary the unfairness of a contractual term shall be assessed taking into account the nature of the goods or services for which the contract was concluded and by referring, at the time of conclusion of the contract, to all the circumstances attending the conclusion of the contract and to all the other terms of the contract or of another contract on which it is dependent" .
The guidelines exclude the possibility of assessment of the bargain under the contract as described above.
Article 5 imposes the plain language requirement and the obligation to interpret ambiguities in the way most favourable to the consumer.
Article 6 provides that unfair terms shall not bind the consumer but that the contract shall continue to bind the parties upon the remaining terms if it is capable of continuing in existence without the unfair terms.
The Article also requires member states to enact measures to prevent working around the Directive by imposing artificially, as the proper law of the contract, the law of a non-member state, where the contract has a close connection with the territory of the member states of the community.
Article 7 appears to give the right to consumer groups or organisations to take action against organisations of suppliers or sellers who draw up and use standard terms and conditions which contain unfair terms.
The article gives the possibility of legal action against individual sellers or suppliers, or groups of them from the same economic sector, or against their trade associations.
This remedy is particularly interesting since it applies to public sector suppliers (such as utilities) as well as private business.
Article 8 provides that member states may adopt more stringent provisions than those set out in the Directive if they so wish.
Article 10 requires the member states to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive no later than 31 December 1994.
Finally, in the Annex there are set out a number of terms which, according to the previous draft of art 3(3), was to be an indicative list of terms which may be regarded as unfair.
The most significant amendment still to be discussed on the Directive prior to its adoption related to the status of this list.
The July 1992 text regarded it as giving non-mandatory guidelines.
Consumer groups wished to give the Annex the status of a blacklist.
The final text adopts a compromise position which changes its status to "an indicative and non-exhaustive list of the terms which may be regarded as unfair" .
This wording, and the relevant wording in the preamble, means that the burden of proof is shifted onto the trader, businessman or professional relying on a clause falling within the Annex to prove that it is not unfair.
Thus while generally speaking all terms listed can be presumed to be unfair, this presumption may be contested by a seller who uses this type of term in specific situations.
At the very least drafting of consumer contracts which avoid the types of clauses set out in the Annex will go most of the way towards ensuring that such contracts are fair within the terms of the Directive.
Further discussion of the drafting of a consumer contract in the light of the Directive is covered in Chapter 5.
So far as UK law is concerned, the real question is the extent to which the Directive will require changes to the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, the Fair Trading Act 1973, the Consumer Credit Act 1974, the UCTA 1977, the SGA1979, and the SGSA 1982.
It is tempting to consider that the current legislation and the case law which has arisen under it, provides equivalent protection to that required by the Directive so that no changes need to be made.
However, the position may not be that clear.
One way of attempting to assess the situation is to look at the list of unfair terms set out in the annex to the Directive, and decide the extent to which English law will already control such clauses.
A preliminary assessment suggests that perhaps three quarters of these specimen clauses would be caught, but that the remainder of them would need specific implementation.
The general "unfairness test" will certainly need legislation to incorporate it into English law.
Although art 4 appears to apply the test of unfairness at the time the contract was entered into (like the UCTA), the standard of reasonableness does not equate exactly with the unfairness test in the Directive.
In addition the "plain language" requirements (although, arguably, case law on the interpretation of contracts and the Consumer Credit Act 1974 deal with the matter to some extent) will also need an enactment.
The definition of "plain language" will, it is suggested, be particularly difficult to arrive at.
The problem with implementation in the UK is that the Unfair Contract Terms Act already regulates various types of contractual relationships, namely freely negotiated commercial contracts, commercial contracts on standard terms and conditions and consumer contracts whether or not freely negotiated.
Simply implementing the Directive by means of a statutory instrument would  result in yet another regime relating solely to consumer contracts.
The alternative would be amendment of the UCTA, either by statutory instrument, or through a new Act.
The current thinking of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) is set out in a Green Paper published in October 1993.
Currently, the DTI do not propose in implementing the Directive to amend the UCTA in any way.
They state that the protection offered by the UCTA will remain.
They consider that the test of fairness in the Directive has similarities to the test of reasonableness to which a majority of the terms within the scope of the UCTA are subject.
In their view, the extent of this similarity should reduce any problems arising from the overlap between the two measures.
The DTI consider that although the title of the Directive applies to all contracts involving consumers, the recitals and indeed parts of the text, imply that it can only apply to contracts for the supply of goods and services.
The DTI also points out that the definition of a consumer in the Directive is narrower than that in the UCTA, which talks of "dealing as a consumer" The courts have thus interpreted the UCTA as giving protection in certain circumstances to companies dealing as consumers, while the Directive only applies to natural persons.
The Green Paper sets out draft implementing regulations which by and large follow closely the wording of the Directive.
Comments on the Green Paper have been requested by 14 January 1994 and it is at the time of writing too soon to predict what the ultimate shape of the implementing legislation will be.
However, if the DTI view is accepted, then the UKwill have to cope both with the UCTA and a separate regime for consumers who are natural persons under the Directive.
Standard conditions for the supply of goods to business customers
2.1 Introduction
This Chapter will concentrate on the drafting of standard conditions for the supply of goods in business as opposed to consumer transactions.
Precedent 1 is a set of standard conditions for the sale of goods written from the viewpoint of the seller.
Thus it is referred to, as is customarily the case, as a set of standard conditions of sale.
Precedent 2 covers the same type of transaction, but it is drafted more widely to cover not only the supply of goods, but also the supply of work and materials and the supply of services.
It is written from the point of view of the purchaser, and therefore, as again is customary, is referred to as a set of standard conditions of purchase.
It will be treated rather as a set of conditions relating to the sale of goods or the supply of work and materials for the purposes of the comparative analysis carried out in this chapter.
Precedent 3 is a framework agreement governing the continuous supply of goods under a number of orders placed over a period of time.
Finally, Precedent 4 deals with particular points relevant to the sale of second-hand goods in a business context.
The chapter commences with a comparative analysis of Precedents 1 and 2, and then finishes with a commentary on Precedent 3 and Precedent 4.
Conditions of sale and conditions of purchase are two different sides of the same coin.
The obligations to be dealt with are the same, but the approach is very different as between the buyer and the seller.
Thus, the most useful way of analysing the first two precedents is to compare the provisions in each of them which relate to the same contractual issues and consider the two different approaches.
This exercise is valuable not only to enable the draftsman to produce a set of conditions which is most to the advantage of his client (whether his client be buyer or seller), but also to enable him to understand the motivation of the other side when he is in negotiation with their advisers.
The use of standard conditions gives rise to two special problems under the common law.
The first relates to whether a set of standard conditions should govern the contract in the first place, and the second (in the case where the  parties exchange their respective sets of standard conditions) to the question of which set shall govern the contract between the parties (the so-called "battle of the forms" ).
These issues will be considered first before turning to an analysis of the remainder of the clauses in Precedents 1 and 2.
2.2 Incorporation of standard conditions in the contract
The problem of incorporation of standard terms and conditions has been dealt with in a series of cases generally known as the "ticket cases" , which arose from the practice of printing terms and conditions on a variety of documents from railway or steamship tickets, to deck chair or swimming pool tickets, which were intended to govern the contract between the proprietor and the person using his services (see for instance Parker v South Eastern Railway (1877) 2 CPD 416, Hood v Anchor Line (Henderson Brothers) Ltd [1918]AC 837, Chapelton v Barry UDC [1940]1 KB 532 and Thornton v Shoe Lane Parking Ltd [1971]2 QB 163).
The special issues in the ticket cases revolve around whether the party whom it is sought to bind under the conditions on the ticket had actual or constructive knowledge of their existence.
The question of constructive knowledge is dealt with in part by asking whether or not, in the circumstances of the particular case, the ticket was the sort of document on which one would reasonably expect to find legally binding terms and conditions, and in part by asking whether or not the party issuing the ticket made reasonable attempts to bring the existence of the conditions to the notice of the other party.
The first relevant principle to be derived from the ticket cases in the case of contracts placed on standard terms and conditions is that, if the party whom it is sought to bind knows that there is a set of standard terms which the other party intends should apply to the contract, and he enters into the contract on this basis, he will be bound by them.
This will be so whether he takes the trouble to read them or not, and whether they are actually set out in a document in his possession, or (subject to the question of the need to offer an oppportunity to inspect, which is discussed below) merely incorporated into the contract by a reference in such a document.
The question of constructive knowledge is more difficult.
On the principles relating to constructive knowledge in the ticket cases, the documents upon which standard terms and conditions are usually printed (quotations, order forms and acknowledgments) are clearly the sort of document where one would expect to find terms and conditions, and which a reasonable man would read carefully.
Thus, prima facie, the party who receives such a document should be bound by relevant standard terms and conditions, even if he never reads the document, and is unaware that they exist.
However, the hostility of the courts towards "unreasonable or onerous clauses" has led them to ignore this principle, where such a clause is printed on the  reverse of a document, or incorporated by reference.
Here they rely on the principles in the ticket cases which require a reasonable attempt to give notice to a party of the existence of terms and conditions by which it is intended to bind him.
If such notice is required and not given, and the party has no actual knowledge of the terms and conditions, he cannot be fixed with constructive knowledge of its existence (see for instance Spurling (J) Ltd v Bradshaw [1956]1 WLR 461 and Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1988]2 WLR 615).
It is hard to see why reasonable notice should be an additional requirement where the document concerned is one which a reasonable man would regard as a legal document, to be read carefully for its terms and conditions.
However, it is the job of the draftsman to produce certainty for his client rather than to rely on general legal principles.
For this reason, all documents which have standard terms and conditions on the reverse should have a clear statement on the front to the effect that the contract is to be subject to the terms and conditions on the reverse.
Examples of relevant statements are given at the beginning of Precedents 1 and 2.
Where conditions are incorporated by reference it is also prudent and, according to some authorities, necessary, to offer to the party whom it is sought to bind by them a reasonable opportunity for inspection (see Parker v South Eastern Railway, above).
This issue is discussed further, below, in the section relating to the effect of sub-contracts.
Finally, as a preliminary issue, it is important to establish that actual or constructive knowledge of the relevant conditions occurred before the contract concerned came into existence.
This is elementary contract law, because, obviously, once the contract has been formed it is too late to try to change it by adding additional terms (see Olley v Marlborough Court Ltd [1949]1 KB 532).
Many of the ticket cases failed because the ticket was not issued until after the contract was formed.
2.3 The battle of the forms
The problems associated with the battle of the forms arise because the common law principles governing the formation of contracts are based on the concept of a bargain arrived at through a process of negotiation, while the whole purpose of standard conditions is to minimise or exclude the process of negotiation.
In the process, according to the common law, one party indicates his interest in the transaction (invitation to treat), the other party then proposes the terms upon which he is willing to complete the transaction (offer), and the first party then indicates his agreement to those terms (acceptance) whereupon the contract comes into existence.
However, in order to create the contract, the acceptance must be a total and unconditional acceptance of the offer.
If the offer is not acceptable, then it is up to the other party to make a different proposal (counter-offer).
The two parties will then exchange counter-offers, until one  party accepts the counter-offer of the other, whereupon the contract then comes into existence.
The common law is not well adapted to the use of standard terms because their use is inconsistent with a freely negotiated bargain.
Thus the process of contract formation arising out of the exchange of documents containing or referring to standard terms creates considerable problems when one tries to fit it into the framework of offer and acceptance.
There are two leading cases on the battle of the forms, BRS v Arthur V Crutchley Ltd [1968]1 All ER 811, and Butler Machine Tool Co Ltd v Ex-Cell-O Corporation (England) Ltd [1979]1 WLR 401.
The first step is for the seller to send out a quotation, on the back of which will be printed his standard conditions of sale.
The quotation will state that any contract entered into as a result of the quotation will be on these standard conditions of sale, to the entire exclusion of those of the buyer (see the preliminary statement of Precedent 1).
In most cases the quotation will also state that the sending back by the buyer of an acceptance of the quotation will not automatically result in a contract; a contract will only come into existence upon acceptance of the order by the seller.
Precedent 1 is a typical set of standard conditions of sale which would be found upon the back of a seller's quotation, and cl 1 adopts this approach.
Where the quotation is not capable of immediate acceptance by the buyer it is thus an invitation to treat, and, at this stage, the seller has kept all of his options open.
Absent this provision, the quotation will be an offer.
Whether the quotation be an invitation to treat or an offer is actually immaterial, because the buyer will in response send back his purchase order with his standard conditions of purchase on the back.
Even though the purchase order accepts on its face all of the terms of the seller's quotation, and even if the quotation had the status of an offer, the purchase order will not qualify as an acceptance.
This is because in the purchase conditions there will be a provision stating that any contract entered into pursuant to the purchase order will be on the standard conditions of purchase on the back of the order (see the preliminary statement and cl 1.1 of Precedent 2).
This contradicts the requirement on the quotation that the contract be on the standard conditions of the seller.
Thus the purchase order is either an offer or a counter-offer, but in neither event does the contract come into existence at this stage.
The seller will on receipt of the order normally send back an order acknowledgement.
If the order acknowledgement contains no reference to the standard conditions on the back of the quotation, the acknowledgement will become the unconditional acceptance needed to create the contract.
In this case, contrary to the wishes of the seller, the buyer's conditions will govern the contract, because the seller has, in effect, accepted the counter-offer of the buyer, contained in the purchase order, to do business on the buyer's conditions.
In fact the acknowledgement in most cases either has the seller's conditions printed on the back, or refers to the execution of the contract in accordance with the quotation in such a way that the seller's conditions on the back of the quotation are incorporated by reference.
In this case the acknowledgement is another counter-offer, and at this stage no contract has been created.
In some cases, on receipt of the seller's acknowledgement the buyer will send back another acknowledgement.
If the seller's acknowledgement amounted to an unconditional acceptance then this further acknowledgement has no effect on the contract which has already been concluded.
However, if the seller's acknowledgement was a counter-offer, the buyer's acknowledgment will, again, either be an unconditional acceptance (ie no further reference to the buyer's standard conditions), or a further counter-offer.
If it is supposed that the last acknowledgement to pass between the parties is a counter-offer then at this stage no contract has been created.
However, in nine cases out of ten the parties do not appreciate this fact.
They will have exchanged their pieces of paper with their attention on the specific terms on the front, and the administrative process of placing and logging an order, but, in many cases, they will not have the legal training to make the proper analysis of the situation.
If asked, at this stage, each side would be likely to reply that its standard conditions governed the transaction.
The above analysis is based upon a combination of the principles in BRS and Butler, but the two cases do have some differences.
In BRS the final exchanges took place just as the goods were being delivered.
Prior to delivery there had been an exchange of counter-offers which the court held did not result in a contract.
At the time of delivery the plaintiff's employee tendered a delivery note for signature which made it clear that the contract was to be on the plaintiff's conditions.
However, the defendant's employee stamped the note with a statement that delivery would be accepted subject to the defendant's conditions, and then signed it.
Following that, the plaintiff's employee made delivery of the goods.
The court held that the tendering of the delivery note was another counter-offer, and that the defendant's employee made a further counter-offer when he over-stamped the delivery note and signed it.
When the plaintiff's employee then chose to accept the delivery note and deliver the goods his conduct constituted an unconditional acceptance of the last counter-offer and the defendan t's terms were held to apply.
In Butler there was a similar exchange of counter-offers, but here the last communication between the parties, sent by the seller, was a copy of the buyer's order, signed by way of acknowledgement, together with a covering letter stating that the order was acknowledged, and was being "entered into in accordance with the offer" .
The court held that the covering letter had not made it clear that the seller was intending to contract on his own terms and conditions, and that he had merely mentioned the offer by way of reference for its main terms (eg quoted price and delivery).
Thus the seller's return of the signed copy order, containing the buyer's terms and conditions, was an unconditional acceptance, and the contract came into existence on the buyer's terms and conditions.
Butler thus agrees with BRS to the extent that both cases see the battle of the forms as an exchange of counter-offers, which can only result in a contract when one side makes an unconditional acceptance, either intentionally, or in error.
The lesson from Butler is that not every document sent between the parties is in fact a counter-offer.
Only those documents which clearly state that the contract is to be entered into upon the terms and conditions of the sender, and either have those terms and conditions printed on them, or clearly incorporate them by reference, will rank as counter-offers.
In Butler the seller lost the battle of the forms because he was careless and failed to make his last document a counter-offer instead of an acceptance.
The decision in Butler turned on the fact that the battle of the forms was ended because the last document exchanged was construed as an unconditional acceptance, but what if the last document exhanged is a counter-offer, as discussed in the analysis set out above?
In this case, as can be seen from BRS, all is not lost.
Acceptance can be signified not only by a written document, but also by conduct.
If the last counter-offer came from the buyer, then the seller will signify acceptance (depending on the type of goods and the nature of the transaction concerned) when he ei ther appropriates goods to the contract, puts their manufacture in hand, or delivers them to the buyer.
Where the last counter-offer came from the seller, the buyer will accept that offer, and create the contract, when he takes delivery of the goods from the seller, or (if earlier) when he pays for them.
On this analysis the contract will always be governed by the standard conditions attached to the last genuine counter-offer to pass between the parties, although (as seen from Butler) this may not actually be the last document to pass between the parties.
Where there is no document constituting an unconditional acceptance, BRS tells us that the contract will actually come into existence when this last counter-offer is accepted by performance.
Since in most cases, the last counter-offer is an acknowledgement of order from the seller, it is his conditions of sale that will most often prevail.
If the purchaser is to try to ensure that his is the last counter-offer, so that it will be accepted by the conduct of the seller, the device of sending back another acknowledgement does not work well in practice.
In many cases, it does not fit into the administrative systems of the parties, nor is it a usual way of doing business.
Not only is this burdensome and difficult to administer, but it becomes very noticeable to the seller.
The seller is then likely specifically to reject the buyer's acknowledgement, and a detailed negotiation as to whose conditions are to govern the contract will probably ensue.
This defeats the purpose of doing business on standard conditions (speed and efficiency in dealing with a large number of transactions), and the purchasing departments of both the buyer and the seller will probably be unable to cope with the work load imposed if there are many such special negotiations.
Clause 1.2 of Precedent 2 (copying the buyer's approach in Butler) approaches the problem in a different way, by seeking to pre-empt the seller's administrative processes.
The buyer provides the seller with, and encourages him to return, a standard acknowledgement which acts as an unconditional acceptance of the purchase order, thus bringing the contract into existence on the standard terms on the back of the purchase order.
Following BRS the buyer also makes explicit the common law rules on acceptance by conduct, in case the seller simply fails to send back any acknowledgement at all.
Clause 1.2 is not foolproof.
If the seller ignores it, and returns his own acknowledgement form, then the seller will simply have made another counter-offer, either precipitating a special negotiation, or, if the buyer is not alert, leaving the way open for an unconditional acceptance on the part of the buyer when the seller delivers the goods to him.
In one situation where such a provision was used in practice, on a large scale, over a number of years, it was found to operate successfully in more than 50 per cent of the cases.
The only practical problem encountered (apart from cases where the proffered acknowledgement form was ignored, and the seller returned his own acknowledgement form or called for a special negotiation) was that some sellers' administrative systems required the issue of their own acknowledgement form before an order could be logged.
They therefore issued their own form and sent back both the buyer's form and their own form.
Under these circumstances, unless the seller's own acknowledgement was poorly drafted (as was the case in Butler), without a special negotiation it was almost impossible to decide in individual cases which set of conditions prevailed.
There is no sure way under English law of winning the battle of the forms.
Some civil code jurisdictions get around the problem by looking for a consensus which blends the two sets of conditions, and uses the power of the court to resolve contradicting conditions.
Another view of some civil law courts is that neither set of conditions can apply to the contract (since the parties manifestly wanted the contract to exist, acted as if it did, but could not agree as to which of their sets of standard conditions should apply to it).
In these circumstances, the general provisions of the code will apply to the contract instead.
There are obiter dicta in Butler which explore these possibilities, but they are possibilities alien to the common law, and unlikely to be applicable.
Certainly they are not part of the ratio decidendi of Butler, so that here BRS, which applies the common law principles in its ratio is to be preferred.
Since the civil law options are not open to the English courts, it is likely that by the application of the doctrines of offer and acceptance, they will, in the end, find in each case one winner and one loser for each particular battle of the forms, even though that winner may not be the one who fires the last shot.
A recent discussion of the battle of the forms in the Court of Appeal which confirms the above analysis, can be found in G Percy Trentham v Archital Luxfer [1993]1 Lloyd's Rep 25, CA.
The only sure way to avoid the problem is to negotiate, either in advance, or on a case by case basis, to determine whose conditions will apply.
This is however, not always practical, and in the absence of a change in the law through  statute, the battle of the forms will continue to be a feature of the formation of contracts placed on standard terms and conditions.
2.4 The effect of sub-contracts
In addition to the problems raised by the battle of the forms, there is the need to consider the relationship between prime contract conditions and subcontract conditions.
In many cases the contract under consideration between the buyer and the seller will be a subcontract (for instance to provide components) which will be used by the buyer to fulfil part of his obligations under a prime contract where he is in his turn acting as the seller.
The buyer's greatest exposure will come not so much from the fact that he has accepted the seller's standard conditions as governing the contract between them, but from situations where there is a mismatch between the obligations undertaken by the seller in favour of the buyer under the subcontract, and the obligations undertaken by the buyer to his customer under the prime contract.
A simple example would be a delivery date, under a subcontract for the supply of components, which was too late to enable the buyer to fulfil his delivery obligations under a prime contract for the supply of a machine in which the components were to be incorporated.
A proper matching of these liabilities is known as a back to back arrangement, and the best way of dealing with this issue is to negotiate a full back to back subcontract rather than rely on standard conditions.
Of course, a seller is not interested in the buyer's liabilities under any potential or actual prime contracts.
In fact, at common law, it is better for the seller if he is not fixed with actual knowledge of such contracts, since he is then more likely to escape liability for consequential loss suffered by the buyer if the seller's default prevents the buyer from fulfilling his obligations under those contracts.
The buyer naturally has the opposite concern and, in the absence of a formal back to back contract, when one is dealing with standard conditions of purchase the best that can be accomplished is to incorporate a provision like cl 1.3 of Precedent 2, which notifies the seller of the possibility of prime contracts, and attempts to impose their terms upon the seller, coupled with an opportunity for the seller to examine them and a warning that they will apply, even if not examined.
This clause relies upon the ticket cases discussed above,(see particularly Parker v South Eastern Railway, ante) If such clauses are to stand it is vital that attention be drawn to them on the face of the order, and wording for this purpose is also provided at the commencement of Precedent 2.
2.5 Delivery, the passing of property and risk, and payment
The discharge of the basic obligations under the contract, relating to delivery, passing of risk and property, and payment, are partly a matter for negotiation  between the parties (although the SGA provides guidelines) but must also be looked at in relation to s 3 of the UCTA, with its restrictions on clauses excluding liability for breach.
On the question of delivery, cl 2.1 of Precedent 2 imposes the strict obligations of compliance with a specified delivery date upon the seller, which a buyer will normally try to require.
The provision making time of the essence will enable the buyer to cancel the contract for breach, without notice, if the seller does not deliver exactly in accordance with the contract.
In the absence of an express (or possibly an implied) provision to this effect, the SGA provides that time of delivery is not of the essence (see SGA 1979, s 10(2)).
So far as the seller is concerned he would prefer not to accept liability to deliver by a particular date in the first instance.
However, s 3 of the UCTA would control a clause which would exempt the seller from liability for failure to comply with a specified delivery date.
Clause 4.2 of Precedent 1 deals with the matter by not taking on the obligation to deliver to a specific date in the first place.
For both the seller and the buyer the question of who pays the costs of delivery is really only a matter related to the negotiation of the price.
This is reflected in the terms of cl 2.1 of Precedent 2 and cl 4.1 of Precedent 1.
Similarly the question of the need to store the goods in third party premises, if the buyer cannot accept delivery when they are ready for delivery, really comes down to who pays for the storage charges.
The matter is addressed from the point of view of the buyer in cl 2.2 of Precedent 2 and of the seller in cl 6 of Precedent 1, but apart from the time when the buyer becomes responsible to pay the storage charges, the principles are much the same.
Under the SGA 1979, s 17 property in the goods under a contract of sale generally passes when the parties intend it to pass (although s 18 of the SGA lays down rules which apply if the intention of the parties cannot be ascertained).
Unless otherwise agreed risk passes when property passes (whether or not delivery has occurred) under s 20(1) of the SGA.
The tension between the buyer and the seller in this area occurs around retention of title clauses.
A detailed discussion of such clauses is beyond the scope of this chapter, but it should be said that the case law shows that use of such clauses to provide security in the event of failure to pay the purchase price is surrounded with many pitfalls.
The more complicated and far-reaching that the clause is, the more likely it is to be ineffective.
A simple clause reserving title in the goods to the seller until the buyer has paid their purchase price in full is probably the type of clause most likely to be effective.
In large measure its effectiveness depends upon the types of goods concerned.
Goods whose identity can be easily determined (eg capital goods) as the subject matter of the contract to which the retention of title clause relates are most suitable for this type of clause.
Commodity goods (eg bricks or cement) give rise to severe problems of identification.
In Precedent 1, cl 5.5 gives an example of a simple retention of title clause, coupled with the express grant of a power to sue for the price, once the due date for payment has come, even though property has not passed.
Section 49(1) of  the SGA in general makes the passing of property a precondition for suing for the price, but s 49(2) permits an express provision of this type, provided that the price is stated in the contract to be due on a "date certain" .
By contrast cl 4.1 of Precedent 2 provides (as the buyer would prefer) for property to pass on delivery, and does not couple either the passing of property or delivery with the obligation to make payment.
In this connection s 28 of the SGA should be noted; unless otherwise agreed delivery of the goods and payment of the price are concurrent conditions, and must therefore occur at the same time.
Such a provision is not normally practical, and certainly not favourable to buyers.
Hence the need to exclude it (both in Precedent 1 and Precedent 2) by express provisions.
The specification of payment terms, currencies and dates has to be dealt with in much the same way, whether looked at from the point of view of the buyer or the seller, as can be seen by a comparison of Precedent 1, cl 5.4, and Precedent 2, cl 5.1.
From the point of view of both the buyer and the seller, it makes more sense for risk to pass on delivery than upon the passing of property, and this is provided for in cl 4.3 of Precedent 1 and clause 4.1 of Precedent 2.
The SGA 1979, s 20(2) provides that where delivery has been delayed through the fault of one of the parties, the goods are at the risk of that party until delivery.
This is reflected in cl 2.2 of Precedent 2, where risk remains with the seller until delivery to the buyer notwithstanding delivery to storage.
On the other hand cl 6 of Precedent 1 deems delivery to store to be delivery for the purposes of the contract, so that risk passes despite s 20(2) of the SGA.
It is a mistake to look at the provisions relating to the passing of risk as in some sense enabling one party to score over the other.
What is at stake here is which party is to carry the insurance to cover the risk, and this is, presumably, once again reflected in the price.
One final area of risk is that relating to goods damaged in transit.
Precedent 2 does not deal with this expressly, since the thrust of cl 2.1 is that delivery will normally be to the buyer's premises.
Since risk does not pass till delivery, in most cases, then any damage in transit will automatically be for the account of the seller.
Clause 7 of Precedent 1 expressly specifies that this is to be the case.
For both the buyer and the seller this tends to make sense, since it is more efficient for the seller to insure against the risk under an insurance policy covering the risk of damage to goods in transit than for the buyer to cover the goods under an all risks policy relating to his moveable property.
2.6 Warranty of good title and quiet possession
As discussed in Chapter 1, ss 6(1) and 7(3A) of the UCTA prevent the exclusion of liability in relation to the warranties of title and quiet possession implied by s 12 of the SGA and s 2 of the SGSA.
The combination of cls 6.3 and 7.3 with cl 1.4 of Precedent 2 in fact imposes both express and implied warranties and an indemnity in this area, but they are hardly necessary, given the  operation of the UCTA.
Apart from the special area of infringement of third party intellectual property rights, which is discussed in detail below, most sellers do not even attempt to exclude such liability, and this approach is followed in cl 5.1 of Precedent 1.
As discussed in Chapter 1, certain classes of sellers, mainly receivers and liquidators, do take advantage of the provisions of s 12 (3) of the SGA or s 2(3) of the SGSA to pass only such title as they may have in the goods, subject to disclosure of known encumbrances, and a warranty of quiet possession so far as they are concerned.
However, although in theory any seller could take advantage of these sections generally, it would not be commercially practicable in most cases for ordinary sellers to do so, and again, provision to this effect is included in Precedent 1.
Precedent 1 does exclude liability for infringement of third party intellec-tual property rights, and the relevant provisions are analysed in the section relating to this subject.
Clauses 5.1 (including both phrases in square brackets), 5.2 and 5.3 are necessary if one intends to exclude that liability otherwise the bracketed phrases in cl 5.1 and the whole of cl 5.2 and 5.3 should be deleted and cl 5.4. and 5.5 should be renumbered accordingly.
2.7 Conformance to specification, quality, fitness for purpose
The most important aspect of the discharge of the obligations under the contract is the supply of the goods that are the subject matter of the contract, in compliance with the specifications contained in the contract.
To the extent that the contract leaves these matters undefined, the warranties implied by the SGA as to quality, suitability, and compliance with description or sample will apply.
The seller is anxious to insure that, above all else there is certainty as to the extent of his obligations in this area.
Clause 2 of Precedent 1 proceeds on this basis.
This provides for a sale by description, but the description is one which has been carefully drafted by the seller for general use when selling that particular product.
Any further specifications must be specifically set out in the relevant order.
Equally important is the last sentence of the clause which excludes prior representations and extraneous material, such as sales catalogues.
Given that the aim is one of certainty, and that here the contract is not with a consumer, the likelihood is that s 8 of the UCTA will have no effect on this clause.
Clause 2 cannot operate effectively without an exclusion of the other warranties otherwise implied by the SGA in the area of quality and fitness for purpose.
Clause 9.3 operates to provide this.
Again given that these conditions deal with a business sale, these exclusions are likely to pass the test of reasonableness imposed in such cases by s 6 of the UCTA.
While the buyer is also anxious to ensure certainty, his desire is to surround the contract and impose upon the seller as many express warranties as possible  to ensure that the goods supplied under the contract are satisfactory to him in every way.
Clauses 3.1 and 3.5 of Precedent 2 achieve this aim.
In fact they spell out many of the warranties which would (in the absence of exclusion) be implied under the SGA anyway.
Finally, since the buyer is also anxious not to exclude any of his rights implied at common law or under the SGA in addition to the express rights which he has included in the contract, he makes it absolutely clear that all such implied rights will also apply to the contract.
This is accomplished by cl 1.4 of Precedent 2.
There is a rule of construction which is sometimes quoted ( "inclusio unius, exclusio alterius" ).
This states that where specific clauses are included in a contract, which deal with matters which would otherwise be implied into the contract by law or statute, the very fact of the inclusion of a specific clause dealing with those matters, by implication, excludes the provisions which would otherwise be implied by law or statute in respect of them.
Nevertheless, as will be seen from both Precedent 1 and Precedent 2, neither the buyer nor the seller has chosen to rely on this maxim.
The seller expressly excludes implied provisions, and the buyer expressly includes them.
In general this rule should only be used as a last resort in legal proceedings over a contract where the parties have failed to make an express provision as to the status of implied terms.
One particular point should also be made here about the implied warranty of fitness for purpose.
Many businessmen suppose that there is a general obligation on the seller (in the absence of exclusion clauses to the contrary) to ensure that the goods are fit for the purpose for which the buyer intends to use them.
Thus whenever goods turn out to be unsatisfactory, they immediately attack the seller with the complaint that they are unfit for purpose.
However, s 14(3) of the SGA in fact provides quite a restricted remedy.
First, the buyer has to make known to the seller, expressly or by implication, the purpose for which he intends to use the goods.
Second, even where this is the case, no warranty is implied if the circumstances show that the buyer does not rely, or it is unreasonable for him to rely, on the skill or judgment of the seller in deciding whether or not the goods are in fact suitable for that purpose.
This warranty is obviously much easier for a consumer to invoke than a businessman.
Not only is the purpose for which the consumer buys consumer goods more likely to be known to the seller (particularly by implication) but it is far more likely that the consumer will rely on the seller's judgment and skill.
In a business sale, the buyer will be less likely to be able to take advantage of the implied warranty, particularly because he may well be as expert as the seller in dealing with the goods which are the subject matter of the contract, and so will not (or it will not be reasonable for him to) rely on the seller's judgment and skill.
A good example is the purchase of components or sub-assemblies for incorporation in apparatus manufactured and sold by the buyer to third parties.
In such cases, where the component is unsuitable for its purpose, it is quite unlikely that the seller will even know what its intended use was, and, even if he did, it would frequently be clearly unreasonable for the buyer to place any  reliance on the judgment and skill of the seller in relation to use in apparatus in respect of which the buyer himself was an expert, since he was its manufacturer.
In all such cases, the buyer is far better advised to include an express statement of the purpose for which the goods are intended, and an express warranty as to their suitability for it.
In this way, the question of suitability is really only another aspect of the description or specification with which the goods are to conform, and it is up to the seller to accept or reject this term as he sees fit.
Buyers often attempt to include express warranties stating that goods will be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended to be used by the buyer, or suitable for the purpose for which they are ordinarily or generally used.
The seller should of course resist such warranties because of their vagueness, and insist that, if he is to give such a warranty, the purpose should be clearly specified in the contract, with sufficient detail to enable him to be sure that the goods that he supplies are in fact suitable for that purpose.
2.8 Acceptance and rejection
Bound up with the question of compliance with specification is the question of acceptance, since, until the goods have been accepted by the buyer, the seller cannot be sure that he has discharged his basic liability to perform the contract, even if he has delivered the goods to the buyer.
The importance of acceptance is that once it has taken place, the buyer can no longer reject the goods, claim that the seller has failed to perform the contract, and refuse to pay the price.
Instead he must rely upon a claim for damages, but is otherwise obliged to keep the goods and pay for them (see SGA 1979, s 11(4)).
The seller thus wants to make acceptance as quick, simple and decisive as possible.
Section 27 of the SGA imposes upon the seller a duty to deliver the goods and upon the buyer to accept the goods in both cases in accordance with the terms of the contract.
Clause 3 of Precedent 1 relies upon this provision, to specify that acceptance shall take place upon delivery.
Given the wording of cl 6 relating to delivery to store, acceptance would also take place upon delivery to store.
The buyer, on the other hand, wishes to put off acceptance as long as possible, so that he can be sure the goods are totally satisfactory to him before he gives up the opportunity of rejecting them.
In the absence of express provisions in the contract, s 35 of the SGA makes this difficult for him, since it provides that he is deemed to have accepted goods either when he tells the seller that he has done so, or when he does an act in relation to them which is inconsistent with the ownership of the seller.
In any event, if he does not reject the goods within a reasonable time he will be deemed to have accepted them.
It is true that s 34 of the SGA gives the buyer an implied to right to examine the goods, to see if they are in conformance with the contract, before he can be deemed to have accepted them, but this right is not a precisely defined one.
Accordingly, the buyer will prefer to set out specific rights to inspect and test the goods, coupled with a formal procedure for acceptance or rejection, and an exclusion of the operation of ss 11 and 35 of the SGA.
This is dealt with in Precedent 2 in cll 3.2 and 3.3.
It should be noted that cl 3.2 gives a right to reject for latent defects that could not have been discovered upon examination and which appear after a reasonable period of use.
This right goes far beyond the rights of rejection otherwise granted by the SGA.
Also, cl 3.3 deals with the right not only to reject the goods in question, but grants a right to cancel the balance of the order as well.
This right does not arise under the SGA where the contract provides for delivery in more than one consignment, since there has been no breach in respect of goods not yet delivered, however reasonable it is for the buyer to fear that there will be in the future.
In most cases, the buyer thus prefers to include such a right expressly, which he can then invoke at his discretion in situations where the defects in the initial delivery of goods are so severe that he loses confidence in the ability of the seller to perform properly under the contract at all.
Finally, cl 3.4 deals with a common practice of sellers in relation to delivery notes.
They often require the buyer to sign a delivery note which contains a statement to the effect that signature signifies that the goods have been delivered in compliance with the contract, and in good condition, a nd that therefore the buyer accepts them.
Such notes are usually signed by the buyer's warehouse staff, who are not necessarily part of the buyer's purchasing department, and may have no idea of what the requirement under the contract is in relation to the goods.
Nevertheless, once signed by an authorised employee of the buyer, the statement on such delivery notes is often hard to rebut.
Clause 3.4 thus negates the effect of such delivery notes, except in relation to matters (eg the number of boxes delivered) which the warehouse staff can properly check, and can be reasonably expected to sign for.
Incidentally, no clause attempting to negate the effect of a delivery note, which purported to apply the seller's terms and conditions to the transaction, would have any effect on the "battle of the forms" .
Either the contract will already have been concluded, on whatever terms, in which case the delivery note's terms are irrelevant anyway, or else, if the contract has not yet been concluded, the delivery note, being a later "shot" in the "battle" , would prevail over the conditions on the purchase order (see the BRS case, above) and the contract would come into existence when the buyer took delivery and signed the note.
2.9 Warranties and guarantees
The terms warranty and guarantee have various meanings in different legal contexts.
For instance in the context of the law relating to sale of goods, a warranty is usually understood to be a representation relating to the subject matter of the contract, which is of secondary importance, and whose breach therefore  entitles the injured party to damages but not to terminate the contract.
However, in the commercial world, in the context of conditions of sale and purchase, the terms are used interchangeably to refer to express remedies granted in the contract by the seller to the buyer in respect of defective goods or workmanship.
Superficially, the approach is the same whether the remedy is contained in conditions of sale or conditions of purchase, and in many cases the wording of the remedies may be very similar indeed.
Clauses 9.1 and 9.2 of Precedent 1 set out a standard type of guarantee.
This guarantee covers the period of time in which defects will be remedied, the procedure that the buyer must go through in order to take advantage of the guarantee, and the remedies which the seller offers in respect of the defects.
Clause 3.2 and the first part of cl 3.3 of Precedent 2 cover the same principles, but, as would obviously be preferred by the buyer, in cl 3.3 the procedures are more flexible, and the buyer's rights are somewhat greater.
In particular, there is no limitation of the remedy by reference to some period of time during which defects will be remedied.
Care should be taken with the phrase in square brackets in cl 9.1.2 of Precedent 1.
If it is not included, cl 3.2 becomes what is known as a "revolving warranty" , with the effect that each time the goods are replaced or repaired, the new or repaired goods enjoy another warranty for the whole of the period in cl 9.1.1.
This will go on indefinitely, unless and until one of the repaired or replaced goods manages to last for the whole of the period.
Some manufacturers (particularly of mass-produced goods) do not take this point, and are happy to replace goods (it is cheaper than repairing them) until the buyer is satisfied.
Both buyers and sellers prefer the inclusion of express remedies.
From the buyer's point of view, the warranties implied by the SGA, the SGSA, or the common law, leave something to be desired.
First, there are the problems of the remedies available to the buyer after he has accepted the goods, discussed above.
Once the right to reject the goods has lapsed, the buyer's only remedy is to sue for damages for breach of contract.
This is an unsatisfactory position when what he really wants is to have the defective goods repaired or replaced.
From the seller's point of view, rather than expose himself to the vagaries of litigation, and the need to negotiate with each buyer as to exactly what remedies are appropriate in each case, it is preferable to set out a specific and detailed procedure which deals with the remedying of defects.
Also, apart from legal considerations, in most situations, a seller who does not provide such a remedy is likely to be at a significant commercial disadvantage compared to his competitors, since the giving of such guarantees and warranties has really become standard commercial practice.
Warranties and guarantees also address one issue, of equal concern to the buyer and the seller, which is otherwise untouched by the law.
This is the question of product lifetimes.
In the absence of some specification which states how long a product should last under normal use without manifesting defects (whether or not due to normal wear and tear), the parties have to resort to the express or implied warranties of merchantable quality, or the express or implied  rights of rejection.
However, both of these look at the state of the goods upon delivery.
Goods can, for instance, be accepted as of merchantable quality, and then manifest a defect sometime afterwards.
Unless the buyer can show that there was a latent defect present in the goods at the time of delivery which later became manifest (and hence that the goods could not have been of merchantable quality at the time of delivery) he may be left with no remedy.
At the most he could try to plead some implied term into the contract that the goods would last for a reasonable time after delivery to allow him a reasonable period of trouble-free use.
The problem then arises, even if the court is prepared to consider that such a term should be implied, as to what is the period of time that should be considered reasonable.
This will obviously vary with many factors, including the nature of the product, the price paid and so on.
It is far better for the buyer and the seller to avoid all these arguments by providing for an express period of time in which defects will be remedied.
This period is thus, in effect, the lifetime of the product, during which it can be expected to function normally without the need for repair (other than, of course , in appropriate cases, replacement of consumables—such as ribbons on a printer, and routine or preventive maintenance—such as the need to service a car in accordance with the maker's guidelines).
Warranties and guarantees are thus generally to the benefit of both the buyer and the seller, but there is one area where their interests do not coincide.
A seller will prefer that the buyer's only remedy in respect of defective goods should be the express one granted under the contract.
He will thus insert an additional clause specifying that the express remedy is the sole remedy, and that all other remedies express or implied by law or statute are excluded.
In Precedent 1 this exclusion clause is set out in cl 9.3.
On the other hand, the buyer will wish to have the comfort of the guarantee, and, in addition, whatever rights law and statute grant him in the particular circumstances of the case.
This is achieved in Precedent 2 by the inclusion of cl 1.4, which expressly protects these additional rights notwithstanding the specific remedies granted by cll 3.2 and 3.3.
Where the seller is successful in adding his additional clause, the guarantee obviously acts as an exclusion of liability.
In this case, s 3 of the UCTA will regulate a guarantee as excluding liability for breach or failure to perform a contractual obligation.
However, it is clear that, as discussed above, an express warranty is in the interests of both parties, so that, provided the guarantee grants what can be regarded as a reasonable remedy under the particular circumstances of the contract, no problems under s 3 of the UCTA should arise.
The reasonableness of the guarantee has two aspects.
First, is the procedure that the buyer has to go through to claim the remedy a proper one from an administrative point of view, or is it designed to make it difficult or impossible in practice for the buyer to invoke the clause?
Second, is the period for which the seller promises to remedy defects a reasonable one given the nature of the goods and any other relevant factors under the contract?
For instance, a year may be a reasonable period for a washing machine, but five years, or even ten, may be expected for building works.
The guarantee in cll 9.1 and 9.2 of Precedent 1 is designed (subject of course to the question of agreeing a specific period for the remedying of defects appropriate to the particular circumstances of the case) to pass the test of reasonableness imposed by s 3 of the UCTA.
The only contentious area is the requirement in cl 9.1.1.2 that the defects must be found "to the Seller's satisfaction to have arisen solely" from the seller's default.
This restriction is often imposed to avoid prolonged arguments between seller and buyer.
However, with one eye on s 3 of the UCTA, it would probably be prudent either to delete the words "to the Seller's satisfaction" and perhaps also "solely" , so that the test to be met becomes an objective one, or, at the very least, to provide that the test be "to the Seller's reasonable satisfaction" .
Such an addition could well be implied into the contract by the court anyway, in instances where the seller refused to recognise responsibility for a defect even though he was clearly responsible, so that the refusal amounted to clear unreasonableness or even bad faith.
In most cases, where the guarantee is a reasonable one both parties are better off excluding other remedies express or implied by law or statute.
The seller appreciates the clear specification of his liability for defects under the contract, and the buyer should be willing to trade his somewhat uncertain remedies at law for the ease and certainty of remedy provided by the guarantee.
The only area where this may work to the buyer's detriment is in the area of the product lifetime.
For instance, if a car manifests a defect outside the express period for the correction of defects, where the guarantee excludes other legal remedies, this is (subject to s 3 of the UCTA) the end of the matter.
However, in the absence of such an exclusion, it might be possible to show that the failure was due to a latent defect present in the car at the time of delivery (particularly possible in the area of negligent design) and this could then be the basis for a claim that there was a breach of the warranty of merchantable quality at the time of delivery.
2.10 Cancellation and termination
So far as cancellation and termination are concerned, in most conventional types of contracts, the seller would wish to perform, or be given the opportunity to perform the contract.
It is not in his interest to terminate the contract prematurely, nor would he wish to give the buyer the opportunity to do so.
The seller might wish to cancel the contract if it proves too difficult or costly to perform, but this is not a feature of the straightforward contracts that would be covered by the use of Precedent 1.
The issue arises in relation to more complicated or long-term contracts such as the system contract dealt with in Chapter 4, and the matter is discussed there.
The seller may also wish to cancel in the event of the buyer's insolvency or impending insolvency, but in this case the remedies granted by the SGA coupled with cl 5 are sufficient to deal with the issue in  most cases.
In any event most sellers prefer, as a commercial issue, not to discuss such questions with their buyers, and, instead to protect themselves by the use of appropriate credit vetting procedures, or else, where possible, by requiring payment upon delivery, or even in advance of delivery.
The buyer, as always, has a different view.
Circumstances may change, and he may no longer want the goods and services that he has ordered, or the seller may appear to be doing a poor job, and the buyer may have lost confidence in him.
Precedent 2 tackles two aspects of this issue.
Clause 10.1 permits cancellation (by either party) after a reasonable extension of time where one party or the other cannot complete the contract through circumstances outside that party's control.
This is not a contentious clause and benefits both buyer and seller equally.
It is in neither's interest for the contract to be kept in suspense indefinitely in circumstances where it clearly cannot be performed.
(However, it must be said that even here, the seller would probably not want the contract to be terminated too quickly or easily by the buyer, as the seller has more to lose by being denied the chance to perform and get full payment for the supply of his goods.)
Clause 10.2 of Precedent 2 provides an express right for the buyer to cancel in the event of breach by the seller.
It is arguable that this clause does no more that restate the remedies available at common law to the buyer in the event of the seller's breach of contract.
However, the common law right to terminate depends upon showing a sufficiently serious breach of contract to justify termination in the eyes of the court.
It is far better for the buyer to have an express right which applies to any breach of contract.
Further, the clause gives additional flexibility by permitting the cancellation of the order in whole or part.
The common law right to terminate does not extend this far.
The remedy of purchase from a third party, with the consequent obligation on the seller to pay the increase in the purchase price, is broadly similar to that available at common law, but, again, the express clause imports a certain amount of flexibility in the area of the price paid for third party goods (for instance a premium might have to be paid for quick delivery to meet the buyer's original timescales), and as to how closely their specification need resemble the original goods.
The final point, not covered by either precedent, relates to cancellation at will for convenience.
The system contract in Chapter 4 deals with this question at some length, but it is not unusual in standard terms and conditions to find a simple clause which permits the buyer to cancel the order in return for payment of a cancellation fee.
The cancellation fee is usually expressed as a percentage of the contract price, and varies on a sliding scale.
For some goods it may be appropriate to permit cancellation at no charge provided sufficiently long notice is given.
However, such notice is usually longer than the lead time that the seller requires to fulfil an order.
This is because until the commencement of the lead time period, the seller has probably not started work on the order, and so has incurred no expense.
Equally, at some point before delivery, the seller will require the scale to rise to 100 per cent, because he will by then have completed the products ready  for delivery, and cancellation will no longer relieve him from incurring the costs associated with performing the contract.
Of course at this stage, rather than pay the cancellation charge, the buyer might as well take delivery.
2.11 General exclusions of liability
The supplier of goods or services can become liable for breach of contract in a variety of ways.
The main types of breach are obviously failure to supply goods or services of the nature or quality promised under the contract, late delivery, and failure to pass a good title to items sold under the contract.
A less common type is some act or omission of the seller u nder the contract which lays the buyer open to legal action from third parties (for instance because goods which have been negligently manufactured injure a third party while they are being used by the buyer).
The exclusion of liability for all of these issues can be dealt with either on a piecemeal basis by writing a particular exclusion or limitation into the contract conditions dealing with each issue, or, alternatively or in addition, by the use of blanket exclusion clauses covering the whole contract.
In practice most sets of conditions use a mixture of the two solutions.
In Precedent 1, this is the approach that has been followed.
As already discussed above, limitation of liability in respect of specification, delivery and defects in the goods have been dealt with specifically in cll 2, 4 and 9 respectively.
The specific exclusions of liability referred to above should in theory be sufficient for nearly all purposes, since it is unrealistic of the seller to suppose (and indeed contrary to s 3 of the UCTA) that he can exclude all liability for his failure to perform in all circumstances.
No set of contract conditions can or should protect the seller totally against his own incompetence.
However, as discussed in Chapter 1, a clause excluding liability for failure to perform due to circumstances beyond his control (usually called a "force majeure" clause) is considered reasonable both commercially, and for the purposes of s 3 of the UCTA.
Clause 8 of Precedent 1 is a typical shortform force majeure clause.
In addition, more as an added insurance than anything else, many se llers also include a general exclusion clause which limits total liability under the contract by reference to a monetary figure.
These general exclusion clauses are discussed in Chapter 1, and a typical example is included in Precedent 1 as cl 13.
As noted in Chapter 1 extreme care must be taken in setting the monetary figure in order to pass the reasonableness test imposed by s 3 of the UCTA.
The final type of general exclusion clause which is also frequently included is one which restricts or excludes liability for various kinds of economic loss.
Such clauses are often called "consequential loss" clauses, but the term is not entirely accurate, since economic loss under a contract can be both direct and consequential under the common law (see Victoria Laundry (Windsor) Ltd v Newman Industries Ltd [1949]2 KB 528).
If one intends to exclude both direct  and consequential economic loss, such as in relation to loss of profit, then it is important not to fall into the trap of drafting the clause to exclude consequential loss only, although exclusion of consequential loss is obviously an important element.
Clause 12 of Precedent 1 deals with the point in the correct way to avoid this problem.
The point of such clauses is to put the buyer in the position where his remedies for failure to perform or defective performance under the contract are limited in fact to compelling either proper performance under the contract (by way of rework repair or replacement) or the return of his money.
Additionally, in the case of a complete failure to perform to contract at all, the buyer will usually have the right to go elsewhere to a third party for the same goods and to charge the seller for any increase in the price paid to the third party over that payable to the seller.
Such clauses are often fiercely resisted by the buyer, but in most cases without reason.
The seller can only obtain a limited profit margin on the goods or services that he supplies, while the economic loss suffered by the buyer for his failure to perform may be unknown to the seller, not easily forecast, and far greater than the profit margin the seller enj oys on the transaction.
A seller who accepted an unlimited liability for economic loss on many of his transactions would soon go out of business.
In appropriate circumstances, and where the profit margin admits of the taking of such a risk, sellers do sometimes accept liability for economic loss, but then it is usually with some upper limit, or through the operation of a liquidated damages clause.
Liquidated damages clauses are discussed in Chapter 4.
From the point of view of the buyer, general exclusion clauses are obviously less popular, and, in general he sees little need for them to protect his own position.
Precedent 2 reflects this position, as discussed above.
However, even buyers tend to adopt some form of force majeure clause (often a mutual one benefiting both parties) and this has been included in cl 10.1 of Precedent 2.
The general exclusion clauses discussed in this section which impose blanket exclusions of liability give rise to particular problems under the UCTA.
Where the UCTA controls exclusion clauses its approach is either to state that liability for the matter in question "cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to any contract term" (imposition of a total ban) or to state that such liability cannot be so excluded or restricted unless the relevant contract term "satisfies the test of reasonableness" .
As discussed in Chapter 1, the total ban, in the case of non-consumer transactions applies only to liability for death or personal injury (UCTA 1977, s 2(1)) and liability for breach of the implied warranties of good title and quiet possession implied by the SGA and the SGSA (UCTA 1977, ss 6(1) and 7(3A)).
Exclusion of other types of liability (for damage other than personal injury or death, for breach generally, for breach of implied warranties other than title or quiet possession, and for pre-contract misrepresentation—ss 2(2), 3, 6(3), 7(3) and 8 of the UCTA) is governed by the requirement of reasonableness.
Where an exclusion clause controlled by the UCTA is specific to a particular liability the effect of the UCTA is either to render the clause unenforceable (if the UCTA imposes a total ban), or (if the UCTA imposes the requirement of reasonableness) to render the clause unenforceable if it fails to satisfy that requirement.
For all practical purposes a specific exclusion clause which is rendered unenforceable under these circumstances can be regarded as void.
However, the UCTA does not state that such clauses are void, merely that the relevant liability cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to them.
Thus, in the case of a general exclusion clause, is it possible that a clause could be enforceable in respect of some classes of liability controlled by the UCTA, but not in respect of others?
The question is easily answered where the two types of liability to be excluded are covered by sections of the UCTA which only render the clause unenforceable if it fails to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness (for instance s 2, property damage, and s 6(3), implied warranty of quality).
Section 11(1) of the UCTA states that the test for reasonableness is that the term must have been "a reasonable and fair one…having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made" .
This means that the court cannot take account of the various breaches actually committed, for which the defendant is seeking protection under the clause, to decide if the clause is reasonable or not, either generally, or separately in relation to each breach.
The test is one test, applied on the factors known to the parties at the time of the breach.
Thus, if the clause is reasonable it will stand for all the classes of liability under the UCTA for which exclusion is permitted if the requirement of reasonableness is satisfied.
If the clause fails the test it will be unenforceable in respect of all of those classes.
The position is more complicated where one of the classes of liability concerned is one for which the UCTA forbids exclusion or restriction.
For instance, take a clause which imposes a total cap on liability under a contract.
Let us suppose that an action is brought for breach of contract by a party to a contract who is a natural person who has suffered both personal injury and property damage as a result of the breach.
Section 2(1) of the UCTA forbids exclusion or restriction of the liability for personal injury, but s 2(2) permits the exclusion or restriction of liability for other loss or damage if the clause satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
Under these circumstances could the court refuse to enforce the exclusion clause in respect of the personal injury, but, subject to the requirement of reasonableness, enforce it in relation to the property damage?
Alternatively would the court regard the clause as so tainted by its attempt to exclude the liability for personal injury that it would also become unenforceable in respect of the liability for property damage as well?
Theoretically, on the wording of the UCTA, this former course would seem correct.
The UCTA does not render the clause void, under s 2(1).
It merely overrides it and makes it unenforceable for the purposes of excluding liability  for death or personal injury.
However, one has to ask whether the court would not be tempted to hold that the clause was not only unenforceable under s 2(1) but also failed the reasonableness test under s 2(2).
One of the circumstances which was known, or ought to have been known, to the parties at the time they were entering into the contract was that in certain circumstances the clause would clearly be unenforceable (namely, in the area of liability for death or personal injury).
Is a clause which is known to be unenforceable in certain circumstances an unreasonable one?
The first way to avoid such danger is not to plead any general exclusion clause as a defence to an action for a class of liability for which the UCTA renders exclusion clauses unenforceable.
However, this is not free from danger if one then seeks to rely on the clause for another class of liability, in the same action, for which exclusion is permitted, subject to the requirement of reasonableness.
The plaintiff may himself raise the arguments in the previous paragraph about the unreasonable nature of the clause, and seek to render it unenforceable for all classes of liability under the action.
The only totally safe way to proceed is to exclude from the operation of the general exclusion clauses all those classes of liability for which the UCTA imposes a total ban on exclusion clauses.
Then, provided the exclusion clause as a whole passes the general requirement of reasonableness as discussed above, the clause will be effective to exclude liability for all the other classes of liability for which the UCTA permits exclusion subject to the requirement of reasonableness.
This is the basis adopted in Precedent 1 by the inclusion of cl 14.
With regard to cl 14.2, there is in fact no need to include such a clause unless one is actually contracting with a natural person, hence the limitation on the operation of the clause in the phrases in square brackets.
However, since the liabilities covered by cl 14.2 are easy to insure against, many sellers offer this clause without any of the limitations in the phrases in square brackets, as a marketing advantage over their competitors.
Finally, the overall reasonableness of this type of clause, which excludes or limits liability for all breaches under a contract, however caused, is discussed in Chapter 1, under the heading relating to s 3 of the UCTA, to which regard should be had.
Clauses 12 and 13 of Precedent 1 rely on the principles in that discussion to pass the test of reasonableness, and are drafted in such a way that they apply to all types of breach however caused (including by reason of wilful default).
2.12 Indemnities for third party claims
The one area of liability which really concerns the buyer is the possibility of claims made against him by third parties which arise because of some act or omission of the seller.
These can arise from a great variety of causes.
A particularly specialised area is that relating to infringement of third party  intellectual property rights, and this is discussed in detail in the next section.
Here the discussion is confined to more general types of tortious liability, such as that arising from negligent acts or omissions.
For instance, a manufacturer may sell defective goods which the buyer then sells on to a third party who suffers loss or injury because of the defect.
The third party will probably sue the buyer under the contract of sale between them, and the manufacturer in tort for negligence.
Another example is the contractor who negligently injures an employee of his customer while on that customer's premises.
The employee is likely to sue the contractor in tort for negligence, and the customer as his employer for failing to provide safe working conditions.
The issues surrounding these indemnities under the UCTA have been discussed in Chapter 1.
However, in general, where he can prevail, the buyer will wish to have an indemnity from his seller against all such third party claims and their consequences.
Clause 7 of Precedent 2 provides an extensive example of such an indemnity.
Were a seller to accept such an indemnity he would probably want to add further clauses requiring the buyer to give prompt notification of such claims, to permit him to take over conduct of the claim, not to admit liability, and to render him any necessary assistance in contesting the claim.
Although there are more elaborate clauses, copying the wording at the beginning of cl 10.2 of Precedent 1 would suffice in most cases.
It should be noted that cl 7.3 goes beyond granting an indemnity for third party claims, since it also grants an indemnity for loss suffered by the buyer as a result of breaches of the contract by the seller.
The purpose of such an indemnity is to aid the buyer in recovering all relevant damages in the event of litigation against the seller.
In the absence of such a clause the buyer would have to prove for the damage suffered under the normal common law rules.
The inclusion of this clause enables him to recover all loss, however remote,(provided he can prove causation) suffered as a result of the sellers's wrongful acts, since the seller has, by the clause, undertaken an express obligation to compensate him for such loss.
This clause is the exact opposite of the seller's clause excluding economic loss included in cl 12 of Precedent 1.
2.13 Intellectual property righ
ts As stated above, ss 6(1) and 7(3A) of the UCTA provide that liability for breach of the obligations as to title and quiet possession implied by the SGA and the SGSA cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to any contract term.
This gives rise to special problems in the area of the supply of goods which infringe third party intellectual property rights, where the UCTA applies.
It has been held that such supply amounts to a breach of these warranties (see Niblett v Confectioners' Materials [1921]3 KB 387 and Microbeads v Vinhurst [1976]RPC 19).
This being the case, it is not possible simply to exclude or, indeed, restrict, liability for the supply of goods which infringe third party intellectual property rights.
Rather as in the case of the warranty given for defective goods, both buyer and seller find it advantageous to set out the procedure and remedies to be followed in the event of any claim of infringement being made by a third party.
The seller normally wishes to have the conduct of the claim at his expense, and its ultimate litigation or settlement, since it concerns his business generally, and it is usually impractical for the buyer to deal with the issue anyway, since all of the relevant knowledge is in the possession of the seller.
Thus most such clauses provide for the seller to have the conduct of the action at his expense, on the basis that he will bear the costs of conduct and pay any resulting settlement or judgment against him and the buyer.
In addition such clauses also normally give the seller the options of trying to alter the goods so that they are no longer infringing, buying the third party claimant out by obtaining a licence from him, or, in the last resort, taking back the goods in return for a refund of their purchase price; all of these at the seller's expense.
Many such clauses then go on to provide, rather as in the case of the warranty in relation to defective goods, that the express remedies in the clause are the only remedies granted to the buyer in respect of infringement of third party intellectual property rights, and that all other remedies implied by law are excl uded.
Where the UCTA applies, this final clause is obviously unenforceable by reason of s 6(1) or 7(3A) of the UCTA.
It is also at least arguable that these sections of the UCTA prevent the seller from imposing an obligation on the buyer to permit the seller to exercise the options of alteration of the goods or taking them back for a refund, because such actions by the seller would be in breach of his warranty of quiet possession.
Where the UCTA applies, despite such an exclusion clause, the buyer will be able to enjoy the express remedies under the clause, and any other remedies available to him at law as well.
For instance, in addition to the express remedies, he would be able, in appropriate cases, to claim damages for lost profits or contracts or other interruption caused to his business if he were unable finally to use or resell the goods concerned.
As discussed under the section relating to general exclusion clauses, not only would the specific exclusion in the infringement clause be unable to bar such claims, but general exclusion clauses (eg those relating to economic loss) would be ineffective as well.
From the buyer's point of view this is a totally acceptable situation, and it will be seen from cll 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 of Precedent 2 that the buyer here provides for express warranties against infringement, coupled with an indemnity against the consequences of such infringement.
The general indemnity in cl 7.3 of Precedent 2 would also assist the buyer in appropriate cases, and would have the effect of permitting recovery of compensation for all damage flowing from the infringement, subject only to proving causation, as discussed in the previous section.
In addition, any other rights the buyer may have at law are reserved to him by the operation of cl 1.4.
The one exception, provided for the benefit of the seller in these clauses, is where the infringement is caused because of a design, specification or other instructions supplied by the buyer for the seller to work to.
This exception is not only totally fair and reasonable, but it is hard to see how the seller could be in breach of a warranty of title or quiet possession since the problem is caused by the buyer not the seller.
Such exceptions should be untouched by s 6(1) or 7(3A) of the UCTA.
If the seller wishes to restrict or exclude liability for infringement of third party intellectual property rights there are, however, some options open to him.
First of all, he can include a patent indemnity, without any exclusion clause tacked on to it, along the lines set out above, providing express but limited remedies, and, in particular, not putting forward an express right to compensation for economic loss.
If the seller honours the express remedies, the buyer will have to prove any loss that he has suffered in addition to that covered by the clause, subject to the ordinary common law rules relating to remoteness.
This will not be easy, and, where the seller has solved the problem of infringement by obtaining a licence, or redesigning the goods so as to put an end to the infringement, there may not be any other damage suffered in any event.
Also, it should not be forgotten that in order for the buyer to be able to claim any additional damage at all, he must first prove that there has indeed been a breach of the warranties of title or quiet possession.
If the allegation of infringement proves unfounded, there will have been no breach.
Not only is it hard to see how the buyer can then bring an action for breach of contract, as opposed to invoking the express remedies of the clause, but, even if he were able to, there is no reason why general exclusion clauses capping liability or excluding liability for economic loss should not be effective, since they would then only have to pass the reasonableness test.
Section 6(1) or 7(3A) of the UCTA could have no application in this situation.
A seller who wishes to exclude liability for third party infringement can do so to some extent by relying on SGA 1979, s 12(3) and (4) or SGSA 1982, s 2(3) and (4),(contracting to pass only such title as the seller may have, subject to disclosure of known encumbrances and a warranty of no interference in quiet possession by the seller).
He can include a clause stating that, while he is not aware of any intellectual property right which may be infringed by the possession or intended use of the goods being sold, he takes no responsibility for the existence of relevant third party intellectual property rights, and the buyer must assume the risk of infringement of the same.
Additionally, of course, where a seller is aware of any infringement (and, to be prudent, any allegation or potential for an allegation of infringement) he should give specific notice of this to the buyer, either in the clause, or separately.
Failure to do this will, in the event of a third party claim based on such an undisclosed infringement, expose him to damages at large for breach of the warranties relating to disclosure of known encumbrances under s 12(4) of the SGA or s 2(4) of the SGSA, as the case may be.
Such a clause is not attractive to the seller, because he loses control of the conduct of the claim of infringement, and it is often a difficult clause to persuade the buyer to accept unless there is a problem which is so well-known in a particular industry that many sellers tend to include a reservation relating to it.
The best way to proceed is to include the clause as described above, but then to add a further clause, covering the issues normally included in an intellectual property rights indemnity, and stating that these express remedies are offered (on, as it were, an ex gratia basis) even though the seller takes no responsibility for the infringement.
There is no case law on such a combination of clauses.
However, given that the disclaimer of responsibility is valid under the UCTA, it is hard to see why such a solution, which puts the buyer in a better position than he would have been in if no express remedies were available, should fall foul of the UCTA.
Precedent 1 adopts this approach of a combination of an exclusion of liability for infringement pursuant to s 12(3) of the SGA and s 2 (3) of the SGSA (set out in cll 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3) and an express but limited remedy for such infringement (set out in cl 10).
If one wished to adopt the approach of a limited express remedy with no exclusion of liability, one would retain cl 10 (except for cl 10.6) and delete the phrases in square brackets in cl 5.1 and the whole of cll 1, 5.2 and 5.3.
In this case cl 14.1 should refer to s 12(1) of the SGA and s 2(1) of SGSA, and not ss 12(3) and 2(3) respectively.
It would then operate to preserve the express warranty in cl 5.1 (as amended) and the implied warranties in s 12(1) and s 2(1).
Finally, with regard to cl 10, it should be noted that no obligation to permit alteration of the goods to make them non-infringing is imposed on the buyer, and that the obligation to return infringing goods, subject to a refund of the price, is only imposed on the buyer where it arises not at the option of the seller but because of a judgment or settlement relating to the claim of infringement (which is presumably not entirely within the seller's control).
This is to avoid the problem about breach of the seller's warranty of quiet possession discussed above.
2.14 Boilerplate, choice of law and confidentiality
It will always be the case that sets of standard terms and conditions contain a number of miscellaneous conditions, falling either within the popular designation of "boilerplate" , or else specifically tailored to the type of transaction that the standard set of terms is designed to cover.
So far as boilerplate conditions are concerned, the draftsman can add these to the extent that they seem appropriate and necessary, although he should be sparing given that the aim of the exercise is to produce a relatively short set of commercially acceptable terms and conditions.
These could cover items such as interpretation, waiver of rights, severability, forum for settling disputes, an arbitration clause, and so on.
In general most of these clauses are not highly desirable in short form  standard conditions.
The most useful is probably a choice of law clause (see cl 15 of Precedent 1, and cl 1.4 of Precedent 2).
It should not be forgotten that there are different systems of law even within the UK, so that even for domestic sales such a clause avoids a potential source of confusion.
Another area of boilerplate that is probably useful t o include as a general rule is that relating to confidentiality, although, where the parties are specifically exchanging and dealing with large volumes of confidential information a separate full confidentiality agreement is much more appropriate.
Short confidentiality clauses in standard conditions are really only precautionary measures to be relied upon in an emergency.
Clause 11 of Precedent 1 is a very short form of confidentiality clause, which is mutually binding, while cl 11.1 of Precedent 2 is inserted by the buyer only to bind the seller.
Additionally this clause forbids the seller to use the order or his connection with the buyer as a reference sale or generally for advertising or publicity purposes.
In practice most buyers are prepared to have their names used for publicity purposes provided that this is done in a controlled manner and with their prior consent.
2.15 Assignment and sub-contracting
One area of boilerplate which concerns the buyer rather more than the seller is the question of the right to assign or sub-contract all or part of the order.
The basic principle of law is that assignment of a contract is not possible where the identity of the assignor is an important factor for the other party to the contract either as a reason for his entering into the contract in the first place, or because it is for some reason significant for the proper discharge of the contract.
Buyers prefer not to leave such issues to the general law.
They would contend that in nearly all cases the identity of their supplier was an important factor, and therefore would prefer to permit no assignments without their prior consultation and consent.
Clause 24 of Precedent 1 achieves this aim.
Even sellers may prefer their buyer not to have the option to assign the contract, given that one of the important factors for sellers when deciding to enter into a contract may well be the creditworthiness of the buyer.
Although it is true that the general law would in most cases not permit assignment by a buyer to a less creditworthy assignee (since creditworthiness would be an important factor relating to the identity of the contracting party) many sellers would prefer to insert a non-assignment clause and avoid the argument.
In standard conditions of sale, therefore, many sellers would choose the option of a clause forbidding both parties to assign (in whole or part) as the most commercially acceptable way of proceeding.
Clauses forbidding assignment of the contract do not however prevent a seller from factoring or otherwise assigning the debts due to him from his buyer as a result of his performance of the contract.
Most buyers in any event have little interest in preventing such an assignment, and most sellers, at least in  today's economic climate, desire to retain the flexibility to sell off or secure their debts to assist their cash flow.
Thus clauses which use wording forbidding the seller to assign the "benefit or burden" of the contract are undesirable.
As long as the seller cannot assign the contract itself, he should be free to deal with the benefit thereof (ie the resulting revenue stream and book debts) as he sees fit.
Sub-contracting is a more complex issue.
In the absence of a clause forbidding this, a seller can sub-contract his performance of the contract without reference to, or sometimes even the knowledge of, the buyer.
The theory is that such sub-contracting should not concern the buyer, because the seller still remains liable to him for the discharge of the main contract in accordance with its terms.
Most sellers will not wish to contract out of the right to sub-contract, since this gives them a very necessary flexibility in times of high demand, or if their own facilities cannot produce the required goods for some reason.
A buyer, on the other hand, may well be concerned about such sub-contracting, since one of the factors on which he decided to place the contract with the seller may well have been his perception of the seller's own quality standards and competence to carry out the contract.
A sub-contractor may not be able to satisfy the buyer in this regard.
Clause 9.2 of Precedent 2 contains a standard clause preventing sub-contracting.
Note however that even this clause does contain some exceptions to allow either for nominated sub-contractors or sub-contracting customary in the trade, since, in practice, the seller probably will not perform every part of the contract himself.
2.16 Tooling, the supply of hazardous goods
It is not possible to discuss all of the possible specially-tailored clauses that may be needed in standard terms and conditions, but these can cover such issues as special acceptance tests, compliance with particular quality standards, or special methods of manufacture or delivery.
In Precedent 2 there are two such special clauses which are, however, felt to be of some general application.
The first relates to the provision by the buyer of jigs, tools and gauges.
Where the buyer places an order with a seller for what is essentially sub-contract manufacture, it is very common either for the seller to require the buyer to provide such items for use in the manufacture, or to have such items made himself.
In the latter case this is often at the buyer's expense (either by way of a lump sum payment, or an amortisation by way of an increase in the unit price of the goods to be manufactured using such items).
A good example would be a contract for the seller to manufacture injection-moulded plastic components for the buyer, which requires one party or the other to provide the mould to be used in such production.
The buyer's concerns here are that these items be properly used and cared for by the seller, that they be used only for the purposes of the sub-contract  (ie that the seller does not use them to make goods for third parties which can then be sold by them in competition with the buyer), and that they be returned to him at the end of the sub-contract.
Although in this case the seller will find it hard to argue with the buyer's concerns, where the seller himself provides the items (even if he charges the buyer directly or indirectly for their provision) he may well wish to keep ownership himself, either to tie the buyer to him for future orders, or to enable him to use the items for sales to third parties, even if this is to the buyer's detriment, and against his consent.
Such use may be an infringement of any design rights that the buyer has in the designs embodied in these tools, but he will in general prefer to avoid the attempt to invoke these rights, and instead to rely on a provision like cll 8.1 and 8.2 of Precedent 2.
A final clause, which is of general application is that relating to the supply of hazardous goods in accordance with the proper safety regulations, particularly in the area of the proper hazard markings and warnings.
This is set out in cl 12.1 of Precedent 2.
2.17 Framework supply agreements
Where the parties have a continuing relationship based on a large volume of business under regular orders the most efficient way to proceed is to enter into a framework agreement which regulates the mechanism for placing orders and decides in advance the terms and conditions which will govern each order.
Such agreements are useful because they make order placing easier, and usually also contain a mechanism enabling the seller to have visibility of his buyer's future requirements and to make some preparation to meet them.
Additionally, since such agreements are usually only entered into by the seller with his most important customers, the special negotiation of a set of terms and conditions of supply is worth the effort of both sides, and, incidentally, is the best way of avoiding the battle of the forms.
Precedent 3 is a typical framework or "umbrella" supply agreement.
Clauses 1, 2 and 3 of Precedent 3 deal respectively with the identity of the parties, the period of validity of the agreement, and the general purpose of the agreement, all of which are self-explanatory.
It should be noted that cl 3 details the subject matter of the agreement (ie the products to be supplied and their particular specifications) by incorporating the contents of Scheds 1 and 2 to the agreement.
This is a useful mechanism which allows the agreement to be easily updated by replacing schedules as old products are dropped and new ones added.
Clause 4 is the heart of the agreement, dealing as it does with the mechanism for the forecasting of requirements and the placing of orders.
The forecast mechanism proposed here is one which is much to the advantage of the buyer, since it carries no obligation upon the buyer to purchase all or any of the forecast quantities.
To the extent the seller uses it to manufacture stock for the buyer  ahead of any orders he does so at his own risk.
Also the mechanism for updating the forecast is not a very accurate one.
One commonly used alternative is a rolling forecast.
As an example, every three months the buyer gives a 12 months forward forecast.
Thus the forecast's window of 12 months rolls forward three months every time the forecast is updated, and the balance of the previous periods' forecasts still within the new window are automatically updated as well.
In some versions of this type of forecasting, the buyer is obliged to purchase the requirements detailed in the first three months of the rolling forecast, so that, in effect, as he rolls his forecast on, he places an order for the first three months' requirements and forecasts those of the next nine months.
Where forecasts are not legally binding on the buyer, another commonly used alternative is for the buyer to agree to compensate the seller (up to some agreed limits) for excess inventory of the products covered by the agreement which are still in the seller's hands on termination of the agreement, but which he cannot reasonably dispose of elsewhere.
Clause 7.4 of Precedent 3 is a simple example of such a clause.
It is weighted in the seller's favour, as it has no upper limit, or other pre-conditions to the obligation to purchase.
The remainder of cl 4 deals with order placing.
Although a variety of provisions is possible, the position taken in Precedent 3 is that the seller is obliged to accept all orders placed for delivery subject to agreed lead times.
This type of provision is suitable for commodity goods which are produced by a continuous production process.
The seller has no difficulty in producing them for the buyer in any quantity provided he has sufficient notice to schedule production, and purchase needed materials and components.
For some types of goods, particularly those made to order this may not be appropriate.
In such cases, the seller will provide that no order is to become binding unless he has specifically accepted it.
Another variation is to impose on the seller the obligation to accept all orders placed in accordance with the buyer's forecast, even though that forecast is not binding on the buyer.
However, in such a case, since the seller may well have to take on commitments, either to purchase materials and components or to manufacture without order cover, so that he can be ready to supply the forecast requirements if ordered, the buyer must take some responsibility if he does not purchase up to his forecast.
This may take the form of an agreement to purchase a minimum percentage of the forecast, or to compensate the seller for excess work in progress or inventories.
Sellers in a strong bargaining position will attempt to impose such a clause even where they are not obliged to supply the forecast requirements.
In this connection, Precedent 3 imposes a minimum purchase obligation (see cl 4.6) and, as already stated, a buy-back on termination provision (see cl 7.4).
Lastly, cl 4.5 provides for the terms and conditions of supply which will govern all orders placed under the agreement.
These are set out in Sched 3.
Any standard set of conditions (such as Precedent 1 or Precedent 2) can be attached.
Clause 5 covers pricing, and incorporates a price variation formula to cover increases in future years.
In the absence of a firm formula, the parties will either tie themselves to a fixed price for the duration of the agreement (which is clearly usually undesirable) or else have to provide an agreement with a shorter duration, but with an option of renewal if new prices can be agreed.
A clause which merely imposes on the parties an obligation to renegotiate prices from time to time, once an initial period has elapsed, will simply turn the agreement, on the lapse of the initial period, into an agreement to agree, which is then void for uncertainty.
Where such clauses are included at the wish of the parties it is always as well to go on to spell out the consequences of the failure to agree.
The usual formula is that for a period of time ending on the expiry of the initial period the parties will attempt to renegotiate the prices to apply for a further fixed period.
If they agree, the agreement is renewed for that period, if they fail to agree by the expiry of the initial fixed period, then the agreement terminates automatically.
Clause 6 is a clause which sellers often try to impose.
Exclusive purchase obligations are in general permissible under various competition law regimes, but buyers, for obvious reasons, tend to avoid them.
The usual quid pro quo for this clause is found in cl 7.2.
If the seller cannot supply, for any reason, even if it is outside his control, then the buyer must be entitled to terminate the agreement and look elsewhere.
As an alternative, the seller sometimes agrees that the agreement can be suspended during the period of his inability to supply, so that the buyer can go elsewhere during that period, but is obliged to return to the seller (subject to any transition period needed to take delivery of and consume orders placed with third parties) when he is next in a position to supply.
This type of clause usually only grants the right of suspension, as opposed to termination, where the seller cannot deliver because of force majeure.
Apart from the points already discussed, the remainder of cl 7 is a standard termination clause.
It should be noted, however, that termination does not affect the status of orders wholly or partially outstanding at the date of termination.
This is a provision which is usually inserted, since, once an order has been placed, it becomes a separate contract, with a life of its own, and stands or falls on the terms and conditions which govern it.
Clause 8 provides the necessary precautionary provision to prevent the buyer claiming that he has the right to intellectual property arising out of any development work which the seller has had to effect in order to put himself in a position to supply the goods under the contract.
The law generally would provide (unless the contract specifically stated to the contrary) that such intellectual property would vest in the seller, but it is as well to clarify the point ahead of time.
Precedent 3 is intentionally a minimalist document, which contains little boilerplate, and little by way of exclusion clauses.
Obviously, once the principle of the document has been understood it is possible to create more elaborate framework agreements depending upon the client's requirements.
However, in  most cases, the best approach is to keep the framework agreement rather along the lines of Precedent 3 for length and simplicity, and to attach a more elaborate set of standard terms and conditions to govern each order.
2.18 Sale of secondhand goods
The problems relating to the sale of secondhand goods are basically no different from those of any other type of goods, except in the area of quality.
Secondhand goods clearly have different standards of quality than new goods.
Precedent 4 shows how this point should be dealt with.
Usually, secondhand goods should be sold on an "as is" or "as seen" basis.
Precedent 4 is a document which would be used where second hand goods were sold, for instance, at auction or over the counter, rather than in the context of a sale governed by a set of standard terms and conditions.
Where secondhand goods were sold regularly under standard terms, the correct approach would be to include a provision equivalent to Precedent 4 in the set, either as an alternative to or instead of the standard clauses applying to the quality standards for new goods.
The main area of exposure with secondhand goods is their use at work.
Section 6 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 imposes liabilities on those who supply equipment for use at work to ensure that it is "so far as reasonably practicable…safe and without risks to health when properly used" .
It should be noted that s 6 does not impose a civil liability, but only a criminal one (see s 47(1) (a) of the 1974 Act).
When secondhand goods are sold on the "as is" basis of Precedent 4, the question arises as to the extent to which the seller can disclaim responsibility for their condition if they are to be used at work either by the buyer, or by someone to whom the buyer sells them.
Section 6(8) of the 1974 Act can relieve the seller of responsibility in these circumstances provided that he obtains a written undertaking from the buyer that the buyer will himself take the necessary steps in relation to the safety of the goods.
Where the seller obtains such an undertaking it will relieve him from his liability "to such extent as is reasonable having regard to the terms of the undertaking" .
Precedent 4 contains such an undertaking and explains the steps that should be taken to obtain the benefit of s 6(8).
Precedent One
Standard conditions for business sale of goods
Statements on front of quotation
THE CONDITIONS OVERLEAF SHALL APPLY TO THIS QUOTATION AND TO ANY CONTRACT BETWEEN US FOR THE SUPPLY OF ITEMS DETAILED IN THIS QUOTATION (SEE CONDITION 1).
[PLEASE READ ALL OF THEM CAREFULLY.]
Statement on front of acknowledgement
YOUR ORDER [REFERRED TO ABOVE][NO []DATED []]IS ACCEPTED ON THE BASIS THAT THE CONDITIONS [OVERLEAF][ON THE REVERSE OF OUR QUOTATION NO []DATED []]SHALL APPLY TO THE CONTRACT BETWEEN US FOR THE SUPPLY OF THE ITEMS DETAILED IN YOUR ORDER (SEE CONDITION 1).
[PLEASE READ ALL OF THEM CAREFULLY.]
1 Formation of contract
1.1 Any order sent to the Seller by the Purchaser shall be accepted entirely at the discretion of the Seller, and, if so accepted, will only be accepted upon these conditions (hereafter referred to as the "Conditions" ) and by means of the Seller's standard order acknowledgement form.
1.2 Each order which is so accepted shall constitute an individual legally binding contract between the Seller and the Purchaser and such contract is hereafter referred to in these Conditions as an "Order" .
1.3 These Conditions shall override any contrary different or additional terms or conditions (if any) contained on or referred to in an order form or other  documents or correspondence from the Purchaser, and no addition alteration or substitution of these terms will bind the Seller or form part of any Order unless they are expressly accepted in writing by a person authorised to sign on the Seller's behalf.
2 Specification
All goods supplied by the Seller shall be in accordance with(i) the current edition of the relevant Product Description Leaflet as published from time to time by the Seller (copies of which are available from the Seller upon request) and (ii) those further specifications or descriptions (if any) expressly listed or set out on the face of the Order.
No other specification, descriptive material, written or oral representation, correspondence or statement, promotional or sales literature shall form part of or be incorporated by reference into the Order.
3 Acceptance
The Purchaser shall be deemed to have accepted all goods upon their delivery by the Seller to the address specified in the Order.
4 Delivery and risk
4.1 Unless otherwise stated in the Order, the price quoted includes delivery to the address specified in the Order, provided that the Seller reserves the right to make an additional charge to cover any increase in transport costs occurring before the date of delivery.
4.2 Any time or date for delivery given by the Seller is given in good faith, but is an estimate only.
4.3 Risk in the goods shall pass to the Purchaser upon delivery.
5 Title and payment
5.1 The Seller warrants that [(except in relation to intellectual property rights of third parties as referred to in Condition 5.3)]the Seller has good title to the goods [and that (pursuant to s 12(3) of the Sale of Goods Act 1979, or s 2(3) of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982, whichever Act applies to the Order) it will transfer such title as it may have in the goods to the Purchaser pursuant to Condition 5.5].
[5.2 The Seller warrants that it is not aware of any actual or alleged infringements of any intellectual property rights of third parties which relate to the goods other than those (if any) which the Seller has disclosed to the Purchaser prior to acceptance of the Order.]
[5.3 The Seller shall have no liability to the Purchaser (other than as provided in Condition 10) in the event that the goods to be supplied under the Order infringe any intellectual property rights of a third party (including without limitation by reason of their possession, sale or use, whether alone or in association or combination with any other goods); the Seller gives no warranty that the goods to be supplied under the order will not infringe as aforesaid, and all conditions, warranties, stipulations or other statements whatsoever relating to such infringement or alleged infringement (if any), whether express or implied, by statute, at common law or otherwise howsoever, are hereby excluded.]
5.4 Unless otherwise stated in the Order, payment of the price of the goods comprised in each consignment delivered pursuant to an Order shall become due at the end of the month following the month in which that consignment is delivered.
5.5 Title to the goods comprised in each consignment shall not pass to the Purchaser until the Purchaser has paid their price to the Seller, but, even though title has not passed, the Seller shall be entitled to sue for their price once its payment has become due.
6 Storage
If the Seller shall be unable, through circumstances beyond its control (including without limitation lack of shipping instructions from the Purchaser), to deliver the goods within 14 days after notification to the Purchaser or its agent that the goods are ready for delivery, the Seller shall be entitled to arrange storage on behalf of the Purchaser, whereupon delivery shall be deemed to have taken place, all risk in the goods shall pass to the Purchaser, and delivery to the Purchaser of the relevant warehouse receipt shall be deemed to be delivery of the goods for the purposes of Condition 4.
All charges incurred by the Seller for storage or insurance shall be paid by the Purchaser within 30 days of submission of an invoice.
7 Damage in transit
The seller will replace free of charge any goods proved to the Seller's satisfaction to have been damaged in transit provided that within 24 hours after  delivery both the Seller and the carriers have received from the Purchaser notification in writing of the occurrence of the damage and also, if and so far as practicable, of its nature and extent.
8 Force majeure 8.1 The Seller shall not be under any liability for any failure to perform any of its obligations under the Order due to Force Majeure.
Following notification by the Seller to the Purchaser of such cause, the Seller shall be allowed a reasonable extension of time for the performance of its obligations.
8.2 For the purposes of this Condition, "Force Majeure" means fire, explosion, flood, lightning, Act of God, act of terrorism, war, rebellion, riot, sabotage, or official strike or similar official labour dispute, or events or circumstances outside the reasonable control of the party affected thereby.
9 Guarantee
9.1 For goods which are manufactured by the Seller or which bear one of the Seller's trade marks, the Seller grants the following guarantee:
9.1.1 The Seller shall free of charge either repair or, at its option, replace defective goods where the defects appear under proper use within [12 months]from the date of delivery, PROVIDED THAT:
9.1.1.1 notice in writing of the defects complained of shall be given to the Seller upon their appearance, and
9.1.1.2 such defects shall be found [to the Seller's [reasonable]satisfaction]to have arisen [solely]from the Seller's faulty design, workmanship or materials, and
9.1.1.3 the defective goods shall be returned to the Seller's factory at the Purchaser's expense if so requested by the Seller.
9.1.2 Any repaired or replaced goods shall be redelivered by the Seller free of charge to the original point of delivery but otherwise in accordance with and subject to these Conditions of Sale [save that the period of [twelve months]referred to in Condition 9.1.1 shall be replaced by the unexpired portion of that period only].
9.1.3 Alternatively to Condition 9.1.1, the Seller shall be entitled at its absolute discretion to refund the price of the defective goods in the event that such price shall already have been paid by the Purchaser to the Seller, or, if such price has not been so paid, to relieve the Purchaser of all obligation to pay the same by the issue of a credit note in favour of the Purchaser in the amount of such price.
9.2 In respect of all goods manufactured and supplied to the Seller by third parties the Seller will pass on to the Purchaser (in so far as possible) the benefit of any warranty given to the Seller by such third parties and will (on request) supply to the Purchaser details of the terms and conditions of such warranty and copies of any relevant product information sheets, technical data sheets or product leaflets issued by such third parties and the Purchaser shall be solely responsible to the entire exclusion of the Seller for complying with all of these.
9.3 The Seller's liability under this Condition shall be to the exclusion of all other liability to the Purchaser whether contractual, tortious or otherwise for defects in the goods or for any loss or damage to or caused by the goods, and (subject to Condition 14) all other conditions, warranties, stipulations or other statements whatsoever concerning the goods, whether express or implied, by statute, at common law or otherwise howsoever, are hereby excluded; in particular(but without limitation of the foregoing) the Seller grants no warranties regarding the fitness for purpose, performance, use, nature or merchantable quality of the goods, whether express or implied, by statute, at common law or otherwise howsoever.
10 Intellectual property rights
10.1 In the event that any claim is made against the Purchaser for infringement of Intellectual Property Rights arising directly from the use [or sale]by the Purchaser of the goods, the Seller at its own expense shall conduct any ensuing litigation and all negotiations for a settlement of the claim.
The Seller will bear the costs of any payment (either by way of a lump sum or a continuing royalty payment) made in settlement, or as a result of an award in a judgment against the Seller in the event of litigation.
10.2 The benefit of Condition 10.1 is granted to the Purchaser by the Seller only in the event that the Purchaser shall give the Seller the earliest possible notice in writing of any such claim being made or action threatened or brought against it, shall make no admission of liability or take any other action in connection therewith, shall permit the Seller to have the conduct of the claim pursuant to Condition 10.1, and shall (at the Seller's expense) give all reasonable information, cooperation and assistance to the Seller (including without limitation lending its name to proceedings) in relation to the conduct of the claim.
In addition to, if it is made a condition of any settlement made by the Seller, or judgment awarded against the Purchaser, pursuant to Condition 10.1, the Purchaser shall return or destroy, as applicable, all infringing goods still under its control subject to a refund by the Seller of any payment for such goods already made [less a reasonable allowance for depreciation of the goods by reason of their use (if any) by the Purchaser prior to their return or destruction as aforesaid].
10.3 The provisions of Condition 10.1 shall not apply to any infringement caused by the Seller having followed a design or instruction furnished or given by the Purchaser nor to any use of the goods in a manner or for a purpose which shall have been specifically prohibited in writing by the Seller, nor to any infringement which is due to the use of such goods in association or combination with any other product.
10.4 Any design or instruction furnished or given by the Purchaser shall not be such as will cause the Seller to infringe any intellectual property rights.
10.5 For the purposes of this Condition, the capitalised term "Intellectual Property Rights" means Patents, Registered Designs, Unregistered Designs, Registered Trademarks and Copyright only, having effect in the United Kingdom.
[10.6 The foregoing states the Seller's entire liability to the Purchaser and the Purchaser's sole and exclusive remedies against the Supplier in connection with claims based on or resulting from the infringement of intellectual property rights, of any kind whatsoever, of third parties.]
11 Confidentiality
Both the Seller and the Purchaser shall each keep confidential and shall not without the prior consent in writing of the other disclose to any third party any technical or commercial information which it has acquired from the other as a result of discussions, negotiations and other communications between them relating to the goods and the Order.
12 Economic loss
Subject to Condition 14, and notwithstanding anything contained in these Conditions (other than Condition 14) or the Order, in no circumstances shall the Seller be liable, in contract, tort (including negligence or breach of statutory duty) or otherwise howsoever, and whatever the cause thereof,(i) for any loss of profit, business, contracts, revenues, or anticipated savings, or (ii) for any special indirect or consequential damage of any nature whatsoever.
13 Limitation of liability
Subject to Condition 14, and notwithstanding anything contained in these Conditions (other than Condition 14) or the Order, the Seller's liability to the  Purchaser in respect of the Order, in contract, tort (including negligence or breach of statutory duty) or howsoever otherwise arising, shall be limited to the price of the goods specified in the Order or [£]whichever is the greater.
14 Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977
14.1 If and to the extent that s 6 and/or 7(3A) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 applies to the Order, no provision of these terms and conditions shall operate or be construed to operate so as to exclude or restrict the liability of the Seller for breach of the express warranties contained in Condition 5, or for breach of the applicable warranties as to title and quiet possession implied into the terms and conditions of the Order by s 12(3) of the Sale of Goods Act 1979, or s 2(3) of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982, whichever Act applies to the Order.
14.2 [Where the Purchaser is a natural person][and if and to the extent that s 2(1) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 applies to the Order,]nothing in these terms and conditions shall operate or be construed to operate so as to exclude or restrict the liability of the Seller for death or personal injury caused [to the Purchaser]by reason of the negligence of the Seller or of its servants, employees or agents.
15 Applicable law
The Order shall be considered a contract made in England and shall be governed in all respects by the law of England and the parties agree to submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Precedent 2
Purchase conditions
Statements on front of orders
1 THE CONDITIONS OVERLEAF SHALL APPLY TO THIS ORDER (SEE CONDITION 1.1).
[PLEASE READ ALL OF THEM CAREFULLY.]
2 [IN ADDITION TO THE CONDITIONS OVERLEAF, THIS ORDER IS SUBJECT TO THE APPLICABLE TERMS OF A CONTRACT, BETWEEN US AND [], FOR WHICH THESE ITEMS WILL BE USED.
PLEASE READ CONDITION 1.3 OVERLEAF.]
1 Formation of contract
1.1 No addition alteration or substitution of these terms will bind us or form part of any contract unless they are expressly accepted in writing by a person authorised to sign on our behalf.
1.2 Acknowledgement of this order must be made by signing the duplicate order, enclosed with it, and the duplicate must be received within fourteen days of the date of this order.
Should you despatch goods to us or perform work for us in accordance with this order without such an acknowledgement, this shall of itself be deemed an acknowledgement falling within this paragraph.
1.3 If the goods and/or the work the subject of this order are to be used in carrying out or otherwise in connection with another contract specified overleaf this order shall be subject to the contract conditions of such specified contract in so far as the same are applicable and do not conflict with these purchase conditions.
Details of any such contract conditions will be supplied by us on request, but you will be deemed to have accepted the same as part of the terms of this order, whether such request has been made by you or not.
1.4 Nothing in these conditions shall prejudice any condition or warranty expressed or implied, or any legal remedy to which we may be entitled, in relation to the goods and/or the work the subject of this order, by virtue of any statute or custom or any general law or local law or regulation.
1.5 The construction validity and performance of these conditions and this order shall be governed by the law of England.
2 Delivery
2.1 In regard to performance of this order by you time is of the essence.
The goods shall be delivered and/or the work performed on the date and at the place stated overleaf, and in accordance with the instructions specified overleaf, during normal business hours unless previously arranged otherwise.
Delivery of goods shall be to the place specified overleaf and terms of carriage shall be as specified overleaf.
2.2 If for any reason, we are unable to accept delivery of the goods on or after the agreed delivery date, you will store the goods, safeguard them and take all reasonable steps to prevent their deterioration until delivery.
In cases where Condition 10.1 does not apply, we shall be obliged to pay you in accordance with the terms specified overleaf upon delivery of the goods to storage, and (where such storage exceeds 30 days) we shall reimburse you for your reasonable expenses (including insurance) of such storage.
3 Specifications, quality tests, rejection
3.1 The goods and/or the work must conform in all respects with the drawings, specifications and other requirements or descriptions stated.
All goods must be of sound materials, workmanship and (where you are responsible for this) design, and shall be equal in all respects to relevant samples, or patterns provided by or accepted by us.
All work must be performed in a sound manner, and be free from all defects including (to the extent if any that you are responsible for design) defects in design.
3.2 All of the goods and/or the work must pass the acceptance tests of our inspector.
We shall be entitled to reject all goods and/or work which do not conform completely in every respect with the terms of this order and in particular(but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) Conditions 3.1 and 3.5.
Furthermore, if by the nature of the goods and/or the work, any defects therein or any failure thereof to conform as aforesaid does not or would not become apparent (despite the carrying out of any examination and/or such tests) until after use we may reject the same even after a reasonable period of use.
It is agreed that in the case of goods we may exercise the aforesaid rights of rejection notwithstanding any provision contained in s 11 or 35 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
3.3 Any goods and/or work rejected under Condition 3.2 must at our request be replaced or re-performed as the case may be, by you at your expense; alternatively we may elect (at our option) to cancel this order as provided in Condition 10.2 both in respect of the goods and/or the work in question and of the whole of the undelivered balance (if any) of the goods and/or the remainder of the work (if any) covered by this order.
All rejected goods will be returned to you at your expense.
3.4 Our signature, given on any delivery note, or other documentation, presented for signature in connection with delivery of the goods, is evidence only of the number of packages received.
In particular, it is no evidence that the correct quantity or number of goods has been delivered or that the goods delivered are in good condition or of the correct quality.
3.5 You will ensure that in all respects (except by way of design or specification where we have supplied the same) the goods and/or the work comply with all relevant requirements of any statute, statutory rule or order, or other instrument having the force of law, which may be in force when the goods are delivered and/or the work performed as the case may be.
In particular, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, all goods capable of use as, or in any way likely to be used in the preparing or packing of, food, toiletries, perfume, cosmetics, pharmaceutical products or any other goods for human consumption or for use upon the human body shall contain nothing rendering them unsuitable for their purpose and shall comply with all relevant requirements relating to their sale and composition and to the use of preservative or colouring matter therein.
4 Property and risk
4.1 Property and risk in the goods shall pass to us, when they are delivered in accordance with Condition 2.1.
Such passing of property and risk shall be without prejudice to any right of rejection arising under these Conditions, in particular(but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) under Conditions 3.1! 3.5 inclusive.
5 Prices and payment
5.1 Prices, payment terms and currency shall be those specified overleaf.
6 Industrial property etc
6.1 You warrant that neither the sale nor the use of the goods nor the performance of the work will infringe any British or foreign patent, trademark, registered design, or other industrial or intellectual property rights whether or not similar to any of the foregoing.
6.2 You shall indemnify us from all actions, costs, claims, demands, expenses and liabilities whatsoever resulting from any actual or alleged infringement as aforesaid in Condition 6.1, and at your own expense will defend or (at our option) assist in the defence of any proceedings which may be brought in that connection, provided that you shall be under no liability under Condition 6.1 or this Condition in respect of any infringement as aforesaid occasioned by use of a design or specification supplied to you by us.
6.3 No goods covered by orders shall be manufactured sold or disposed by you in violation of any right whatsoever of third parties, and in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, of any patent right, trademark or similar right, or of any charge, mortgage or lien, provided that you shall be under no liability under this Condition in respect of a violation as aforesaid occasioned by use of a design or specification supplied to you by us.
7 Indemnities, third party liabilities
7.1 You shall indemnify us against all loss, actions, costs, claims, demands, expenses and liabilities whatsoever (if any) which we may incur either at common law or by statute in respect of personal injury to or the death of any person or in respect of any loss or destruction of or damage to property (other than as a result of any default or neglect of ourselves or of any person for whom we are responsible) which shall have occurred in connection with any work executed by you against this Order or shall be alleged to be attributable to some defect in the goods.
7.2 Should you use any personnel to execute work on our premises they shall be required to abide by the safety rules and other relevant regulations laid down by us from time to time.
This order is given on the condition that (without prejudice to the generality of Condition 7.1) you will indemnify us against all loss, actions, costs, claims, demands, expenses and liabilities whatsoever (if any) which we may incur either at common law or by statute (other than as a result of any default or neglect of ourselves or of any person for whom we are responsible) in respect of personal injury to, or the death of, any such employees, agents, sub-contractors or other representative while on our premises whether or not such persons are (at the time when such personal injury or deaths are caused) acting in the course of their employment.
7.3 You will indemnify us against any and all loss, costs, expenses and liabilities caused to us whether directly, or as a result of the action, claim or demand of any third party, by reason of any breach by you of these conditions or of any  terms or obligations on your part implied by the Sale of Goods Act 1979, by the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 or by any other statute or statut-ory provision relevant to the order or to goods or work covered thereby.
This indemnity shall not be prejudiced or waived by any exercise of our rights under Condition 3.3.
7.4 Whenever any sum of money is recoverable from or payable by you to us as a result of the operation of any of these conditions or any breach by you of the same, such sum may be deducted by us from any sum then due or which at any time thereafter may become due to you under any other order or transaction placed or entered into by us with you.
8 Jigs, tools, gauges, etc
8.1 If any jigs, tools, dies, patterns, moulds, gauges, components, materials or any other items of whatsoever nature are supplied to you by us for use in connection with this order, the same shall be at your risk from the time they leave our premises until they are returned thereto, but shall remain our property.
We shall have the right of reasonable access to your premises to inspect such items while they are there.
You shall not use any of the foregoing except in connection with our orders, and you shall maintain the same in good condition and return them to us at any time on demand or otherwise automatically on completion of this order.
Gauges are issued as reference standards only.
All jigs, tools, dies, patterns, moulds and gauges manufactured or supplied by you for us in connection with this order shall become our property and shall be retained by you until disposal instructions are given by us to you which instructions shall be complied with forthwith.
8.2 You shall indemnify us against any loss or damage to the items mentioned in Condition 8.1, arising while such items are in your possession or before redelivery to us.
You will insure the aforesaid items against all risks and (if necessary) note our interests on your policy.
9 Assignment and sub-contracting
9.1 You may not assign or transfer this order or part thereof to any other person without our written consent.
9.2 You may not, without our written consent, sub-contract this order or part thereof, other than for materials, minor details, or for any part of the goods in respect of which the makers are specified overleaf, or to the extent to which sub-contracting is a trade custom in relation to the subject matter of the order.
10 Cancellation
10.1 If either you or we are delayed or prevented from performing our obligations under this order, by circumstances beyond the reasonable control of either of us,(including without limitation any form of government intervention, strikes and lock-outs relevant to this order, breakdown of plant or delays by sub-contractors concerned) such performance shall be suspended, and if it cannot be completed within a reasonable time after the due date as specified in this order, this order may be cancelled by either party.
We will pay to you such sum as may be fair and reasonable in all the circumstances of the case in respect of work performed by you under this order prior to cancellation, and in respect of which we have received the benefit.
This Condition can only have effect if it is called into operation by the party wishing to rely on it giving written notice to the other to that effect.
10.2 Subject to Condition 10.1, we reserve the right to cancel the whole or any part of this order or any consignment on account thereof, if the same is not completed in all respects in accordance with the instructions and specifications stated in the order and with the foregoing conditions, in particular(but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) with Conditions 2.1, 3.1 and 3.5, compliance with which by you is of the essence.
In the event of our cancelling this order as to all or any of the goods and/or the work covered thereby we shall be entitled to purchase from a third party a like quantity of goods of similar description and quality, or a reasonable alternative thereto, bearing in mind our need to take delivery of the goods by the date specified overleaf, or to contract with a third party to perform work of a similar description and quality, and in that event you shall be liable to reimburse to us on demand all expenditure incurred by us in connection with our said cancellation, including any increase in the price over that stated overleaf.
11 Confidentiality
11.1 You will keep secret and will not disclose to any third party (except sub-contractors accepting a like obligation of secrecy, and then only to the extent necessary for the performance of the sub-contract) all information given by us in connection with this order, or which becomes known to you through your performance of work under this order.
You will not mention our name in connection with this order or disclose the existence of this order in any publicity material or other similar communication to third parties without our prior consent in writing.
12 Hazardous goods
12.1 You will mark all hazardous goods with international danger symbols where they exist, and display the name of the material in English.
Transport and  other documents must include declaration of the hazard and name of the material in English.
Goods must be accompanied by emergency information in English in the form of written instructions, labels or markings.
You shall observe the requirements of UK legislation and any relevant international agreements relating to the packing labelling and carriage of hazardous goods.
All information held by or reasonably available to you regarding any potential hazards known or believed to exist in the transport handling or use of the goods supplied shall be promptly communicated to us prior to delivery.
Precedent 3
Framework supply agreement
1 Parties
[]LIMITED of []( "the Company" ) and []LIMITED of []( "the Supplier" )
2 Date and term
This Agreement commences on []and will continue for a fixed period of three years and thereafter will continue from year to year unless terminated by at least sixty days' written notice by either party to the other, such notice to expire on any anniversary date of the commencement of this Agreement falling after the expiry of the fixed period aforesaid.
3 Purpose of agreement
The Supplier will supply to the Company during the currency of this Agreement the products set out in Schedule 1 hereto in the form and to the specifications (including packaging) set out in Schedule 2 hereto (hereinafter called the "Products" ) in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained.
4 Sales forecasts and placing of orders
4.1 The Company will provide the Supplier on the date of commencement hereof and thereafter on each anniversary of the said date with a forecast for the following twelve months of the Company's requirements for the Products.
4.2 The Company will give three months' notice to the Supplier of any alterations to the above forecast should it wish to revise the same during any twelve month period.
4.3 The above forecasts shall be given by the Company to the Supplier on the basis that they are for information only, and, while the Company will exercise all reasonable care in their compilation, the Company shall be under no obligation (legal or otherwise) to order all or any of or no more than the quantities shown in the said forecasts.
4.4 The Company will place purchase orders with the Supplier for quantities of the Products as and when required, and the Supplier shall accept the same, provided that all such orders will be placed so as to allow to the Supplier at least 90 days for delivery.
4.5 All such orders will be placed by the Company on the terms and conditions set out in Schedule 3 hereto, which shall govern and form part of every contract for the supply of the Products by the Supplier to the Company and prevail over any express or implied terms or conditions of the Company.
Any variation, waiver or cancellation of the said terms and conditions must be in writing and signed by a duly authorised representative of the Supplier.
4.6 The Company undertakes, notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Clause, to purchase in each year of the currency of this Agreement not less than the minimum amount of the Products (by value) set out for that year in Schedule 4 hereto.
5 Pricing
5.1 The Supplier will supply the Products hereunder initially at the ex works prices set out in Schedule 5 hereto.
5.2 The above prices shall be subject to increase in accordance with the price variation formula set out in Schedule 6 hereto.
6 Third parties
While this Agreement is in force the Company undertakes not to purchase the Products from any person other than the Supplier or to manufacture the Products itself whether directly or indirectly.
7 Termination
7.1 This Agreement may be terminated by either party immediately upon the happening of either of the following events:
(i) if either party shall pass a resolution for winding up or the court shall make an order that either party shall be wound up (in either case other than for the purpose of reconstruction) or if a receiver or manager on behalf of a creditor be appointed, or if circumstances shall arise which would entitle a court or a creditor to appoint a receiver or manager or which would entitle a court to make a winding up order; or
(ii) on either party assigning or attempting to assign this Agreement other than to a subsidiary or associated company.
7.2 If the Supplier shall become substantially unable, whether for reasons within or beyond its control, to fulfil its obligations to supply the Products to the Company in accordance with any purchase orders outstanding at any time and,(after the Company has notified the Supplier in writing of such default) the Supplier shall not have remedied the same within a period of 90 days from the receipt of such notice, then the Company shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement forthwith, and obtain supplies of the Products from third parties.
7.3 Termination under this Clause shall be without prejudice to the fulfilment of purchase orders wholly or partially outstanding at the date of such termination, and likewise shall not prejudice or affect any right of action or remedy which shall have accrued or shall accrue thereafter under this Agreement to either party.
7.4 In addition to this obligation under cl 7.3, upon termination of this Agreement for whatever cause (including effluxion of time) the Company shall purchase from the Supplier all stocks of finished Products held by the Supplier which are not covered by purchase orders together with all stocks of unused packaging materials for the Products which are either held by the Supplier or which the Supplier is already obliged to purchase from third parties.
The said finished Products shall be purchased at the prices laid down in cl 5 and the said packaging materials at cost to the Supplier plus five percent.
8 Intellectual property rights
Any and all patents, registered designs, unregistered designs, copyright, or other intellectual property rights whether or not similar to any of the foregoing in or resulting from any work carried out by the Supplier under or in pursuance of this Agreement shall belong exclusively, throughout the world, to the Supplier.
9 Notice
Any notice direction or communication given hereunder by one party to the other if sent by post to the last known place of business of the other party shall  be deemed to have been served on the date when in the ordinary course of post it would have been delivered to the other party.
Precedent 4
Standard conditions for the business sale of secondhand goods
HEALTH AND SAFETY AND WORK, ETC ACT 1974 UNDERTAKING IN ACCORDANCE WITH S 6(8)
The items sold to the Buyer under this contract of sale are second-hand, having already been used by the Seller in the Seller's business.
Accordingly, the Buyer agrees to take the goods in their current state, after having satisfied himself by inspection, as to their quality and fitness for the purpose for which the Buyer requires them.
Accordingly, the Seller gives no warranties in relation to the quality of the goods or their suitability for any purpose, and all such warranties, whether express or implied by statute, common law or otherwise howsoever, are hereby excluded.
The Seller shall be under no liability, whether at contract or in tort or otherwise, in respect of the quality of the goods or their fitness for any purpose, save that, if the Buyer is a natural person, in accordance with the provisions of s 2(1) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, the Seller accepts and does not seek to limit or exclude liability for any death or personal injury caused to the Buyer by reason of the Seller's negligence.
Where the Buyer intends to use the goods at work, the Seller supplies the goods on the basis that the Buyer will ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, that the goods will be safe and without risks to health when properly used, and that prior to delivery the Buyer will sign and return the written undertaking attached hereto as Annex A obliging the Buyer to take the steps specified in that undertaking to ensure this.
Where the Buyer purchases the goods with the intention of selling them to a third party for the use by that third party of the goods at work, the Buyer undertakes to supply the goods to the third party on the basis that the third party will ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, that the goods will be safe and without risks to health when properly used, and the Buyer further undertakes to procure the signature by the third party (prior to delivery of the goods to the third party) of the written undertaking attached hereto as Annex A obliging the third party to take the steps specified in that undertaking to ensure this.
The Buyer shall upon obtaining such signature send a copy of the signed undertaking to the Seller.
ANNEX A
Undertaking under Section 6(8) of Health and Safety at Work, etc.
Act 1974, I/we []of []having agreed to purchase []( "the Article" ) for use at work, hereby undertake in accordance with the above Section that I/we will implement the Specified Steps as set out below in order to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, that the Article will be safe and without risks to health when properly so used.
Specified Steps
[Note: the Seller must fill in here the specified steps which are relevant to the particular machinery in order to take advantage of the Section of the Act.
This would include things like providing adequate guarding, wiring up properly in accordance with electrical regulations, installing fume extractor equipment, etc.
If the properly specified steps are not inserted, then the undertaking has no effect.]