

Choice of High Court or County Court
Once it has been determined that the county court has jurisdiction to hear the particular proceedings, the question arises where those proceedings should be issued, ie whether in the county court or in the High Court.
Most proceedings may be commenced in either court, though they may be transferred to the other court in due course; of the rest, there are some which should always be commenced in the county court and others which should always be commenced in the High Court (notwithstanding that the county court has jurisdiction to hear the case).
The choice of where to begin is determined by the principles set out below.
References in brackets are to the relevant articles of the High Court and County Courts Jurisdiction Order 1991 (SI No 724).
General principles for determining where to commence proceedings
Proceedings should always be commenced in the county court if the court has exclusive jurisdiction to try the case (see Chapter 2).
This is because if such proceedings are commenced in the High Court they are liable to be struck out under s 40(1) (b) of the 1984 Act (see below).
Note however that proceedings in the High Court brought under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 which, by virtue of s 141 of that Act, must be heard in the county court shall be transferred to the county court rather than being struck out altogether (s 141(2)).
If the county court and the High Court have concurrent jurisdiction to hear the case proceedings may be commenced in either court (art 4), except that:(1) proceedings which include a claim for damages in respect of personal injuries must be commenced in the county court, unless the value of the action (defined below) is £50,000 or more (art 5(1)); personal injuries are defined as "personal injuries to the plaintiff or any other person and include disease, impairment of physical or mental condition, and death" (art 5(2));(2) applications under s 19 of the Local Government Finance Act 1982 (applications concerning decisions of local authority auditors) and appeals under s 20 of that Act (appeals against such decisions) must be commenced in the High Court (art 6); and (3) under s 1 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 the Lord Chancellor may by order require any other categories of case to be commenced in one or other court; to date there are no such other orders.
As from 1 July 1991 every personal injury writ issued in the High Court must bear an endorsement stating, "This writ includes a claim for personal injury but may be commenced in the High Court because the value of the action for the purposes of art 5 of the High Court and County Courts Jurisdiction Order 1991 exceeds £50,000" : see the Practice Direction (Personal Injuries Action: Endorsement on Writ) reported at [1991]1 WLR 643.
If, by virtue of the above, proceedings may be commenced in either court, the choice of court will be influenced by the following considerations:(1) where the case is eventually to be tried, ie whether in the High Court or in the county court—separate rules for each, set out below, apply;(2) whether the county court has jurisdiction to grant the relief being sought (see Chapter 2);(3) whether the county court has jurisdiction to enforce the judgment to be obtained (see Chapter 2); and (4) the risk of being struck out or penalised in disallowance of costs if proceedings which are clearly suitable for one court are brought instead in the other (see below).
Rules determining where the case is to be tried
Article 7 applies:(1) In general, but subject to the following, proceedings in which the High Court and county courts have concurrent jurisdiction may be tried in either court (art 7(1)).
(2) Cases within the county court's equity and probate  jurisdiction (ie those mentioned in s 23, 24 or 32 of the 1984 Act) fall outside the remainder of these rules, as do proceedings which, in accordance with the rules laid down in arts 9 and 10, have no quantifiable value (art 7(2)).
(3) An action of which the value (defined below) is less than £25,000 shall be tried in a county court unless:(a) a county court considers that it ought to transfer the action to the High Court for trial and the High Court considers that it ought to try the action; or (b) it is commenced in the High Court and the High Court considers that it ought to try the action (art 7(3)).
(4) An action of which the value is £50,000 or more shall be tried in the High Court unless:(a) it is commenced in a county court and the county court does not consider that the action ought to be transferred to the High Court for trial; or (b) the High Court considers that it ought to transfer the case to a county court for trial (art 7(4)).
(5) Wherever, in (3) and (4) above, the order requires one or other court to consider whether it ought to try the case or whether it ought to transfer it (pursuant to the powers of transfer under ss 40(2), 41(1) or 42(2) of the 1984 Act) that court must have regard to the criteria laid down in art 7(5) and set out at the start of Chapter 13.
Definition of "value of the action" 
Articles 9 and 10 of the 1991 Order, set out below, apply and are self-explanatory.
(1) For the purposes of arts 5 and 7 (see above):(a) the value of an action for a sum of money, whether specified or not, is the amount which the plaintiff or applicant reasonably expects to recover;(b) an action for specified relief other than a sum of money:(i) has a value equal to the amount of money which the plaintiff or applicant could reasonably state to be the financial worth of the claim to him, or (ii) where there is no such amount, has no quantifiable value.
(c) an action which includes more than one claim:(i) if one or more of the claims is of a kind specified in paragraph (b)(ii), has no quantifiable value;(ii) in any other case, has a value which is the aggregate of the values of the claims as determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and (2) In determining the value of an action under paragraph (1) above:(a) unspecified further or other relief;(b) interest, other than interest pursuant to a contract; and (c) costs; shall be disregarded.
(3) In determining the value, under paragraph (1), of an action which is brought by more than one plaintiff or applicant regard shall be had to the aggregate of the expectations or interests of all the plaintiffs or applicants.
(4) In determining the value of an action under paragraph (1)(a):(a) the sum which the plaintiff or applicant reasonably expects to recover shall be reduced by the amount of any debt which he admits that he owes to a defendant in that action and which arises from the circumstances which give rise to the action;(b) no account shall be taken of a possible finding of contributory negligence, except to the extent, if any, that such negligence is admitted;(c) where the plaintiff seeks an award of provisional damages as described in s 32A(2) (a) of the Supreme Court Act 1981, no account shall be taken of the possibility of a future application for further damages;(d) the value shall be taken to include sums which, by virtue of s 22 of the Social Security Act 1989, are required to be paid to the Secretary of State.
Article 9
The value of an action shall be determined:(1) for the purposes of art 5 (allocation for commencement), as at the time when the action is commenced, and (2) for the purposes of art 7 (allocation for trial), as at the time when the value is declared in accordance with rules of court.
Article 10
Consequences of commencing proceedings in the wrong court
Where either the High Court or a county court is satisfied that proceedings before it are required to be in the other court whether by reason of the 1991 Order or any other provisions made under s 1 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, or by reason of any other enactment, then it must either transfer the proceedings to the other court or strike them out (CCA 1984, ss 40 and 42).
The provisions for transfer are considered in detail in Chapter 13.
For penalties as to costs, see below.
The court with the power to strike out is the court before which the proceedings have been brought, rather than the one to which transfer is being considered.
Both the High Court and the county court are obliged to strike out the proceedings if they are satisfied that the person bringing the proceedings knew, or ought to have known, of the requirement that the proceedings be in the other court (s 40(1) (b) and s 42(1) (b)).
It would therefore appear that where, for example, a solicitor on behalf of his client commences a personal injury action which includes a claim for damages of less than £50,000 by way of writ in the High Court, the proceedings are bound to be struck out on the basis that the solicitor ought to have known of the provision contained in art 5(1) of the 1991 Order.
Striking out
Where proceedings have, according to the criteria set out in this chapter, been commenced in the wrong court, the new s 51 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (which has effect from 1 October 1991) provides for two ways in which the misallocation can be reflected in costs orders.
First, in any proceedings the court may disallow, or (as the case may be) order the legal or other representative concerned to meet, the whole of any wasted costs or such part of them as may be determined in accordance with rules of court (s 51(6)).
Costs penalties
 "Wasted costs" means any costs incurred by a party as a result of any improper, unreasonable or negligent act or omission on the part of any legal or other representative, including their employees, or any costs which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring after they were incurred, the court considers it is unreasonable to expect that party to pay (s 51(7)).
Secondly, and more specifically, where a person has commenced proceedings in the High Court but those proceedings should, in the opinion of the court, have been commenced in a county court in accordance with any provision made under s 1 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 or by or under any other enactment, the person responsible for determining the amount which is to be awarded to that person by way of costs must have regard to those circumstances (s 51(8)).
Where, in complying with s 51(8), the responsible person reduces the amount which would otherwise be awarded to the person in question, the amount of that reduction must not exceed a prescribed percentage (for the time being 25 per cent) and on any taxation of the costs payable by that person to his legal representative, regard must be had to the amount of the reduction (s 51(9)).
The trial judge in proceedings which were commenced in the High Court and subsequently transferred to the county court is entitled to express the opinion referred to in s 51(8) (b) that the proceedings he is trying should have been commenced in the county court.
Where he does so the court associate must, at the conclusion of the trial, record that opinion in his certificate so that an appropriate reduction may be considered (Ord 35, r 10A).
Commencement of Proceedings; Choice of County Court
Classification of proceedings
All proceedings in the county court are classified as either actions or matters.
An action is defined as any proceedings in a county court which may be commenced as prescribed by plaint (CCA, s 147(1)).
Actions are proceedings where the object is to obtain relief against any person or to compel any person to do or abstain from doing any act (Ord 3, r 1).
In practice they are those cases in which the plaintiff seeks to enforce or protect some right vested in him (eg, an injunction to restrain a breach of contract) rather than those where he merely invites the court to exercise its powers to grant him some statutory relief (eg an application by a debtor for a "time order" under Consumer Credit Act 1974, s 129(1) (b)).
Actions
Actions may be subdivided into:(1) fixed date actions (see Ord 3, r 2(1));(2) default actions (Ord 3, r 2(2));(3) rent actions (Ord 24, rr 8–10); and (4) admiralty actions (Ord 40).
In every such case the parties are referred to as "plaintiff" and "defendant" .
A fixed date action is an action which includes a claim for any relief other than payment of money, eg the recovery of goods or land, or an equitable remedy such as an injunction.
A default action is any action, other than an admiralty action or a rent action, in which the only relief claimed is payment of money, whether that sum is already ascertained (eg a debt) or is to be ascertained in due course by the court (damages).
A rent action is any action where a landlord claims arrears of rent from a tenant or former tenant who is still in occupation of the land to which the claim relates.
Although the only relief claimed is payment of money, in form of process it resembles a fixed-date action (see below).
An admiralty action is one which falls within the County Courts' Admiralty jurisdiction, that is any action where a plaintiff brings one or more of the claims set out in CCA 1984, s 27.
A matter is defined as every proceeding in a county court which may be commenced as prescribed other than by plaint (CCA, s 147(1)) ie any proceeding which does not amount to an action.
Matters
Types of originating process
There are four types of originating process in the county court:(1) summonses (Ord 3, r 3);(2) originating applications (Ord 3, r 4);(3) petitions (Ord 3, r 5);(4) appeals to the county court (Ord 3, r 6).
All actions are begun by the entry of a plaint in the records of the court and the issue and service of a summons, which is analogous to the High Court writ.
The plaint records the filing at court by the plaintiff of the documents required to begin the proceedings (see further below).
Matters are begun by any of the other three originating processes, namely by originating application, by petition or by appeal, according to the nature of the relief sought.
Originating applications form a residual category, being the appropriate originating process for any proceedings authorised to be brought in a county court and not required by any Act or rule to be commenced otherwise.
Proceedings begun in this way include summary proceedings for the recovery of land (subject to the special rules in Ord 24, rr 1–7) and those which, in the High Court, would ordinarily be commenced by originating summons, eg an application by a business tenant for a new tenancy under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 (Ord 43, r 2).
The parties to proceedings begun by originating application are referred to as "applicant" and "respondent" .
Except in divorce proceedings, commencement by petition is  now very rare.
The parties to proceedings begun by petition are referred to as "petitioner" and "respondent" .
Commencement may be also by appeal from the order, decision or award of some other person, body or tribunal eg an appeal against a housing authority's overcrowding notice under the Housing Act 1985, s 362.
Appeals to judges from the decisions of district judges are considered in Chapter 19.
The parties to proceedings begun by appeal are referred to as "appellant" and "respondent" .
Commencement by summons
Although the same procedural steps for commencement apply to all actions, the form of the request for summons (if appropriate) and the summons itself differs according to the type of action.
These are considered below.
The methods of service of the documents required by the Rules are considered in Chapter 7.
For the appropriate procedure in Admiralty actions reference should be made to Part II of The County Court Practice.
These requirements are:(1) filing by the plaintiff of the appropriate documents with the court, which are:(a) either a request for the issue of a summons in the appropriate form (N201—204) or, if allowed by the court (Ord 3, r 3(1A), the summons itself prepared by the plaintiff together with a copy for each defendant or both; and (b) particulars of claim together with a copy for each defendant.
(2) payment of the plaint fee and fee for service by bailiff where appropriate (see Table of Fees);(3) where the plaintiff is under a disability an undertaking by his next friend as to costs (N235) or a sealed office copy order of the Court of Protection (Ord 10, r 2);(4) civil aid certificate, if any, and notice of issue of certificate for service on the defendant (Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1980, reg 50).
General requirements on issue of summonses (Ord 3, r 3)
The filing of documents at court may be done by post addressed to the proper officer, provided a self-addressed envelope is also included (Ord 2, r 5(1)).
Forms of particulars of claim are supplied by the court office to parties in person.
Upon the filing of  the documents mentioned in (1) the court office enters a plaint in the records, prepares (if necessary) a summons based on the request, issues the summons with the particulars of claim and delivers to the plaintiff a plaint note in form N205 (default summons) or N206 (fixed date summons)(Ord 3, r 3(2)).
In every fixed date action commenced before 1 October 1990 the summons issued fixes a date for the attendance of the parties, called the return day.
The return day is either for a pre-trial review (summons form N3) or for the trial of the action (N4).
Fixed date actions
That procedure now applies only to the limited class of actions which are excepted from the effect of the new Ord 17, r 11.
All fixed date actions to which the rule does apply are now subject to automatic directions (see Chapter 11) and are not given a return day at the outset.
In these cases judgment can be entered in default of delivery of a defence within 14 days (Ord 9, r 4A); "fixed date actions" is therefore something of a misnomer since they more closely resemble default actions.
Order 17, r 11 applies to any fixed date action (and any default action) except those listed in r 11(1), which include actions for the recovery of land, rent actions and actions arising out of a regulated consumer credit agreement.
In the case of a fixed date action to which Ord 17, r 11 does not apply the return day must, unless the court otherwise directs, be a day fixed for a pre-trial review (Ord 3, r 3(3)).
This rule does not apply to an action for the recovery of land, where the return day is that of the final hearing (N5—6), unless a claim is joined for some relief other than the payment of mesne profits or arrears of rent or for moneys secured by a mortgage or charge (Ord 3, r 3(4)).
However, in an action by a mortgagee for possession of a dwelling house a return day for a hearing in chambers will be given, unless the court otherwise orders (Ord 49, r 1).
The appropriate forms of request for summons are N203 (for N3 or N4) and N204 (for N5 or N6).
Notice of a day fixed for a hearing includes notice of the time so fixed (Ord 1, r 12).
In a default action a summons is issued either for a fixed (liquidated) amount (N1) or for an amount not fixed (unliquidated)(N2).
No date of hearing is given at this stage.
Default actions
The appropriate forms of request for summons are N201 and N202; separate particulars of claim may be dispensed with if form N202 is used and the proper officer allows it (Ord 6, r 1(2)).
Apart from special rules relating to venue and time for service of the summons the procedure for commencement of rent actions is the same as for fixed date actions (Ord 24, r 8).
The summons should be in form N7.
Rent actions
Where the circumstances are that a plaintiff (such as a mail order company) wishes to bring separate proceedings in one county court against a great number of defendants, provision is made for a combined request and particulars of claims by the Lord Chancellor's Practice Directions made on 1 March 1979 and 17 March 1987 setting out full instructions; these are given in the notes under Ord 3, r 3 in The County Court Practice.
Multiple summonses
Commencement by originating application
Order 3, r 4 applies.
The general requirements upon issue are:(1) filing by the applicant of the appropriate documents with the court.
These are:(a) the originating application together with as many copies as there are respondents; and (b) a request for the issue of the originating application (though see under "Preparation of documents" above).
(2) payment of the fee for issue and for service by bailiff where appropriate (see Table of Fees);(3) where the plaintiff is under a disability an undertaking by next friend as to costs (N235) or a sealed office copy order of the Court of Protection (Ord 10, r 2);(4) civil legal aid certificate, if any, and notice of issue of certificate for service on the defendant.
As in the case of summonses the filing of documents at court may be done by post addressed to the proper officer, provided a self-addressed envelope is also included (Ord 2, r 5(1)).
There is no prescribed form of request for an originating application but the form for fixed date actions (N203) may be used and adapted as appropriate.
Upon receipt of the requisite documents the proper officer enters the originating application in the court  records and fixes a return day, prepares a notice to each respondent of the return day and delivers a plaint note (N206) to the applicant (Ord 3, r 4(4)).
The return day fixes the date either of the hearing or, if the court so directs, of a pre-trial review (Ord 3, r 4(5)).
Order 24, rr 1–7 apply.
Where a person claims possession of land he alleges is occupied solely by a person or persons (not a tenant or tenants holding over) who entered into or remained in occupation without his licence or consent or that of any predecessor in title of his, the proceedings may be brought by originating application under Ord 24.
These proceedings apply to a trespasser, following the determination of a licence to occupy the premises (Greater London Council v Jenkins [1975]1 All ER 354) and to an unlawful sub-tenant (Moore Properties (Ilford Ltd v Mckeon [1977]1 All ER 262).
Summary proceedings for the recovery of land
The requirements upon issue are:(1) filing by the applicant of the originating application (N312), a copy of each named respondent and two further copies;(2) an affidavit in support with the same number of copies for service; the affidavit should state:(a) the applicant's interest in the land;(b) the circumstances in which the land has been occupied without licence or consent and in which his claim to possession arises; and (c) if it be that the name of any person occupying the land is not stated in the originating application, that the applicant does not know the name of such person.
(3) payment of the fee for issue and service by the bailiff (see Table of Fees);(4) self-addressed envelope if issued by post; and (5) where the applicant considers that service in accordance with Ord 24, r 3(2) (b) may be necessary, provision of sufficient stakes and transparent envelopes for such service.
Any persons whose names are not known to the applicant should be referred to in the application and in the title to the proceedings as "other occupiers" .
This is preferable to describing them as "persons unknown" for the purposes of the warrant.
The court prepares notice of the return day (N8(1)), being the date of the hearing of the application.
Such notice shall contain a notice to the effect that any person who, being in occupation of the land  but not named as a respondent, wishes to be heard, may apply at any stage of the proceedings to be joined as a respondent.
As to service of these proceedings on the occupants, see Chapter 7.
Commencement by petition
Order 3, r 5 applies.
Requirements on issue are as for originating applications, save that "petitioner" and "petition" are substituted for "applicant" and "(originating) application" .
Commencement by appeal
Order 3, r 6 applies.
The requirements upon issue are:(1) filing by the appellant of the appropriate documents.
These are:(a) a request for entry of appeal (N209) stating the names and addresses of persons intended to be served (the respondents) and the appellant's address for service, together with as many copies as there are respondents;(b) a copy of the order, decision or award appealed against;(c) where the enactment under which the appeal lies requires the appellant to give to the other parties notice in writing of his intention to appeal and of the grounds of his appeal, a copy of such notice; in any other case the request for entry of appeal must include the grounds of the appeal;(3) payment of fees for issue and for service by bailiff if appropriate (see Table of Fees);(4) a self-addressed envelope if issued by post.
An appeal must be filed within 21 days after the date of the order, decision or award appealed from.
The procedure follows that for originating applications.
Proceedings in the wrong form
If proceedings are commenced by the wrong originating process, eg by summons rather than by originating application, such a breach of the rules is not necessarily fatal—thecourt may set the proceedings aside or it may allow them to be amended and  give such directions as it thinks fit (Ord 37, r 5).
The court office cannot refuse to issue proceedings by the process requested by the plaintiff/applicant merely because it considers such process to be inappropriate (Baker v Thatcher (1984) 134 NLJ 863).
Preparation of documents
Under Ord 50, r 4A where under the rules a document is to be prepared by the court, that document may, if the proper officer so allows, be prepared by the plaintiff (or applicant) and, where a document is so produced the plaintiff is not required also to file a request but must provide a sufficient number of copies of the document for the court's use.
The rule does not require the proper officer to accept a document which is illegible, has not been duly authorised or is for some other reason unsatisfactory (Ord 50, r 4A(2) (a)).
On its commencement every proceeding is identified by a title, made up of the name of the court in which it is brought, the names of the parties and any Act (other than the 1984 Act) relied on to give the court jurisdiction, and by a distinguishing number allotted to it by the court office, written (in an action) as "Case No" or (in a matter) as "No of Matter" .
Every document filed, issued or served in the proceeding must bear the title and the number (Ord 3, r 7).
It should also be quoted in all correspondence with the court.
Correspondence should generally be addressed to "The Chief Clerk" .
The Lord Chancellor's Practice Direction of 17 March 1987 provides that clear photographic copies (of all documents) will be accepted as if printed or typed.
Choice of county court
Order 4 sets out the general rules as to venue.
Note that a judge or district judge may sue or be sued in accordance with the rules set out below, but if the court in which the action would be commenced is a court of which he is judge or district judge, then the action may be commenced in the nearest court or most convenient one of which he is not the judge or district judge (Ord 4, r 7).
An action may be commenced:(1) in the court for the district in which the defendant or one of the defendants resides or carries on business;(2) in the court for the district in which the cause of action wholly or in part arose or;(3) in the case of a default action, in any court (Ord 4, r 2(1)).
Actions
Part (3) was introduced by the County Court (Amendment No 2) Rules 1991, which has also abolished the restrictions on the venue in hire-purchase and sale of goods instalment contracts in the case of any action commenced after 1 July 1991.
In an action for a liquidated sum, the proceedings will be automatically transferred to the defendant's home court (if the action was commenced elsewhere) upon the filing of a defence or, in the case where the defendant states that he has already paid the amount claimed, upon the plaintiff confirming in writing to the court that he wishes the proceedings to continue (Ord 9, r 2(8)).
Where the plaintiff sues as an assignee the action shall be commenced only in a court in which the assignor might, under the above rule, have commenced the action but for the assignment (Ord 4, r 2(2)).
An action against the Crown must be commenced in the court for the district in which the cause of action wholly or in part arose or, in the case of a default action, in any court.
If there is any reasonable doubt as to the court in which an action against the Crown should be brought, it may be commenced in the court for the district in which the plaintiff or one of the plaintiffs resides or carries on business (Ord 42, r 2).
Proceedings for the recovery of land, for foreclosure or redemption of a mortgage, for enforcing a charge or lien on land (other than a charging order made under the Charging Orders Act 1979), or for the recovery of moneys secured by a mortgage or charge on land, must be started in the court where the land or part of it is situated (Ord 4, r 3).
Proceedings relating to land
Proceedings under the Settled Land Act 1925, the Trustee Act 1925 or for the administration of the estate of a deceased person may be commenced in the court which the plaintiff regards as most convenient having regard to the residences or places of  business of the parties or to the subject matter of the proceedings (Ord 4, r 4), but payment into court under s 63 of the Trustee Act 1925 shall be made to the court in whose district the person (or any of them) making the payment resides (Ord 49, r 20(2)).
Proceedings under the Settled Land Act 1925
Proceedings for the dissolution or winding up of a partnership shall be commenced in the court for the district in which the partnership business was or is carried on (Ord 4, r 5).
Partnership proceedings
Proceedings begun by originating application or petition may be subject to specific enactments or rules, but otherwise they may be commenced in the court for the district in which the respondent or one of the respondents resides or carries on business or in which the subject matter of the application is situated, or if no respondent is named, in the court for the district in which the applicant or petitioner or one of them resides or carries on business (Ord 4, r 8).
If the application is urgent, eg for a non-molestation injunction under the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1976 and there is no judge sitting, the court office will say at what court there is a judge and the application may be made and heard at that court, but the more usual practice is for the application itself to be made in the court which would otherwise have been appropriate, with the papers and order being sent back to that court after the hearing.
Originating applications and petitions
In the case of an originating application against the Crown, the proceedings must be commenced in the court for the district in which the subject matter of the application is situated (Ord 42, r 2(1)).
An appeal to a county court shall be brought in the court for the district in which the order, decision, or award appealed against was made or given (Ord 4, r 9).
Appeals to the county court
Proceedings commenced in the wrong county court
Order 16, r 2 applies.
Where proceedings are begun in the wrong county court the court, in the absence of agreement between the parties, may either transfer the proceedings to the correct court, order the proceedings to continue in the court in  which they were commenced, or order them to be struck out.
Sharma v Knight [1986]1 WLR 757 is authority for the proposition that jurisdiction conferred on county courts by statute is a general one and it is not restricted to the district in which proceedings should have been brought in accordance with Ord 4, r 8 and that, if proceedings have been brought in the wrong county court, then the court nevertheless has jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
Whether or not any address is within the district of any particular county court can usually only be reliably ascertained by inquiry at the court office where a directory is held.
Early inquiry should obviously be made where an application, eg under s 29(3) of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, is required to be made within strict time limits.
Parties
Limited companies
A plaintiff limited company's registered office must be given in the request for issue of a summons.
No other address need be shown unless to give an address for service in England and Wales.
The registered office of a defendant limited company or any place of business of the defendant company which has some real connection with the cause or matter in issue must be given for purposes of service (Ord 7, r 14(2)).
N201 should be amended accordingly.
If the registered office is outside England and Wales, see the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgment Act 1982, s 42 and Sched 1 Arts 2–6 and Chapter 7 below.
The head office is not of course, necessarily the registered office and a company search may be necessary.
As to where a company resides which may be relevant for some purposes, a company or corporation resides where it carries on business and it can reside in more places than one (Davies v British Geon Ltd [1956]3 All ER 389).
It is of course important, in the interests of later enforcement, for a plaintiff instituting proceedings to distinguish between a defendant firm (or partnership), a single person trading under a business name, and a defendant limited company.
The words "in liquidation" should follow the name and after the address there should be added: "by the liquidator AB of [address and description]" .
Companies in liquidation
The Crown
The title of the department suing or being sued should be precisely stated in accordance with the list of Crown departments  published under s 17 of the Crown Proceedings Act 1947.
This list appears in The County Court Practice.
The particulars of claim in actions against the Crown must specify the circumstances in which the Crown's liability is said to have arisen and "as to the government department and officers of the Crown concerned" (Ord 42, r 4).
If the Crown does not consider the particulars of claim give sufficient information as to the government department and officers concerned under Ord 42, r 4, it may, before the time for filing a defence has expired, file with the court two copies of a request for such information, one of which is sent to the plaintiff.
The time for defence is then extended to four days after either the Crown gives notice to the court and to the plaintiff that it is satisfied with the information given, or the court decides that no further information is required.
Such a decision may be given on the plaintiff's application on seven days' notice to the Crown (Ord 42, r 5(1),(2)).
No default judgment can be entered against the Crown save by leave of the court on application on seven days' notice (Ord 42, r 5(4)), nor can summary judgment be given against the Crown under Ord 9, r 14 (Ord 42, r 5(5)).
On issue, the court does not fix a return day but serves on the Crown copy of the particulars of claim, and a notice (N 390) of entry of plaint, and of the effect of paragraphs (3) and (5) of Ord 42, r 6, namely the rights of the Crown if it considers that the particulars of claim do not contain sufficient information and the action itself is stayed.
The Crown may then seek further information within 21 days as in the case of a default action.
If it does not, or when it files and gives notice that it is satisfied, or the court on application decides it needs no further information, then only is a return day fixed by the court.
Fixed date action against the Crown
Partners and business names
Any one of two or more partners carrying on business in England or Wales may sue and be sued in the name of the firm in which he was a partner when the cause of action arose (Ord 5, r 9(1)).
This is the situation even if one of the partners is under a disability, such as minority.
A person carrying on business in a name other than his own whether or not he is within the jurisdiction may be sued in his own name, followed by "trading as AB" , or in his business name followed by the words "a trading name" (Ord 5, r 10).
He may not sue in his business name, although this may properly be recited in the particulars of claim to avoid confusion.
Where partners sue or are sued in a firm name, the partners shall on demand in writing by any other party, forthwith deliver, and file a statement, of the names and places of residence of all the persons who were partners when the cause of action arose (Ord 5, r 9(2)).
An order may be made staying an action, until a request for particulars has been completed, or, in the case of defendants, barring them from defending (see Ord 5, r 9(3) and (4)).
Persons under disability
The procedure is contained in Ord 10.
 "A person under disability" is either "a minor" or "a mental patient" .
The latter is a person who, by reason of mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983, is incapable of managing and administering his property and affairs (Ord 1, r 3).
A minor may sue for wages, piece work or for work as a servant (s 47 of the 1984 Act), but apart from this a person under disability may not bring or defend proceedings, or counter-claim, except if a plantiff by his next friend or if a defendant by a guardian ad litem(Ord 10, r 1(1),(2)).
Where the person under disability wishes to be a plaintiff or applicant, before commencing proceedings, if he is a mental patient and a person is authorised by order of the Court of Protection to conduct the proceedings, then that person must file in the court office a sealed office copy of the Court of Protection's order (Ord 10, r 2(a)).
In the case of a minor, or of a mental patient where no person is authorised to act for him by the Court of Protection, then the "next friend" must file a written undertaking (N 235), attested as would be an affidavit, to be responsible for costs (Ord 10, r 2(b)).
Should proceedings be commenced by a person under disability without a "next friend" , the court may on application appoint the authorised person, or person who gives an undertaking (N 235) as to costs, as next friend, or may strike out the proceedings (Ord 10, r 3).
Where the person under disability is a defendant or respondent, and a person proposes to act as "guardian ad litem" , he should deliver to the court office a defence, answer, counterclaim  or admission, and if he is appointed to act by order of the Court of Protection, a sealed copy of the order.
If he has not been appointed to act, he should deliver a certificate that he is a fit and proper person to act as guardian ad litem and has no interest adverse to the defendant.
Thereupon such person shall be the guardian ad litem(Ord 10, rr 5, 8(2)).
A guardian ad litem has no personal liability for costs unless occasioned by his personal negligence or misconduct (Ord 10, r 9).
If a counterclaim is delivered in addition to a defence or admission, the appointment as guardian ad litem is still automatic under Ord 10, r 5.
Where a defendant or respondent under disability has no guardian ad litem acting for him under rr 5 or 8(2), the plaintiff (or applicant) shall, after the time for delivering a defence (or answer) has expired and before taking any further steps, apply to the court without fee on not less than three days' notice to the person on whom the summons was served under Ord 10, r 4 for the appointment of a guardian ad litem(Ord 10, r 6).
The application shall be supported by an affidavit (N 237) showing that the proposed guardian is a fit and proper person, has no interest contrary to the defendant (or respondent), and consents to act.
A copy is served with the notice of application (N 238).
At the hearing, the court may appoint (N 239) the person proposed, any other person willing to act, or in default the district judge (Ord 10, rr 6, 8(2)).
However, it is not generally considered practicable, if no suitable person can be found, to appoint a district judge, and in practice the Official Solicitor should be approached.
Where a defendant/respondent minor attends a hearing at court and he has no guardian ad litem, the court may appoint (N 240) any person the defendant/respondent names who is willing to act; otherwise the court may appoint (N 241) any person present who is willing to act, or again may appoint the district judge.
Where a person appearing to be a mental patient attends court without a guardian ad litem, the court may give the necessary directions under Ord 13, r 2(1) of its own motion.
Where a minor is sued for a liquidated sum, which includes the cost of repairs to a vehicle or to any property in, on, or abutting a highway (Ord 1, r 10), the court may on the plaintiff's application dispense with the appointment under Ord 10, rr 6 or 7 of a guardian (Ord 10, r 8(1)).
If a judgment has been obtained without the appointment of a guardian ad litem(save where an order has been made under Ord  10, r 8(1) see above) the judgment may be set aside by the court under Ord 37, r 5.
Where a money claim is made on behalf of a person under disability, the approval of the court is required to any settlement, compromise, or payment into court.
If the sole purpose of bringing an action for a money claim is to obtain such consent, the particulars of claim need state the case only briefly and ask for approval (Ord 10, r 10).
The district judge may give approval, whatever the sum involved (Ord 10, r 10(3)).
Unless the court otherwise directs, money received or paid into court in respect of persons under disability shall remain in court and be invested or dealt with as the court thinks fit, which in many cases may be its transfer to the High Court (Ord 10, r 11(1)—(3)).
For form of order see N 292.
Solicitors should consider whether a charge arises on such moneys under s 16(6) of the Legal Aid Act 1988.
No investment rule applies to a claim under s 47 of the 1984 Act, that is, minors suing for wages.
Any payment by, on behalf of, or to a person under disability should, it seems, be made into court (Ord 22, r 9).
Bankruptcy of the plaintiff
The bankruptcy of the plaintiff in an action which the trustee might maintain for the benefit of the creditors does not cause the action to abate if, within such reasonable time as the court orders, the trustee elects to continue the action and to give security.
The hearing of the action may be adjourned until an election is made.
When the trustee does not elect to continue the action and to give security, the defendant may use the bankruptcy as a defence (s 49 of the 1984 Act).
Where a defendant has a bankruptcy order made against him, or being a limited company is subject to a winding-up order, the plaintiff in a simple money claim should consider whether it is not best to ask for the action to be adjourned generally and lodge a proof of debt.
(Personal Insolvency by Muir Hunter (1989) should be consulted.)
A trustee in bankruptcy should sue or be sued as "Trustee of the Estate of AB a bankrupt" without adding his own name (s 305 (4) of the Insolvency Act 1986; Pooley's Trustee v Whetham (1884) 28 Ch D 38).
A trustee to a bankrupt mortgagor may be in possession actually or constructively and should be made a party.
Companies in liquidation
The words "in liquidation" should follow the name, and there should then follow "by the liquidator AB of…" , and his address and description should be given.
Death
Where a plaintiff or defendant dies and the cause of action survives but no person is substituted for the deceased under Ord 5, r 7, the defendant (or his personal representatives) may apply for an order directing the plaintiff (or other person entitled) to proceed within such time as may be ordered, and in default, the action may be struck out (Ord 5, r 12).
A like order may be made on a counterclaim.
An action purporting to have been commenced against a person who is dead at its commencement is treated as if it had been commenced against his estate, whether or not a grant of representation had been issued at its commencement (Ord 5, r 8(3)).
Change of parties by transmission of interest
Where at any stage of proceedings by assignment, transmission, or devolution the interest or liability of any party devolves on some other person, the court may order ex parte that other person to be made a party "to carry on" the proceedings (Ord 5, r 11).
The requirements are:(1) application (N 213) with as many copies of notices as there are parties to be served;(2) affidavit of truth of facts.
The court sends the order (N 214) and a copy of the application (N 213) to all existing, former or new parties, and if to new parties, a copy of the originating process.
The rule has no application if a plaintiff becomes bankrupt (Ord 5, r 14), when s 49 of the 1984 Act will apply enabling the trustee to elect to continue and give security for the costs.
For change of parties on application, see Chapter 5.
Persons having the same interest
In such circumstances, one or more persons may be appointed to sue or be sued in a representative capacity as having a common  interest with all other persons (Ord 5, r 5(1)).
A plaintiff or a defendant sued in a representative capacity may apply for the appointment of one defendant to represent all, or all those named, and a plaintiff suing in a representative capacity may apply to be similarly appointed (Ord 5, r 2).
A judgment in such "representative proceedings" may not be enforced against a non party without the leave of the court (Ord 5, r 5(5)).
Proprietary clubs are often limited companies, and if so, they of course sue or are sued in their corporate name.
Change in parties after judgment
Order 26, r 5 applies where any change has taken place after judgment by death, assignment or otherwise, in the parties entitled to enforce a judgment or order or in the parties liable under a judgment or order.
A party entitled to enforce the judgment or order may apply on affidavit to issue the necessary process.
The requirements are as for an application applying for leave to issue enforcement process (ex parte unless court orders) with supporting affidavit.
(Application in form N 213).
If the application affects more than one judgment, one application may be made specifying judgments in a schedule.
Order 5, r 13 applies where there is money in court (N 213 (1)).
In an action for recovery of land, any person in possession (by himself or by his tenant) and not named as a defendant may by leave be made a defendant on filing an ex parte application showing that he is in possession, by himself or by his tenant, and giving grounds for the application.
If the applicant is added as a defendant the court sends the order to all parties, annexing to it a copy of the application (Ord 15, r 3).
In the case of summary proceedings for recovery of land, Ord 24, r 4, any person not named as a respondent may apply to be joined at any stage of the proceedings on the question whether an order for possession should be made.
Particulars of Claim
Order 6 deals with particulars of claim.
Particulars of claim are signed by the plaintiff or by solicitors acting for the plaintiff giving an address for service (Ord 6, r 8).
Where solicitors are acting, the following or similar wording should appear on the particulars of claim below their signature: "AB (& Co) of…[address]solicitor(s) for the plaintiff, who at this address will accept service of all documents on his behalf" .
The signature should be legible or repeated in type because it is from this signature that notices and orders are addressed.
If settled by counsel, his draft pleading will have been signed by him, and the particulars of claim should show his name, in capital letters for preference, as having signed them (Ord 50, rr 6 and 6A).
Except in the shortest of particulars of claim, allegations should be divided into paragraphs and numbered consecutively.
A complete code of pleading for the High Court is in the High Court rules (RSC Ord 18 and Ord 18, r 12(1) as amended), which now requires pleadings to include, in relation to damages claims, details of any mitigation claimed by the defendant.
This might well be good practice in the county court.
However, in the county court, Ord 6, r 1(i) simply gives a general requirement that for a claim, the cause of action, relief or remedy and the brief facts shall be specified or stated.
In relation to defences, Ord 9, r 7 states that a defence means any document which shows that the defendant desires to dispute the whole or any part of the plaintiff's claim.
This has opened the door to bare, inadequate denials (see Chapter 8) but these do still stand the risk of the district judge striking them out.
In the case of debts, a copy of or repetition of the plaintiff's bill or account is accepted (Ord 6, r 2); otherwise the particulars of claim could state "for goods sold and delivered" , or "for work done and materials supplied" with particulars; to say "account rendered" would not be sufficient.
The date of the bill or account, or the date from when the cause of action arises, must of course be given.
Where in an action for a debt the particulars of claim can conveniently be incorporated in the form of request for a summons (N 202) this may be done if the proper officer allows (Ord 6, r 1(2)); otherwise, a copy of the particulars of claim is to be filed for each defendant (Ord 6, r 1(4)).
A claim for debt or liquidated demand may be expressed in a foreign currency (Miliangos v George Frank (Textiles) Ltd [1975]3 All ER 801).
High Court Practice Direction of 18 December 1975 [1976]1 All ER 669 should be followed so that the particulars of claim will state: "The rate current in London for the purchase of [state unit of foreign currency]at the close of business on the [state date next or most nearly preceding the date of issue of summons]was…to the £ sterling and at this rate the amount claimed, namely [state the sum of foreign currency claimed]amounts to £…" .
If a plaintiff abandons the excess of his claim to bring it within the jurisdiction of the county court, the abandonment must be stated at the end of the particulars (Ord 6, r 1(3)).
Where a plaintiff in the first instance desires to have an account taken, the particulars must state the amount which the plaintiff claims subject to the taking of the account, and if no such amount is stated, the plaintiff will be deemed to claim £5,000 (Ord 6, r 2).
There should be served with a pleading a copy of any document referred to in it (with certified translation in English if required)(Ord 7, rr 10 and 13 (as amended)).
Where there are issues which require pleading, it is said in the White Book that this is "a task fitted only for counsel" ; but solicitors will be likely to have precedents available to them.
Nonetheless, if counsel is to be briefed for the hearing he should settle the pleading, and for that matter, the letter before action.
Where a plaintiff claims aggravated, exemplary or provisional damages the particulars of claim must so state and the facts relied on must be pleaded (Ord 6, r 1B).
It is assumed that a claim is limited to £5,000, and so falls within the trial jurisdiction of the district judge, unless it is stated in the particulars that the claim is more.
Further particulars
The delivery of a request for further and better particulars is not a condition precedent to the making of an order for them, but  the failure to make a prior request is a ground for refusing the order: Ord 6, r 7.
Particulars delivered pursuant to an order, or to a request, must incorporate the text of the order, or of the request.
Recovery of land
Order 6, r 3 applies.
In an action for recovery of land, the particulars must give:(1) a full description of the land;(2) the net annual value for rating, or, if the land does not consist of one or more hereditaments having a separate net annual value for rating:(a) where the land forms part of a hereditament having a net annual value not exceeding the county court limit (see under "Limits of County Court Jurisdiction" ), the net annual value of that hereditament, or (b) in any other case, the value of the land by the year;(See as to NAV—Chapter 29)(3) the rent, if any, of the land;(4) the grounds on which possession is claimed;(5) in a case under s 138 of the 1984 Act (proceedings to enforce a right of re-entry or forfeiture for non-payment of rent), the daily rate at which the rent in arrear or mesne profits are to be calculated;(6) in proceedings for forfeiture the name and address of any underlessee or mortgagee entitled to claim relief against forfeiture and a copy of the particulars of claim for that person (Ord 6, r 3(2));(7) a claim for arrears of rent and mesne profits should be included if applicable (see Chapter 16).
In a forfeiture action the landlord must notify any person entitled to relief of whom he is aware (Ord 6, r 3(b).
Injunctions and declarations relating to land
Where the plaintiff claims an injunction or declaration unaccompanied by any other claim for relief under s 22 of the 1984 Act, the particulars of claim must give a full description of the land and the annual value for rating (Ord 6, r 4).
Mortgagee possession actions
Order 6, r 5 provides that in mortgagee possession actions—that is where the plaintiff claims payment of money secured or possession of the property mortgaged—the particulars of claim must state:(1) the date of the mortgage;(2) the state of the account, giving particulars of the amount of the advance, the periodic payments required, the amount of any interest in arrear, the amount of the unpaid instalments, the amount of any costs or fines or insurance unpaid; the daily rate of interest and the amount remaining due under [and required to redeem]the mortgage;(3) what proceedings (if any) the plaintiff has taken against the defendant in respect of the money secured by the mortgage or the mortgaged property and, where payment of such money only is claimed, whether the plaintiff has obtained possession of the property;(4) where the plaintiff claims possession of the property, whether or not the property consists of or includes a dwelling house within the meaning of s 21 of the County Courts Act 1974;(5) where a plaintiff claims as mortgagee possession of land which consists of or includes a dwelling house, he shall state, in his particulars of claim, whether there is any person on whom notice of the action is required to be served in accordance with s 8(3) of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983 and, if so, he shall state the name and address of that person and shall file a copy of the particulars of claim for service on that person (Ord 6, r 5(1A)).
PD (No 1 of 1991) issued by the Chief Master, Chancery Division referring to RSC Ord 88, r 5(2) that a copy of the mortgage deed must be exhibited to the affidavit also requires a copy of any Standard Conditions which the mortgage incorporates to be exhibited.
This practice is recommended to be followed in the county court.
At the hearing there should be handed to the district judge an affidavit verifying the particulars of claim, in particular the arrears of instalments, the amount required to redeem and the mortgage conditions if these are not contained in the mortgage deed itself; together with offer of advance again if the mortgage deed is silent, the affidavit to be sworn say some seven days before, the  charge certificate and a completed search on Form 106 (registered land) or on Form K15 (unregistered land).
If the search reveals an existing land charge Class F or a caution, notice shall be given by the mortgagee (s 8(3) of the Matrimonial Homes Act, 1983).
(1) "Mortgage" includes a legal or equitable mortgage or charge (Ord 6, r 5(2)).
An equitable mortgagee seeking possession is in precisely the same position as a legal mortgagee (Barclays Bank Ltd v Bird [1954]Ch 274 at p 280), but the remedy of an equitable chargee is only by way of sale (see The Supreme Court Practice Vol 1 at 50/1—9/23).
A charging order has the same effect and is enforceable in the courts in the same manner as an equitable charge (s 3(4) of the Charging Orders Act 1979).
(2) Part IV of the Administration of Justice Act, 1970 gives exclusive jurisdiction to County Courts, save if in Greater London, wheresoever the mortgage includes a dwelling house (s 37) and invests the court with its powers (s 36).
See Chapters 3 and 16. (3) "Dwelling house" includes any building or part thereof used as a dwelling.
Notes
Landlord and Tenant Act 1954
Proceedings by a tenant for a new tenancy must be commenced not less than two months nor more than four months of the date of the original notice or the tenant will lose his rights under the Act, and this limitation of time is absolute.
In the main, notices to be given under the Act can only be given in the prescribed form (see the Landlord and Tenant 1954 Part II (Notices)(Amendment) Regulations 1989).
The procedure on application for a new lease is similar to that to be followed in the Chancery Division (see Chancery Practice and Orders, Blackford, Jaque and Quint (Longman 1991).
Section 38 of the 1954 Act as amended by s 5 of the Law of Property Act, 1969 provides for application to the court for the court's approval to an agreement excluding the provisions of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
Such applications are made by way of joint application of the landlord and tenant, one of the parties issuing on behalf of both, supported by an affidavit exhibiting the proposed lease though local practice in some courts  may not require this.
These applications are not regarded as a mere formality by most courts which may require the originating application to state the grounds in proper detail, for example that the lessor may require to occupy at the expiration of the lease; that the premises are temporarily surplus to the needs of the lessor; that the lessee has indicated that he only requires the premises for a limited period; that there is to be development at the expiration of the term; that the lessor is only prepared to grant if the section is excluded; that exclusion of the section has been taken into consideration in negotiations for the rent, or possibly that the premises form part of other premises which brings the provisions of management of the whole into question if the section is not excluded.
Applications for exclusion of a right to a new tenancy are almost invariably dealt with by the district judge without the parties attending.
Early appointments may usually be obtained, as a matter of practice, for such applications.
For procedure and requirements on applications, see Chapter 27.
Hire-purchase actions
Order 6, r 6 applies.
Where a plaintiff claims the delivery of goods let under a hire-purchase agreement to a person other than a body corporate, he shall in his particulars state in the following order:(1) the date of the agreement and the parties to it, with the number of the agreement or sufficient particulars to enable the debtor to identify the agreement;(2) where the plaintiff was not one of the original parties to the agreement, the means by which the rights and duties of the creditor under the agreement passed to him;(3) whether the agreement is a regulated agreement and, if it is not a regulated agreement, the reason why;(4) the place where the agreement was signed by the debtor (if known);(5) the goods claimed;(6) the total price of the goods;(7) the paid-up sum;(8) the unpaid balance of the total price;(9) whether a default notice or a notice under s 76(1) or s 98(1) of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 has been served on the debtor and if it has, the date on which and the manner in which it was so served;(10) the date when the right to demand delivery of the goods accrued;(11) the amount (if any) claimed as an alternative to the delivery of the goods; and (12) the amount (if any) claimed in addition to the delivery of the goods or any claim under sub-paragraph (10), stating the cause of action in respect of which each such claim is made.
Where a plaintiff's claim arises out of a hire-purchase agreement, but is not for the delivery of goods, he shall in his particulars state in the following order:(1) the date of the agreement and the parties to it with the number of the agreement or sufficient particulars to enable the debtor to identify the agreement;(2) where the plaintiff was not one of the original parties to the agreement, the means by which the rights and duties of the creditor under the agreement passed to him;(3) whether the agreement is a regulated agreement and, if it is not a regulated agreement, the reason why;(4) the place where the agreement was signed by the debtor (if known);(5) the goods let under the agreement;(6) the amount of the total price;(7) the paid-up sum;(8) the amount (if any) claimed as being due and unpaid in respect of any instalment or instalments of the total price; and (9) the nature and amount of any other claim and the circumstances in which it arises.
The above provisions apply to all agreements dated after 18 May 1985.
As to "regulated agreement" see s 189(1) of the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
 "Total price" (as to which see s 189(1)) is, broadly, the same as "hire-purchase price" under the Hire-Purchase Act, 1965.
Note
Personal injury actions
Order 6, r 1(5) applies.
A medical report and statement of special damages must be filed with the particulars of the claim, with copies for each defendant; there is power to dispense, or to specify a period within which such documents are to be provided (Ord 6, r 1(6)).
Actions against the Crown
The particulars of claim must contain information as to the circumstances in which it is alleged that the liability of the Crown has arisen and as to the government departments and officers of the Crown concerned (Ord 42, r 4).
(See also the section on "The Crown" in Chapter 5.)
Interest
This must be specifically claimed (Ord 6, r 1A) and reference could usefully be made to Practice Note (Claims for Interest)(No 2),[1983]1 WLR 377 issued for the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court which specifies the particulars required to be pleaded in the Queen's Bench in claims for interest on debt or damages made under s 15 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982, the empowering Act.
For county court purposes interest should be claimed pursuant to s 69 of the County Courts Act, 1984.
The current rate is 15 per cent.
Interest may be given for all or any part of the period between the date when the cause of action arose and:(a) in the case of any sum paid before judgment, the date of the payment; and (b) in the case of the sum for which judgment is given, the date of judgment.
Interest is not payable under this section for any period during which, for whatever reason, interest on the debt already runs (s 69(4)).
Interest, if given under the section, may be calculated at different rates in respect of different periods (s 69(5)).
Where there is a judgment for personal injuries (or death) which exceeds £200 the court has no discretion but must give interest under (a) above unless the court is satisfied that there are special reasons to the contrary (see Jefford v Gee [1970]All ER 1202 and Birkett v Hayes [1982]2 All ER 710).
And the Plaintiff claims the said sum of [£250.00]together with interest pursuant to s 69 of the County Courts Act 1984 at the rate  of 15 per cent per annum from the [First day of October 1991][the date upon which payment became due]to the date hereof [£3.70]and continuing hereafter at the daily rate of [£0.1027]until the date of judgment or sooner payment.
Precedent of claim to be inserted at the foot of the Particulars of Claim
The plaintiff therefore claims the said sum of [£253.70]continuing interest and costs.
Hours 10.00 am to 4.00 pm Monday to Friday except in vacation.
Payment of fees and other payments
Payment at a court office
Payment may be made by cash, banker's or giro draft, cheque supported by a cheque card (present limit £50) or by other cheques, subject to clearance and the Chief Clerk's consent.
(Solicitors' cheques are usually accepted.)
The payer (unless issuing a summons) should produce the plaint note or summons to enable the court to identify the plaint number of the case.
Payment may be made to the court office by postal order, banker's or giro draft or cheques (subject to clearance and the Chief Clerk's consent).
(Solicitors' cheques are usually accepted.)
The payer must send the payment in a properly stamped envelope, enclosing the plaint note or summons (or otherwise clearly identifying the plaint number) and enclosing also a self addressed envelope so the court can return a receipt with the plaint note or summons (if sent).
Payment by post
Cheques, postal orders and drafts must be made payable to "HM Paymaster General" and crossed.
The court cannot accept stamps or payments by bank and giro credit transfers.
Service
Generally; service of other than originating process
Subject to the requirements of any act or particular rule (as to which see below) any document may be served, if the person to be served is acting in person, by delivering it to him personally or by delivering it at, or sending it by first class post to, the address he has given for service.
A party in person may give his place of residence or business, or if he resides outside England or Wales any address in England or Wales (Ord 1, r 3).
If he has given no address for service, service may be effected by delivering the document at his residence or by sending it by first class post to his last known residence, or in the case of a proprietor of a business, by delivering the document at his place of business or sending it by first class post to his last known place of business (Ord 7, r 1).
If the person to be served is represented by a solicitor, the document may be served by delivering the document at, or sending it by first class post to, the solicitor's address for service (Ord 7, r 1(b)).
See below.
Service by post of documents, other than of originating process, which will obviously be documents served subsequent to the originating process, are deemed to have been served and received if sent by post to the "address for service" , which is defined in Ord 1, r 3.
Generally service is deemed to have been effected at the time the letter would have been delivered in the ordinary course of post (s 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978).
Where personal service of a document is required, it may be served by a court bailiff, or if the person to be served attends and is present at court, or in the court office, by any other officer of the court.
Following service, the bailiff or other officer of the court files a certificate of the manner, place and date of service (N 12).
If a court bailiff fails to effect service, a notice of non-service (N 216) is sent by the court of which he is bailiff to the plaintiff or other party issuing the process (Ord 7, rr 2–6).
If the bailiff knows or ascertains before notice of non-service is sent that the defendant is at another address within the district, he should attempt to serve the summons there and state the new address in his certificate of service (Ord 7, r 17(3)).
If the address for service by the bailiff is not within the district of the court issuing the summons, or within five hundred yards thereof, the issuing court must send the summons to the court within the district for which the address for service is situated for personal service to be effected by that court (Ord 7, r 7).
The judge or district judge of the issuing court may order process to be served by their own bailiff out of area (Ord 7, r 4(2)).
Where it is a party, his agent or his solicitor who effects personal service, this is proved by filing an affidavit of service (N 215)(Ord 7, rr 2, 6).
Until it is filed, judgment cannot be entered nor the action or matter proceed unless the defendant has filed a defence, admission or counterclaim (Ord 7, r 12).
Personal service may not be effected by anyone under sixteen years of age (Ord 7, r 2).
No process, except in an admiralty action, may be served or executed within England or Wales on a Sunday, Christmas Day or Good Friday, except in case of urgency with leave of the court (Ord 7, r3).
All documents sent by post for service, whether originating process or otherwise and whether to companies or to persons, should be sent by prepaid letter post, not registered or recorded; only documents other than originating process can be sent by second class post.
By s 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978, proof of prepaid posting to the proper address raises a statutory presumption of delivery (provided that the document has not been returned through the Post Office as undelivered).
If a document other than originating process (as to which, see below) is sent by first class post, it is presumed to arrive on the second working day after posting (working days being Monday to Friday and excluding Bank Holidays).
(See Practice Direction [1985]1 WLR 489.)
Affidavits should therefore specify whether first or second class mail has been used.
Service of summons or other originating process
Unless the plaintiff requests that he (the plaintiff) serve personally, service is effected in the first instance by the court by first class postal service to the address given for the defendant in the request for summons (N 201–4, 208 or 209).
In personal injury claims, the plaintiff's solicitor may himself serve by post, if desired.
The solicitor presents copy summonses (two copies for the court and one for every defendant) at the court office with the particulars of claim, medical reports, details of special damage and fee.
The court will prepare the appropriate form of reply, account for the fee and hand the made-up summonses back to the plaintiff's solicitor for posting.
The court makes up a record card from the spare copy summons lodged.
The court staff have been admonished to deal with a request for postal service by solicitor as a matter of priority.
An affidavit of service is only required where no defence or other evidence of service is available and judgment in default is being sought.
The authority being the County Court (Amendment No 2) Rules 1991 (SI 1991 No 1126).
Substituted service
If it appears to the court that it is impracticable for any reason to serve a document in any manner prescribed by the rules, the court may, upon an affidavit showing grounds, make an order for substituted service (N 217) giving leave for such steps to be taken as the court directs to bring the document to the notice of the person to be served (Ord 7, r 8(1)).
Although an order of substituted service may be made in committal proceedings, the judge may decide to exercise his discretion not to commit until personal service has been effected.
If the defendant's address can be proved, but he is denied there, an order for substituted service "by first class prepaid post in a plain white or blue (but not buff) handwritten envelope on which is to be affixed an ordinary postage stamp" may be sought, and some district judges are familiar with an order in these terms knowing of the antipathy to buff envelopes when received by some defendants, particularly debtors.
Once the envelope is known to have been slit open, an explanation from the recipient may be required.
For subsequent service, different coloured envelopes and different handwriting may be desirable.
Substituted service may be made at a defendant's place of employment or his bank or his former solicitor  (see Supreme Court Practice, Vol 1, 65/4/16).
If via his former solicitor, it is perhaps desirable for the court to send a covering letter making clear that the solicitor is not himself being asked to accept service.
If substituted service by advertisement is required, a draft of the advertisement must be submitted to the district judge to settle.
The expense is to be borne by such party as the court may direct (Ord 50, r 8), and on a taxation reasonable costs may be allowed (Ord 38, r 12).
Where a document is to be served by a bailiff, the proper officer of the bailiff's court shall, if so requested, take such steps as may be necessary to provide evidence on which an order for substituted service may be made (Ord 7, r 8(2)).
Non service
Where the summons has been so sent by post and returned to the court office undelivered, notice of non-service (N 216) is sent to the plaintiff saying that he may request bailiff service.
If such service is requested, the bailiff then serves by inserting the summons etc through the letter-box or handing it to a person (apparently not less than 16 years old) at the address given in the request for summons.
Alternatively he serves the defendant personally (Ord 7, r 10(1),(2) and Ord 3, rr 4(6), 5 and 6(6)).
All summonses and originating applications must now be served within four months.
Affidavit of service
An affidavit of service is required where no defence or other evidence of service is available and the plaintiff is seeking judgment by default.
Time relating to service of originating process
A fixed date summons, originating application, petition or appeal should be served not less than twenty-one clear days before the return day, but on the plaintiff satisfying the district judge by affidavit that a defendant is about to remove, it may be served at any time before the return day (Ord 7, r 10(5), Ord 3, rr 4–6).
Furthermore, if the originating process is served late, the court may allow the hearing or pre-trial review to proceed even in  the defendant's absence, or it may adjourn the hearing (Ord 7, r 16).
Notice of service (N 222) is to be sent by the court office to the plaintiff when a default summons is served by the court (Ord 7, r 21).
Where an originating process is sent by post (first class as required), the date of service is deemed to be seven days thereafter unless the contrary is proved (Ord 7, r 10(3); Ord 3 rr 4–6).
Thus in calculating the date to be given for a hearing (Ord 7, r 10(5)), an additional seven days must always be allowed where postal service is effected.
Service on solicitor
The defendant's solicitor endorses on the copy summons a certificate duly accepting service and giving an address for service.
The copy summons so endorsed will be sent by the solicitor to the court office or else retained by the person who has effected service.
Where the solicitor accepts service, no affidavit of service is required.
Service is deemed to have been effected on the date of the certificate (Ord 7, r 11).
Service may be effected on the solicitor:(1) if by delivering the document at, or sending it by first-class post to the solicitor's address for service, service by post is deemed to have been effected at the time the letter would have been delivered in the ordinary course of post (s 7 of the Interpretations Act 1978): or (2) where the solicitor's address for service includes a numbered box at a document exchange in a county court, and the document is left at that exchange or at an exchange which transmits daily to the first exchange, it is then deemed to have been served on the second day after the day on which it was left, but any day on which the court office in which one or both exchanges is situated is shut shall not be taken into account (Ord 1, r 3; Ord 2, r 5(1A); Ord 7, rr 1(1) (b), 1(3), and (4)).
Crown and government departments
Service must be effected on one of the persons acting or deemed to be acting as solicitor for the department.
A list of authorised government departments and their solicitors and addresses is published by the Treasury for the Civil Service, and is  reproduced in The County Court Practice.
Service is to be effected by posting the process or document in a prepaid registered envelope, or by personal delivery.
Minors and mental patients
If a defendant is a minor, a summons must be served (if he is not also a mental patient) on a parent or guardian, or if he has no parent or guardian, then on the person with whom he resides or in whose care he is (Ord 10, r 4).
If, however, the defendant is a mental patient, the summons must be served on the person, if any, who is authorised under the Mental Health Act 1983, Pt VII to conduct proceedings on the defendant's behalf or if there is no such person, then on the person with whom he resides or in whose care he is (Ord 10, r 4(1)).
If a summons is purported to be served otherwise on a person under disability, the court is empowered to order that the summons be deemed duly served (Ord 10, r 4(2)).
Partners
Where partners are sued in the name of their firm, unless the plaintiff requests that he (the plaintiff) serve a partner personally, service is effected in the first instance by the court by first class postal service to the address given for the firm in the request for summons (N 201–4).
Where the summons has been so served by post and returned to the court office undelivered, notice of non-service is sent to the plaintiff (N 216).
If he then requires bailiff service the bailiff serves the summons by delivering it at the said address and by delivering it to the person having, or appearing to have, control or management there alternatively to a partner personally.
(The above applies even if any of the partners are out of England or Wales.)
If the firm has been dissolved to the knowledge of the plaintiff before the commencement of the action, the summons must be served upon every person within England and Wales sought to be made liable (Ord 7, r 13).
Limited companies
A summons must be served on a limited company by leaving it at, or by sending it by post to, the registered office pursuant to s 725(1) of the Companies Act, 1985.
The expression "by post" includes ordinary post, though it may be preferable to use first class.
Order 7, r 10(4) which provides that the date of service is deemed to be the seventh day after posting does not apply, and the summons is in this case deemed, by virtue of s 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978, to be received in the time it would be delivered "in the ordinary course of post" .
The fact that the limited company has vacated its registered office and/or made no arrangements for forwarding post does not affect the validity of service.
If, however, the summons is returned by the post office, the district judge will normally require proof that the address was the up-to-date registered office on the date of service before deeming service to have been effected.
Where a company is registered in Scotland a summons may be served on it by leaving it at, or by sending it by post to, its principal place of business in England or Wales addressed to the manager or head officer and by further posting a copy to the registered office (s 725(2) and (3) Companies Act 1985).
Corporations aggregate
Service may be effected on the mayor, chairman or president, or on the chief executive, clerk, treasurer or secretary, in the absence of any statutory provision (Ord 7, r 14).
Members of the armed forces
Reference should be made to the Memorandum issued by the Lord Chancellor's office on 26 July, 1979 entitled "Memorandum on service of legal process on members of HM Forces" .
This requires a letter of inquiry to be addressed to the Ministry of Defence, for example.
Service of summonses for recovery of land
If in the opinion of the court a summons for recovery of land cannot be served in accordance with Ord 7, rr 4–10, an order may be made on request in N 220 for service on the husband or wife of the defendant, a person living with but not married to the defendant, or upon anyone who is or appears to be authorised by the defendant to reside or carry on business in the premises, to manage them or to safeguard or deal with the premises or  contents thereof (Ord 7, r 15(1)—(3)).
Notice in N 220(1) is to be served on the "representative" of the defendant.
Such service must be effected twenty-one days before the return day (Ord 7, rr 15(2), 10(5)).
In an action for recovery of land, if there is no one in occupation, or where the property is occupied only by virtue of the presence of furniture or other goods, the summons may be served on request (N 220) and if so ordered by the court, by affixing it to a conspicuous part of the property (Ord 7, r 15(4)).
If the summons for recovery of land has been served under Ord 10, r 15 and a money claim is joined, the court must, unless it thinks it just to do otherwise, mark the summons "not served" as to the money claim (Ord 10, r 15(5)).
Where a mortgagee claims possession a person who has registered a land charge, notice or caution under s 2(7) of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 or a notice under s 2(8) of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983 must be served with a copy of the particulars of claim (Ord 6, r 5(1A)).
Note the special rules for service under Ord 24, r 3, which include leaving the documents at the premises.
It is also provided that where a person, not named as a respondent, is in occupation, the originating application and other documents may be served by affixing a copy of them to the main door or other conspicuous part, and, if practicable, inserting them through the letter box, or by placing stakes in the ground with the documents (in a transparent sealed envelope) attached.
Services of notices under the Law of Property Act 1925 eg "s 146 notices" may be served by registered letter post (s 196(3) and (4)) and also by recorded delivery (Recorded Delivery Service Act 1962).
Service relating to the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, Part 2
The plaintiff will be the tenant and the landlord the defendant, but if head lessors or mortgagees are likely to be affected they should be added as defendants and served by the lessee, or else notice should be given to them that they may apply to be joined if desired.
Mortgagees in possession must be joined as defendants.
Section 137 of the 1984 Act provides that "every lessee to whom there is delivered any summons issued from a county court for the recovery of land held by him…shall forthwith give notice to his lessor…if a lessee fails to give notice he shall be liable to forfeit  to the person of whom he hold the land an amount equal to three years improved rent of the land" .
Doubtful service
Where a summons has been served in accordance with Ord 7, r 10(4) (b) by delivering the summons to a person not under sixteen years of age, if it is doubtful from the endorsement whether the summons will come to the knowledge of the defendant in sufficient time, notice of doubtful service (N 221) is sent by the court.
Where such a notice has been served, then unless the court receives from the defendant a defence, admission or counterclaim, the plaintiff will have to satisfy the court that the defendant received the summons in "sufficient time" (Ord 7, r 18(2).
For default summonses, "sufficient time" means sufficient time for the defendant to deliver a defence, admission or counterclaim within fourteen days after delivery of the summons, and sufficient time in the case of fixed date summonses for him to attend on the return day (Ord 7, r 18(3)).
If the court is unable to effect service, notice of non-service (N 216) is sent to the plaintiff or his solicitor (Ord 7 r 6(2)).
If the defendant files a defence, admission or counterclaim, service is presumed on the date of such filing (Ord 7, r 12).
Alteration in summons or request
If a summons has not been served, it may be amended if the plaintiff files an amended request "notwithstanding that the amendment consists of the addition or substitution of a defendant" .
However, the court may disallow such amendment (Ord 7, r 17(2)).
The requirements are:(1) amended request;(2) plaint note;(3) addressed envelope, if requested by post.
No fee.
Successive fixed date summonses
Where a fixed date summons has not been served on every defendant before the return day, successive summonses may be reissued with fresh return days (Ord 7, r 19(1)).
The requirements are:(1) amendment request;(2) plaint note, to show amended return day;(3) addressed envelope, if requested by post.
No fee.
Where such a summons has not been served because the defendant has left the district after issue, successive summonses may be issued for service in any district to which he has moved (Ord 7, r 19(2)).
Successive summonses bear the same number and date as the original and are deemed to be a continuance of the original fixed date summons (Ord 7, r 19(3)).
Duration and renewal of default and fixed date summonses
A summons may, unless extended, only be served in England or Wales within four months from the date of the issue of the original summons (Ord 7, r 20(1)).
A note of the extension is made by the court on the summons and copy.
A successive fixed date summons is deemed to have been issued on the date of the original summons (Ord 7, r 19(3)).
The district judge may extend the period of four months for a further period or periods each not exceeding four months, if reasonable efforts have been made to serve the summons and provided that the application has been made before the preceding 12 months expire, or if later, in the court's discretion (Ord 7, r 20(2)).
Exceptionally, 12 months' extension may be granted (Ord 7, r 20(3)).
The application, setting out the facts, may be made by letter.
It is made ex parte and usually without attendance.
The plaint note should be produced.
There is no fee.
A note of the extension is made by the court on the summons and copy.
Where leave is required to serve out of the jurisdiction (leave is not always needed—see Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982) the period is six months.
Service of matters
An originating application, petition or an appeal to the county court is served in accordance with the rules for a fixed date summons unless an enactment or rule otherwise provides (Ord 3, rr 4(6), 5 and 6(6)).
The rules as to renewing summonses apply to matters.
Originating applications for new tenancies under s 24 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954
Such applications must be served within two months of issue unless the period is extended.
The time for service may be extended by two months at a time, before the two months expire, or even afterwards in the court's discretion (Ord 43, r 6(3) applying and modifying Ord 7, r 20).
Service out of England and Wales
Order 8 applies.
Service of an originating process out of England and Wales is permissible without the leave of the court provided that each claim made is either:(1) a claim which, by virtue of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982, the court has power to hear and determine, made in proceedings to which the following conditions apply:(a) no proceedings between the parties concerning the same cause of action are pending in the courts of any other part of the United Kingdom or of any other Convention territory, and (b) either:(i) the defendant is domiciled in any part of the United Kingdom or in any other Convention territory, or the proceedings begun by the originating process are proceedings to which art 16 of Sched 1 or of Sched 4 to the 1982 Act refer, or (ii) the defendant is a party to an agreement conferring jurisdiction to which art 17 of the said Sched 1 or Sched 4 applies.
[The request for summons and the particulars of claim must contain the certificates required by Ord 3, r 3(5)—(8) or r 4(7).
The rules themselves should be consulted for detail.]
or,(1) a claim which by virtue of any other enactment the court has power to hear and determine notwithstanding that the person against whom the claim is made is not within England and Wales or that the wrongful act, neglect or default giving rise to the claim did not take place within England and Wales.
In other cases, service outside England and Wales requires the court's leave.
The following are the principal cases where that leave would be forthcoming:(1) relief is sought against any person domiciled in England or Wales;(2) an injunction is sought ordering the defendant to do an act or refrain from doing anything (whether or not damages are also claimed in respect of a failure to do something or for the doing of that thing);(3) the claim is brought against any person duly served within or out of England and Wales and a person out of England and Wales is a necessary or proper party thereto;(4) the claim is founded on any breach or alleged breach of any contract wherever made, which:(a) according to its terms ought to be performed in England and Wales, or (b) is by its terms, or by implication, governed by English law, or (c) contains a term to the effect that a court in England or Wales shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any action in respect of the contract;(5) the claim is founded on a tort and the damage was sustained or resulted from an act committed, within England and Wales;(6) the whole subject-matter of the proceedings is land (with or without rent or profits) or the perpetuation of testimony relating to land;(7) the claim is brought to construe, rectify, set aside or enforce an act, deed, will, contract, obligation or liability affecting land;(8) the claim is made for a debt secured on immovable property or is made to assert, declare or determine proprietary or possessory rights, or rights of security, in or over movable property, or to obtain authority to dispose of movable property;(9) the claim is brought to execute the trusts of a written instrument, being trusts that ought to be executed according to English law and of which the person to be served with the originating process is a trustee, or for any relief or remedy which might be obtained when such a claim is brought;(10) the claim is made for the administration of the estate of a  person who died domiciled in England or Wales or for any relief or remedy which might be obtained when such a claim is made;(11) the claim is brought in a probate action within the meaning of Ord 41;(12) the claim is brought to enforce any judgment or arbitral award;(13) the claim is brought against a defendant not domiciled in Scotland or Northern Ireland in respect of a claim by the Commissioners of Inland Revenue for or in relation to any of the duties of taxes which have been, or are for the time being, placed under their care and management;(14) the claim is brought in respect of contributions under the Social Security Act 1975;(15) the claim is made for a sum to which the Directive of the Council of the European Communities dated 15 March 1976 No 76/308/EEC applies, and service is to be effected in a country which is a member of the European Economic Community.
(16) the claim is brought for money had and received or for an account or other relief against the defendant as constructive trustee, and the defendant's alleged liability arises out of acts committed, whether by him or otherwise, within the jurisdiction.
When serving out of England and Wales, the court fixes in the case of a default summons, or in a fixed date action to which Ord 17, r11 (automatic directions) applies, the time for delivering an admission or defence or for paying the total claim and costs into court, and in any other case a return day (Ord 8, rr 2(3), 4 and 7).
The times allowable are given in Ord 8, r 2(3) (a) and (b) or in the table in Vol 2 of The Supreme Court Practice, para 902.
Where service is to be effected outside the jurisdiction, the request for service (N 201–204 or N 224) must contain the details required by Ord 3, rr 3(5) and (6).
The order is in Form N 223.
When jurisdiction is claimed under the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982, the particulars of claim must contain the statement required by Ord 3, r 3(7).
Service of an interlocutory process out of England and Wales is permissible with the leave of the court on a person who is already a party to the proceedings and who in the case of a defendant, respondent or third party, has been served with the originating process but leave shall not be required for such service in any  proceedings in which the originating process may by these rules or under any Act be served out of England and Wales without leave,(Ord 8, rr 1 and 4).
The Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982, in force from 1 January 1987, waives the need to obtain leave to serve abroad where defendants are resident in the EEC, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Where service is requested in Scotland or Northern Ireland see Ord 8, r 5.
In the case of a limited company with a registered office in Scotland carrying on business in England and Wales, service can be effected without leave by post or by delivering the process at the address in England and Wales and at the same time sending a copy of the process to the registered office (s 725(2) and (3) of the Companies Act 1985).
As to overseas companies which establish a place of business in Great Britain, reference should be made to s 695 of the Companies Act 1985, and to The Supreme Court Practice, notes 65/3/7—65/3/15.
The procedure for service out of jurisdiction is complex and Table 3 of the Procedural Tables at the back of Part 1 of The County Court Practice should be referred to before any application is made and where the jurisdiction of the court is involved under the Civil Jurisdiction Act 1982.
See Ord 3, r 3(5)—(8), Ord 7, r 20 and Ord 8, r 7.
Special note should be made of:(1) the definitions of "domicile" of individuals on the one hand and of corporations (including limited companies) and associations on the other, in ss 41 to 46 of the 1982 Act, and (2) the provisions in Scheds 1 and 4 (ibid) which give the Court jurisdiction to hear and determine claims.
Admissions, Defences, Counterclaims and Answers
Originating applications—filing an answer
An obligation to file an answer to an originating application only arises if there is some specific provision in the rules relating to that particular application, or if the court so orders.
Actions—defences and counterclaims
The defendant receives a summons and two separate forms of reply (N9A—admission/statement of means and N9B—defence and counterclaim).
Form N9 (combined admission, defence and counterclaim) continues to be used where the plaintiff is under disability, in unliquidated cases etc.
The provisions are contained in Ord 9, r 2 which applies to both default and fixed date summonses.
A defendant who disputes the whole or part of the claim, or who wants to counterclaim, must within fourteen days of service (exclusive of the day of service) either file the form annexed to the summons or else his own admission, defence or counterclaim in duplicate (Ord 9, r 2(6)).
The defendant's admission, defence or counterclaim must be signed by him if acting in person, or else by his solicitor in the solicitor's own or firm's name.
It must give an address for service (Ord 9, r 19).
If counsel settled the pleading for further and better particulars, his name should appear at the end.
It may be typed (Ord 50, rr 6 and 6A).
If the defendant is a person under disability he may not defend or counterclaim except by his guardian ad litem(Ord 10, r 1(2)), see Chapter 5.
The court may allow a defendant to withdraw or amend a first  admission at any time on such terms as may be just (Ord 9, r 2(4)).
Any forms sent to a plaintiff by mistake should be filed in the court office straight away.
Admissions of whole liquidated money claim
A defendant who admits the whole of the plaintiff's liquidated claim and asks for time to pay will send direct to the plaintiff a form of admission (Form N9A on p 524 of the 1991 edition) which contains a statement of means.
Where the admission is sent direct to the plaintiff and the offer is accepted, the plaintiff is not required to file the admission (or a copy) with the request for judgment.
To protect the defendant, separate forms of judgment explain both how judgment was entered (eg in default, on acceptance) and what can be done if judgment has been wrongly entered.
Copies of judgments are to be sent in all cases except where a warrant of execution is issued straight away(Ord 22, r 1(3)).
The admissions direct procedure does not apply, where the plaintiff is under disability (summons issued in Form N1D), to unliquidated claims (issued in Form N2), to Admiralty cases, or to part admissions (Ord 9, r 2(5)).
Defence or counterclaim delivered in default actions
If a defence without part admission (see above) or a counterclaim is delivered to the court before judgment is entered, a pre-trial review is fixed (N 233) or a hearing date given (N 232) or, if the claim does not exceed £1,000, the matter is referred to arbitration either forthwith (N 232), with Terms of Reference attached or with a preliminary consideration (N 18)(Ord 9, rr 5, 9; Ord 19, rr 2(3), 5(2) or 2(4) (a)(Term No 1) Automatic directions, viz no pre-trial review if the claim is over £1,000.
Although there is no rule requiring them to do so, many district judges scrutinize the defences in small claims matters to see:(1) if they are viable and if not to make appropriate directions including a striking-out order and a requirement for a "full and proper" defence to be filed;(2) if the matter can immediately be set down for arbitration with appropriate directions;(3) if a PTR is necessary or can be dispensed with.
On receipt of a defence a "proper officer" has to scrutinize it, not for "quality control" , but to determine the question of venue.
Judgment in default or on unqualified admissions in default actions
Order 9, r 6 applies if the defendant in a default action:(1) does not within 14 days after service of the summons on him, pay to the plaintiff the total amount of the claim and costs on the summons; or (2) delivers an admission of the whole of the plaintiff's claim unaccompanied by a counterclaim or a request for time for payment, or (3) does not deliver an admission of part of the plaintiff's claim, a defence or counterclaim, the plaintiff may on filing a request for judgment, and certifying that defendant has not sent any reply to the summons, and stating what payments, if any, have been made, have judgment entered, either for payment forthwith or at such times as plaintiff may specify.
(1) If the claim is for money secured by a mortgage or charge, legal or equitable, judgment may be entered only on application to the district judge on notice to the defendant (Ord 9, r 7).
(2) Except with leave, no judgment can be entered in default against the Crown (Ord 42, r 5(3)).
(3) In addition to the sum claimed, judgment for interest to date of judgment or payment if earlier, may be given (i) at the contractual or statutory rate specified in the particulars of claim or (ii) if no rate is specified, at the rate allowed in the High Court (when the summons is issued), assessed without appointment (Ord 9, r 8).
(See Chapter 6 under "Interest" )(4) Where the defendant is an individual or a company who has been served outside the jurisdiction under Ord 8, r 2(2) (9), or, within the jurisdiction but is "domiciled" in Scotland, Northern Ireland, Belgium, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany), Italy, Luxembourg or the Netherlands, judgment may be entered in default of defence only by leave of the "Registrars" .
This  may be given ex parte on affidavit and the order giving leave must be attached to the judgment (Ord 9, r 6(4), RSC Ord 13, r 7B and Queens Bench Masters Practice Note of 17 December 1986).
(NB "Domicile" is defined specifically for these purposes by ss 41–46 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982.)
Notes
Admissions of part, or request for time, in default actions
New Ord 9, r 3 applies.
The plaintiff may, within fourteen days after notice on filing the form, which certifies the terms of the admission, have judgment entered, with the costs; and he can accept, or not accept, proposals for payment.
If he does not accept the proposals he must give on the form his reasons for non-acceptance.
He then sends to the court the defendant's admission, and states what payments, if any, have been made (Ord 9, r 3(1) and (2)).
The proper officer, under his devolved powers, determines the time for payment, using means guidelines provided, which determination the plaintiff or the defendant is entitled to seek reconsideration by applying within 14 days on notice giving reasons (Ord 9, r 3(4); the proceedings then having been transferred, if necessary, to defendant's home court and date, giving not less than eight days' notice to each plaintiff and defendant, is fixed before the district judge.
The procedure is similar where the plaintiff does not accept the part only admission, when a date is fixed for pre-trial review (Ord 9, r 3(6)).
Where the action is for unliquidated damages and the defendant delivers an admission of liability for the claim but disputes or does not admit the amount of the plaintiff's dam ages, then:(1) if the defendant offers to pay in satisfaction of the claim a specific sum which the plaintiff accepts, the provisions of this rule shall apply as if the defendant had admitted part of the plaintiff's claim; and (2) in any other case, the plaintiff may apply to the court for such judgment as he may be entitled to upon the admission, and the court may give such judgment, including interlocutory judgment for damages to be assessed and costs, or make such other order on the application as it thinks just.
(Ord 9, r 3(7)).
Part admissions not accepted by the plaintiff are subject to the  automatic transfer arrangements (Ord 9, r 2(6)).
The "defendant's home court" means the county court within whose jurisdiction the defendant's address falls.
If there are two or more defendants, the home court is the court for the first defendant's address.
Automatic transfer does not apply where the defendant lives outside England and Wales (Ord 1, r 13).
Where a defendant sends a document to the plaintiff instead of to the court, the plaintiff is required to send it to the court straight away.
A "states paid" defence is not automatically transferred on receipt of the defence.
Instead it is copied to the plaintiff together with new Form N236 which asks him to confirm whether he wishes the case to proceed or that he is withdrawing the action (Ord 9, r 2(7)).
If the admission etc is delivered late but in a default action before judgment is entered or in a fixed date action before the return day, then the court proceeds as if the admission etc had been filed in time, as far as possible.
The defendant may defend on the return day even if he has failed to file a defence (Ord 9, r 9(2)).
He may be penalised in costs (Ord 9, r 9(3)).
Late admissions before judgments
A copy of the admission etc is sent to the plaintiff, with instructions, in default and hire-purchase actions, as to what to do where part is admitted and/or time to pay the whole or part is sought (N 225, 226 and 228).
Where a third party notice has been issued in a default action, judgment on admission or default cannot be entered without a hearing (Ord 12, r 1(7)).
Where the defendant is under disability, a plaintiff may not enter judgment on an admission unless there is a guardian ad litem or steps are taken to appoint a guardian ad litem(Ord 10, r 6(1), but see Ord 10, r 8).
If judgment is so entered it may be set aside under Ord 37, r 5.
As to proceedings against persons under disability, see Chapter 5.
Third party notices; disability
If the defendant admits the plaintiff's right to recovery of land, notice is sent to the plaintiff (N 229).
No costs are allowed after receipt of such notice of proving anything the admission renders it unnecessary to prove (Ord 9, r 16).
Recovery of land
If the defendant files an admission of the whole or part of the claim within 14 days of service, notice is sent in N 227 to the plaintiff, who may then apply, on notice to the defendant before the return day, for judgment for the whole, or that part of the claim, which the defendant admits, without waiting for any other issues to be resolved.
The court may make such order as is just (Ord 9, r 4).
The plaintiff may apply for judgment or directions in such actions to which Ord 17, r 11 (automatic directions) applies where the Defendant fails to file a defence within 14 days of service and the court may make such order as is just (Ord 9, r 4A).
Early judgment in other fixed date actions
Where goods, in hire-purchase and conditional sale cases, are protected under s 33 of the Hire-Purchase Act 1965, or under s 90 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974, if the defendant makes an offer to pay the whole or part of the outstanding balace by instalments, the plaintiff must notify the proper officer within 14 days of notice whether he accepts or not.
If he does, a proper officer will enter judgment (N 32 (1) and N 32 (2)) as soon as is practicable.
Where there is a guarantor or where the offer is not accepted, judgment cannot be entered before the return day (Ord 9, r 3(1),(2); Ord 49, r 6(5))(for agreements dated 18 May, 1985 or earlier).
For agreements dated 19 May, 1985 or later see Ord 9, r 3(1) and (2) and the alternative Ord 49, r 4(7).
There appears to be no difference in substance between the procedures.
Admissions in actions for delivery of goods
Order 11 r 10 applies.
A party to proceedings may at any time make a written offer to any other party to those proceedings which is expressed to be "without prejudice save as to costs" and which relates to any issue in the proceedings.
Written offers "without prejudice save as to costs" 
A party who makes such an offer shall file a copy in a sealed envelope, but the offer shall not be brought to the attention of the court at the hearing until the question of costs falls to be decided and the court shall, in exercising its discretion as to costs, take into account any offer which has been brought to its attention: Provided that, except in a case to which paragraph (3) of the rule applies, the court shall not take such an offer into account if, at the time it is made, the party making it could have protected his position as to costs by means of a payment into court.
Paragraph (3) applies to a case where the party making the offer has applied for but has not yet received, a certificate of total benefit given in accordance with Sched 4 to the Social Security Act 1989; but this paragraph shall not apply with respect to any time after seven days after that party has received the certificate.
The rule provides for the practice approved in "Calderbank" (Calderbank v Calderbank (1976) 3 All ER 333).
Interlocutory judgment
When this has been entered (unless a date has been given for the assessment) the plaintiff should, when ready to prove his figures, apply for an appointment before the district judge, or, if the sum claimed is more than £1,000, before the circuit judge (unless the defendant admits liability).
(N 244).
The court gives seven days' notice to the parties (Ord 22, r 6(1)).
Judgment cannot be entered merely on an affidavit lodged by the plaintiff.
Interim payment of damages
Application for such payment can be made where more than £500 is claimed or involved (Ord 13, r 12).
Whilst it may possibly have been the intention to increase the amount in the new rates, no provision appears as yet to have been made.
Provisional damages
Where there is a claim for provisional damages under s 51 of the 1984 Act and the defendant fails to deliver a defence in time, or admits the whole or part of the claim Ord 9, r 4 applies (Ord 22, r 6A(3)).
Transfer to another county court
If the judge or district judge is satisfied that any proceedings can be more conveniently or fairly dealt with in some other court, he may order the action or matter itself to be transferred to that court (Ord 16, r 1).
For this purpose "proceedings" include the hearing of any action, matter or arbitration (Ord 16, r 4(5)), the disposal of a default action, any pre-trial review or interlocutory application, proceedings for enforcement which can also be transferred under  Ord 25, r 2 and payments into court under a judgment or order.
Save for appeals and applications under Ord 37 in cases of transfer for enforcement and payments into court, all further steps after transfer are to be taken in the transferee court (Ord 16, r 4(6)).
Transfer cannot be ordered where an Act or statutory instrument other than the 1981 Rules, eg s 17 of the Married Women's Property Act 1982, requires the matter to be commenced in a particular court (Ord 16, r 3).
An order to transfer may be made by the court on its own motion, or on the application of any party on not less than two clear days' notice (Ord 16, r 4(1)).
However, where a defendant does not reside or carry on business within the district of the court and he desires the action to be transferred to the court for the district in which he resides or carries on business, he may, after delivering a defence, counterclaim, or request for time for payment, apply ex parte in writing for an order to transfer the action to that court.
Before dealing with the application, the judge or district judge may give the plaintiff an opportunity to make representations (Ord 16, r 4(2)).
The transferring court draws the order and notifies all parties (N 271).
A certified copy of the entries in the court books is sent to the court to which the proceedings are transferred; so are all other documents, but in enforcement or payment into court cases only if the transfer ee court so requests (Ord 16, r 4(3),(4)).
The court to which the action is transferred sends notice of hearing,(N 272), or pre-trial review unless Ord 17, r 11 (automatic directions) applies (Ord 16, r 4(5) and 5A).
Where a judge is the judge for two or more districts the judge or district judge may at any time upon application or upon his own motion direct that the hearing of proceedings pending before the judge in one court shall take place in some other court of which he is the judge.
Notice of hearing (N 247) is given by the court (Ord 13, r 2(3)).
This procedure is sometimes followed when a "branch" county court has a long defended action which is more conveniently heard at the judge's main court in some large town.
Infants' funds
The court may, at any time, on application or on its own motion order that any money invested as funds in court under Ord 10, r 11(1) ( "infants' settlements" ) be transferred to another  county court (Ord 16, r 5).
Application can be made by letter.
The court may also transfer such funds to the High Court or to a district registry, and most courts now do so.
All moneys, securities and effects paid or deposited in a county court now vest in the Accountant General; s 38(1) of the Administration of Justice Act 1982.
Inactivity in a default action
Should twelve months have expired from date of service, without judgment having been entered by the plaintiff on an admission, the action is struck out and cannot be revived.
The same applies where neither plaintiff nor defendant have, after service, taken any action at all(Ord 9, r 10).
Defence of tender before action
This is valid only if the sum in question is paid into court (Ord 9, r 12).
Irregularities
Delivery of a defence is not waiver of an irregularity, but the defendant must promptly apply to set aside the proceedings and take no other step meanwhile (Ord 9, r 13).
Letters and documents purporting to dispute or admit
The court shall treat any document which shows a desire to dispute, admit, ask time to pay, or counterclaim as prima facie admission, defence etc (Ord 9, r 17) provided that it is properly signed (Ord 9, r 19).
Plaintiffs (and their solicitors) should not write to the court ex parte asking for judgment to be entered "because there is no real (or proper) defence" .
Such submissions must be made at the pretrial review or preliminary consideration, or on application under Ord 9, r 14 where more than £1,000 is claimed.
Counterclaims
If the sum counterclaimed exceeds the sum claimed a fee is payable on the difference (see Table of Fees).
Originating applications
Where an answer is required to be filed of which notice must have been given to the respondent (Ord 9, r 18(5)), the answer shall be filed within 14 days inclusive of the day of service, unless another period is prescribed, and shall be accompanied by sufficient copies for all other parties, including other respondents separately represented.
These are sent to the other parties by the court (Ord 9, r 18).
Payment Into and Out of Court and Between Parties
Payment in generally
Save where the Rules or the Funds Rules 1987 provide otherwise, all monies due are paid to the party in whose favour there is a judgment or Order (Ord 22, r 1A).
This does not apply, however, to money ordered to be paid into court, to payments from debtors under warrants, attachment of earnings orders, administration orders and a small number of minor provisions, to some orders as to enforcement, nor where any party is under disability; in those cases where the court will be taking payments, all other payments will be made direct from debtor to creditor.
If one (or more) only of several defendants makes payment, this must be stated (Ord 11, r 1(3)).
 "Payment in" shall not be mentioned in the pleadings and the notice must not be with the pleadings or documents for the use of the court at the trial or arbitration until after its decision, except in the case of a defence of tender, or the filing of a plea under the Libel Acts (Ord 11, r 7).
Defendants in person unfortunately often mention payment in, in their defences.
This can be corrected at the pre-trial review or preliminary arbitration hearing.
Where monies are paid direct between parties, obviously the parties should keep full accounts of payments made and received.
If a defendant wishes payment under the counterclaim to be made other than at his address for service or to his solicitor he must give an address for payment "with appropriate reference details" .
Payment of whole sum claimed
(1) Where the whole amount is paid to the plaintiff (including interest to payment in if claimed) the action is stayed save  as to costs, or where an order for payment out is required, or where hospital expenses are claimed (Ord 11, rr 2(1), 4 and 6).
(2) Where the action is for a debt or liquidated demand (including interest to payment in, if claimed) and the defendant pays the claim and interest to the plaintiff within fourteen days of service exclusive of the day of service, together with summons costs, then the action is stayed and the defendant is liable to no further costs unless the court otherwise orders or unless the plaintiff is under disability (Ord 11, r 2(1),(2),(3b),(4); Ord 10, r 1).
In the latter case it seems that the court must approve the payment in pursuant to Ord 10, r 10, though it is difficult to see to what approval a debt or liquidated sum can be subject.
(3) In cases where payment in is made later than within fourteen days of service, or without summons costs, the action is stayed but the defendant is liable for the plaintiff's costs up to the date when the plaintiff receives payment, but not for costs thereafter (Ord 11, r 2(3)).
(4) Where the plaintiff is under disability, payment must be made into court (Ord 29, r 9).
On receiving notice of the payment in, the plaintiff may either (i) lodge his bill of costs for taxation, or (ii) if he so opts or in any event where the amount recovered does not exceed £100 but exceeds £25, ask for his costs to be assessed under costs Appendix C to the 1981 Rules (see Costs Appendix C) to which will be added the plaint fee (Ord 38, r 19).
If the costs are not paid then, except where a defence to costs has been filed, the plaintiff may enter judgment in default for them.
However if an order for payment out is required under Ord 11, r 4(2), or if a legal aid certificate is in force in favour of the defendant, then the plaintiff must apply for his judgment and order for costs (Ord 11, r 2(3) (b); ss 12 and 17(1) of the Legal Aid Act 1988 and reg 124 of the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989).
Where payment in is made of the whole or on account of the sum or sums claimed, the court pays out automatically to the plaintiff's solicitor or to the plaintiff if acting in person, subject to Ord 11, r 4(2) and Ord 10, rr 10, 11 (Ord 11, r 4(1)).
Payment of lesser sum
Order 11 contains the provisions which apply.
In an action for debt or damages, a lesser sum than claimed may be paid into  court at any time before judgment (Ord 11, r 1).
The requirements are:(1) the summons;(2) addressed envelope if by post;(3) notice as to payment in satisfaction (see below).
Payment should be made in the manner described in Chapter 6 under "Fees" .
Action by court office
A receipt is issued.
Notice of payment in is prepared and sent by the court office to all parties (N 242 or 243)(Ord 11, r 1(10)).
Form of notice of payment in satisfaction
(1) If in satisfaction of the only or all the causes of action, the notice should simply state that the payment is "in satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim" (Ord 11, r 1(5)).
(2) If there are two or more causes of action and a payment in satisfaction is made for each separately, the notice must in respect of each cause of action identify it and give the figure applicable to it "stating" nil"if such be the case (Ord 11, r 1(5)).
Acceptance of a "lesser sum" 
The provisions below apply to cases where a claim other than one for money is made (Ord 11, r 3(1)) and since unliquidated damages cannot be the "whole sum" to which Ord 11, r 2 (above) applies they appear to apply as well where unliquidated damages are claimed.
Whether the payment is made within or after fourteen days of service, if the plaintiff elects to accept the sum he must within 21 days after receipt by him of the notice of payment into court or, if the notice is received less than three days before the return day, then before the hearing of the action begins, give notice of his acceptance to the court and to every other party (Ord 11, r 3(1)).
If the hearing of the action has begun and thereafter money is paid into court in satisfaction (or the amount paid in is increased) the plaintiff may accept within 14 days of notice provided that the court has not commenced delivering judgment (Ord 11, r 3(2)).
The cause(s) of action in respect of which the payment is made is/are then stayed (Ord 11, r 3(3)).
Except in a case to which  Ord 11, r 4(2) applies, the plaintiff is entitled to have the accepted sum paid out to him without any order of the court, if he accepts it within the time limited by the rule (Ord 11, r 4(1)).
Further (i) he may apply for an order for the costs incurred by him before the receipt of the notice of payment into court where the defendant has legal aid or where Ord 11, r 4(2) (see below) applies, or (ii) in any other case provided he abandons all other claims, he may lodge a bill of costs for taxation, or have costs assessed and if the costs allowed are not paid within 14 days, he may have judgment entered for them (Ord 11, r 3(5)).
However, where payment in was made in the case of a liquidated claim within fourteen days of service together with appropriate summons costs (Ord 38, r 4) the defendant is under no further liability for costs unless the court so orders (Ord 11, r 3(4)).
If payment in, "in satisfaction" is not accepted within the time prescribed (see above) the proper officer sends a remittance and notice to the Accountant-General, 22 days after payment in (The Court Funds Rules 1987, r 31(2)).
If payment is made into court "to abide issue" , a remittance and notice is sent to the Accountant-General immediately (ibid r 31(3)).
Late acceptance
If the plaintiff fails to give notice of acceptance within the time limited by the rules, he may still give notice at any time before the hearing of the action begins, but an order for payment out of court is then required, and the court may order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs reasonably incurred since the date of payment into court (Ord 11, r 5).
Payment out requiring an order
Where payment into court is made:(1) by one or more of several defendants sued jointly or in the alternative (unless the matter is settled by acceptance and the claims against the other defendants are abandoned and they agree in writing);(2) with a defence of tender before action;(3) in admiralty actions;(4) where the plaintiff is a person under disability;(5) where more than one person is entitled to the money in claims under the Fatal Accident Act 1976 and/or the Law  Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 (Ord 11, r 1(7) and Ord 11, r 4(2),(3)).
A sum paid into court "to abide order" 
A sum paid into court "to abide order" may be appropriated as a payment into court in satisfaction under Ord 11, r 9.
Notice must be given by the defendant not only under this rule, but to the Accountant-General (The Court Funds Rules 1987, rr 25(2) and 31).
Where a party cannot protect his position by a payment into court, he may make the other party a written offer filing a copy with the court, but not to be brought to the attention of the court until costs fall to be decided (Ord 12, r 10) and similarly, where contribution arises a party may make a written offer to contribute (Ord 12, r 7).
Release from lien
Order 29, r 6 applies.
A party seeking to recover his property, which may be held, for example, by someone who has done work on it, will have first to issue proceedings, and if it appears that a lien arises, the court may order that the party seeking to recover may pay into court, to abide the event, the amount in respect of which the security is claimed together with such further sum by way of interest and costs as the court directs, and upon such payment, the property be given up.
Payment in; Social Security benefits
Where payment into court is made in respect of an accident and the plaintiff is receiving Social Security benefits as a result of the accident Ord 11, r 5(4) applies.
This and s 22 and para 12 of Sched 4 to the Social Security Act 1989 should be consulted.
Misdirected payments
A party receiving a payment which should have been made into court shall forthwith notify the proper officer in writing and pay the money received into court (Ord 11, r 1A).
The court has jurisdiction to recall money paid out of court in error (Gainsborough Mixed Concrete Ltd v Duplex Petrol Installations Ltd [1968]3 All ER 267.
Interest
Money paid into court to abide the event, whether in satisfaction under Ord 11, r 1(1) or as a condition of obtaining relief, is placed by the court in a deposit account (in case of payment in satisfaction after the time for acceptance expires).
Therefore, on payment out, the court must direct what is to happen to the accrued interest.
If an order is made the judge should be asked to include a direction therein as to the interest.
If no such direction is made the district judge will order payment of any interest accruing between payment in and its acceptance (or the judgment or order for payment out) to the party making the payment.
Legally-aided parties
Money in court for the benefit of a person who has legal aid must be paid out only to his solicitor or, if he is no longer represented by a solicitor, to the Legal Aid Board (Ord 11, r 4(4) and reg 87 of the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989.
Hospital expenses
As to such expenses under s 154(1) of the Road Traffic Act 1972, see Ord 11, r 6.
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent
The effect of early payment, into court and otherwise (see below) in actions for possession on the ground of non-payment of rent is specifically dealt with in s 138 of the 1984 Act.
If the rent in arrear to the date of service (Canas Property Co Ltd v KL Television Services Ltd [1970]2 QB 433;[1970]2 All ER 795) and summons costs are paid into court five clear days before the hearing, the action ceases.
The court has no power to award further costs.
In contrast to the High Court's requirements, in the county court the defendant need not pay in such mesne profits as might have accrued after service.
Schedule 17 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 which came into force on 1 July 1991, aligns county court procedure with that of the High Court in allowing defendants in forfeiture cases to pay either the plaintiff or the court.
There are no rule  changes but amendments are made to the "How to Pay" box on Forms N6, N27, N27(1) and N27(2).
Plaintiffs will need to inform the courts immediately if they receive payment from the defendant before the hearing.
Counterclaims
Where payment is made into court by a defendant who makes a counterclaim, it must be accompanied by a notice to show how the counterclaim has been taken into account (Ord 11, r 1(9)).
(See Ord 11, r 3(6) as to "stays on acceptance" .)
A plaintiff or other person made defendant to a counterclaim may pay money into court as if he were a defendant (Ord 11, r 8).
If the plaintiff accepts a sum which takes a counterclaim into account, he must say so (Ord 11, r 3(6)).
Payment in by trustees
—See Chapter 26.
Costs on payment in
If assessed or taxed costs under Ord 11, rr 2(3) (a) or 3(5) (a) are not paid, the plaintiff may obtain judgment for them on filing a request (Ord 22, r 5(3)).
The court should not enter these on the court record card before such request is lodged.
If an order for costs or additional costs is required to be made, the time for applying is when an application is made for payment out of court.
Application for payment out may be made on the return day, or it may be made earlier by application on notice.
Some courts will made an order ex parte on production of a consent signed by the other parties.
No costs (save the plaint fee) are allowable where £25 or less is recovered save by special order (Ord 38, r 3(4)).
Where a claim has been automatically referred to arbitration (when £1,000 or less was claimed or in dispute, Ord 19, r 2(3)), costs are limited to the summons costs, save by special order (Ord 19, r 6).
Where it is desired to make an offer to settle a claim other than one for a sum of money by making a written offer "without prejudice save as to costs" , the offer should be filed with the court; it is not brought to the attention of the court until the question of costs falls to be decided: Ord 11, r 10.
Payment received after hearing fixed
Where, after a date has been fixed for the hearing of a case, payment of the whole or part of any sum claimed is received, the party receiving the payment shall forthwith inform the proper officer (Ord 21, rr 3A and 4).
Applications
The basic procedure is set out in Ord 13, r 1.
All applications must be made on written notice unless otherwise directed.
The following items are required:(1) Notice of application and copy for each respondent to application, unless ex parte(N 244).
(2) Fee (see Table of Fees) if any.
Subject to a special fee being prescribed for some applications, the plaint fee includes all other interlocutory applications (see Appendix II to County Court Fees Order 1982 as amended—at back of book).
(3) Affidavit, if any, but an affidavit is not necessary on the hearing of applications unless an enactment or rule specifically requires.
(4) Plaint note or originating process, to be receipted with any fee paid.
(5) Addressed envelope, if by post.
On issue the place, date and time of hearing are completed by the court and, unless service is to be effected by the court, a copy of the application duly sealed will be available for service to be effected by the party issuing the application.
Applications are heard in chambers unless otherwise directed.
If made ex parte, the application must be filed a reasonable time before the hearing subject to the power of the court to hear applications at any time.
All applications, unless the judge otherwise directs or unless it be an "excepted application" , shall be made to the district judge.
Excepted applications are most applications for injunctions, and all applications to commit.
Excepted applications must be made to the judge.
Where applications are made on notice:(a) notice is to be  served on the opposite party and filed in the court not less than two days before the hearing, unless the court gives leave for short notice; and (b) the party making the application is responsible for ascertaining that the court will be available to hear the application and that sufficient time will be available.
The court may authorise notice to be given orally (Ord 50, r 4).
This may be useful in emergency but leave is given sparingly.
Where the application is made to the district judge he may, if in doubt as to the proper order to be made, refer the application to the judge forthwith or at the next convenient opportunity, and the judge may hear the application and make such order as may be just or may refer it back to the district judge with directions.
Appeals from orders of district judge made on applications are made to the judge on notice to be filed and served within five days after the order is made unless additional time is allowed by the circuit judge.
Such appeals are heard in chambers unless the judge otherwise directs.
Copy documents on applications
In Chambers, copy documents are not required in the High Court (RSC Ord 32/21), and it is not expected that they will be provided in the county court.
Costs on applications
The costs of an interlocutory application are not taxed until the general taxation of the costs of the action or matter, unless the court otherwise orders.
Applications by letter are now generally accepted in cases where no appointment is required.
Certain ex parte applications are required to be made by affidavit, in which case the affidavit itself suffices as the application.
The court as a condition of granting any application may impose such terms and conditions as it thinks fit, including the giving of security, the giving of an undertaking, payment of money into court (sic), payment of all or any part of the costs of the proceedings, or the giving of a power of re-entry (Ord 13, r 1(8) and Ord 22, r 9)).
A condition of payment into court is often imposed where a judgment is to be set aside but other terms and conditions are imposed sparingly.
The court may decide applications in the applicant's absence.
Some courts allow attendance on simple or agreed applications by  letter, but this is not as of right.
Enquiry should be made at the court office as to a particular court's practice.
Adjournment or advancement of hearing
Order 13, r 3 applies.
The court may upon application or of its own motion adjourn or advance the date of hearing of any proceeding.
Notice of such adjournment or advancement is given by the court to all parties who were not present when the order was made (Ord 13, r 3(2)); it is common practice to send notice also to those parties who were present (N 232).
Adjournment is discretional, and whilst this must, of course, be exercised judicially, courts in general expect good reason to be shown before an adjournment will be granted, and will, in particular , consider if the opponent to an application will be prejudiced.
Some applications for adjournment are made ex parte on filing written consent of all parties but reason for the adjournment is expected to be given, and the court may not necessarily grant it even if all parties consent.
An application to restore an action to the list for hearing after being adjourned generally ( "sine die" is synonymous) is usually made by letter of which a copy should be sent to all other parties.
An estimate of the time required is helpful to the court.
Notice of the new hearing is sent by the court (N 232).
If an action is not restored within twelve months, it will be struck out after a warning notice sent out by the court (Ord 13, r 3(4)).
Directions for trial
All necessary and desirable directions for disposing of the proceedings should be given at the pre-trial review, and the parties should as far as practicable ask for all the directions they need at the pre-trial review, giving prior notice to all interested parties (Ord 17, rr 1 and 3).
As well as the procedure of giving directions on the pre-trial review, the court may on the application on notice of any party, or of its own motion, give directions at any time (Ord 13, r 2).
However, it should rarely be necessary to apply to the court for directions before the pre-trial review or preliminary arbitration appointment (Ord 19, r 5; Term No 2).
The court may treat the hearing of an application where no pre-trial date has been fixed as a pre-trial review (Ord 13, r 2(4)), and can be requested to do so.
For automatic direction in most personal injury claims see Ord 17, r 10 and Chapter 12.
Further particulars of claim
If a defendant requires further particulars, he should first send a written request to the plaintiff.
If the particulars are not supplied, he may apply to the court, which will only order particulars before defence for good reason (Ord 6, r 7(2)).
The further particulars given must incorporate the request or order.
They must be filed with the court and a copy must be sent to the defendant (Ord 6, r 7(4)).
Defence and further particulars
If the defendant in a fixed date action fails to deliver a defence in time, the court may order a defence to be filed at any time before the trial (Ord 9, r 11(1)).
The procedure for the obtaining and giving of further particulars of defence is the same as appertains in relation to further particulars of claim.
Pleadings and particulars in general The court has general powers to order a pleading or particulars to be filed and delivered and these may be exercised by the court on applications or, if the court wishes the issue to be defined, on the court's own motion (Ord 6, r 7(1), Ord 9, r 11(2) and (3) and Ord 13, r 2(1) and (2)).
Consolidation of actions
The criteria for an Order for Consolidation, which may be made on application or by the court, are the same as for joinder of parties, viz a common question of law or fact, the relief sought arises out of the same transaction, or, "it is desirable" for "some other reason" .
An undertaking may be required from the applicant to be bound by the decision in a selected action, in the case, not usual in the county court, of a "test action" (Ord 9).
Split trial
The court may order one or more issues to be tried before the others (Ord 13, r 2(2) (c).
Dismissal of proceedings and striking out
Dismissal and striking out (save for want of prosecution) are conditional on the court first having made an "unless" order, that is an order which sets a time limit for compliance after which an order for dismissal and striking out may be made (Ord 22, r 3).
An order for delivery of particulars may direct that in default the proceedings be dismissed, or that the defendant or respondent be debarred from defending, or that part of a pleading be struck out (Ord 13, r 2(2)).
The order must make clear whether the time runs from the date of the order or from service thereof Van Houten v Foodsafe (1980) 12 SJ 277.
For the form of wording to be used in "unless" and peremptory orders, see Chapter 16 under "Form of peremptory order" .
Application for dismissal for want of prosecution may be brought on grounds of default in complying with an order, or for inordinate delay prejudicing the opposing party in having a fair trial.
The loci classici are Allen v McAlpine [1968]2 QB 299 and Birkett v James [1978]AC 297; the principles are given at 25/¼, 25/1/5, and 25/1/6 in The Supreme Court Practice 1988.
 "A fresh action started on the same grounds as one struck out for failure to obey an"  "unless"  "order may be struck out as an abuse of the process of the court" (see Bailey v Bailey [1983]1 WLR 1129 at 1133).
In Landeur v Comins & Co (a firm)(1991) The Times, 7 August, the Court of Appeal observed that in cases of contumacious conduct, such as deliberate suppression of a document, striking out can be justified even if a fair trial of the action is still possible.
Judgment where defendant debarred
Where a defendant is debarred from defending altogether or the whole of his defence is struck out, the plaintiff may have judgment entered for his claim and costs (N 30)(Ord 22, r 5).
A request for judgment for the claim and costs, on grounds that the defendant has not complied with the "unless" order, must be lodged.
If the claim is for unliquidated damages the request (N 234) is for an interlocutory judgment for damages to be assessed and costs.
An application for assessment of damages is made on notice under the procedure for interlocutory applications under Ord 22, r 6.
The judgment will be in N 34.
Summary judgment
Application may be made only in default actions and where the claim exceeds £500 and the defendant has delivered at the court office a document purporting to be a defence; the application is for judgment on the grounds that notwithstanding the delivery of that document, the defendant has no defence (Ord 9, r 14).
This does not apply where possession of land is claimed, title to land is in question or the plaintiff claims libel, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment or fraud.
In these cases, RSC, Ord 14 applies.
Discovery
Sections 52 and 53 of the 1984 Act and Ord 14, rr 1–10 apply.
Any party requiring general discovery may give notice in writing to any other party requiring him to make discovery by list of the documents, relating to any question in the proceedings, which may be or have been in his possession or power.
The list (N 265) shall state where, within seven days of service, the documents may be inspected (Ord 14, r 3).
[It should be noted that the rule does not make clear that the form incorporates the notice.]
A party may require his opponent to supply copies of documents which he is entitled to inspect; the notice requiring the copy document must be served at or before the time when inspection takes place and must contain an undertaking to pay the proper charge, which charges are set out in Appendix A item 4 (Ord 14, r 5A).
If the party against whom discovery is sought does not comply with the notice, application may be made to the district judge for an order by lodging an application with copy for service, but application is more frequently made during the pre-trial review under Ord 17, or at the preliminary arbitration hearing.
Where a party fails to supply a copy of any document the court may make such order as it thinks fit.
The court may make an order for discovery (N 264) notwithstanding that prior notice has not been given, where it is satisfied that there were reasonable grounds for not giving such notice.
Discovery will not be ordered if unnecessary (Ord 14, r 8).
For example, in a claim for cost of repair to a car, the court may think it sufficient merely to order the claimant to send copies of the repair estimates and paid bills to the other party without making any order for discovery.
Limited discovery can be ordered (Ord 14, r 1(3)).
For example, in many cases it may be considered sufficient to order the parties to file and deliver lists only of the documents they actually possess.
There may well be such an order in the case of litigants in person.
Section 53 contains powers of disclosure special to proceedings for personal injuries and death.
The section is invoked under Ord 13, r 7(1) which applies the Rules of the Supreme Court.
N 265(1) is the affidavit verifying a list of documents.
Inspection of documents referred to in affidavits and pleadings may be required by a party (Ord 14, r 4).
If the request is not complied with, the court may order it (Ord 14, r 5).
If there is a claim or likely claim in respect of personal injuries or death, the Rules of the Supreme Court Ord 24, r 7A(1) is applied to the county court by Ord 13, r (1)(g) and this enables an application for discovery to be made before the action is commenced against a person "likely to be a party" .
See also s 52(1) of the 1984 Act.
In actions for such claims, discovery can also be ordered against non-parties (Ord 13, r 7(1) (g) applying the Rules of the Supreme Court, Ord 24, r 7A(2)).
(See also s 53(1) and (2) of the Act.)
As to most personal injury claims, see Ord 17, r 10.
Interrogatories
Order 14, r 11 applies the provisions of the Rules of Supreme Court Ord 26.
Interrogatories can be twice administered without leave save in cases referred to arbitration under Ord 19, r 2(3).
Such interrogatories shall bear a note at the end setting out the effect of RSC Ord 26, r 3(2), which is that the opposing party may within 14 days apply to vary, or have withdrawn, the interrogatories.
If the opposing party refuses unreasonably to act on the interrogatories, they can be administered with leave, application to be made on notice in Form N 244.
A copy of the proposed interrogatories must be served with the notice (RSC Ord 26, r 1(2)).
The Order in Form N 269, if leave be granted, will require the other party to answer the interrogatories on affidavit within such period as may be specified.
The court only gives leave to serve interrogatories if necessary for disposing fairly of the action, or for saving costs, and before giving leave will consider whether particulars, admissions, or production of documents have been offered (RSC Ord 26, r 1(3)).
The principle used to be not allow interrogatories as to the evidence of the party interrogated, nor any "fishing" but there is wide discretionary power which, on the basis of the principles involved in exchan ge of witnesses' statements may possibly be more widely exercised in the future.
A form of application for leave to deliver interrogatories is given in Atkin's Court Forms, second edn, 1980, vol 22 p 492 and examples illustrating the principles are given in the The Supreme Court Practice at 26/¼ et seq.
Enforcement
Orders for discovery, inspection and supply of documents, and for answering interrogatories, may be enforced by committal (Ord 14, rr 10, 11).
No reasonable cause of action
The court may order the whole or part of any pleading to be amended or struck out on the ground that (a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, or (b) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, or (c) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial, or (d) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court.
The court may order that the action be stayed or dismissed or that judgment be entered for plaintiff or defendant.
The application for such an order is to be made on notice (Ord 13, r 5).
It is not of course sufficient to obtain an order to say that the facts alleged are wrong, as is sometimes done, because that is a matter to be decided on a hearing.
On an application to strike out, no evidence is to be tendered.
Inspection, detention or preservation of property
Section 52(1) of the 1984 Act gives the court power to make any order for inspection, preservation and detention of property which is the subject matter of proceedings or to which any question may arise in any such proceedings and Ord 13, r 7(b) again applies the Rules of the Supreme Court.
Interim payments
Order 13, r 12 applies the provisions of the Rules of Supreme Court Ord 29, II (Interim Payments) to county courts which are  empowered to award interim payments of debt or damages where the sum claimed or amount involved exceeds £500.
Application is made on the general form of application (N 244) supported by affidavit which must verify the amount of damages, give the grounds of the application, exhibit any documentary evidence and if under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 give all particulars (RSC Ord 29, r 10(3)).
Provisional damages under s51 of the 1984 Act
The detailed provisions of Ord 22, r 6A, which incorporate RSC, Ord 37, and relate to provisional damages in personal injury actions should be considered.
See also Provisional Damages Practice Direction (QB)(1988) 1 WLR 654.
Whilst the county court may now award provisional damages in personal injury cases, they must be claimed in the particulars of claim.
Social Security deductions
Order 11, rr 5(4), 10(2) applies.
The amount of related benefit received by a plaintiff in a personal injuries claim from Social Security can be recouped by DSS from the "compensator" and are fully deductible from any claim for general and special damages and interest.
Where the defendant makes a payment into court he will normally:(1) obtain a certificate of total benefit from the Compensation Recovery Unit of the DSS and;(2) send to the court with the payment a certificate showing the amount deducted.
Compromise or settlement, persons under disability
Application under Ord 10, r 10 is for approval of a compromise or settlement on behalf of a minor.
Such settlements are regarded as a matter of considerable responsibility for the next friend, solicitors and counsel, and the court will rely heavily upon the latter.
Importantly, no settlement figure is given in the application, commonly heard before the registrar, but the facts will be set out in an affidavit, and medical reports, if relevant, and counsel's opinion if taken, should be available to be shown to the court.
The extent to which liability can be established can be explained, each party putting his version before the court  referring to any police report if a road acccident, together with counsel's opinion on liability if such has been obtained.
The court will then be in a position to enable it to form its own opinion as to the plaintiff's chances of success.
On quantum, the court must decide simply whether the settlement itself is a reasonable one and for the benefit of the minor or other under disability having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the risk of litigation, desire of the parties to settle, and the disinclination of the plaintiff to go to trial.
If the court does not feel entirely satisfied, it may adjourn the application for the parties to be given further opportunity to negotiate.
For detail the notes to the Rules of Supreme Court, Ord 80, r 11 at 80/10—1¼ should be carefully consulted.
As to persons under disability generally, see Chapter 5.
The Pre-Trial Review and Preliminary Consideration
Automatic directions
The procedure to be followed in disputed actions (whether default or fixed date actions) is now set out in the automatic directions contained in Ord 17, r 11(3)—(12), subject to any further directions, given by the court (Ord 17, r 11(2) and (3)).
There are special provisions for actions for personal injuries (see below) and automatic directions do not apply to any of the actions listed below:(1) an action for the administration of the estate of a deceased person;(2) an Admiralty action;(3) proceedings which are referred for arbitration whether automatically or otherwise under Ord 19;(4) an action arising out of a regulated consumer credit agreement within the meaning of the Consumer Credit Act 1974;(5) an action for the delivery of goods;(6) an action for the recovery of income tax;(7) interpleader proceedings or an action in which an application is made for relief by way of interpleader;(8) an action of a kind mentioned in s 66(3) of the Act (trial by jury);(9) an action for the recovery of land;(10) a partnership action;(11) an action to which Ord 48A applies (patent actions heard at Edmonton County Court);(12) a contentious probate action;(13) a rent action;(14) an action to which Ord 5, r 5 applies (representative proceedings);(15) an action to which Ord 9, r 3(9) applies (admission of part of plaintiff's claim);(16) an action on a third party notice or similar proceedings under Ord 12;(17) an action to which Ord 47, r 3 applies (actions in tort between husband and wife);(18) "cases" transferred from High Court.
These are as follows:(1) When the pleadings are deemed to be closed;(a) there shall be discovery of documents within 28 days, and inspection within seven days thereafter, in accordance with para (5);(b) except with the leave of the court or where all parties agree;(i) no expert evidence may be adduced at the trial unless the substance of that evidence has been disclosed to the other parties in the form of a written report within ten weeks; and (ii) subject to para (7), the number of expert witnesses of any kind shall be limited to two;(c) photographs and sketch plans and, in an action for personal injuries, the contents of any police accident report book shall be receivable in evidence at the trial and shall be agreed if possible;(d) unless a day has already been fixed, the plaintiff shall within six months request the proper officer to fix a day for the hearing and r 12 shall apply where such request is made.
(2) Subject to para (3)(below), the parties must make discovery by serving lists of documents and;(a) subject to sub-para (c), each party must make and serve on every other party a list of documents which are or have been in his possession, custody or power relating to any matter in question between them in the action;(b) the court may, on application;(i) order that discovery under this paragraph shall be limited to such documents or classes of documents only, or as to such only of the matters in question, as may be specified in the order, or  (ii) if satisfied that discovery by all or any of the parties is not necessary, order that there shall be no discovery of documents by any or all of the parties; and the court shall make such an order if and so far as it is of opinion that discovery is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the action or for saving costs;(c) where liability is admitted or in an action for personal injuries arising out of a road accident, discovery shall be limited to disclosure of any documents relating to the amount of damages;(d) the provisions of Ord 14 of these rules relating to inspection of documents shall apply where discovery is made under this paragraph as it applies where discovery is made under that Order.
(3) Discovery under para (2) shall not apply in proceedings to which the Crown is a party.
(4) In an action for personal injuries;(a) the number of expert witnesses shall be limited in any case to two medical experts and one expert of any other kind;(b) nothing in para (1) above shall require a party to produce a further medical report if he proposes to rely at the trial only on the report provided pursuant to Ord 6, r 1(5) or (6) but, where a further report is disclosed, that report shall be accompanied by an amended statement of the special damages claimed, if appropriate.
(5) Where the plaintiff makes a request pursuant to para 1 (a) above for the proper officer to fix a day for the hearing, he shall file a note which shall if possible be agreed by the parties giving;(a) an estimate of the length of the trial, and (b) the number of witnesses to be called.
(6) If no request is made pursuant to para 1 (a) above within 15 months of the day on which pleadings are deemed to be closed (or within nine months after the expiry of any period fixed by the court for making such a request), the action shall be automatically struck out.
Automatic directions under Ord 17, r 11
The court may extend the date but if nine months expires after the extended period the action will be automatically struck out.
The striking out is automatic as compared with Ord 13, r 3(4) where the court has to give notice of intention to strike out where no action has been taken for 12 months.
(7) Where the proper officer fixes a day for the hearing, he shall give not less than 21 days' notice thereof to every party.
(8) For the purpose of this rule:(a) pleadings shall be deemed to be closed 14 days after the delivery of a defence in accordance with Ord 9, r 2, or, where a counterclaim is served with the defence, 28 days after the delivery of the defence; but in an action which has been transferred down from the High Court, pleadings are deemed closed 14 days from transfer.
(b) "a road accident" means an accident on land due to a collision or apprehended collision involving a vehicle;(c) "a statement of the special damages claimed" has the same meaning as in Ord 6, r 1(7). (9) Unless the context otherwise requires, references in these rules to the return day in relation to a fixed date action to which this rule applies shall be construed as references to the date on which directions take effect under this rule.
Where automatic directions become applicable the court sends out "Notes for guidance on automatic directions" to all parties.
Where automatic directions do not apply or the court proposes to give other directions, and the court directs a pre-trial review Ord 17, rr 1–9 apply.
The power to make directions is also available to the district judge on a preliminary arbitration appointment (Ord 19, r 5(2); Term No 2).
In any proceeding in which no pre-trial review has been fixed, the district judge may nonetheless give notice to the parties requiring them to appear before him on the day named in the notice, so that the question of giving directions may be considered (Ord 17, rr 10 and 11(4)).
Such notice might also be given in an originating application under s 17 of the Married Women's Property Act 1882.
The purposes of a pre-trial review are twofold, viz:(1) if there is no reasonable case in law to be tried (whether on the claim or defence), as far as is possible, to dispose of the case;(2) if there is a case to be tried, to give directions to see that it is properly prepared.
A pre-trial review should rarely be necessary in most personal  injury claims in view of the automatic directions in Ord 17, r 10 (see above).
Disposal of case
(1) If the defendant admits the claim (or such part as the plaintiff accepts in satisfaction) judgment may be entered and the question of payment dealt with (Ord 17, r 6).
If liability only is admitted, interlocutory judgment (N 17) may be given and a date fixed for assessment or the plaintiff left to apply under Ord 22, r 6. (2) If the defendant does not appear and has delivered no admission or defence, then judgment may be entered (or directions given) as the court thinks fit (Ord 17, r 7).
If the claim is for unliquidated damages the judgment must be interlocutory (N 17) unless the plaintiff can prove quantum (Ord 17, r 7(2)).
(3) If the defendant has delivered a defence but does not appear then if the plaintiff so requests and can give evidence of the facts and as to quantum, judgment may be given or alternatively directions (Ord 17, r 8).
(4) At the hearing of a pre-trial review the district judge may exercise any of his interlocutory powers (Ord 17, r 4).
In particular if notice of an application for such an order has been given he may:(a) strike out the claim or defence if they show no reasonable cause of action or defence and enter judgment (Ord 13, r 5);(b) where £1,000 or more is claimed, upon submission of affidavit evidence proving the facts (and proof of service of the application, copy affidavit and exhibits seven days before), enter summary judgment in a default action where there is no real defence.
RSC, Ord 14 applies (Ord 9, r 14).
This power may not be exercised against the Crown: Ord 42, r 5(5). (5) Affidavit evidence may be used at the hearing if notice has been given (Ord 20, rr 5, 7 and 10).
However, notice need not be given where the defendant does not appear, or where in a fixed date action he has failed to deliver a defence in time.
(6) The plaintiff may appear by affidavit.
If he does not appear  the proceedings may be struck out or the district judge may proceed with the review in his absence or may order the action or matter to be struck out (Ord 17, r 5; Ord 21, r 1(2)).
Some courts accept a letter in lieu of attendance, but this is not provided for in the rules.
Enquiry should be made of the court as to its particular practice.
Where directions are required
On the pre-trial review the district judge must consider the course of the proceedings and give all necessary or desirable directions.
He must endeavour to secure that the parties make such admissions and agreements as are reasonable.
Every party should, so far as practicable, apply for any particular direction he may desire on notice to the district judge and the other parties (Ord 17, rr 1–3).
At the pre-trial review any interlocutory applications may be made (Ord 17, r 4).
Orders commonly sought are for the delivery of pleadings and particulars, and for discovery, and, as may be appropriate, for the following:(1) Amendment of pleadings and change of parties where leave is necessary.
(2) Consolidation of proceedings.
(Note: There is general power to consolidate any action or any matter with another if certain criteria are fulfilled (Ord 13, r 9).)
(3) That the necessary paginated bundles of documents are to be prepared for the hearing.
(Note: Bundles will be required for the court, the witness and all parties.)(4) That a sketch plan be prepared (especially in road accident cases; if more than a sketch plan is needed it should be asked for, or there may be a costs penalty in default (Ord 38, r 10)).
(5) Directions as to expert witnesses and any limitations as to number to be called (Ord 20, r 27).
(6) Directions as to service of written statements of oral evidence to be called at the trial on the opposite party.
RSC Ord 28, r 2A applies.
Such direction cannot be given where the proceedings stand referred to arbitration under Ord 19, r 2(3) (Ord 20, r 12A).
On the pre-trial review applications may be made on notice for  reference to arbitration, albeit more than £1,000 is in issue (Ord 19, r 2(2) and (5)).
As soon as practicable after the pre-trial review, if the action or matter still remains to be heard, the court fixes a date for hearing and gives notice to all parties (Ord 17, r 9).
(1)(a) If on the pre-trial review the district judge has ordered that the hearing be adjourned generally and certificates of readiness (with an estimate of length of hearing) be lodged by all parties before the matter is set down, then it will not be regarded as practicable by the court to fix a date of hearing until the certificates or readiness are in fact provided.
(b) If a party should be dilatory in providing his certificate of readiness, the correct procedure is not to complain to the court but simply to apply on notice for a hearing date to be fixed.
(2) Many courts have standard forms of orders for directions with which practitioners must make themselves familiar (See references to the necessity for solicitors to obey codes in the Introduction.)
Notes
Third party, contribution an d indemnity proceedings
Where a defendant to an action claims against any person not already a party, contribution or indemnity, or some relief, remedy, or settlement of an issue connected with the subject matter of the action, he must proceed by way of a third party notice (N 15).
(1) In a default action where no hearing or pre-trial review date has been fixed, or Ord 17, r 11 (automatic directions) applies and before pleadings are closed under Ord 17, r 11(a), he may issue without leave (Ord 12, r 2(b) and (c).
The requirements are:(a) third party notice for court and copies for third party and plaintiff.
(b) addressed envelope if by post; postal service certificate or bailiff's fee (see Table of Fees).
The court then fixes a pre-trial review, giving notice to the plaintiff and defendant and endorsing notice thereof on the third  party notice.
The third party is served (as in a fixed date action) with the notice, a copy of the summons and any existing pleadings.
A copy of the third party notice must be served on the plaintiff (Ord 12, r 1(1),(4),(5),(6).
After issue a default judgment cannot be entered against the defendant (Ord 12, r 1(7)).
(2) Otherwise in a default action, or in a fixed date action, the third party notice may issue only with leave of the court (Ord 12, r 1(2)).
The requirements are:(a) form of application and copy for plaintiff;(b) third party notice for filing with court and copy for service with application;(c) addressed envelope if by post.
At the hearing if leave be granted the district judge shall give directions as to service and the further conduct of the case (Ord 12, r 1(3).
The third party notice, accompanied by a copy of the summons and the pleadings, is to be served in accordance with the rules applicable to service of the summons (Ord 12, r 1(6)) but subject to directions, if any, of the district judge.
It may well be that the district judge will direct a further pre-trial review for all parties.
Where there is a counterclaim, third party notices may be issued by the plaintiff (Ord 12, r 8).
A third party may similarly apply for leave to issue a fourth party notice, and so on(Ord 12, r 6).
Where a defendant makes against any other party in the same action a like claim, he may without leave issue and serve on such other party a notice making such a claim (Ord 12, r 5).
A copy of the notice must be filed with the court.
The third party should file any defence with copies for delivery to all the other parties within 14 days of service on him inclusive of the day of service.
Judgment against him cannot be obtained by default (Ord 12, r 2); but, if he does not appear at the hearing of the action he is deemed to admit the notice and is bound by any judgment, even if by consent (Ord 12, r 3(3)).
After judgment, execution may not be issued against a third party without leave of the court until the defendant has satisfied the judgment against him (Ord 12, r 3(4)).
A party brought in or who has a notice served under these procedures may make an offer of contribution and file a copy with the court.
This must not be shown to the court before judgment.
No payment in is required (Ord 12, r 7).
It is often unwise of the plaintiff to rely on the defendant sued obtaining an indemnity from a third party if the plaintiff could bring the third party in as a second defendant, eg in road accident cases.
Change of parties; joinder
Order 15, r 1 provides that the court may at any time allow or direct any person to be added, struck out or substituted as a party to proceedings in accordance with the High Court practice (see RSC, Ord 15, r 6; Ord 20, rr 5, 8).
Where a limitation period has expired, see Ord 15, r 1(2).
Misjoinder or non-joinder should not defeat an action (Ord 5, r 4).
No person may be added as plaintiff without his consent in writing, or in the case of a person under disability without the consent in writing of the next friend (Ord 15, r 1(4)).
An order may be made, on application, for the joinder of another party or parties on the basis that common questions arise, the relief sought is in respect of the same transaction, or it is desirable to make the order (Ord 5, r 2).
Amendment to pleadings
The court may in any action or matter by order allow or direct the amendment of any originating process or pleading, and a party may (unless Ord 9, r 2(3) applies—see below) without an order amend any pleadings at any time before the "return day" by filing the amended pleading and serving a copy on every other party.
A party may at any stage in the proceedings amend the pleading if endorsed with the consent of every party to the proceeding (Ord 15, r 2).
 "Return day" is defined as the day appointed in any summons or proceedings for the appearance of the defendant, or any other day fixed for the hearing of any "proceedings" , that is for the hearing of an action or matter, or if one had been fixed, for the pre-trial review.
The court may disallow an amendment on its own motion or on application, and shall do so where satisfied that if an application for leave had been applied for under Ord 15, r 1 it would have been refused (Ord 15, r 2(3)).
Seemingly, as the rules are at present drafted, if no "return day" as defined has been fixed, then amendment of a pleading cannot be made without leave (see Ord 7, r 17).
A defendant cannot rely on unpleaded defences or  counterclaims, but must if necessary amend his defence.
Leave to amend at the trial may be refused (see Supreme Court Practice 1988, 20/5—8/1).
Order 9, r 2(3) allows a defendant to amend (or withdraw) an admission, but on such terms as may be just.
Before service, the summons may be amended on the plaintiff filing an amended request (Ord 7, r 17).
If an increase in the claim (or counter-claim) results in an increased in the plaint fee this must be paid on filing.
A copy of the amended pleading is sent direct by the party filing to the other parties.
The copy does not have to be sealed.
If the application to amend is only made at the hearing, if it will prejudice the opposing party, especially if it shifts the burden of proof it may be disallowed (see Emin v Mustapha (1982) The Times, 24 October).
Leave, where necessary, is fairly readily granted before the hearing, unless the other party cannot be compensated in costs, which is an almost invariable term of leave being granted.
The basic principle is that the amendment must not cause an injustice.
A late application may well give rise to an adjournment, for an Order for leave to file an amended pleading in response, for further particulars, and for discovery arising from the amendment.
A cause of action which did not exist when the summons was issued can be added by amendment only with the consent of the other party (Chuan Chow Maritime v K/S A/S Bulk Transport (1984) The Times, 25 February).
In a default action where the plaintiff's claim is amended by adding or substituting a claim which could not have been made in a default action, the action continues as if it had been commenced as a fixed date action (Ord 15, r 2(2)).
The detailed notes appended to Ord 15 or amendments should be referred to.
The detailed notes given in The Supreme Court Practice at paras 20/5—8/2 are also pertinent.
For addition or substitution of a party, see above.
Setting down
The Plaintiff must set down within six months of close of pleadings; if no request is made within 15 months, the action is automatically struck out.
On setting down a note, agreed if possible, an estimate of the time and the number of witnesses to be called should be filed.
The "slip rule" 
Clerical mistakes in judgments or Orders, or errors arising from an accidental slip or omission, may be corrected by the Court at any time (Ord 15, r 5).
This is interpreted to mean an accidental slip or omission, whether by the Court itself, or by a litigant, solicitor or Counsel appearing before it; as to the last, see Craigmyle v Inchape (1942) 1 Ch p 394.
On a claim for interest after judgment see Tak Ming Co Ltd v Yee Sang Metal Supplies (1973) 1 All ER 569.
Judgments and orders should be checked on receipt and, if an error is found, a letter written to the court and a copy sent to each other party.
This apart, a judge may always consider or vary any decision before "the Order has been perfected" , meaning before it has been sealed and sent out; he may have to give further opportunity to be heard, if he is going to make a change, see Note to Ord 5, r 5.
Non-compliance with rules
In its discretion, the court may, on application, correct any irregularity, by setting aside proceedings, by amendment or otherwise (Ord 37, r 5).
No party is to be prejudiced by a procedural error of the court (Aly v Aly (1983) The Times, 27 December, CA quoted in Sharma v Knight [1986]1 WLR 757).
Application of High Court rules
Section 76 authorises the County Court to adopt and apply the "general provisions" of the High Court where there are "lacunae" in the county court rules.
Order 1, r 6 seems an otiose provision to the effect that the application of s 76 of the Act does not extend the respective jurisdictions of judge and district judge.
Where specific rules correspond, reference where appropriate is made to the RSC rule in the notes which follow the County Court rule in the County Court Practice.
Procedure for Transfer
Transfers where High Court and county court have mutual jurisdiction
Article 7(5) of the High Court and County Courts Jurisdiction Order 1991 sets out the criteria to be considered when deciding whether or not to make an order for transfer in a case in which both the High Court and the County Court have mutual jurisdiction.
Article 7(5) does not apply to proceedings under ss 23, 24 or 32 (equity and probate proceedings) of the County Courts Act.
One of the criteria for transfer is the "financial substance" of the action and, for this purpose, regard will also be had to the value of a counterclaim.
Order 16, r 9 (as revised) made important changes to the rules on transfer and requires that:(1) the grounds of an application for transfer be stated by reference to the criteria in art 7(5); and (2) all applications (whether or not based on "financial substance" ) be supported by a statement of value.
The criteria under Art 7(5) to which the court is to have regard in deciding whether to transfer are: "(a) the financial substance of the action including the value of any counterclaim,(b) whether the action is otherwise important and, in particular whether it raises questions of importance to persons who are not parties or questions of general public interest,(c) the complexity of the facts, legal issues, remedies or procedures involved, and (d) whether transfer is likely to result in a more speedy trial of the action but no transfer shall be made on the grounds of subparagraph (d) alone." 
Although a statement need only indicate whether or not the value exceeds £25,000, an applicant for transfer may wish to be  more specific and bolster an application for transfer by a statement showing that the case also falls within the upper regions of county court jurisdiction.
The criteria
Rule 21 amends Ord 25, r 13 (transfer for enforcement) under the new s 42 of the County Courts Act (as substituted by s 2 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990).
A certificate of judgement is still required, but see r 27 enabling judgment creditors to prepare documents for the court.
Where an action is transferred from the High Court to the county court, Ord 17, r 11 (automatic directions) apply to those actions not within Ord 17, r 11(1) subject to any directions already given in the High Court (No 3 Amendment Rule 1991).
All Queen's Bench proceedings are reviewed, in relation to the new s 40 of the County Courts Act, within seven days of setting down when the master or district judge may give notice to all parties (Forms PF 200 or 202) as to proposal to transfer.
If anyone seeks to object, they should complete Form PF 201 or 203 within 14 days, when an appointment will be given to hear objections (for further detail, see Practice Direction (Queen's Bench Division: Transfer of proceedings to County Court) of 26 July 1991 (1991) The Times, 2 July).
High Court's review of all proceedings
Transfer to county court under the general power of the High Court
The High Court also has a general power under s 41 of the Act at any stage of the proceedings (in addition to its powers to make prerogative orders) to order the whole or part of any proceedings commenced in a county court, or previously transferred from the High Court to a county court under s 40, to be transferred to the High Court.
Transfer to High Court by county court
The whole or part of any proceedings may under s 42 of the Act also be transferred to the High Court at any stage of the proceedings by the county court.
Matters previous transferred from the High Court under s 42 may be transferred back to the High Court (s 42(4)).
The section applies to all proceedings commenced in a county court other than(a) matrimonial causes, and (b) adoption, custody, access, guardianship and custodianship matters relating to minors  (s 42(3)).
As to transfer of the latter to the High Court see s 37 of the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 Ord 16, r 12 and Rayden on Divorce should be consulted.
Any application for transfer to the High Court (other than family business) must set out the grounds upon which the application is made by reference to the criteria.
The application is to be supported by a statement showing whether or not the value of the action exceeds the sum for the time being specified in art 7(3) of the Order, and shall be on notice stating the grounds of the application (Ord 16, r 9(2)) —See above.
Where a counterclaim (or set-off and counterclaim) are transferred to the High Court but judgment has been given on the claim save for the question of set-off, execution is stayed thereon until the proceedings transferred to the High Court have been concluded, unless the High Court otherwise orders (s 42(2)).
Procedure on transfer to county court
Queen's Bench Masters' Practice Direction of 25 March, 1988 requires that where an order is made transferring an action from the Queen's Bench Division to a county court, the party having carriage of the order by himself or his solicitor shall forthwith produce at the Filing Department of the Central Office the order transferring the action and shall file:(1) a copy of the order transferring the action;(2) a statement of the names and addresses of the parties and of their solicitors;(3) copies of any pleadings served;(4) if he is the plaintiff and has not served a statement of claim, particulars of his claim together with a copy for each defendant;(5) if he is the defendant and only a counterclaim is transferred and no counterclaim has been served, particulars of the counterclaim together with a copy for the plaintiff;(6) where money has been paid into court, a copy of the notice of payment into court;(7) a statement of the index numbers of any affidavits filed.
Thereupon the filed documents together with the writ of summons, the acknowledgment of service and any orders made in the High Court (the "relevant documents" ) are sent by post from the Central Office to the county court to which the action has been transferred.
These mechanics for transfer are strictly not dealt with through the post but the Filing and Record Department which is at Room  81, Royal Courts of Justice, London WC2A 2LL although it is prepared to make an exception provided all of the documents, so far as applicable, set out in the above Practice Direction are sent to it by post (an unofficial proforma provided to solicitors in fact repeats the list); though in lieu of the proforma no doubt a letter referring to the items in the list would equally suffice.
If it is necessary to bespeak:(1) affidavits, then their index number, series, by whom sworn, and date of filing, should be provided;(2) other documents, such as writ, appearance, Legal Aid Certificate, Orders (though all of these might already be in the possession of the solicitor in sealed or photographic copies) —filing number and year should be given.
Subject to making such searches as may be required to obtain such affidavits and documents as it has been necessary to bespeak, the Filing and Record Department will send the listed documents to the county named in the Order.
The proper officer on receipt of the relevant documents sends notice of hearing (N 272) or pre-trial review (N 273) by post to the parties, the court giving not less than 21 clear days' notice (Ord 16, r 6(1)).
However, this is not done where Ord 17 r 11 (automatic directions) applies, unless the case had been set down for hearing in the High Court before transfer or a request for a day for hearing to be fixed is made under Ord 17, r 11(3) (d).
The proper officer may first refer the matter to the district judge for his directions (Ord 16 r 6(1)); otherwise, and more likely, he will send out a pro-forma letter informing the parties that the action is transferred, giving its number, and saying that a date will be fixed for hearing, pursuant to Ord 16, r 6(1), but inviting the parties to notify the court and other parties within seven days if a pre-trial review is required.
The letter is likely to call for statement of parties and any pleadings served but not filed (Ord 16, r 6(2)).
Customarily also, a questionnaire is sent for completion.
A copy of the particulars of claim, or counterclaim if any filed, is annexed to the notice sent to the relevant party (Ord 16, r 6(5)).
Where no defence to claim or counterclaim has been served in the High Court, the defendant or plaintiff must, within 14 days of the receipt of the notice of hearing, deliver at the court office a defence together with a copy for the plaintiff or defendant as the case may be.
Any counterclaim must be filed with the defence (Ord 16, r 6(3),(4)).
When a particular issue is directed by the High Court to be heard by a county court, all of those documents listed above must  be lodged.
The county court may then either direct a hearing of the issue or a pre-trial review (Ord 16, r 6(1)).
Notice of the county court's direction is given in N 274 or 275.
Procedure on transfer to High Court
Order 16, r 10 applies, and in whatever manner a transfer may be ordered, the county court:(1) gives notice to all parties (N 278);(2) copies all court records, has them certified by the district judge, and sends them to the High Court together with:(a) all documents filed;(b) the transfer order (if made by the county court)(N 278);(c)(if legitimacy proceedings) a certificate by the district judge showing the state of the proceedings and the steps taken (Ord 16, r 10).
If there is money in court, the county court should transfer the money to the High Court.
Interpleader proceedings
For interpleader proceedings transferred from the High Court, Ord 16, r 7 applies, and N 276 and 277.
Costs
By s 45 of the Act where an action or matter is transferred from the High Court to a county court, and no order to the contrary has been made in the High Court, the costs of the proceedings prior thereto are in the discretion of the county court judge, and will be taxed in the county court upon such scale, whether of the High Court or county court, as the judge thinks just (a statement to the contrary can be found on p 868 of the County Court Practice, 1991 but this has been adjudged incorrect: Forey v London Buses Ltd (1991) 2 All ER 936).
The costs in the county court are at the discretion of the judge, and will be taxed on such county court scale as he thinks just.
In a discontinued action, the district judge has power, on taxation, to determine the scale of costs (Ord 38, r 4(7)) and as to costs where an action is brought and tried in the High Court which could have been brought in the county court see s 19.
As to costs if proceedings are wrongly brought in High Court —see above.
Arbitrations
Section 64 of the 1984 Act applies.
The two main types of arbitration in the county court are those heard by the district judge under the "small claims" procedure and those heard by outside arbitrators.
There is an additional power rarely, if at all, used to refer an action to be heard by the judge as arbitrator, with the judge's consent (Ord 19, r 2(3),(5)(c)).
 "Small claims" procedure
Order 19, rr 2 and 6 (as amended) applies.
Any proceedings in which the claim is £1,000 or less are automatically referred for hearing by the district judge as arbitrator (N 18) upon the filing of a defence.
This is irrespective of the value of any counterclaim (ibid).
The district judge may, on application, refer the proceedings for arbitration by a judge or outside arbitrator (Ord 19, r 2(3)).
The defence may be limited to the amount of the claim (Ord 19, r 2(6)).
In such cases the district judge may on application or on his own motion rescind the reference if satisfied that:(1) a difficult question of law or a question of fact and exceptional complexity is involved; or (2) a charge of fraud is in issue; or (3) the parties are agreed that the dispute should be tried in open court; or (4) it would be unreasonable for the claim to proceed to arbitration having regard to (a) its subject matter,(for example that an injunction is also claimed—an injunction cannot, so it seems, be granted on the hearing of an arbitration),(b) or the size of any counterclaim,(c) the circumstances of the parties, or (d) the interests of any other person likely to be affected by the award (Ord 19, r 2(4)).
If the district judge intends to rescind, notice is given to the parties and they have 14 days to object, whereupon a hearing is fixed to decide on rescission.
In the absence of objection the district judge may rescind without further notice (Ord 19, r 4A).
Additionally, where sums in excess of £1,000 are involved, reference to arbitration may be made on application in the request or particulars of claim, the defence or counterclaim, or an application under Ord 13, r 1 (Ord 19, r 2(1), and (2)).
In such cases the district judge may, unless the application has at a party's request been referred to the judge (Ord 19, r 2(5) (b)), on hearing the application (usually at the pre-trial review) refer the matter to a district judge for arbitration (N 19).
If fraud is in issue the consent is required of the party so charged to the making of an order for arbitration (Ord 19, r 2(5)).
Subject to any directions by the court, the district judge may conduct the hearing at any convenient place or inspect any property or thing involved.
The attendance of witnesses may be compelled, and the district judge has the powers of the circuit judge as to discovery and inspection of documents and the conduct of the case and has limited powers to commit.
References to arbitration are on the following numbered Terms unless otherwise directed:(1) The arbitrator shall appoint a date for the preliminary consideration of the dispute, unless the size or nature of the claim or other circumstances make such a course undesirable or unneccessary.
If directions have already been given on pre-trial review, this appointment is not needed.
(2) At or after the preliminary appointment if there be one, the arbitrator shall fix a date for the dispute to be heard (unless the parties consent to his deciding it on the statements and documents submitted to him—an unusual course not usually acceptable to the parties or the district judge) and he shall give such directions regarding the steps to be taken before and at the hearing as may appear to him to be necessary or desirable.
A district judge arbitrator shall have the same powers on the preliminary appointment as under Ord 17 on a pre-trial review.
(3) Any hearing shall be informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
(4) At the hearing the arbitrator may adopt any method of procedure which he may consider to be convenient and to afford a fair and equal opportunity to each party to present his case.
(5) If any party does not appear at the arbitration, the arbitrator may make an award on hearing any other party to the proceedings who may be present.
(6) Where an award has been given in the absence of a party, the arbitrator shall have power on that party's application to set the award aside and to order a fresh hearing as if the award were a judgment and the application were made pursuant to Ord 37, r 2. (7) With the consent of the parties and at any time before giving his decision and either before or after the hearing, the arbitrator may consult any expert or call for an expert report on any matter in dispute or invite an expert to attend the hearing as assessor.
(8) Subject to the provisions of Ord 19, r 6 in respect of claims involving £1,000 or less, the costs of the action up to and including the entry of judgment shall be in the discretion of the arbitrator to be exercised in the same manner as the discretion of the court under the provisions of the County Court Rules (Ord 19, r 5(2)).
Note that Ord 20, r 12A (as to the filing and delivery of statements by witnesses of fact) can be involved where the reference to arbitration was not automatic under Ord 19, r 2(3).
Additional matters may be included in the reference later, on application to the court (Ord 19, r 3).
Where the reference was automatic (£1,000 or less only being involved) Ord 19, r 6 provides that no solicitors' charges or litigant in person costs may be awarded except the costs which were stated on the summons or which would have been stated on the summons if the claim had been for a liquidated sum, the costs of enforcing the award, and such further costs as the arbitrator may direct where there has been unreasonable conduct on the part of the opposite party in relation to the proceedings or the claim therein.
A litigant in person for preparation of the case for arbitration, as opposed to the solicitor, may claim costs.
A copy of a district judge-arbitrator's award is sent by the court to the parties with the judgment.
Distridct judge-arbitrators usually give their reasons orally, the award merely stating the result.
Court fees and witness fees and allowances can be claimed (Ord 38, rr 3(5), 13–16).
Judgment on the award is entered by the court (s 64 of the 1984 Act).
While the rules as to admissibility do not apply, the value of any particular evidence, and the weight to be given to it, will be the same in arbitration as in hearings in open court.
Arbitration procedure does not apply to actions for recovery of land nor, seemingly, to any proceedings other than actions.
Rescinding a reference to arbitration
The amount of the counterclaim is now a factor that can be considered by the court in deciding whether to rescind a reference to arbitration.
Further, the court can now rescind a reference of its own motion, notice having been given to the parties by the court of an intention to do so, giving the parties 14 days in which to lodge written objections.
The objections will be considered without the presence of the parties unless a hearing has been requested.
Where only quantum is in dispute it will be dealt by arbitration.
The bar to costs does not apply to costs incurred after the rescission of the reference.
A litigant in person cannot recover costs under Ord 38, r 17 other than witness allowances and expenses, which can include the reasonable costs of consulting a solicitor.
Arbitrations other than by "small claims" procedure
An outside arbitrator may be appointed only on application (Ord 19, r 2(2),(3)) and with consent (Ord 19, r 2(5) (d)).
The order for reference has to be served on the arbitrator as well as the parties, but only when such sum for the arbitrator's fees as the district judge determines has been paid into court (Ord 19, r 4).
In practice the parties and arbitrator should agree his remuneration in advance.
The Terms Nos 1–8 listed as applying to "small claims" procedure all apply where an outside arbitrator is appointed, except for the powers under Ord 17 exercisable by a district judge on a pre-trial review (see notes on "Pre-Trial Review" ).
The outside arbitrator cannot increase the reference to include other matters (Ord 19, r 3).
An outside arbitrator's fees may be justified in those cases where an expert's adjudication is required.
Setting aside the award
Application to set aside must be made to the judge (s 64(4) of the 1984 Act) save under Term No 5 when it may be made to the arbitrator himself.
The application must be on notice, should give the grounds, and be served within fourteen days after the day on which the award was entered as a judgment (Ord 37, r 7).
Awards can usually be set aside only for an error of law on the face of the award or for misconduct on the arbitrator's part (Meyer v Leanse [1958]2 QB 371;[1958]3 All ER 213; and Leung v Garbett [1980]2 All ER 436).
Costs
Save for costs on summons and for enforcing the award (or such costs as are directed by the arbitrator to have been incurred through unreasonable conduct), no solicitor's charges as between party and party are allowed in those arbitration proceedings which have been referred because the sum claimed or amount involved did not exceed £1,000 (Ord 19, r 6).
In any other case, solicitor's charges as between party and party are allowable.
References for inquiry and report
The judge has power under s 65(1) of the 1984 Act to refer to the district judge or to a referee (N 280) for inquiry and report:(1) any proceedings which require any prolonged examination of documents or any scientific or local investigation which cannot, in the opinion of the judge, conveniently be made before him;(2) any proceedings where the question in dispute consists wholly or in part of matters of account;(3) with the consent of the parties, any other proceedings;(4) subject to any right to have particular cases tried with a jury, any question arising in any proceedings.
A judge may, after deciding or reserving any question of liability, refer to the district judge any mere matter of account which is in dispute.
He may then, after deciding the question of liability, give judgment on the district judge's report (s 65(4)).
A district judge may make an order (N 280) referring any question to a referee for inquiry and report if the sum claimed or amount involved does not exceed £1,000, or in any other case  with the consent of the parties (Ord 19, r 8).
Such an order may be made on application on notice by any party before the hearing under Ord 13, r 1; or on application by any party at the hearing; or at any stage of the proceedings by the court of its own motion (Ord 19, r 7).
Ord 19, r 9 applies to the conduct of the reference.
It may well be necessary at the time of ordering a reference to a referee to agree the limits of his remuneration and to undertake to make payment thereof when called upon; the district judge is required when the report is filed to fix the remuneration of the referee, unless it has been agreed (Ord 19, r 9(g) (ii)).
Reference to the European Court
An order referring a question to the European Court may be made by a judge only before or at the trial or hearing of any action or matter either of his own motion or on the application of any party.
When an order has been made, the district judge sends a copy of it to the Senior Master of the Supreme Court, Queen's Bench Division, for transmission to the Registrar of the European Court.
Order 19, r 11 applies.
Non-attendance of Plaintiff: Discontinuance
Non-attendance of plaintiff, or failure to prove his case
If the plaintiff does not appear on the return day, or does not attend by an admissible affidavit, the proceedings may be struck out or, if the defendant appears, the court may proceed in the plaintiff's absence.
If proceedings are struck out and the defendant attends, costs may be awarded against the plaintiff (N 290)(Ord 21, r 1(1),(2)).
The action may be restored for hearing on application or of the court's own motion (Ord 21, r 1(3)).
If the plaintiff appears but fails to prove his case to the satisfaction of the court, the court may nonsuit him or give judgment for the defendant (N 289)(Ord 21, r 2(1)).
A power to nonsuit is peculiar now to the county court and is useful where the plaintiff may have a good case but "his tackle is not in order" .
See Ord 21, r 2(2) as to payment of costs before bringing another action where the plaintiff has been nonsuited or struck out.
Discontinuance
If a plaintiff or applicant desires to discontinue wholly or in part any proceedings against all or any of the parties, he must give notice (N 279) to every such party (Ord 18, r 1).
Notice must be given also to the court with a certificate that notice has been given to the other parties.
If the hearing date is very close, the court office should also be notified by telephone.
After receiving notice of discontinuance a party may, unless the court on the application of a plaintiff otherwise orders, lodge for taxation a bill of costs incurred by him before the receipt of the notice, or, if the proceedings are not wholly discontinued, his costs incurred before the receipt of the notice in relation to the part discontinued (Ord 18, r 2(1)).
If the costs allowed on taxation  are not paid within 14 days after taxation upon application (Ord 22, r 5), judgment may be entered for them together with the costs of entering such judgment.
If the proceedings are not wholly discontinued, execution may not issue without leave (Ord 18, r 2(2)).
More often, discontinuance follows agreement between the parties and a letter to the court ends the matter.
If doubt exists where any agreement will be carried out, it is advisable to request the court to adjourn the proceedings sine die.
Whilst there can be no formal discontinuance by a plaintiff in the High Court without leave (RSC Ord 21, r 3) there can be in the county court.
Evidence
Generally, witnesses must give their evidence under examination in open court (Ord 20, r 4).
Affidavits
In chambers, evidence in any proceedings may be given by affidavit unless otherwise provided or ordered, but the court may order the deponent to attend for cross-examination (Ord 20, r 5).
The judge or district judge may also at any time order that at the hearing of any action or matter any particular facts may be proved by affidavit (Ord 20, r 8), or that the affidavit of a witness be read at the hearing on such conditions as he thinks reasonable (Ord 20, r 6).
Where a party desires without having first obtained an order to use an affidavit at the hearing, he may not less than 14 days before the hearing give notice accompanied by a copy of the affidavit to the party against whom it is to be used.
Unless that party, not less than seven days before the hearing, gives notice to the other party that he objects to the use of the affidavit, he is to be taken to have consented to the use of it and the affidavit may be used at the hearing unless the court otherwise orders (Ord 20, r 7(1)).
In a fixed date action, if the defendant has not delivered a defence within the time limited, or in any action where the defendant does not appear at the pre-trial review (or preliminary arbitration appointment), evidence by affidavit is admissible without notice unless the court otherwise orders (Ord 20, r 7(2); Ord 19, r 5(2); Term No 2).
See RSC Ord 41, notes 41/1 and 4½-8 and Practice Direction (Evidence: Documents)(1983) 1 WLR 922—whilst the latter is a  High Court Direction, all its requirements on affidavits, exhibits, etc should be adopted in the county court, for example, individual letters should not be made separate exhibits; and see also CCR Ord 20, r 10.
Form and content of affidavits
Rule 10 of the Amendment Rules 1991 provides for affidavits to bear corner-markings.
The new Ord 20, r 10(3) provides for markings to show the party on whose behalf the affidavit is filed, the deponent's initials and surname, the number of the affidavit in relation to the deponent, the date on which it is sworn and the date on which it is filed.
Markings may take the following form: 2nd Def: EW Jones: 3rd: 24th July 1991: 25th July 1991.
Unless the court otherwise orders, an affidavit may be used notwithstanding that it contains statements of information or belief, but every affidavit shall state which of the facts deposed to are within the deponent's knowledge and which are based on information or belief and shall give, in the former case, his means of knowledge and, in the latter case, the sources and grounds of the information or belief (Ord 20, r 10).
Notice to produce the document must have been given in order to render oral evidence of it admissible; it must be shown that the document existed, is or was in the possession of the other side, and that the original would have been admissible and relevant.
Secondary evidence of documents
Witnesses
Order 20, r 12 applies.
Witness summonses (N 20) may issue to compel oral evidence or the production of documents.
The requirements on issue are:(1) request (N 286);(2) any plaint or originating process for receipts to be marked;(3) conduct money, if service by bailiff or by post by court;(4) addressed envelope, if by post;(5) notice of date of hearing.
Conduct money must be sufficient to cover cost of travelling each way and, in addition, a sum specified currently as £15.00 for a police officer or £21.50 for anyone else for compensation for loss of time, but there is provision for increase and updating; the amounts are specified in the costs appendices.
The summons must contain the name of one witness only, but may be issued in blank.
The summons and copy are drawn by the court.
The summons shall be issued not less than seven days before the date upon which attendance before the court is required unless the judge or district judge otherwise directs and shall be served on the witness not less than four days before the date upon which attendance before the court is required unless the judge or registrar otherwise directs.
Service is to be effected by delivering the summons to the witness personally (Ord 20, r 12(4)).
If the witness fails to attend, the applicant must be able to prove in enforcement proceedings that the witness was served, or knew of the service in time, and received the conduct money.
Witness summonses may not issue less than seven days before the hearing and be served in less than four days before the hearing without leave of the court.
Any witness whose attendance in court ought for some sufficient cause to be dispensed with may be ordered (N 21) by the judge or district judge to be examined before an examiner in England or Wales (Ord 20, r 13).
The value of this procedure is much diminished by the decision In the Estate of Wipperman [1955]P 59;[1953]1 All ER 764, that an examiner may not include in the deposition any opinion as to the witness's credibility (Ord 20, r 13(5) (e); note 39/13/1 in The Supreme Court Practice).
For examination of witnesses abroad, s 56 of the 1984 Act applies, and application is by originating summons to a master of the High Court (RSC Ord 39, rr 1, 2).
Whether or not a witness should remain in court during the hearing is at the discretion of the court (Moore v Registrar of Lambeth County Court [1969]1 All ER 782) but they are usually brought in and remain there unless some application is made.
Exchange of witness statements
Order 20, r 12A provides as follows:(1) Subject to paragraph (2), at any stage in an action or matter the court may, if it thinks fit for the purpose of disposing fairly and expeditiously of the action or matter and saving costs, direct any party to serve on the other parties, on such terms as the court shall think just, written statements of the oral evidence which the party intends to lead on any issues of fact to be decided at the trial and RSC Ord 38, r 2A shall apply to a direction under this rule.
(2) No direction shall be made under this rule in proceedings which stand referred for arbitration under Ord 29, r 2(3).
Entries in bankers' books
See the Bankers' Books Evidence Act 1879 as noted in The County Court Practice.
Entries in Land Register
Where a matter or action is pending in the court the district judge may order that a party may inspect and make a copy of any document referred to on the Land Register (s 112(3) of the Land Registration Act (as amended) and r 8 of the Land Registration (Open Register) Rules 1990 (SI No 13625 of 1990)).
Expert evidence
Except by order or leave of the court or where all parties agree, no expert evidence (which includes medical evidence) may be adduced at the trial or hearing (Ord 20, rr 27, 28).
Application for leave is usually made at the pre-trial review.
Hearsay
Hearsay evidence if not generally admissible but exceptions are afforded by common law and by the Civil Evidence Act 1968.
The latter is activated by Rules of Court.
Thereunder in the county court, Ord 20, r 15 enables notice to be given of intention to give evidence at the trial pursuant to s 2 of the Act whensoever, for reasons to be given in the notice, a witness cannot be called: see Ord 20, rr 14–24 and notes thereunder in The County Court Practice.
There are detailed rules relating to documentary evidence, experts' reports, experts, and evidence in general contained in Ord 20 and the copious notes thereunder, and reference should be made to The County Court Practice and to the standard text books.
The basic requirement is that within 21 days after setting down, notice is to be given in a form which varies according to which section applies to the statement sought to be admitted; more often than not this will be s 2, seeking the admissability of a statement otherwise than in a document, when the notice must give particulars of the time, place and circumstances, at or in which the statement was made, the person by whom, and the person to whom, it was made and the substance of the statement  or, if material, the words used.
A counter-notice which must be served within 21 days after service of the Notice, should only be given where it is required that the party whose statement it is sought to admit, should be called as a witness, but there are witnesses who cannot, or should not be called, that is if dead, beyond the seas, or unfit to attend, or who cannot after reasonable diligence be identified, or cannot reasonably be expected to have any recollection; consequently in respect of all those persons, the opposing party is not entitled to serve a counter-notice requiring such person to be called unless he can contend that the person can, or should be called.
The strict rules of evidence do not apply in arbitrations (Ord 19, r 5(2), Term 3), but, of course, the district judge or other arbitrator may feel that he should give less weight to evidence which is hearsay than to evidence which is direct.
Notice to admit facts
Order 20, r 2 applies.
This is not, in practice, much brought into use, because the trend is to put the other party to proof.
At least 14 days before the hearing, the notice is served; if no admission of the facts is forthcoming, the facts must be proved evidentially.
If the court directs, such proof must be at the expense in costs of the party who has not admitted the facts in question.
Again in practice, facts not in dispute are verbally agreed, often shortly before the hearing, between counsel or solicitors.
Viewing
This is at the judge's discretion (Ord 21, r 6(1) with opportunity for the parties to be present.
Bundles of documents for use at hearings
See Practice Direction (Evidence: Documents)(1983) 1 WLR 922 which is applicable to the High Court and the Court of Appeal, but can well be adopted in the county court.
See also Ord 17, r 12 for detailed requirements.
The basic requirement is that at least 14 days before the day fixed for the hearing, the defendant shall inform the plaintiff of the documents he wishes to be included in the bundle.
Then, at least seven days before the day fixed for hearing, the plaintiff is to file one copy of a paginated and indexed bundle (with earliest  date on top) comprising the documents on which either party intends to rely, or which either party wishes to have before the court.
Opening case
The judge can dispense with an opening; and he can decide who shall start first (Ord 21, r 5A).
Judgments and Orders
Order 22 applies.
In general the "proper officer" draws up and serves judgments and final orders and orders for directions under Ord 13, r 2 and Ord 17, r 1(a), and serves them under Ord 7, r 1 on every party against whom judgment was given or the order made (Ord 22, r 1(1),(2)).
Service is presumed in favour of the party in whose favour the judgment or order was made (Ord 22, r 1(2)).
For forms of final judgments see N 24–36, N 289–291.
Where judgment is given in a default action (Ord 9, r 6(1)) for payment forthwith, it need not be drawn up or served unless a request to issue enforcement proceedings has not been made, or the plaintiff has abandoned part of his claim without amending his particulars of claim and serving the defendant, or where the judgment is interlocutory (N 17) or where a Certificate for judgment under s 12 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 is to be sought (Ord 22, r 1(3)).
Solicitors should remember to inform their clients of judgments and orders made against them at once.
Money judgments
The court may order payment in one sum forthwith or on a fixed day (s 71(1) (a) of the 1984 Act).
If no date is fixed, payment is fourteen days from judgment or order (Ord 22, r 2(1)).
Costs, where taxation takes place after the date for payment specified in the judgment or order, are payable fourteen days after taxation (Ord 22, r 2(2)).
The court may order instalment payments (s 71(1) (b) of the 1984 Act) or suspend payment altogether (s 71(2)).
Interlocutory judgments and assessment of damages
Order 22, r 6 applies.
If at the pre-trial review the defendant does not appear and has not delivered an admission or defence and the plaintiff produces evidence as to the amount of his damages, then judgment may be entered for them (Ord 17, r 2(2)), but if evidence is not then produced the court may enter a judgment for unliquidated damages and thereafter, unless the court has itself fixed a date for assessment of such damages, the plaintiff may apply for such assessment on seven days' notice to the defendant (Ord 22, r 6(1)).
The district judge has jurisdiction to hear and determine the amount of the damages.
There is now no financial limit on the district judge's authority.
The form of judgment is N 34.
Orders on recovery of land
By s 9(1) of the Housing Act 1988, the court may adjourn for such period as it thinks fit, proceedings for possession of assured tenancies, and may stay, suspend, or postpone a claim for possession—but an order for possession must not in general be postponed to a date later than fourteen days from judgment, unless this would cause exceptional hardship, when up to six weeks may be allowed (s 89(1) of the Houseing Act 1980); the maximum of 14 days is subject to important qualifications (s 89(2)) examples of which are those cases under the Rent Act 1977 where the court may only order possession if reasonable, possession actions by mortgagees when the period is 28 days, and by lessors for forfeiture for non-payment of rent, when any order for possession must be for not less than four weeks (s 138(3) of the 1984 Act).
Where a possession order is made in respect of a "regulated tenancy" of residential property in a mandatory case (Cases 11–20), the court is empowered to grant only a maximum of fourteen days and has no other discretion: Rent Act 1977, Sched 15, Pt II and s 89 of the Housing Act 1980.
Regulated tenancy, mandatory case
Where a possession order is made in respect of a "regulated tenancy" of residential property in a discretionary case (Cases 1–10), the court may stay or suspend execution, or postpone the date of possession for such periods as it thinks fit but it must  (unless there is exceptional hardship) impose conditions as to payment of rent (or mesne profits) and arrears: s 100 of the Rent Act 1977; s 75(1)—(3) of the Housing Act 1980.
Regulated tenancy, discretionary case
Where the tenant occupies the premises permanently and as his principal home (Housing Act 1985, ss 79–82) and where possession is ordered on grounds 1–8 or 12–16 (which includes non-payment of rent) contained in Parts I and III of Sched 2 of the Housing Act 1985, the provisions are similar to those for regulated tenancies, discretionary cases (above).
Secured tenancy (public sector tenants)
Protection is given for the duration of the term, which must be for at least six months, with prior prescribed notice.
The landlord must be given an order for possession after the expiry of the term, provided he has given the requisite two months' notice requiring possession, ideally from the landlord's point of view expiring when the tenancy terminates.
The landlord may seek possession before expiry if there is a breach of any obligation of the tenancy or non-payment of rent and a proviso for re-entry or forfeiture therefore is contained in the tenancy agreement.
Shorthold tenancies
Possession may be mandatory or discretionary according to the grounds, and reference should be made to Parts I and II to Sched 2 of the Housing Act 1988.
Assured tenancies
Where a possession order is made of an "agricultural tied cottage" under s 7 of the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976, the mandatory and discretionary grounds being similar to those which appertain to "regulated tenancies" , there are like provisions as to postponement of date of any possession order and like provisions as to suspension.
Agricultural tied cottage
Under s 36 of the Administration of Justice Act 1970, where a possession order of a dwelling house is made, then if satisfied that the defendant can pay the current instalments and the arrears in a reasonable time (or remedy other defaults), the court has wide powers of suspending a possession order.
Possession orders in such mortgagee possession cases are in Form N 31.
Mortgagee possession actions
While the existence of a counterclaim does not support a mortgagor's contention that he would be able to pay within a reasonable time: Citibank Trust Ltd v Ayivor (1987) 3 All ER 241, if the counterclaim is directed to the validity of the mortgage deed, that is a different matter, see Barclays Bank v Waterson (1988) 1989 CLY 2505.
The period for which the order is stayed or suspended should be defined: Royal Trust Co of Canada v Markham [1975]3 All ER 433.
Section 138 does not affect the court's powers to grant relief on such terms as it thinks fit under s 146(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925, but subject thereto, it provides that where rent arrears have not been paid into court not less than five clear days before the hearing, then if there is a right of re-entry or forfeiture the court must order possession at the expiry of such period, not being less than four weeks from the date of the order, as the court thinks fit, unless within that period the lessee pays into court all the rent in arrears and the costs.
There is power to extend the time period before actual possession.
Forfeiture cases
See also "Relief from forfeiture" , Chapter 17.
A forfeiture order should be on Form N 27, or where the property or part of it consists of premises subject to the Rent Acts on Form N 27(1) or (2), or if the order is made on breach of covenant, other than covenant to pay rent, on Form N 27 adapted.
Where an order for possession is made under Ord 24 ( "summary procedure" for recovery of land occupied without licence or consent), r 5(4) says that there is nothing which prevents the order for possession being given on a specific date as if the proceedings had been brought by action (r 5(3) and (4).
Dicta to the contrary in McPhail v Persons Unknown [1973]3 All ER 393 are thought to be applicable only if in the High Court.
There is, however, no power to suspend execution of the possession order in proceedings for summary possession (Swordheath Properties Limited v Floydd and Others [1978]1 All ER 721).
The note to Ord 24 in The County Court Practice says that with reference to occupiers whose occupation was originally unlawful (otherwise, seemingly, if the occupation started as lawful as with for example, a terminated service occupancy), then the court will normally order  "possession forthwith" , but the orders issued by the court (unless the court has fixed a date) will simply state that the plaintiff "do recover possession" .
In such cases, a warrant for possession may be issued immediately if issued within three months after the order was made but (Ord 24, r 6) after three months have elapsed, only with leave.
Summary procedure: Ord 24
The usual order is judgment for arrears of rent to date of termination of the tenancy, and for mesne profits to date of hearing and thereafter mesne profits at a daily rate and (almost invariably calculated by reference to the rent) from the date of hearing until actual possession is given up.
The district judge may enter judgment for mesne profits accrued after the hearing on application supported if he so requires, by affidavit.
Mesne profits
A judgment or order to do or abstain from doing any act
Such judgment or order must fix a time within which the act is to be done (Ord 22, r 1(3)).
It should make clear from what date the time runs (Van Houten v Foodsafe (1980) 124 SJ 277).
The order must either (a) specify the time after service of the order within which the act is to be done, or (b) specify some other time for the purpose.
For forms of wording to be used in the High Court, which could be adopted in the county court, see heading "Peremptory orders" , below.
Such judgment or order if the final time limit has expired, may be enforced by committal by a judge (Ord 29, r 1(1)) —see Chapter 23.
Order 29, r 1(3) provides that if the order was injunctive, it should have been served having borne thereon a "penal notice" —see below.
A general form of undertaking is now contained in N 117 and is as follows: On the day of 19 (John Smith) appeared in person/was represented by solicitors/counsel and gave an undertaking to the court promising [terms of undertaking then to be set out]and to be bound by these promises until.
The court explained to John Smith the meaning of his undertaking and the consequences of failing to keep his promises and the court accepted his undertaking [and, if so ordered]directed that John Smith should sign the statement overleaf.
And the court ordered that [further directions are then set out].
Form of undertaking
The printed form N 117 is usually used, and some are likely to be on the judges "table" .
The circuit judge or district judge may, or may not, direct the respondent to sign the undertaking—but it is now invariable practice to require him to do so.
The respondent is to sign personally.
The Penal Notice contained in the N 117 for undertakings states: you may be sent to prison for contempt of court if you break the promises that you have given to the court.
If you do not understand anything in this document you should go to a solicitor, or Legal Advice Centre or a Citizen's Advice Bureau.
The person undertaking, if required to sign, states: "I understand the undertaking that I have given, and that if I break any of my promises to the court I may be sent to prison for contempt of court" .
An undertakin g given by a party in person can usually be enforced as if it were an order of the court: Gandolfo v Gandolfo [1980]1 All ER 833.
By Ord 29, r 1A, a copy of the peremptory order should be served, that is handed, to the recalcitrant party before he leaves the court building, or else posted to him, or through his solicitor — by the "proper officer" ; if delivery cannot be effected in one or other of these ways, the order is to be delivered to the party for whose benefit the order has been made, and he should then have it served personally.
Obviously it is more convenient to practitioners if service is effected through the court.
The specimens provided for use in the High Court by Practice Direction (QBD) Peremptory Order of 12 May 1986 might safely be adopted in the county court.
The Queen's Bench Division Direction says that the wording must be specific, and if prescribing unpleasant consequences unless a particular act is done, the order must make clear the precise period within which the act is to be done except that unless the court otherwise specifies, no time need be specified in the case of judgments or orders for the payment of money, for possession of land, or the delivery of goods; in those cases, the order, unless some time is specified, may be enforced immediately.
Form of peremptory order
In all other cases outside of those exceptions the order which prescribes unpleasant consequences, unless a person does a particular act, must make clear the precise time within which the act is to be done (RSC Ord 42, r 2(1)).
Where the person is present or represented the following wording may be used: Unless by [4 pm on Friday 13 June 19]The defendant [serves his list of documents]the defence be struck out and judgment entered for the plaintiff with costs.
If however the party affected is not present or represented, then the following, which has slight variance, must be used: Unless within [14]days of service of this order [then continue as above]The form of order "Unless within [14]days from today…" can still be used where the party is present or represented, but can lead to argument how the time is to be reckoned, and is not suitable for consent orders, for which the wording "unless by 4 pm on etc…" should be used.
Where by the order a party is first ordered to do the act, and there is then added a clause in the order that in default of so doing specific consequences will follow, the part that directs the act to be done must use one or other of the above forms of wording.
Selecting the appropriate form seems to depend on whether or not the party affected is present or represented.
If an order of these types does not fulfil these requirements, a supplementary order should be obtained fixing the time, and until this is done the order cannot be enforced.
Where a judgment or order is enforceable by committal, that is where a person is required to do or abstain from doing an act, then if the order is in the form of an injunction, the court office will itself endorse a penal notice (in new form N 77), probably by attachment, rubber stamp, or printed on their form.
It is the preface to the form "General form of Injunction—Injunction Order" (N 16 (1)).
In other cases, a penal notice may be endorsed on application.
Such application may be made at the time when the order is made; if not then applied for, the practice required, at least in some courts, is that the applicant should certify in writing that he has notified the other party of the intended application.
The application accompanied by such certificate will then be referred to the district judge, ex parte, who may grant the application.
Alternatively he may have sent out a notice of appointment.
The precise directions in respect of which the penal notice is sought should be specified by the solicitors when applying for such a penal notice.
There is a fee of £10 on such an application.
Penal notice
An extension of time for compliance with the order may be required to be given at the time of endorsing the penal notice.
The wording of the penal notice in Form N 77 is as given at the foot of the draft injunctions in Chapter 32.
All orders or judgments to do or abstain from doing any act must generally be personally served (Ord 29, r 1(2)), but there are exceptions (Ord 29, r 1(6) and (7)).
Substituted service (N 217) can be allowed (Ord 7, r 8(1)).
Service of peremptory orders
As to enforcing discovery and inspection of documents and answers to interrogatories, see Ord 14, rr 10, 11.
Order 22, r 7A applies.
Where solicitors want a "consent order" , provided it does not relate to a possession order of residential premises, and is not for an order in matrimonial proceedings, the Court staff can now sign it, which should provide for a quicker return; it must be clear from the face of the order that it is "by consent" .
Consent orders
The drafting or settling of complicated judgments or
deeds For such orders, the court drafts these and sends them with a notice of appointment before the district judge to all parties not less than seven days before the appointment (Ord 22, r 7(1)—(5); otherwise the court simply prepares the orders and sends them out.
Nonetheless the bench will in practice expect consent orders, orders for custody and access and injunctive orders to have been prepared beforehand, and to be put up to the bench for approval.
As to settling deeds, reference should be made to Ord 22, r 7(6).
 "Tomlin Order" 
This order stays all further proceedings except for the purpose of carrying terms agreed—as contained in a Schedule annexed into effect; the order ends with the words "…for that purpose, the parties are to be at liberty to apply" .
Save that the court would obviously not countenance terms which are nonsensical, the court is not concerned with the terms on which the parties have agreed.
Court staff can sign.
Copies and certificates of judgment
Copies or duplicates of a judgment or order are supplied by the court to any of the parties on payment of a fee (see Table of Fees).
A certificate of a judgment or order (N 293) for use in England or Wales is supplied to a party on a request by letter stating the reason for which it is required, usually for enforcing the judgment in the High Court or as evidence or for bankruptcy proceedings.
The request (if for the purpose of enforcement) shall not be dealt with until after any pending proceedings whet her for variation of an instalment order, setting aside, an administration order, or a stay of execution, are determined (Ord 25, r 13).
The form of Certificate of Judgment or order for use outside the UK is a modified Prescribed Form 110 in Appendix A (Volume 2 of the Supreme Court Practice).
For use outside England and Wales, but in the UK modified Prescribed Forms 111 or 112 should be used.
Where the person applying for a Certificate of Judgment is not a party, he must state in writing with particulars the purpose for which he requires the Certificate of Judgment and the capacity in which he applies and must satisfy the district judge that the application may properly be granted.
The district judge may refer the application to the judge (Ord 22, r 8(2)).
The form of Certificate of Judgment or order for use in England and Wales in the county court is N 293.
Registration of judgments
Pursuant to s 73 of the 1984 Act and the Register of County Court Judgments Regulations 1985 (SI 1985 No 1807)(as amended) judgments for whatever amount are registered when entered.
The debtor can procure cancellation if satisfied within one month; if satisfied only after, whilst a certificate of satisfaction can be obtained, the registration will remain, for the period of six years.
However, where there has been a contested hearing and:(1) a money judgment payable in one lump sum is ordered, the debt is registered only when the judgment creditor takes steps to enforce it, or issues an oral examination;(2) a money judgment (payable in one lump sum or by instalments) including an order for costs to be taxed is entered, registration is effected on completion of taxation;(3) an application for new trial has been made or an appeal lodged with the Court of Appeal, registration is effected when the new trial (if ordered) or appeal have been disposed of.
The regulations preclude registration of money judgment made in daily proceedings, and administration orders, and where there is an order restricting enforcement made under ss 112 and 112A of the Act.
The register is maintained by Registry Trust Ltd, 173–175 Cleveland Street, London, W1P 5PE (Tel 071 380 1033) where searches must be made.
Registry Trust Limited (RTL) have agreed to pay the postage of all registrations and have supplied pre-paid envelopes and labels to courts.
Fees for searches
There is a form provided by the registry; if this is not used, a letter such as is given below could be used instead: To Registry Trust Ltd, 173–175, Cleveland Street, London, W1P 5PE Request for Postal Search of the Register Please search the Register for the years 198–to 198–(inclusive) for entries against the undermentioned: Surname Forenames  Present Address Previous Address(es) (if known) I enclose a fee of £ Signature Address Date The remittance by cheque or postal order for the fee should be made payable to Registry Trust Ltd.
Where a judgment has been set aside or reversed, the county court office sends a certificate to that effect to the registry to cancel any entry if it has been registered.
If a person wishes to have the registration of a judgment noted because the judgment has been satisfied, the party should make a request in writing to the district judge of the county court supported by confirmation from the creditor or a written statement that this was requested and not provided.
The district judge may determine a dispute as to payment on application on notice on payment of a fee to the court where satisfaction was made (see Table of Fees).
The court will send a certificate if necessary of satisfaction to the registry and issues a certificate of satisfaction to the debtor.
Interest on debt or damages
Interest from the date the cause of action arose until judgment (or until payment before judgment) may be included in the judgment (s 69 of the 1984 Act and Ord 6, r 1A and Ord 9, r 8).
Where judgment is given for a sum which exceeds £200 and represents or includes damages in respect of personal injuries, or in respect of a person's death, the court must include in that sum interest on those damages or on such part of them as the court considers appropriate, unless the court is satisfied that there are special reasons why no interest should be given (ibid, s 69).
Appropriate rate
The interest is simple interest only.
The rate of interest is that allowed in the High Court (at the date of issue of the summons) or such rate as the court thinks fit.
Interest on judgments
A county court judgment did not carry interest under the Judgments Act 1838 (R v Essex County Court Judge (1887) 18 QBD 704), but the Lord Chancellor is empowered under s 74 of the 1984 Act to order by statutory instrument that county court judgments shall carry interest.
The County Court (Interest on Judgment Debts) Order 1991 is restrictive, but does provide for such interest on a judgment of not less than £5,000.
Rule 2 of the No 3 Amendment Rules 1991 inserts Ord 25, r 5A and provides that: where the judgment creditor claims interest pursuant to the County Court (Interest on Judgment Debts) Order 1991 and takes proceedings to enforce payment under the relevant judgment (within the meaning of Art 4(1) of that Order), any request or application for enforcement made in those proceedings shall be accompanied by two copies of a certificate giving details of:(1) the amount of interest claimed and the sum on which it is claimed,(2) the dates from and to which interest has accrued, and (3) the rate of interest which has been applied and, where more than one rate of interest has been applied, the relevant dates and rates.
Money paid by the defendant is appropriated first to reducing the principal debt and then towards the interest.
Interest cannot be claimed on judgments or orders made before 1 July 1991.
Suspension and Variation of Judgments and Orders
Variations
Order 22, r 10 applies.
The debtor may apply for an order that the money, if payable in one sum, be paid at a later date than that by which it is due or by instalments, or, if the money is already payable by instalments, that it be paid by smaller instalments.
The application shall state the proposed terms, the grounds on which it is made and include a signed statement of the debtor's means.
The proper officer then sends copies of the application and affidavit to the creditor, who is to give reasons for objecting within 14 days, failing which, an order is made by the proper officer in the terms asked; the proper officer still adjudicates (the staff have means guidelines) even if objection is taken, until the creditor, within 14 days of such adjudication, asks for reconsideration, when, the proceedings being transferred to the debtor's home court, the application is finally determined by the district judge.
Judgment creditors may apply on notice for increase in instalments, or for payment on an earlier date, and this is also determined by the district judge; if the judgment creditor seeks extended payment, or smaller instalments, he writes to the court and the proper officer simply makes the new order.
Suspension of warrants of execution
There is general power to stay warrants of execution under s 88 of the 1984 Act.
This includes "foreign warrants" (s 103(5)).
Suspension (order in N 41) maybe on terms as to payment of warrant costs and expenses before suspension.
The court may order part of the goods seized to be sold to cover these (Ord 25, r 8).
Unless the court otherwise directs, the warrant re-issues on the judgment creditor writing to the court if the conditions of suspension are not met (Ord 25, r 8(2) (b)).
Order 25, r 8 applies to suspension of warrants.
The procedure is similar to that provided by Ord 22, r 10 in relation to variations; the judgment creditor may object to the terms offered by the defendant and either party may apply for the order made by the proper officer to be reconsidered by the district judge.
Where, however, the plaintiff objects to the suspension of the warrant on any terms, the application will be listed before the district judge.
A warrant suspended at the request of the execution creditor may be re-issued on the application of the creditor to the court holding it.
If re-issued, priority is reckoned from the time of re-issue (Ord 26, r 10(3)).
The execution creditor is required to give the balance due under the judgment or order, notifying the whole or any part of an instalment due, and stating why re-issue is necessary.
Re-issue
A warrant of execution suspended by the court under Ord 25, r 8 (N 41) may, subject to the directions by the court, be re-issued on the judgment creditor's written request by letter showing that the condition of suspension has not been complied with (Ord 25, r 8(2) (b)).
The court will check the court records to see if instalments have been made and any "pass through" must be taken into account.
As to "taxes" , see note Ord 42, r 10.
The court may allow a request for a warrant of execution to be amended at any time to show the debtor's amended address or place of levy (Ord 15, r 1(1) (a)).
It would seem that its priority would date from the time of such amendment.
A letter is usually accepted.
Where a part warrant is suspended on payment of instalments the balance of the judgment or order (unless otherwise directed) is automatically suspended on the same terms (Ord 26, r 11).
Part warrant
Applications are made to the district judge (N 245).
The court sends an accompanying memorandum in N 246.
(1) In the case of an agreement made on 18 May, 1985 or earlier—The court has power to vary orders and suspend warrants for delivery of goods made under the Hire-Purchase Act 1965 pursuant to s 39 thereof where a suspended order was made.
Where execution of a warrant or variation of a district judge's order is concerned, application is to be made to the district judge, and in the case of variation of a judge's order to the judge (Order 49, r 6; order in Form 32(4)).
Hire-purchase
(2) In the case of an agreement made on 19 May, 1985 or later—The court has similar power pursuant to s 130(6), Consumer Credit Act 1974 as read with the alternative Ord 49, r 4.
An application by the debtor, or hirer, for a "time order" , may be made by originating application (Form N 440) in the court in whose district the applicant resides or carries on business (alternative Ord 49, r 4(5)).
The application must give the particulars specified in the rule.
Application for enforcement orders under s 127 (where the 1974 Act has been infringed in various ways); ss 86(2) and 87(1) (relating to the death of debtor or hirer); ss 92(2) and 126 (relating to land), are all commenced by originating application (alternative Ord 49, r 4(9)—(11).
Suspension of possession orders
See also under "Recovery of Land" , Chapter 16.
Applications to stay or suspend the order or warrant are made to the district judge (Ord 25, r 8).
Application to vary the order itself is made to the circuit judge or to the district judge according to who made the possession order.
Effect of application for rehearing, setting aside or appeal
The lodging of an application does not act as a stay of execution unless the court otherwise orders (Ord 37, r 8(2); Moore v Registrar of Lambeth County Court [1969]1 WLR 141;[1969]1 All ER 782).
As a matter of practice execution is often not carried out pending the hearing.
There may be persistent and unmeritorious applications.
The court has power to order that no application is issued without leave.
Where the applicant has failed to attend a previous hearing the court may refuse to hear his renewed application until he has paid the previous costs thrown away, which the court may assess for that purpose (Thames Investments & Securities plc v Benjamin [1984]1 WLR 1381).
Some courts in such circumstances will mark the court record so that further applications are brought to the district judge's notice before any action is taken in the court office.
The court may in such circumstances give an early hearing or order execution to proceed notwithstanding the application (Moore v Registrar of Lambeth County Court, above).
Orders for discovery, inspection and interrogatories
These may be revoked or varied (Ord 14, r 12).
Relief from forfeiture for non-payment of rent
A Notice under s 146 of the Law of Property Act 1925 need not have been served and the lessor may rely simply on his right of re-entry, assuming such be contained in the lease or tenancy agreement.
Section 138(1)—(10) of the 1984 Act is applicable whensoever a lessor is proceeding by action to enforce a right of re-entry or forfeiture for non-payment of rent in the County Court.
Provided that the action does not cease under sub s (2) of s 138 (that is, the lessee has not paid into court (sic) not less than five clear days before the return day all the rent in arrear and the costs of the action) then, if the court is satisfied that the lessor is entitled to enforce the right of re-entry or forfeiture for non-payment of rent, it shall order possession to be given not less than four weeks from the date of the order unless within that period the lessee pays into court (sic) all arrears and costs (s 138(3)).
The court may extend the period of possession at any time before possession is recovered (s 138(4)).
Where the court extends a period at a time when that period has expired and a warrant has been issued, the court is to suspend the warrant for the extended period; if before the expiration of the extended period the lessee pays into court (sic) all the rent arrears and all the costs, the court shall cancel the warrant (s 138(9)).
The extension of a period fixed shall not be treated as relief from which the lessee is barred if he fails to pay arrears and costs within that period (meaning the period fixed)(s 138(8)).
Where the lessor recovers possession after the making of an order under s 138(3) above, the lessee may at any time within six months from the date on which the lessor has recovered possession, apply for relief; the court may grant the lessee relief, subject to such terms and conditions as it thinks fit (s 138(9A)).
Claims may not include mesne profits as they may in the High Court, but are confined to claims for non-payment of rent.
The provisions relating to abatement of the action on payment within five clear days of all arrears of rent and costs is not applicable where in the same action the lessor is claiming re-entry or forfeiture on a ground other than, or as well as for non-payment of rent.
In such an action, relief may be given pursuant to s 146(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925.
The jurisdiction to grant relief for breach of covenant other than to pay rent is discretionary, and may be given on terms.
Section 146(3), statutory and mandatory liability of lessee for costs if breach waived or relief granted, should be noted.
Service of a notice under s 146(1) for breach of covenant other than for non-payment of rent is essential if a right of re-entry or forfeiture for breach of such covenant is sought to be enforced.
In cases of breach of repairing covenants where three years or more of the lease remain unexpired a preliminary application for leave under s 1(3) of the Leasehold Property (Repairs) Act 1938 will be necessary before an action for forfeiture may be commenced.
Revocation of committals on attachment of earnings orders
Application for revocation of an order for committal of the debtor under s 23(7) of the Attachment of Earnings Act 1971 must be made to the judge ex parte in writing explaining the reason for failure to attend court or refusing to be sworn or to give evidence, and undertaking to comply in future (Ord 27, r 8(2)).
Application is made to the judge (Ord 28; r 4; Ord 27, r 8(2)—(4)).
Discharge of committals on judgment summonses
Committals for non-attendance
(1) Payment in full The court arranges for release (N 345)(Ord, 28, r 13).
(2) Request by judgment creditor Request (N 346) lodged with court and registrar orders discharge (certificate in N 347)(Ord 28, r 14(1)).
(3) If debtor can give reasons why he was unable to pay and  ought to be discharged Application to judge (certificate in N 348)(Ord 28, r 14(2)—(4); Ord 27, r 8(3),(4)).
Committals otherwise
Discharge from prison of persons committed
For committals under the Attachment of Earnings Act, application is to be made to the judge (Ord 27, r 8(2),(3),(4)).
For committals for breach of order or undertaking, see Ord 29, r 3 for procedure.
If the committal order does not reserve the application to the judge and the district judge has the judge's leave (enquire of the court), the application may be made to the district judge (order of discharge is N 83).
The application must be to the district judge if made by him (Ord 29, r 3(2)).
New Trials: Setting Aside Judgments, Orders and Awards
Both parties present or represented
Where no error of the court is alleged, for example where new evidence becomes available after the hearing which could not previously have been discovered by reasonable diligence, then the judge or district judge has power to order a rehearing: Ord 37, r 1(1) and form N 372.
The application must state the grounds of the application and should be made to the judge or district judge who tried the proceedings and (save with leave) not more than 14 days after the trial and on not less than seven clear days' notice to the opposite party.
Unless otherwise ordered, any money in court is retained until the application has been heard (Ord 37, r 1(6)).
The principles upon which a new trial is granted are set out in notes to Ord 37, r 1 in The County Court Practice (no application to jury trials—see Ord 37, r 1(1)).
Judgment or order given in absence of party
Any judgment or order made against a party in his absence, ie where he does not appear at the hearing and a judgment or order is made against him, "may" be set aside, and if on the facts a refusal would involve a miscarriage of justice, the judge "must" grant the application—See Note "Discretion to set aside" under Ord 37, r 2).
The application is made to the judge if the judgment or order was given or made by the judge and, if not, to the district judge (Ord 37, r 2).
It appears that the application need not necessarily be made to the judge or district judge by whom the judgment or order was made (cf Ord 37, r 1(2)).
Furthermore, the judgment court can transfer the application once made to the defendant's court for hearing under Ord 16, r 1(c).
Where on an arbitration an award has been made against a party in his absence, the award can be set aside, but, in this instance, by the arbitrator only (Ord 19, r 5(2) (Term 6)).
Judgment in default
Where judgment is entered in default under Ord 9, r 6 the court may on application, or if its own motion, set aside or vary the judgment (Ord 37, r 4).
Where the defendant makes application, it will be subject to automatic transfer if the court where judgment is entered is not the defendant's home court.
Court staff are expected to deal with such transfers quickly.
Application must be made on not less than two days' notice.
The defendant will have to explain his default and satisfy the court that he has a defence or counterclaim which ought to be heard.
Where the defendant has no defence then, if he is unable to come to an arrangement with the plaintiff as to payment, the court may give him time to pay (Ord 37, r 4).
An order that a defence be struck out (eg for failure to obey an order for discovery) and that judgment be entered puts the defendant in the position of not having filed a defence at all, and therefore the judgment, like any other default judgment, can be set aside or varied under this rule.
A judge setting aside a default judgment should give reasons for so doing (Lennard v International Institute for Medical Science (1985) The Times, 29 April, CA citing Eagil Trust Co Ltd v Pigott Brown [1985]3 All ER 119, CA.
Irregularity
The court may set aside proceedings, including any step taken in the proceedings and any judgment, order or document therein, on the grounds of non-compliance with the Rules.
If it does not, the proceedings are not affected.
The application must be made on notice and must state the objections.
Such an application shall be refused unless made within a reasonable time and will not be granted where the party applying has taken any step in the proceedings after knowledge of the irregularity.
Notice of the hearing must be at least two clear days before the hearing (Ord 37, r 5).
Postal service of process, not received in time
Where a summons or other originating process has been served on a defendant by post or insertion in his letter-box under Ord 7, 4 10(1) (b) or 4(a) or r 13(1) (b) or (4) and after judgment has been given or entered it appears to the court that the process did not come to the knowledge of the defendant in time, the court may of its own motion set aside the judgment and may give any direction or make any such order as the court may think just.
Where a judgment has been so set aside, the court gives notice to the plaintiff (Ord 37, r 3).
Once the process is posted to defendant's address, if it is not returned by the Post Office, it is deemed to have been delivered,(see s 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978); thus applications by defendants will generally seek to show, by affidavit, that the defendant was away from the a ddress, for example, abroad or on a prolonged holiday; it has been held that he is not entitled to have the judgment set aside ex debito justitiae.
Costs may be costs in the cause, or howsoever the judge exercises his discretion (see Cooper v Scott-Farnell (1969) 1 All ER 178.
Setting aside arbitrator's award
Application to set aside an award must be made within 14 days after the award was entered as a judgment.
Grounds must be stated in the application (Ord 37, r 7 and see notes under "Arbitrations" —Chapter 13).
A fee is payable: see Table of Fees.
The court may stay execution pending a hearing under any of the rules in Ord 37 (Ord 37, r 8).
Application should be made to the district judge in the first instance (Ord 13, r 1(6)).