

1 Pre-Trial Considerations
Peter Mantle, Barrister
Contents
Establishing Liability
1.1 The emphasis of this work is on quantum but even the biggest case will fail at trial if the plaintiff cannot establish the defendant's liability.
In considering pre-litigation inquiries, therefore, a few points about liability and contributory negligence should be remembered.
These points generally apply equally whether the action is brought in the High Court or county court.
Oral evidence
1.2 The first point is of general importance to both liability and quantum: namely, that the basic rule relating to evidence contained in RSC Ord 38, r1 (see Appendix C) and CCR Ord 20, r4 provides that questions of fact should be proved at the hearing of any action begun by writ or of any action in a county court by the examination of witnesses orally in open court.
Thus, the best way of proving anything that the other side will not agree to is to be prepared to call the witness to give evidence about it at trial.
Remember that a subpoena in the High Court, once issued, is valid only for twelve weeks and must be served not less than four days before the day on which the witness is required to attend before the court unless the court fixes a shorter period.
More than one witness can be named in a subpoena ad test but not in a subpoena duces tecum.
Under s36 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 a subpoena can be issued for service on a witness anywhere in the UK, but the court must give leave to issue a subpoena for service in Scotland or Northern Ireland.
County Court witness summonses can name only one witness and should be applied for not less than seven days before attendance is required.
Hearsay
1.3 However, RSC Ord 38 and CCR Ord 20 are expressed to be subject to the Civil Evidence Act 1968 (see Appendix B) under which hearsay evidence in documents can be put in at trial if a party cannot call the witness.
This and the Civil Evidence Act 1972 (see Appendix B) allow the court to admit hearsay evidence of fact and opinion from both lay and expert witnesses.
The power is  wide enough on the one hand to allow the statement of an eye-witness to an accident to express an opinion (eg that one of the drivers was going too fast) and on the other hand to allow a party to put in a medical report from a doctor who has died or who cannot be called for any other reason.
It would obviously include statements relevant to quantum, such as statements from deceased employers about earnings.
Rules 21 to 27 of RSC Ord 38 (with which rules 14 to 24 of CCR Ord 20 correspond) deal with the procedure for putting in, objecting to and getting directions about hearsay statements.
There are five specific reasons for not calling a witness given in r25—namely, that the witness is dead or beyond the seas or unfit by reason of bodily or mental condition to attend as a witness or that, despite the exercise of reasonable diligence, it has not been possible to identify or find him or that he cannot reasonably be expected to have any recollection of matters relevant to the accuracy or otherwise of the statement.
If the party serving an r21 notice intends to rely on one of those reasons for not calling the witness he must say so.
The cases of Rasool v West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive [1974]3 All ER 638 and Piermay Shipping Co SA v Chester [1978]1 WLR 411 make it clear that these five reasons are disjunctive so that the party serving the r21 notice can rely on any one of them.
Where the witness is ill it is advisable to send a medical certificate with the notice itself.
If there is a dispute about this or any of the other four reasons, the court can be asked to decide the issue on an application under r27.
Under r29 hearsay statements can be admitted at trial, even though the rules have not been complied with because there has been no r21 notice.
The criterion is fairness, however, and if a party has deliberately concealed a statement until the trial in order to secure an advantage, as happened in Ford v Lewis [1971]1 WLR 623, his breach of the rules will not be excused and the statement will be excluded.
In Cable v Dallaturca (1977) 121 SJ 795, the defendant who deliberately withheld an expert's report was given leave to call him at trial but was deprived of half the costs of the hearing.
The time for serving a hearsay notice set by Ord 38, r21 is 21 days from setting down.
While it is clear that the court can and will exercise discretion, it is obviously wise to check on the availability of witnesses before setting down.
Plans, photographs and police reports
1.4 Plans and photographs are indispensable in many personal injury cases and are best prepared at an early stage.
RSC Ord 25, r8(1) (d)(with which CCR Ord 17, r11(3) (c) corresponds) deals with plans and photographs in personal injury actions (with the exception of Admiralty actions and most significantly medical negligence actions in the High Court).
Photographs, a sketch plan and any police accident report book are receivable in evidence at trial.
The parties should attempt to agree them in advance.
In practice the onus is on the plaintiff to obtain the police report and it should be borne in mind that the police destroy such reports as a matter of course after a relatively short period.
High Court medical negligence actions are governed by Ord 38, r5 which requires the party intending to produce plans, photographs or models at trial to give the other side the opportunity to inspect them at least 10 days before the hearing unless the court for "special reasons" orders otherwise.
Convictions
1.5 Under s11 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 (see Appendix B) parties can plead convictions against one another if they are relevant to issues in the civil proceedings.
Obvious examples are convictions for driving offences, for defective vehicles under the Motor Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1978 (SI 1978 No 1017) and in prosecutions by HM factory inspectors.
The fact of the conviction can be proved just by putting in the certificate from the convicting court.
As to the certificate generally, see s18 of the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871.
Notes of the evidence given in those proceedings may be admissible under s2 or s4 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 (see Appendix B).
1.6 There are special rules of pleading in RSC Ord 18, r7A (see Appendix C) that must be observed: the party who is facing a pleaded conviction cannot simply traverse his opponent's pleading otherwise he runs the risk of having his own pleading struck out.
He must either deny the fact of the conviction or admit it, and, if he wants to, allege that it was erroneous or irrelevant.
If the defendant states he was wrongly convicted, he puts that fact in issue in the civil proceedings.
The plaintiff must then put in the notes of evidence from the magistrates' court (or the Crown Court) with a r21 notice and apply for directions under r28 in order to force the defendant to call all the witnesses from the magistrates' court to give evidence in the civil trial.
It is important to remember that the effect of pleading a conviction is to transfer the legal as well as the evidential burden on to the convicted party (Stupple v Royal Insurance Co [1971]1 QB 50).
Where the  defendant alleges that his conviction is irrelevant to the issues in the civil trial, which is the usual line counsel takes, the plaintiff will have to prove its relevance.
This may mean having to call some or all of the witnesses from the magistrates' court or Crown Court and he may not just be given leave to put in the notes of evidence.
A defendant who pleads that he was erroneously convicted is putting up a positive case and can be asked for particulars.
A defendant who admits his conviction but denies its relevance is probably also putting up a positive case and not just relying on a denial of which particulars would not normally be ordered.
In most cases the defendant will be hard put to give convincing particulars and the results of failure to do so, in different circumstances, are vividly illustrated in Butcher v Dowlen [1981]RTR 24.
1.7 If the judge is undecided on the other evidence after he has heard both sides then the conviction is conclusive, but the judge is not precluded from making a finding of contributory negligence against the plaintiff or accepting (in an appropriate case) a defence of volenti non fit injuria (Murphy v Culhane [1976]3 All ER 533).
1.8 The definition of "contributory negligence" in s1(1) of the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 (see Appendix B) refers to "the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage" (not the responsibility for the cause of the damage).
This has been highlighted in two lines of decisions in road traffic cases where the plaintiffs' damages have been reduced, even though they in no way caused or contributed to the accidents in which they were injured.
These are the seat belt cases and the drink cases.
Seat belts
1.9 In every case the onus lies on the defendant to prove that the plaintiff should have been wearing a seat belt and that his injuries would have been avoided or less severe if he had been.
This task will be easier if the plaintiff has been convicted of an offence under the Motor Vehicles (Wearing of Seat Belts) Regulations 1982 or the 1991 Regulations making the wearing of seat belts in rear seats by adults compulsory because that conviction will throw the onus on to the plaintiff who will have to show it was erroneous or irrelevant to discharge it.
The defendant will still, of course, have to prove that wearing a seat belt would have avoided or reduced the plaintiff's injuries.
A good example of this was Owens v Brimmell [1977]QB 859 where the plaintiff sustained catastrophic brain injury.
The court accepted that the  plaintiff's injury could have been caused by a brain shake without any actual blow to the head.
No reduction in damages was made for the plaintiff's failure to wear a seat belt even though he was found after the collision hanging out of the defendant's car and had suffered a severe blow to the head.
1.10 Whether there should be a reduction for contributory negligence and the amount of such reduction is a question of fact to be decided on the circumstances of the particular case.
The Court of Appeal laid down some rough guidelines in Froom v Butcher [1976]QB 286 when it decided that the defendant who succeeded in establishing that a plaintiff's injuries could have been avoided by wearing a seat belt would have the benefit of a 25 per cent reduction in the plaintiff's damages, even though the plaintiff was otherwise an innocent party.
If the injuries would only have been lessened by wearing a seat belt the damages may be reduced by 15 per cent.
The decision in Froom v Butcher was based on "the duty of every driver of a vehicle and every front-seat passenger to take reasonable precautions for his own safety by wearing a seat belt at all times" .
That it is now compulsory to do so does not seem to increase that duty and, correspondingly, the plaintiff's share in the responsibility for the damage he suffers.
However, it seems that the court will not now have to judge whether the plaintiff has taken "reasonable precautions" .
The exceptions to the regulations are very limited and the question of whether it is medically inadvisable to wear a seat belt, considered in Froom v Butcher, for obese or pregnant plaintiffs, or in Mackay v Borthwick [1982]CLY 2157 where the plaintiff suffered from a hiatus hernia is probably pre-empted by para 5(d) of the regulations.
This requires a certificate of exemption signed by a registered medical practitioner, to avoid conviction for not wearing a seat belt otherwise made compulsory by the regulations.
1.11 In Roberts v Sparks [1977]CLY 2643, where the plaintiff was thrown out of the defendant's vehicle, the court reduced his damages by 25 per cent because the injuries he suffered would clearly have been avoided by wearing a seat belt; but it added back 5 per cent for the injuries he would have suffered if he had been wearing a seat belt.
This point was developed in Traynor v Donovan [1978]CLY 2612, where the court refused to make any reduction because the plaintiff's injuries would have been just as severe, but of a different nature, if she had been wearing a seat belt.
The argument that the court should take account of the fact that the wearing of a seat belt would have caused other injuries of  a different nature was rejected as a matter of principle in Patience v Andrews [1983]RTR 447: it is respectfully submitted that this decision is wrong and does not give effect to the provision in s1 of the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945, that damages should be reduced to such extent as the court thinks just and equitable.
It is surely not just and equitable to reduce the damages if the court is satisfied that as severe, or more severe, damage would have been caused if a seat belt had been worn.
The decision in Traynor v Donovan [1978]CLY 2612 is to be preferred.
In Kaye v Alfa Romeo (GB)(1984) 134 NLJ 126 the plaintiff's damages in an action against the manufacturers of a seat belt which failed were reduced by one-third because of his own negligent driving.
1.12 The common point about such cases is of course that expert evidence can be called to dispute the allegations about seat belts, and that must always be borne in mind in these cases.
Sometimes the expert evidence is given by a medical witness; more often, an expert motor engineer who has studied the effect of crashes on bodies in a car would be a more appropriate witness.
If a medical expert is asked to deal with both injuries and seat belts he should be asked to do so in separate reports.
Drink and driving cases
1.13 The leading case where drink is alleged to be a contributory factor is Owens v Brimmell [1977]QB 859.
There the plaintiff passenger's damages were reduced by 20 per cent because he had been out drinking with the defendant driver and a lot of beer had been consumed by both the plaintiff and the defendant.
The plaintiff's share of the responsibility for the damage he had suffered in the accident arose out of the finding that either he ought to have known that the defendant's ability to drive was impaired or, more likely, that he had drunk so much himself that he was unable to tell that the defendant's ability was in fact impaired.
But the latter is not an automatic finding, however high the blood-alcohol level might be, as was demonstrated by Traynor v Donovan [1978]CLY 2612.
There the court accepted forensic evidence called by the plaintiff that, while a blood-alcohol level of 168 milligrams represented an excessive intake of alcohol, it would not necessarily produce symptoms apparent to a lay person, such as the plaintiff, who had met the defendant in a pub only half an hour before the accident.
No reduction was made in that case.
There was a similar result in Campbell (decd) v Jeffey [1984]CLY  2296 where the defendant and his passenger drank six pints of beer each in one another 's company at lunchtime and two further pints each after the defendant had collected his passenger at 9.30 pm that day.
The passenger was killed when the defendant's car hit an unlit lorry.
The court accepted both the widow's evidence and expert evidence that the defendant's demeanour would have appeared reasonably sober despite an alcohol level of 131 milligrams.
The passenger had not been negligent in accepting a lift.
1.14 It is not yet clear how courts would treat the combined effects of, say, negligent driving and failing to wear a seat belt.
It seems likely from Gregory v Kelly [1978]RTR 426 that they will simply take a global figure, and not aggregate separate percentages for each type of contributory negligence.
1.15 In Gregory's case the plaintiff, who was injured in a way that could have been avoided by wearing a seat belt, suffered a 40 per cent total reduction since he was also travelling as a passenger in a car knowing that it had defective brakes.
In conclusion, one must remember that in all cases of contributory negligence the burden of proof lies on the party alleging it.
Defendants should always plead allegations of contributory negligence (Fookes v Slaytor [1978]1 WLR 1293).
Latent defects
1.16 Finally on pre-litigation investigation, one should bear in mind the need for experts in cases involving latent defects and inexplicable accidents.
The balance might well be tipped by forensic evidence.
In personal injury cases the damage caused is usually all too painfully obvious even though its cause was a negligent act or omission many years before; and time usually runs from the injury and not from the act or omission causing it.
For instance, a workman may be injured by a chip of metal flying off a hammer which had been negligently manufactured a long time before.
Time runs from the date of the injury not from the date of the negligent manufacture.
Where the damage is insidious and not discovered until later, eg industrial diseases, the provisions of s14 of the Limitation Act 1980 which define "knowledge" may delay the running of limitation even further, until the plaintiff knows not only that he is ill but also the likely cause.
See also Leadbitter v Hodge Finance Ltd [1982]2 All ER 167 at para 1.37.
1.17 In latent defect cases the onus of proof is on the party setting up the defect as a defence (Henderson v Henry E Jenkins & Sons and Evans [1970]AC 282).
The first obstacle is, of course, to  show that the defect caused the accident.
There is no point in a defendant blaming his defective brakes if he was going so fast that nothing could have stopped him, or in blaming a puncture if he was driving on a tyre that was worn down to the canvas.
Where a defendant raises the defence of latent defect, and the defect alleged is one arising in the manufacture of the product, as opposed to a defect caused by lack of maintenance, the plaintiff now has another weapon in his armoury.
Section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 imposes strict liability for a defective product on the producer, and in some cases the supplier, of the defective product.
 "Product" is widely defined in the Act.
It extends, for example, to any ship, aircraft or vehicle.
In the case envisaged the plaintiff should inform the defendant that he will join the maker of the product as co-defendant and that, in the event of the court finding that the injury was not caused by the latent defect, the plaintiff will seek a Sanderson Order against the original defendant in respect of the co-defendant's costs.
This course should persuade a defendant who has raised a spurious latent defect defence to drop it: on the other hand, if such defence prevails, the plaintiff will have a valid claim against the producer.
1.18 Usually the onus is on the plaintiff to establish the defendant's fault, but the plaintiff will not necessarily fail if he cannot say exactly how an accident happened.
Thus if two vehicles collide and neither driver can say what happened after (and there is no corroborative evidence), the judge cannot simply refuse to make any finding.
If he cannot deduce that one or other party was to blame he cannot send them both away empty-handed but must find that both contributed (as happened in Baker v Market Harborough Industrial Co-operative Society, Wallace v Richards (Leicester) Ltd [1953]1 WLR 1472.
Of course, that does not always happen because the judge is entitled to draw a reasonable inference from the evidence that one party was entirely to blame even though he cannot decide on the basis of the evidence exactly how an accident happened.
This is illustrated in Knight v Fellick [1977]RTR 316 (which is worth reading).
Engineering evidence can help the judge to draw that inference.
It is clear from Sullivan v West Yorkshire Passenger Executive [1985]2 All ER 134 that motor engineers' evidence cannot now be excluded per se at an interlocutory stage, but Hinds v London Transport Executive [1979]RTR 103 is still good law in so far as the trial judge is still likely to disregard such evidence if it just argues out the cause of the accident without dealing with any real engineering matters.
Establishing Damage
Medical evidence
1.19 The keystone of any personal injury case, apart from the plaintiff's own evidence, is the medical evidence.
This can be the keystone of the defence as well, although the defendant might be prepared to accept the plaintiff's evidence if it contains nothing controversial.
At this stage it is worth emphasising that we still deal with personal injury litigation under an adversarial system.
This means that neither side—plaintiff nor defendant—has an automatic right of access to the other side's medical (or any other) expert reports.
Of course, the parties might agree to disclose expert reports, a practice which is encouraged by the Court of Appeal.
Disclosure of a written report is a pre-condition to calling expert evidence, but the basic rules remain the same: expert evidence is privileged and neither party is obliged to disclose a report which is hostile to his case and on which he therefore will not wish to rely (see below).
1.20 In any case involving continuing disability both sides should obtain independent medical evidence.
The plaintiff will want an independent assessment of the extent of his disability preferably from a doctor who was not involved in treating him and so will not be influenced by the extent of his recovery to date.
The defendant will want to check the extent of any permanent disability alleged by the plaintiff, whether any pre-accident condition has been exacerbated and the extent of the functional element.
Neither side should be afraid to instruct more than one doctor when the plaintiff suffers multiple injuries giving rise to a variety of symptoms.
It is important to remember that automatic directions under RSC Ord 25, r8 and CCR Ord 17, r11 provide for only two medical experts.
If either party wants to call more he must ask the other side to agree or apply for directions to do so.
Automatic directions, as stated above, do not apply to admiralty actions or medical negligence cases in the High Court in which a summons for directions must be taken out.
It is essential that the case is tried on the basis of up-to-date medical reports, whether or not medical evidence is agreed.
In Kaiser (An Infant) v Carlswood Glassworks Ltd (1965) 109 SJ 537 it was said that reports should not be more than a year old, but six months is probably safer.
1.21 The plaintiff's rights in relation to medical examinations by the defendant's doctor have been redefined in two cases.
The  first was Starr v National Coal Board [1977]1 WLR 63 which dealt with the plaintiff's right to object to being examined at all by the defendant's doctor.
It is clear that he cannot object solely on the ground of the freedom of the individual or because that particular doctor usually examines for insurance companies.
The plaintiff must go further and show that the doctor is not suitably qualified or that the examination is not necessary or that he has a reasonable apprehension about the particular doctor which, if realised, might make a fair trial more difficult than if another doctor were to examine him.
The plaintiff's solicitor will have to go on affidavit about that, which is not an easy matter.
If the plaintiff unreasonably refuses a medical examination his action is not struck out, it is stayed; but if he continues to refuse to be examined the stay continues and, of course, he runs the risk of dismissal for want of prosecution and, additionally, in the county court, of an automatic strike out under Ord 17, r11(9).
The second case was Hall v Avon AHA [1980]1 All ER 516 in which the Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff cannot insist, as of right, upon having his own doctor present when the defendant's doctor examines him.
Limited exceptions were envisaged, for instance where the plaintiff is in a nervous state or confused by the effects of a brain injury or if the defendant's doctor is known to have a fierce cross-examining manner.
Also the plaintiff's doctor may be present if he has some active part to play, for example to explain a long and complicated medical history, his own diagnosis or to bring his own evidence up to date.
The note at para 25/6/2 of the White Book says "it is a sensible practice for the medical men on both sides to arrange a joint examination" , which is clearly a desirable practice and one more likely to lead to agreed medical evidence.
Where the medical examination that the defendant's doctor wants to carry out involves tests and the like, going beyond the usual type of physical examination, the plaintiff may not necessarily be entitled to object.
In Aspinall v Sterling Mansell Ltd [1981]3 All ER 866 it was said that there is a difference in kind between an ordinary medical examination and one involving experimenting or a diagnostic procedure.
Examinations involving the use of a hypodermic syringe, the administration of a drug or exploratory operations were ruled out.
In Prescott v Bulldog Tools Ltd [1981]3 All ER 869 the court adopted a more pragmatic approach by saying that if the defendant genuinely felt he needed an examination of the plaintiff which involved the risk of a real but  short-term injury, the court could balance the plaintiff's objections against the defendant's request to ensure a fair determination of the issues.
However, the defendant would have to agree to compensate the plaintiff for any such short-term injury caused, obviously regardless of the outcome of the litigation as a whole.
1.22 The automatic directions now provide for mandatory disclosure of the substance of expert evidence which is to be relied upon at trial within 10 weeks of close of pleadings.
Nevertheless, the mere submission to a medical examination does not entitle the plaintiff to see the report produced to the defendant as a result of that examination.
He will only be entitled to see it if the defendant has agreed to disclose it or, of course, if the defendant subsequently decides to rely on the evidence of the examining doctor.
The automatic directions confirm that only those reports on which it is intended to rely at trial need be disclosed.
Whether a requirement to disclose an ensuing report prepared for the defendant would be upheld by the court as a valid condition for granting an examination in the first place is not clear from McGinley v Burke [1973]1 WLR 990.
The condition may be upheld if the plaintiff had previously disclosed his reports or offered to disclose them in exchange for the defendant's reports (Clarke v Martlew [1973]QB 58) but even that is in doubt since Megarity v DJ Ryan & Sons Ltd [1980]2 All ER 832 in which it was said that the plaintiff cannot make it a condition precedent to granting a medical examination that the defendant must produce the ensuing report, since to do so would pre-empt the court's power to give directions as to expert evidence.
This can be disadvantageous to the plaintiff if, for instance, the defendant's report paints a gloomier picture than the plaintiff's report.
Therefore, the plaintiff's solicitor should, in any case involving substantial injury and continuing disability, attempt to agree to disclose his reports on the basis of mutual exchange for the defendant's reports.
A plaintiff is now required to serve a medical report with his statement or particulars of claim (see RSC Ord 18, r12(1A) and CCR Ord 6, r1(5) (a)) which apply to proceedings commenced on or after 4 June 1990 (see para 1.47 below).
If agreement for mutual exchange is not reached at an early stage, the defendant will have the advantage of first sight of at least one of the plaintiff's medical reports.
A further danger to avoid is agreeing in advance to disclose a particular medical report, or indeed any other sort of expert's report, before one has actually seen it.
The report might contain  some nasty shocks, so the formula to be used by both sides is to agree to disclose reports upon which they intend to rely at trial.
If they use this formula and then get a report they do not like and on which they do not intend to rely at trial, then they are not committed to disclose it.
It is often unwise for the plaintiff's solicitor to disclose the identity of the doctor who will be examining the plaintiff as a failure to disclose a report from a nominated doctor creates the obvious inference that the doctor did not support the plaintiff's alleged injuries.
1.23 As a result of the automatic directions or a direction for reciprocal disclosure of medical evidence, evidence is agreed in the majority of cases.
But even if there is agreement it is clear from Jones v Griffith [1969]1 WLR 795 that the plaintiff should still be prepared to call his doctor in, say, a serious head injury case so that the court can be guided on such matters as the management of the plaintiff or the epileptic risk.
A defendant whose doctor alleges that the plaintiff is malingering must be prepared to call that doctor at trial to make out the allegation and to face cross-examination.
He should not, as seems to have happened in Stojalowski v Imperial Smelting Corpn (NSC)(1976) 121 SJ 118, rely on a written report.
In Joyce v Yeomans [1981]2 All ER 21 the Court of Appeal said that although the impression made on the trial judge by expert witnesses is less important than that made by lay witnesses, it will still carry considerable weight.
1.24 Pursuant to the Queen's Bench Masters' Practice Direction of 29 November 1989, in order to save time at trial, copies of disclosed medical or other experts' reports upon which any party intends to rely (whether agreed or not) must be lodged by that party as soon after setting down as is practicable.
These reports will then go with the pleadings and form part of the documents for use of the trial judge.
The direction specifically requires (in para 4) that each report should state on the face of it the name of the party on whose behalf the expert has given the report, the date on which it is given (of course that can be avoided by the use of an indexed bundle), and whether or not it is agreed by the other parties.
1.25 Both sides should of course beware of "agreed" medical evidence that is, in fact, not agreed: orthopaedic reports on the one side referring to arthritic change being probable and on the other to its being possible; or neurologists' reports referring respectively to 10 per cent and 2 per cent epileptic risk are not "agreed" .
The doctors must be called to explain their differences.
Plaintiffs' solicitors should remember that the range of claimants  was extended by the decision of the House of Lords in McLoughlin v O'Brian [1982]2 All ER 298 to include, in that case, a wife and mother who suffered nervous shock on seeing her husband and children apparently badly injured in hospital after an accident and learning that one child had died.
In Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992]1 AC 310 the relevant principles for determination of who can claim damages for nervous shock were reconsidered and emphasis was placed on the need for a plaintiff to demonstrate particular ties of love and affection with the injured victim.
In Rourke v Barton [1982]CLY 793 the plaintiff's general damages took into account the fact that she had been prevented from nursing her terminally ill husband.
As the law stands, he of course has no separate claim, following the abolition of claims for loss of services by s2 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982.
Provisional damages
1.26 Some of the risks have been taken out of the system of "once and for all" compensation by s32A of the Supreme Court Act 1981 (Appendix B) and the corresponding s51 of the County Courts Act 1984.
They deal with awards of provisional damages where the plaintiff proves or the defendant admits that there is a chance that the plaintiff's health will change or will get worse because he may develop a serious disease or suffer a serious deterioration in his mental or physical condition.
It does not matter that the plaintiff cannot say when this is likely to happen.
The use of the word "chance" in s32A(1) suggests that the test is less than the balance of probabilities.
However, the anticipated deterioration must be clear, severable and go beyond ordinary or continuing deterioration (Willson v Ministry of Defence [1991]1 All ER 638).
The court can make an order for provisional damages at trial or on an earlier settlement, but the settlement must be approved even if the plaintiff is not under a disability.
The practice is dealt with in Ord 37, rr7 to 10 (see Appendix C) and Practice Direction (QBD)(Provisional Damages: Procedure)(1985) 5 July [1985]1 WLR 961.
There must always be a judgment whether the action is tried or settled and there are detailed provisions for the retention of documents by the court.
The important thing to remember is that the court will have no power to order provisional damages unless the plaintiff has pleaded a claim for it (RSC Ord 18, r8(3) and Ord 37, r8(1) (a)).
If an order for provisional damages is made, the court will make  an award of immediate damages excluding any for the risk that the plaintiff will develop the specified disease or suffer the specified deterioration.
Thus the plaintiff has to gamble either way.
He can still settle or ask the court to award damages on the old basis of including something for the future risk.
On the other hand, he can ask for provisional damages and get a lesser sum now which may seem unattractive even though he can go back for more later.
In Cowan v Kitson Insulations Ltd [1992]PIQR Q19 it was emphasised that the plaintiff should never be treated disadvantageously by reason of seeking a final award even if a provisional award appears suitable.
The court will assess a fair level of award recognising that if the risk materialises the plaintiff will be under-compensated and if it doesn"t, he will be over-compensated.
In many cases the problem could be solved by seeking an interim payment, which can take much of the urgency out of getting quantum tried.
What is certain is that the plaintiff's solicitor must not overlook the provisional damages machinery when advising a client whose medical prognosis is guarded or unclear.
Initially only the High Court had jurisdiction to award provisional damages.
County courts now have the same powers as the High Court under the County Court (Amendment No 4) Rules 1989 (which insert CCR Ord 22, r6A).
Accountants and actuaries
1.27 In any case involving serious and lasting injury, the plaintiff's solicitors may have to instruct an accountant to calculate past and future pecuniary loss.
As with any other expert's report the accountant's report will have to be disclosed as a condition precedent to calling him: the defendant's solicitor will be entitled to object to the expense of such evidence if it simply deals with calculations the plaintiff's solicitor could make himself.
Where the plaintiff was self-employed, in partnership or the director of a small company, the accountant's evidence may be essential to identify and evaluate the plaintiff's losses.
Where the fund of damages is likely to be substantial, including future nursing costs and the like as well as loss of earnings, an accountant's evidence can help the court to decide the multiplier, as well as the multiplicand, for example in the case of a one-man business where the accountant has been concerned with the accounts over a number of years and is in a position to give an expert opinion as to the future prospects of the business.
Actuarial evidence can also be helpful in such cases.
The Court of Appeal said in Sullivan v West  Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive [1985]2 All ER 134 that although the court has power to limit the number of medical or other expert witnesses, it has no power to bar a party from calling expert evidence including actuarial evidence provided he has complied with the rules.
The plaintiff will be at risk as to costs, if the court regards the actuarial evidence as unnecessary.
The court now takes judicial notice of the Actuarial Tables prepared by the Government Actuary and annexed to the Joint Working Party of Lawyers and Actuaries chaired by Sir Michael Ogden, QC; Docherty as Curator Bonis to O'Brien v British Steel Plc [1991]SLT 477, a decision of the Inner House in Scotland.
The Tables are set out in Kemp & Kemp, Vol I, p8023 et seq.
Courts in England and Wales now regularly take judicial notice of these Tables.
Architects and surveyors
1.28 A badly disabled plaintiff might need specially constructed or modified accommodation and a whole range of appliances to make his life more tolerable (see George v Pinnock [1973]1 WLR 118, Cunningham v Harrison [1973]QB 942 and Abdul-Hosn v The Trustees of The Italian Hospital (1987) unreported).
Architects and surveyors will have to be called to give evidence in support of, or to dispute, such claims.
Reports from such experts are subject to the same rules and privileges as medical reports but would be classed as non-medical experts so that directions will have to be sought in any type of personal injury case if a party wants to call more than one (see RSC Ord 25, r8 below).
Sullivan v West Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive applies to such reports as well.
Under s5 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982 (Appendix B), the saving to a plaintiff of his being maintained wholly or partly at public expense can be offset against his claim for future loss of earnings.
No such offset would apply to a plaintiff living in his modified home, but of course savings in board and lodging may be deducted from private nursing home or hospital fees (Shearman v Folland [1950]2 KB 43).
Nursing
1.29 The need for private nursing is chiefly a matter for medical evidence but the extent and likely cost can best be established by reference to expert evidence such as that available from the British Nursing Association or local nursing agencies whose addresses can be found in the Nursing Times.
Where the plaintiff is  paralysed, valuable advice and evidence as to appliances and nursing and other assistance can be obtained by contacting the Spinal Injuries Association of 5 Crowndale Road, London NW1.
Such a report was relied upon by Taylor J in Brown v Merton etc Area Health Authority [1982]1 All ER 650; and is now an almost invariable feature of serious paraplegic cases.
The need for qualified nursing, as opposed to help with housework or companionship, will arise only in the most extreme cases of severe disability (see Connolly v Camden and Islington AHA [1981]3 All ER 250; Croke v Wiseman [1981]3 All ER 852).
It is a wise precaution for the plaintiff's solicitor to ensure that the plaintiff is receiving this type of help before trial in order to emphasise the need for it.
Indeed, in extreme cases, it may be sensible to organise some form of help even before the nursing expert reports to avoid the argument that such help has only been obtained on the expert's advice.
In either case, finance can be arranged by interim payments if liability is not an issue.
In one case of mine, eventually settled for £300,000, the master ordered an interim payment of £125,000 to be paid in two instalments, the first of £75,000 to enable the plaintiff to buy a suitable bungalow and install a nurse, so that she could come out of hospital, and the second of £50,000 to ensure that nursing could continue to trial.
Both sides would be well advised to check what help is actually available from the plaintiff's local authority.
The court cannot refuse to award the cost of private necessary nursing or domestic help, even though State help may be available, when assessing special damage (see the Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act 1948, s2 (Appendix B)), but may take available State facilities into account when assessing future loss, following Cunningham v Harrison [1973]QB 942.
In Daly v General Steam Navigation Co Ltd [1981]1 WLR 120 the plaintiff housewife was awarded damages for the cost of future help as a measure of damages for her crippled arm even though she had no help up to trial and might have struggled on without it.
The plaintiff's solicitor should not overlook the value of gratuitous help given by the plaintiff's relatives or even friends for which damages can be included in the plaintiff's claim.
There is no need for any contractual agreement.
If the relative or friend gives up work to look after the plaintiff, the measure of damages is his or her loss of earnings, provided it does not exceed the commercial cost of the help provided.
If not the damages will be such that the plaintiff can make reasonable recompense to the relative or friend for "the proper and reasonable" cost of their services.
The damages should also take into account the possibility that the relative or  friend might become unable to provide the services.
The decision in Housecroft v Burnett [1986]1 All ER 332 provides very clear and comprehensive guidance as to what can be claimed in cases of serious injury.
Earnings
1.30 In a serious personal injury case or in a fatal case the initial calculations of loss of earnings or dependency may be made very soon after the accident, based on wage rates provided by the employers at that time.
Those rates may be completely out of date by the time a statement of the special damages claimed is drawn up, and even more so by the time the action is tried.
The plaintiff's solicitors must make regular checks (and it is a good idea for the defendant's insurers and solicitors to do the same) on the wage rates at regular intervals, and not only on the rates for the job that the plaintiff would have been doing but the rate for any job into which he might have been promoted but for the accident.
Benefits rates and totals should be regularly checked as well.
In a big case (perhaps three, four or even five years old) the rates may have increased very substantially between the issue of the writ and the date of trial; and that makes an enormous difference to quantum.
Of course the plaintiff's solicitor will have to bring his calculations up to date and if necessary amend the statement of special damages on service of further medical reports or before trial.
Pre-litigation Procedure
Discovery
1.31 Pre-litigation applications for discovery and inspection of particular documents are mainly relevant to liability.
They are now made in the High Court under s33(2) (i) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 and in the county court under s52(2) of the County Courts Act 1984.
The practice is in RSC Ord 24, r7A which also applies in the county courts.
The application must be against someone who is likely to be a party to proceedings but this can extend to cases where even the bringing of these proceedings depends on what is in the documents (Dunning v United Liverpool Hospitals' Board of Governors [1973]2 All ER 454).
The defendant's documents may be just as relevant and important as the evidence of eye witnesses as indeed can be the lack of such documents (see Coyle v Arnham Timber Co Ltd (1981) NLJ 367).
However, the court's power under the Supreme Court Act 1981, s34(2) and the County  Court Act 1984, s53(2) to order discovery by a non-party after proceedings have been commenced can be useful when difficulties arise in obtaining information from witnesses on quantum (for instance, an unco-operative employer).
Discovery under s33(2) is limited to personal injury cases.
In Shaw v Vauxhall Motors Ltd [1974]1 WLR 1035 the Court of Appeal gave valuable guidance to applicants for pre-litigation discovery of servicing and maintenance records of machinery and vehicles.
In that case a fork-lift truck with a fail-safe device failed; the plaintiff was injured and he had no idea what had gone wrong.
He would have been fighting blindly if he started proceedings without seeing the maintenance and servicing records of the fork-lift truck to see whether it had gone wrong before and what went wrong on this occasion.
In a case like this the applicant must, before issuing an originating summons, write to his opponent setting out the nature of his allegations and his information that the documents are relevant.
If he can satisfy the court (and this is the whole crux of the matter) that discovery would be likely to assist in the fair disposal of the case or in saving costs, discovery will be ordered.
The court must particularly bear in mind in the case of a legally aided plaintiff that it is in the public interest to have such an early disclosure, which might affect the bringing or continuance of legal proceedings; if discovery is ordered and it discloses that there is no case, then that is an end to it.
On applications for pre-action discovery the court will not take into account limitation defences unless the prospective plaintiff's claim is bound to be time barred (Harris v Newcastle-upon-Tyne Health Authority [1989]1 WLR 96).
Order 62, r6(a) states that the general rule is that the costs of pre-litigation discovery will usually be given to the respondent "unless the court otherwise orders" .
In Jacobs v Wessex Regional Health Authority [1984]CLY 2618 the respondents were ordered to pay the costs in any event where the plaintiff's solicitors had written letters to them referring to the reasonableness of their request for discovery, the relevant authorities and the saving in public expense from voluntary discovery to a legally aided plaintiff.
Similarly, in Hall v Wandsworth Health Authority (1985) 129 SJ 188 the court said that costs could be awarded when the respondents had been dilatory in answering the plaintiffs' solicitors' requests for discovery with no excuse and that leave to appeal from the master's order as to costs was not necessary.
1.32 Patients now have an entitlement to see their own medical records under the Access to Health Records Act 1990 which  came into force on 1 November 1991 and applies to records created after that date.
This new right could prove to be of particular utility in medical negligence claims.
The object of orders for discovery under the Supreme Court and County Courts Acts is to bring forward the time for the disclosure of relevant documents in a personal injury action by, to use the wording of RSC Ord 24, r7A, a "likely" party from the stage after action to the stage before action, and to require disclosure after the commencement of proceedings by someone who is not a party to the proceedings at all, eg, a health authority (Walker v Eli Lilley & Co (1986) The Times, 1 May).
In both instances earlier discovery might obviously give rise to great savings in costs.
Claims to privilege are the same as they would be on ordinary discovery.
In Campbell v Tameside Metropolitan BC [1982]2 All ER 791 the plaintiff was a teacher who had been assaulted by a pupil.
She sought discovery of psychiatric reports held by the defendants who were the education authority.
The application was defended on the basis that discovery would be contrary to public interest as the reports were highly confidential and the fact that they might be used in litigation would inhibit the doctors preparing such reports in the future.
The Court of Appeal said that public interest in non-disclosure for these reasons had to be weighed against public interest in justice being done.
The court could actually look at the documents in order to make a decision.
In Waugh v British Rail Board [1980]AC 521 the House of Lords decided that where a report, following an inquiry, had been prepared as much to prevent further accidents as to obtain legal advice about potential claims, it was not privileged because its sole or dominant purpose was not submission to a legal adviser in view of litigation.
In Lask v Gloucester Health Authority (1985) The Times, 13 December there was a similar decision relating to health authority accident reports required by various Health Circulars.
In McAvan v London Transport Executive (1983) 133 NLJ 1101 reports prepared by a bus crew and an inspector after an accident were held to be privileged as their dominant purpose was to ascertain blame if a subsequent claim was made.
Discovery will not be ordered of evidence prepared by someone who is not a party at the request of someone who is a defendant or potential defendant wanting to obtain legal advice, even though this amounts to the non-party sheltering behind the privilege of the defendant or potential defendant (Lee v South West Thames Regional Health Authority [1985]2 All ER 385).
Inspection etc of property
1.33 Similarly, even before proceedings are commenced application can be made to the court under s33(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 or s52(1) of the County Courts Act 1984 for an order for the inspection, photographing, custody or detention of property or for the taking of samples.
In Evans v Lufthansa Airlines (1981) NLJ 1166 the Shaw v Vauxhall Motors guidance was applied to this type of application.
The advantage of following it and the fact that costs will not always be awarded to the respondent in any event under Ord 62, r6(9) is illustrated by Jacobs v Wessex RHA and Hall v Wandsworth HA above.
Similar orders can be made after the proceedings have been commenced in respect of property not in the possession of any party to the proceedings under s34(3) of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
These are not restricted to personal injury or fatal accident cases.
The procedure on such applications is described in RSC Ord 29, r7A.
Litigation
Allocation and commencement of proceedings
1.34 Significant changes to the allocation of personal injury actions between the High Court and county courts have been introduced by the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 and the High Court and County Court Jurisdiction Order 1990.
The relevant county court jurisdiction is now unlimited.
Any personal injury action may be started in a county court.
Any proceedings which include a claim for personal injury or death must be commenced in a county court unless the value of the action is £50,000 or more.
Before a writ is issued in a personal injury action it must be endorsed with a standard form statement that the value of the action exceeds £50,000 (see Practice Direction (QBD)(Personal Injuries Action: Endorsement of Writ)(1991) 21 June [1991]1 WLR 642).
The relevant value of the action is the amount that the plaintiff reasonably expects to recover, or if there is more than one plaintiff, the aggregate amount.
In assessing the value of the action no account is to be taken of a possible but unadmitted finding of contributory negligence, costs or interest.
However, the value must be taken to include sums relating to state benefits which by virtue of s22 of the Social Security Act 1989 have to be paid to the Secretary of State.
In practice no deduction need be made from the  value of the claim on account of state benefits received.
Even where it is clear that proceedings be commenced in a county court, practitioners must concern themselves with quantum at the pleading stages.
County court actions will automatically be allocated for trial by a district judge unless the particulars of claim include a statement that the value of the claim exceeds £5,000.
The effect of the Order is that many personal injury claims which used to be pursued in the High Court must now be brought in a county court.
The point should also be made that practitioners facing potential limitation problems in claims valued at less than £50,000 can no longer employ the expedient of issuing a writ at the last moment before the limitation period expires.
In accordance with the county court rules, a request for the issue of a summons must be accompanied by particulars of claim, a statement of the special damages claimed and a medical report.
Therefore the preparation of the case must be well advanced by the date on which proceedings must be commenced.
The new provisions on allocation of personal injury proceedings should reduce the number of actions transferred from the High Court.
However, it should not be assumed that every action with a value in excess of £50,000 will be retained in the High Court.
Inevitably occasions will also arise when an initial valuation proves over-optimistic, for example where a plaintiff makes an unexpectedly good recovery.
Moreover some actions commenced before the new provisions came into effect on 1 July 1991 will have to be transferred.
The defendant or the court of its own motion can, under the Practice Direction (QBD)(Transfer of Proceedings to County Courts)(1991) 26 July [1991]1 WLR 643), apply to have the action transferred to a county court under the County Courts Act 1984, s40 (as amended).
The court itself will, under this Practice Direction, continue to scrutinise every action set down to see whether it is suitable for transfer.
Cases valued at more than £50,000 may well be transferred if they do not raise any important or complex questions of law or fact.
There is jurisdiction for actions valued at less than £50,000 to be transferred up to the High Court under ss41(1) or 42(2) of the County Courts Act 1984, although such transfers are likely to occur only in exceptional cases raising questions of general public interest.
Prompt commencement of proceedings is of importance for the maximisation of interest.
Although interest on general damages has now been reduced to 2 per cent following Birkett v Hayes [1982]2 All ER 710 and Wright v British Railways Board [1983]3 WLR 211, this interest is only recoverable from the date on which a writ has been served.
Indeed if a plaintiff delays his action unreasonably he may not even get his 2 per cent.
Initial steps in High Court actions
1.35 There is now only one composite form of writ which must bear the Royal Arms.
There must be a copy for service on each defendant and all service copies must be sealed as well as the original under Ord 10, r1 and accompanied by an acknowledgement of service form.
The plaintiff's solicitor has these alternatives to personal service, which no longer requires production of the original writ:(1) By ordinary first class post to the defendant's address (not by recorded delivery which would destroy the presumption of service),(2) By insertion through the defendant's letter box.
In both these cases, the presumption is of service seven calendar days after the date of posting or insertion.
In Hodgson v Hart District Council [1986]1 WLR 317 the Court of Appeal said that the presumption is rebuttable by evidence that the defendant actually received the writ sooner.
If the letter then comes back through the dead letter office, the plaintiff's solicitor should make his own application to set aside any interlocutory judgment he has signed.
(3) By service on the defendant's solicitor.
Order 10, r1(4) states that this mode of service is effected by the defendant's solicitor endorsing an acceptance on the writ, which means he must be sent the original as well as the service copy.
The note to this rule in the 1993 White Book suggests that service on the defendant's solicitors in England pursuant to an unqualified oral agreement by them to accept service is good service but points out that this practice of endorsement is unnecessary and unsafe since by itself it does not give notice of an intention to defend.
Duly completing the acknowledgement of service is recommended.
A writ can still be served on a limited company by sending it by first class post to the registered office, but following the Practice Direction (QBD)(Service of Documents: First and Second Class Mail)(1985) 8 March [1985]1 WLR 489 the presumption will be of service on the second working day after posting by first class post or the fourth working day after posting by second class post.
In either case "working day" means Monday to Friday and excludes bank holidays.
If the plaintiff's solicitor has to swear an affidavit of service he must specifically state that first class post was used, otherwise the court will presume it was second class post.
The first step in the proceedings taken by a defendant is now  governed by Ords 12 and 13 and has two functions—to acknowledge that he has been served with the writ and to give the plaintiff notice that he intends to defend the proceedings.
If he fails to do both the plaintiff will be entitled to interlocutory judgment.
However, it seems that if the plaintiff claims provisional damages, the defendant's failure to give notice of intention to defend does not entitle the plaintiff to sign judgment (Ord 37, r8(5)).
In such cases the procedure set out in the Senior Master's Practice Note of 14 April 1988 should be followed.
The acknowledgement of service enables the defendant's solicitor to correct any misnomer in the writ unless, of course, it is so fundamental that he might not accept service at all .
The time fixed for filing acknowledgement is 14 days from service of writ, including the day of service, an exception to Ord 3, r2(2).
This was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in British Oxygen Company v John H Pike (Meat Products)(1984) CAT 288.
Initial steps in county court actions
1.36 In a county court, proceedings are commenced by the plaintiff and entered in the court record by the court itself.
The plaintiff must file in the court office a request for the issue of a summons.
It must be accompanied by particulars of claim, a medical report and a statement of special damages together with a copy of those documents for each defendant.
If the plaintiff so desires and the proper officer so allows, the summons itself may be prepared by the plaintiff in which case a copy must be filed instead of a request.
There are prescribed forms of request for summons and of summons.
Personal injury actions, being default actions, can be commenced in any county court of the plaintiff's choice under CCR Ord 4, r2(1) (c).
The court has full discretion under Ord 16, r1 to transfer an action, on the application of either party, to a more convenient county court.
The court will automatically serve the defendant by post following receipt of the request for a summons unless the plaintiff otherwise requests.
In a personal injury action where the plaintiff prepares the summons it may now be served by the plaintiff's solicitor sending it by first class post to the defendant at the address stated in the summons under Ord 7, r10A.
Personal service is also permissible.
If the defendant disputes liability for the whole or part of the plaintiff's claim he must, under Ord 9, r6, within 14 days after service of the summons on him, deliver a defence at the court office.
If he fails to do so the plaintiff may request an interlocutory judgment for damages to be assessed.
Periods of limitation
1.37 Limitation in personal injuries actions is governed by the Limitation Act 1980 (see Appendix B) which consolidates previous statutes of limitation.
The basic limitation period is three years from the date on which the cause of action accrued or the date of knowledge (if later) of the person injured.
By s14, the date of knowledge is the date on which that person first had knowledge that his injury was significant; that his injury was attributable to the act or omission which is alleged to constitute negligence, nuisance or breach of duty; the identity of the defendant; and, if it is alleged that the act or omission was that of a person other than the defendant, the identity of that person and the additional facts supporting the bringing of an action against the defendant.
By s14(3) a person's knowledge includes knowledge which he might reasonably have been expected to acquire from facts observable and ascertainable by him or from facts ascertainable by him with the help of medical or other appropriate expert advice which it is reasonable for him to seek.
In Leadbitter v Hodge Finance Ltd [1982]2 All ER 167 the date of knowledge was taken as that when the police report of a motor accident became available.
The plaintiff was allowed to sue a second defendant, whose possible liability was revealed in the report more than three years after the accident.
The same time limits apply to claims under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 but knowledge is that of the dependant not the deceased (s12).
Where there is more than one, limitation is applied to them separately and not as a class (s13).
However, where the deceased allowed the s11 period to expire during his lifetime his dependants will not be able to rely on the s12 period.
Limitation for plaintiffs under a disability is three years from the end of their disability or death, whichever is first.
Knowledge is irrelevant.
The effect of this extended limitation is that, even where the next friend has started proceedings during the disability, the court will not strike them out for want of prosecution, since the minor or patient could start new proceedings when the disability ceases: Tolley v Morris [1979]1 All ER 71.
The court has a discretion under s33 to override the s11 or s12 limitation periods if it would be equitable to allow an action to proceed having regard to the prejudice to the plaintiff of applying the s11 or s12 periods against the prejudice to the defendant of not doing so.
This discretion can now be exercised by masters or district registrars as well as judges (RSC Ord 32, r9A).
Section 33(3) requires the court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case and in particular to:(a) the length of, and the reasons for, the delay on the part of the plaintiff;(b) the extent to which, having regard to the delay, the evidence adduced or likely to be adduced by the plaintiff or the defendant is or is likely to be less cogent than if the action had been brought within the time allowed by s11 or (as the case may be) by s12;(c) the conduct of the defendant after the cause of action arose, including the extent (if any) to which he responded to requests reasonably made by the plaintiff for information or inspection for the purpose of ascertaining facts which were or might be relevant to the plaintiff's cause of action against the defendant;(d) the duration of any disability of the plaintiff arising after the date of the accrual of the cause of action;(e) the extent to which the plaintiff acted promptly and reasonably once he knew whether or not the act or omission of the defendant, to which the injury was attributable, might be capable at that time of giving rise to an action for damages;(f) the steps, if any, taken by the plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other expert advice and the nature of any such advice he may have received.
Paragraphs (a) and (b) deal with matters affecting the extent to which the plaintiff and the defendant will be prejudiced according to whether or not the action is allowed to proceed.
Paragraphs (c),(e) and (f) deal with the question of whether a direction would be "equitable" .
The delay referred to in paras (a) and (b) is the delay between the expiry of the limitation period and the issue of the writ, and not the period between the beginning of the limitation period and the issue of the writ nor any period after the issue of the writ (Thompson v Brown [1981]1 WLR 751; Donovan v Gwentoys Ltd [1990]1 WLR 472).
It is clear from Thompson v Brown [1981]1 WLR 744 that the s33 discretion is unfettered and can include all relevant matters in balancing the prejudice.
The court can therefore have regard to the totality of the delay between the date of accrual of the cause of action and the date of issue of the writ, notwithstanding s33(3) (b) and (c) and is likely to pay particular heed to the length of any delay in first notifying the defendant of the claim against him, even if such delay occurred before the expiry of the limitation period,(Donovan v Gwentoys Ltd [1990]1 WLR 472).
The fact that the plaintiff may have a cast-iron claim against his own solicitor for the full damages which he could have recovered against the defendant, is only one and not an overriding factor.
In Davis v Soltenpur (1983) The Times, 16 February a writ was issued more than three years after the accident.
The master ordered the limitation issue to be set down for trial within 28 days, but it was not set down until ten months later.
The likely date of trial was seven years from the accident.
Section 33 discretion was refused having regard to three factors: the prejudice to the defendant, the unsatisfactory nature of a trial seven years later and the potential claim the plaintiff had against his solicitors.
It is also clear from Walkley v Precision Forgings [1979]1 WLR 606 and Chappell v Cooper [1980]2 All ER 463 that where the plaintiff commences an action during the primary s11 or s12 limitation period but then puts himself in a position where he cannot pursue it, for instance by letting his writ expire without service or delaying so much that his action is struck out for want of prosecution, the court will have no power to exercise s33 discretion, since it is the plaintiff's own action or default which has prejudiced him and not the operation of s11 or 12.
If he tries to start a second action, it will be struck out as an abuse of the process of the court.
In Deerness v John R Keeble & Son (Brantham) Ltd (1982) The Times, 18 October this rule was applied even though the defendants had made an interim payment after the plaintiff issued a writ which he subsequently failed to serve.
Where, however, the first action is a nullity, for instance because the plaintiff sues a limited company in liquidation without leave of the court, discretion may be exercised (Wilson v Banner Scaffolding (1982) The Times, 22 June).
Also it seems that if the plaintiff's first action is at risk of being struck out for want of prosecution, it is not an abuse of the process of the court to issue a second writ as there has been no disobedience of a peremptory order of the court (Bailey v Bailey [1984]RTR 167).
One of the nightmares of personal injury litigation is a defence blaming someone else who is not already a party, served after primary limitation has expired.
If there is any substance in the allegation the plaintiff must apply to join him as a defendant.
The question is whether the date of the joinder relates back to the date the proceedings were started, which would avoid the limitation argument.
The answer is in s35 of the Limitation Act 1980 under  which the new claim dates back to when the original writ was issued but not so as to defeat a limitation defence although the court can exercise discretion under s33 or RSC Ord 15, r6(6) which says that no one shall be added as a party after limitation unless the court directs that the period should not apply.
The plaintiff now seems to have the option of applying to join the new defendant in the existing proceedings as happened in Liff v Peasley [1980]1 All ER 623 or starting separate proceedings and relying on Thompson v Brown.
The question of whether a plaintiff's claim is time-barred by the Limitation Act does not fall to be considered until the point has been pleaded by the defendant, at which stage, if appropriate, the plaintiff may make an application for a direction under s33 (Kennet v Brown [1988]1 WLR 582).
1.38 Suppose time has slipped by and the plaintiff's solicitor suddenly discovers that limitation is on him; he can take comfort from the fact that the day the cause of action accrues is excluded from the three-year limitation period (Marren v Dawson, Bentley & Co Ltd [1961]2 QB 135).
Indeed if the three years and a day expire on a Saturday or a Sunday or a bank holiday, when one cannot issue a writ, the limitation period is extended until the next day on which one can (Pritam Kaur v S Russell & Sons Ltd [1973]QB 336).
Dozing defendants can take comfort from that as well because the same rule applies to filing acknowledgement of service.
A plaintiff has only four calendar months (six if leave to serve out of the jurisdiction is required under RSC Ord 11), in which to serve the writ and if he does not serve it within that period the fact that the last day is a Sunday, when it cannot be served, does not come to his aid.
Time is extended only if the act requires an attendance at the court office.
1.39 It is clear from Walkley v Precision Forgings that an unserved writ is worse than no writ at all.
It interrupts limitation only temporarily and does not start interest running.
The underlying reason for not serving the writ is frequently a fear of upsetting the insurers and of their consequently breaking off negotiations.
That is absolute nonsense.
The vast majority of insurers would regard it as a perfectly normal step for a plaintiff's solicitor to issue and serve a writ and, after acknowledgement of service by their solicitors, would call for the papers back and continue negotiations.
There is no point in leaving a writ unserved: it does not start interest accruing; it does not do anything but temporarily interrupt the limitation period.
It simply creates the need to make another diary entry which can be easily overlooked.
Renewal of writ
1.40 What adds additional force to this argument is that under the Rules of the Supreme Court writs can be renewed only for a good or sufficient reason (see Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Barbrak Ltd, "The Myrto" (No 3)[1987]AC 597).
Under the RSC (Amendment No 4) Order 1989 which amends Ord 6, r8, writs issued on or after 4 June 1990 may only be renewed by the court for a maximum of four months at any one time, unless the court is satisfied that it may not be possible, despite all reasonable efforts, to serve the writ within four months, in which case renewal of up to 12 months may be ordered.
In practice that will only occur if there are difficulties in serving the defendant (see, for example, Gurtner v Circuit [1968]2 QB 587, Howells v Jones (1975) 119 SJ 577, Sisknys v Hanley (1982) The Times, 26 May) or if there has been an express or implied agreement to defer service of the writ or the plaintiff's delay in serving it or renewing it has been induced or contributed to by the defendant's words or conduct (Heaven v Road and Rail Wagons Ltd [1965]2 QB 655).
The agreement must be clear or the inducement strong—not merely the making of an interim payment as happened in Deerness v John R Keeble & Son (Brantham) Ltd.
Delay caused by a failure of the legal aid authorities to act, or act reasonably may constitute good reason, but delay caused by the failure of the plaintiff or his solicitors to act promptly in applying for legal aid, or for the removal of a legal aid restriction, will not constitute a good reason (Waddon v Whitecroft-Scovill Ltd [1988]1 WLR 309).
A writ will not normally be renewed so as to deprive the defendant of the accrued benefit of a limitation period, and the court does not deal with the question of whether to renew a writ after expiry of the limitation period on the same basis as an application to disapply the limitation period under s33 of the Limitation Act 1980 (see para 1.37 above)(Waddon v Whitecroft-Scovill Ltd [1988]1 WLR 309).
Good reason must be shown for non-service (Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Babrak Ltd [1987]AC 597).
The mere fact that negotiations are continuing, in the absence of agreement between the parties to defer service, is not a good reason for extending validity (The Mouna (1991) The Times, 7 May).
An expired writ which has not been served creates such a fundamental defect in procedure that the court's wide powers under Ord 2, rr1 and 2 to cure non-compliance with the rules will not be exercised to treat it as valid for service or substituted service (Bernstein v Jackson [1982]2 All ER 806).
1.41 Even if the writ is renewed the plaintiff's troubles are not over.
Where a writ is served after its original period of validity has expired, even though its renewal period has not expired, the defendant may apply to set aside service and the order for renewal, which would of course have been made ex parte.
He no longer has to enter a conditional appearance, since that practice was abolished when acknowledgements of service were introduced, but must file his acknowledgement and give notice of intention to defend and then issue his application to set aside service and the renewal order within 14 days.
It appears that time can be extended under Ord 3, r5.
The duration of a county court summons is also four months (six months if leave is required to serve out of the jurisdiction under CCR Ord 8).
There are comparable provisions for renewal of a summons in CCR Ord 7, r20 and the same considerations apply to the exercise of the court's discretion.
Split trials in the High Court
1.42 One of the main reasons for delay in personal injury cases is the fact that the plaintiff's solicitor is waiting for a medical prognosis before being able to quantify the claim.
This uncertainty need not prevent the action being run up to setting-down provided the liability issue and special damages to date can be reasonably particularised and the plaintiff's injuries described.
The plaintiff's solicitor need not wait until it is all neatly tied up before serving a statement of claim (although note the operation of RSC Ord 18, r12(1A—C) in respect of proceedings commenced on or after 4 June 1990—see para 1.47 below).
However, a problem arises if the medical prognosis or prospects of employment are unclear by the time the trial is close.
If liability is not in dispute, the action can simply be stood out by agreement or an application made to the judge of the lists, or to the judge on circuit, for a standing-out order, or possibly an application made to claim provisional damages; but if liability is still in dispute the action must be tried and ought to be heard as soon as possible, irrespective of the uncertainties on quantum.
Application should be made for a split trial under Ord 33, rr3 and 4, under which liability can be tried first and quantum tried when the plaintiff's medical or employment position, or any other doubt on quantum, has been clarified.
The court now has a wide power in personal injury actions to order, of its own motion and at any stage in the proceedings, that issues of liability be tried before quantum (Ord 33, r4 (2A)).
1.43 It was said in Coenen v Payne [1974]1 WLR 984 (which  was a defendant's application for a split trial) that such a trial will be ordered whenever it is just and convenient, and not only in difficult and unusual cases, and in Ashworth v Berkeley Walbrood (1984) The Times, 13 July that the court can be asked to try a preliminary issue whenever there is a real probability that the effect will be to save time and expense and simplify the issues, which need not be limited to questions of law.
This procedure can be used by defendants, as happened in Coenen v Payne, to dispose of a plaintiff's claim which is weak on liability but difficult and complicated on quantum, so that substantial costs of investigating and defending it may be thrown away, particularly if the plaintiff is legally aided.
Where the plaintiff obtains such an order, the defendant may not be able to make an effective payment in.
He can protect himself under Ord 33, r4A by making a written offer to accept liability up to a specified proportion, which can be brought to the attention of the judge after he has decided the liability issue at trial.
Although the rule does not specifically say so it seems clear that the plaintiff can treat the offer as an admission of liability and apply to enter judgment with damages to be assessed when ready.
Clearly, he will be entitled to an interim payment.
The judgment given after the trial of a preliminary issue is not interlocutory even though quantum is still to be tried.
This means that the parties do not need leave to appeal from it (White v Brunton [1984]2 All ER 606).
Costs follow the event on the hearing of the preliminary issue so that a plaintiff who gets judgment on a preliminary trial of the liability issue will be entitled to his costs up to that point straight away, which is an advantage over simply getting an interim payment.
Service on insurers etc
1.44 Reference was made earlier to cases in which delay arose because a defendant could not be served and the fact that a writ would not necessarily be renewed in these circumstances.
In a running-down case it is quite simple to get round this problem.
The answer is in RSC Ord 65, r4, under which the court can, on an ordinary application for substituted service with the usual evidence of attempts, make an order for substituted service on the defendant's insurers or on the Motor Insurers' Bureau.
This has been the case since about 1965 (Gurtner v Circuit [1968]2 QB 587).
This is obviously a safer course than renewing the writ although it was said in Sisknys v Hanley (1982) The Times, 26  May that the fact that the plaintiff's solicitor could have but did not use this substituted service procedure was not a good reason for refusing renewal.
There seems to be no reason why the attempts to serve the defendant before applying for substituted service on his insurers or MIB should not be by post, but it is probably safer to try personal service.
A great advantage of using this procedure is that the court can order substituted service on MIB even where the defendant vanishes after the accident and is never found, provided he was properly identified.
If he gave a false name and address, substituted service will not be ordered, Clarke v Vedel [1979]RTR 26.
Substituted service on the MIB does of course mean that the case can be tried by the court under the adversary system and the plaintiff avoids the disadvantages of an application under the Motor Insurers' Bureau (Compensation of Victims of Untraced Drivers) Agreement.
It is now clear from Cooper v Motor Insurers' Bureau [1985]QB 575 that MIB's liability does not extend to a judgment obtained against the owner of a vehicle by the person actually using it who is injured because of its dangerous condition.
Pleadings
1.45 Pleadings in running-down cases are usually in common form and none more so than the defence—often a straight denial of everything the plaintiff claims, although Ord 18, r12(1) (c) requires that where a claim for damages is made against a party, a defence must contain particulars of any facts on which the party relies in mitigation of, or otherwise in relation to, the amount of damages.
Ord 18, r13(4) used to provide that allegations as to the amount of damages were deemed to be traversed unless specifically admitted.
The rule has now been revoked.
This is an important change in practice and unless denied, damages are now deemed to be admitted.
All pleadings must be on A4 paper.
Under RSC Ord 3, r3 they may be served during the Long Vacation including the month of August.
The advantage of serving a writ with statement of claim endorsed is that it can be served after 4 pm on a weekday or all day Saturday.
1.46 Given this formality of pleading it is easy to overlook the basic rule that what one does not plead one will not get at trial.
Convictions have to be strictly pleaded, and pleaded to.
If the defendant wants to allege contributory negligence (eg in the manner of the plaintiff's driving or his failing to wear a crash helmet or a seat belt, or his drinking) then it must be pleaded.
It was emphasised  in Fookes v Slaytor [1978]1 WLR 1293 that the court has no power to make a finding of contributory negligence if it is not pleaded.
In a Canadian case, Duchane v Davies [1984]CLY 2291, the defendant was denied a finding of contributory negligence against an infant for failing to wear a seat belt because she was too young and against her mother because he had failed to plead contribution or indemnity against her for failing to ensure that her daughter wore a seat belt.
Similarly, in Bowes v Sedgefield DC [1981]ICR 234 the defendants were not allowed to rely on a statutory defence at trial which they had not pleaded.
The same rule applies to quantum.
Under Ord 18, r8 the plaintiff must plead both the claim for provisional damages and the facts relied on to support it as specified by s32A of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
If the plaintiff is going to seek additional damages for loss of earning capacity this, too, must be specifically pleaded in order to give the defendant proper notice (Chan Wai Tong v Li Ping Sum [1985]2 WLR 396).
The plaintiff will not be allowed to give evidence at trial of any special damage not explicitly claimed in his pleadings or particulars (Ord 18, r12).
Therefore, where the plaintiff claims continuing loss of earnings or loss of dependency and the rate has changed, for instance because of salary increases, the defendant must be given notice of the plaintiff's intention to amend his statement of claim.
A letter written six months before trial was sufficient in Mumby v R R Taylor (Trading as Daisy Bus Service)(1976) SC Library Transcript No 459 and the plaintiff was allowed to amend at trial even though doing so meant the defendant's payment in was inadequate.
In Owen v Grimsby Cleethorpes Transport [1992]PIQR Q27 the Court of Appeal stated that it is not always necessary for the pleadings in personal injury cases to be amended each time a fresh medical report leads to developments in the case.
However, in that case the defendants had been aware of the plaintiff's medical evidence and to avoid possible objections at trial it is good practice to amend to plead any substantial changes to the plaintiff's claim.
1.47 RSC Ord 18, r12(1A-C) and CCR Ord 6, r1(5) apply to proceedings commenced on or after 4 June 1990.
A plaintiff is now obliged to serve with his statement of claim or file with his particulars of claim:(a) a medical report, substantiating all the personal injuries alleged in the statement of claim which the plaintiff proposes to adduce in evidence as part of his case at trial; and  (b) a statement of the special damages claimed, giving full particulars of the special damages for expenses and losses already incurred and an estimate of any future expenses and losses, including loss of earnings and pension rights.
If the required documents are not so served, the court may specify a time limit for providing them, or make such order as it thinks fit, including dispensing with the requirements or staying proceedings.
The Lord Chief Justice's Practice Note [1984]1 WLR 1127 still applies to High Court actions commenced before and after 4 June 1990 and requires the plaintiff to serve a schedule of particulars of any claims for loss of earnings, loss of future earning capacity, medical expenses, the cost of care, attention, accommodation or appliances or loss of pension rights on the defendant.
The time limits for doing so are not later than 14 days after the action appears in the Warned List in London, or the lodging of the Certificate of Readiness outside London.
The defendant has to reply in writing also within 14 days, confirming which items are agreed and at which figure, which items are not agreed and why, and giving his counter-proposals.
The plaintiff's solicitor should draw up the schedule in four columns, for item number, description, amount claimed and the fourth, blank, for the defendant's comments.
In complicated cases, the schedule can and should be drafted by counsel.
When the defendant has served his comments, the schedule should be lodged with the court, so that the trial judge can, before the hearing starts, get a clear picture of which of the issues raised in the case are agreed and which disputed and why from the pleadings, the experts' reports and the schedule.
The schedule is, of course, not intended to be a means of adding new heads or items of damage to the plaintiff's claim which have not already been pleaded.
The plaintiff will still have to make the necessary amendments to his statement of claim and, if he has left it this late to do so, may well find himself in difficulty over costs if the action has to be stood out or adjourned because the defendant has not been given adequate notice.
Finally, RSC Ord 18, r8(4) and CCR Ord 6, r1A make it clear that the plaintiff must specifically plead a claim for interest even though it is awarded automatically in personal injury claims unless the defendant can show good reason (see para 1.66 et seq).
Where either party gives particulars RSC Ord 18, r12(7) provides that both request and particulars must be incorporated in the same document and go into the bundle of pleadings immediately  after the pleading to which they refer.
Similar provisions apply in the county courts (see CCR Ord 6, r7 and Ord 9, r11).
Pleadings close 14 days after service of defence, reply or defence to counterclaim, even though a request for further and better particulars is outstanding.
This date is particularly important now, because it fixes the date upon which automatic directions apply in most personal injury actions and the time for discovery in all actions.
Discovery
1.48 Discovery in personal injury cases in the High Court, or at least in running-down cases, is an exception to the general rule for mutual discovery by both parties without order since the defendant in such cases is specifically relieved of any obligation to make discovery unless he is ordered to do so.
In relation to running-down cases or cases where liability is admitted automatic discovery is limited to disclosure by the plaintiff of any documents relating to special damages.
In the county courts discovery in personal injury cases remains mutual but in running-down cases or cases where liability is admitted, discovery is limited to documents relating to the amount of damages, and so in practice the defendant, unless the employer, is unlikely to have any documents to disclose.
In certain running-down cases, however, a defendant should be asked to make discovery (eg latent defect cases, where the plaintiff may want to see all his maintenance and servicing records; accidents alleged to have been caused by sudden and unexpected illness or death, where the plaintiff wants to see the medical records; and of course claims in nuisance against highway authorities and their contractors, where discovery can often reveal breaches of prescribed safety codes and bad accident records).
Medical or other expert reports that have been disclosed to the other side should not go in Sched 1, Pt1, of the list, even if they have already been disclosed to the other side, but always go in Pt2, otherwise one will lose the right to claim privilege for such reports.
(See generally as to the privilege attaching to medical reports: Worrall v Rich [1955]1 QB 296, and Causton v Mann Egerton (Johnsons) Ltd [1974]1 WLR 162.)
At a later stage one might, for some reason, want to prevent the other side using reports disclosed to them voluntarily as part of their case, and if they have been put in the wrong part of the list of documents the right to do so will have been lost.
In Earle v Medhurst [1985]CLY 2650 the plaintiff's claim to privilege for medical reports he had  disclosed in a previous action against a different defendant claiming damages for similar injuries was not upheld.
The obligation to give discovery of relevant documents is continuing, so that documents which come into existence or a party's possession after he has made formal discovery must be disclosed to the other side.
Payment into court
1.49 Payments into court are the defendant's finest weapon and they are not used often or effectively enough.
Sometimes insurers might feel that they can get a better deal at the doors of the court in a heavy case, and the identity of the judge allotted to that case can influence corridor negotiations pretty heavily, but an experienced plaintiff's solicitor with nothing much to worry about in court who has gone that far will strike a fairly hard bargain.
The payment in can be made any time after service of the writ or particulars of claim, and should be made at least 21 days before trial if it is to protect the defendant in costs.
Under RSC Ord 22, r3 or CCR Ord 11, r3 the plaintiff may accept a payment in as of right within 21 days of receipt of notice of the payment in, provided that the trial has not begun.
If a payment in is made less than 21 days before the trial, and is not accepted, the court is entitled to take the fact and amount of the payment in into account in exercising its discretion as to costs (King v Weston-Howell [1989]2 All ER 375), although it should be noted that in Bowen v Mills and Knight Ltd [1973]1 Lloyd's Rep 580 it was held that even one day less was not enough to protect the defendant in costs.
In Kinvig v Holland Hannen & Cubbitts [1977]CLY 373 an interesting situation arose because the plaintiff failed to beat a payment in but had his damages increased on appeal, although still not so as to bear the amount that the defendant had paid into court.
However, the Court of Appeal gave the plaintiff his costs of the appeal because it was unlikely that the defendant would have allowed him to take out from the sum paid into court an amount equal to the increased amount the Court of Appeal eventually awarded him.
Acceptance of a payment into court operates only as a stay of the proceedings.
In Buckland v Palmer [1984]1 WLR 1109 it was held to be an abuse of the process of the court for a plaintiff's insurance company to start a second action for insured losses when the plaintiff had accepted a payment into court in his action for uninsured losses.
The proper course was for the insurance company to apply to remove the stay in the plaintiff's action.
1.50 Once the 21 days for acceptance have passed or the trial has started the plaintiff can take the money in court only with the defendant's consent or by order unless the payment in itself was made or increased after the trial started, when he has two days to accept, but must do so before the judge begins to deliver his judgment (RSC Ord 22, r5; CCR Ord 11, r3).
The court will order the money to be paid out only if the risks are the same as they were when it was paid in and on terms protecting the defendant as to costs.
If the trial goes so badly that the plaintiff wants to take the money out during it he must, as was decided in Gaskins v British Aluminium Co Ltd [1976]QB 524, make an application to do so, and he must have the defendant's consent even to make the application.
An order for payment out will be needed whenever the money in court is accepted if it was paid in by one of two or more defendants.
If the plaintiff is under a disability settlement of the action has to be approved by the court under RSC Ord 80, r13 or CCR Ord 10, r10; so too if the claim is under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 as amended and more than one person is entitled to the damages even though no one is under a disability.
Under RSC Ord 22, r1(8) or CCR Ord 11, r1(8) the defendant can, and should, pay interest into court as well as damages.
The notice of payment in should specify whether interest is included but, it seems, need not itemise the amount.
At trial the judge will have to decide whether his award of damages and interest exceeds the payment in of damages and interest.
Where the plaintiff claims continuing loss the judge has to decide the issue by reference to interest on the loss calculated up to the date of payment in.
If the defendant has made an interim payment before he pays in, his notice must specifically refer to the interim payment and aggregate the two amounts if he is to put the plaintiff at risk for the total.
He can do this whether the interim payment was voluntary or under Order.
When making a payment into court in respect of an accident or injury occurring on or after January 1989 the defendant should first obtain a "certificate of total benefit" from the Department of Social Security.
This will state the gross amount of relevant state benefits paid to the plaintiff, for which the plaintiff must give credit and which the compensating defendant must reimburse the Department of Social Security.
In accordance with s93 of the Social Security Administration Act 1992 the defendant should deduct an equal amount from the payment into court, and furnish the court with a certificate of the amount so withheld.
Unnecessarily overcomplicated supplementary provisions require the payment into court to be treated as increased by the amount shown on the  certificate, although the plaintiff is not allowed to take out of court more than the amount actually paid in.
The plaintiff's advisers must therefore bear in mind that the amount that will be notified as having been paid into court will frequently be greater than the amount which the plaintiff is being offered in settlement.
The problem is largely ameliorated by amendments to the prescribed forms for giving notice of payment in which require the defendant to state the relevant deduction withheld.
The defendant is not bound to reimburse the Department of Social Security until he is notified that the money in court has been paid out to the plaintiff.
If the defendant makes a payment in without having obtained a certificate of total benefit he must apply for a certificate on the same day.
Relevant state benefits for which the plaintiff must give credit should still be estimated and deducted when fixing the amount to be paid into court before a certificate is received as the plaintiff will be entitled to take out the whole amount in court and the defendant remains liable to reimburse the Secretary of State.
The best course is to apply for the relevant certificate at an early stage.
In the county courts the defendant's position in costs can be protected by making a "Calderbank" offer which, provided a certificate has been applied for, will be effective for up to seven days after receipt of the certificate, by when it should be superseded by a payment in (CCR Ord 11, r10(3)).
The Supreme Court Funds (Amendment) Rules 1983 provide that any payment into court under Ord 22, r1 which is not accepted within 21 days will then be placed on deposit automatically and earn interest on a daily basis for each complete pound.
If the plaintiff is under a disability the money will remain on deposit until the settlement is approved.
There is no longer any need for the defendant's solicitor to apply to have the payment in invested when time for acceptance has expired, but it will now earn less on deposit than on short-term investment account.
There are similar provisions in the County Court Funds (Amendment) Rules 1983 but the transfer to deposit will be after 14 days.
In either case sums of £10 or less earn no interest.
Money in court belongs to the party who paid it in until it is accepted.
It follows that the defendant will be entitled to the interest it has earned on deposit up to the point of acceptance.
Where the plaintiff is under a disability, he cannot accept a payment into court without approval under RSC Ord 80, r11 or CCR Ord 10, r10 which is likely to take place later than the time limited for accepting the payment in.
The duty imposed by RSC Ord 22, r7 and CCR Ord 11, r7 not  to disclose a payment in to the trial judge until all questions of liability and damages have been decided is extended to the Court of Appeal by Ord 59, r12A.
It applies not only to the appellant's notice and respondent's counter-notice, but also to the copy documents lodged by the appellant under Ord 59, r9 including, of course, the transcript of the proceedings in the court below.
The exceptions to this rule are that the plaintiff can disclose the fact that there has been a payment in into court, and how much it is, on the hearing of an application for an interim payment (Fryer v London Transport Executive (1982) The Times, 14 December (see Kemp & Kemp, vol 1, para 14–066 for discussion of this case).
The other exception is that, under RSC Ord 22, r7(2), any party may bring the attention of the court to the fact that a payment in has or has not been made and the date (but not the amount) of such payment where the question of the costs of the issue of liability falls to be decided, that issue having been tried and an issue of question of quantum remaining to be tried separately.
In "A" Ltd v "B" Ltd [1992]CLJ p263 H H Judge Davies QC, dealing with Official Referee's Business, declined to follow Fryer's case, purporting to distinguish it and holding the relevant passages of the Court of Appeal's judgments to have been obiter dicta.
He was clearly wrong.
The relevant passages formed part of the Court of Appeal's ratio decidendi and the case cannot sensibly be distinguished.
Had the matter been res integra, there is much to be said in favour of Judge Davies QC's reasoning.
As we have seen, defendants can protect themselves by making written offers when they cannot make an effective payment into court because they are faced with a split trial.
There is a similar procedure available to a defendant faced with a claim for provisional damages.
Under Ord 37, r9 the defendant can make a written offer to the plaintiff tendering a sum in satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim on the basis that he will not suffer the disease or deterioration claimed and identifying the disease or deterioration in question and agreeing to the court making an award of provisional damages.
He can, of course, also make a payment into court, but the difficulties of calculating it are obvious and he would probably have to pay in more than the value of the claim for immediate damages to tempt the plaintiff.
Interim payments
1.51 Interim payments are one of the most important procedural developments in personal injury cases in recent years.
They  are used far too infrequently by plaintiffs' solicitors and are resisted, unfortunately, by many insurers.
The practice is contained in RSC Ord 29, rr9—18 which apply (with minor amendments) in a county court by virtue of CCR Ord 13, r12.
1.52 A payment will be ordered, of course, if liability is admitted on the pleadings.
It seems that the admission need not be an express one and that if, for instance, a plaintiff has pleaded a relevant conviction and the defendant admits it and does not claim that it was erroneous or irrelevant, the plaintiff should get his interim payment.
An interlocutory judgment will certainly enable the plaintiff to get an interim payment as will a judgment on liability tried first (ie when a split trial has been ordered).
1.53 Finally, a plaintiff will obtain an interim payment if he can satisfy the court on the balance of probabilities that he will recover substantial damages at trial from the defendant or, where there are two or more defendants, from any given defendant (Breeze v McKennon (1985) 32 Build LR 41; Ricci Burns Ltd v Toole [1989]3 All ER 478).
If he can show this, then the onus will be on the defendant to prove that the plaintiff's claim will fail or be so reduced by contributory negligence that the damages he is likely to recover will not be substantial.
Now that, following Fryer v LTE (see para 1.50), a payment into court can be disclosed on an interim payment application, a defendant who has paid anything more than a small proportion of the value of the plaintiff's claim into court will find it difficult to resist the application on this ground, especially as the court will usually order the interim payment to be paid out of the money in court.
Proof of hardship is not a condition precedent as emphasised by the Court of Appeal in Schott Kem Ltd v Bentley & Ors [1990]3 WLR 397 which disapproved the then current practice of limiting awards to sums for which the plaintiff could show a need.
In assessing a just amount the court will obviously take account of the fact that the plaintiff has incurred or will incur specific expenditure eg private medical treatment (and see para 1.60).
An interim payment can only be ordered against a person who is insured in respect of the plaintiff's claim, a public authority, or a person whose means enable him to make the payment.
1.54 An interim payment is, in effect, a payment in advance of the plaintiff's own money to which he is entitled.
Obviously he is entitled to it if he has got a good case.
Thus an interim payment will be made directly to a legally aided plaintiff.
The only exception to the rule is when the plaintiff is under a disability, when  of course the interim payment has to be approved and directions given about how it is to be applied.
The time limit for an application for interim payment is any time after the plaintiff has served his writ and the time for acknowledgement of service has expired.
1.55 The summons and supporting affidavit should be served together ten clear days before the return date (Ord 29, r10)(seven days before the hearing of the application in a county court).
The form and content of the affidavit are very important.
It must be like an Ord 14 affidavit in the sense that it has to be sworn by the plaintiff or someone authorised to do so (eg his solicitor or legal executive) and if it is sworn by someone other than the plaintiff, the affidavit has to state specifically that the deponent is duly authorised by the plaintiff to make the affidavit on his behalf.
The affidavit must verify that the defendant falls within the categories in Ord 29, r11(2) and the amount of the damages to which the application relates and contain enough information to enable the master or district judge to reach a preliminary valuation of the claim (because he has got to order a part of it to be paid to the plaintiff).
Thus the medical reports on which the plaintiff intends to rely must be exhibited.
Special damages must be calculated to date and verified by exhibiting vouchers (eg employers' letters).
The best way to treat special damages is to deal with each item of special damage in a separate paragraph and to have a final paragraph totalling them all up and giving a global figure.
1.56 If it is a fatal accident case, full details of the dependants and the loss of dependency up to the date of the application must be included.
This must be calculated just like special damage and must be verified by exhibits in the same way.
It is not sufficient for the plaintiff merely to refer to his affidavit to the statement of claim or statement of special damages for the calculations of special damage.
Those calculations might be out of date by the time the application is made.
Indeed, if he tries to deal with the application on that basis the affidavit may be considered defective and the application may fail.
The affidavit is not specifically required to deal with future loss but it is advisable to indicate what items are continuing so that the master or registrar has a global view of the case.
Paragraph 29/10/1(f) of the 1993 White Book recommends that the affidavit should explain why the plaintiff needs an interim payment and details should be given of any special needs and hardship.
This remains good practice although an affidavit which failed to do so would not be defective.
1.57 There are three grounds for defending the application.
The first is that the plaintiff's solicitor has the practice wrong.
The second is that the plaintiff is unlikely to recover substantial damages.
1.58 It is not enough for the defendant to argue that he denies liability or denies a conviction in his defence; he must also show that his grounds for doing so are sufficiently strong to put the plaintiff at risk of either complete or substantial failure at trial or that, on the face of it, the plaintiff's claim is not worth very much even on full liability.
A defendant who relies on this ground would be wise to file an affidavit in answer to the plaintiff's affidavit and not leave all the argument to the application itself.
1.59 The third ground for defending an application is that the defendant from whom the interim payment is sought is not a person who appears to the court to fall within one of the categories listed in Ord 29, r11(2), namely:(a) a person who is insured in respect of the plaintiff's claim;(b) a public authority; or (c) a person whose means and resources are such as to enable him to make the interim payment.
As suggested in earlier editions of this book, a defendant does not fall within either category (a) or (c) solely because the MIB is obliged to meet any unsatisfied judgment which the plaintiff may obtain against him (Powney v Coxage (1988) The Times, 8 March).
The MIB itself does not fall within the categories specified in Ord 29, r11(2) and no interim payment can be ordered against it.
1.60 It is impossible to give any clear indication of what level or percentage of the damages the interim payment will be.
Order 29, r12(1) simply states that the interim payment should be just and not exceed a reasonable proportion of the damages that the plaintiff is likely to be awarded.
The note at para 29/11/2 of the 1993 White Book now gives some further guidance.
In practice, if the application succeeds special damages up to the anticipated date of trial will certainly be awarded.
Moreover, contrary to some earlier decisions by masters, an interim award does not depend on need.
If it is clear that in any event the plaintiff is entitled to a substantial sum, a reasonable proportion of such sum may be awarded whether or not the plaintiff is in immediate need of it (Schott Kem Ltd v Bentley & Ors [1991]1 QB 61).
If the plaintiff is under a disability, the interim payment will usually be only for sums needed by the next friend to maintain the plaintiff and cover expenses until trial.
1.61 Second or subsequent applications for an interim payment can be made even if the first one failed.
1.62 As we have seen, when the defendant pays into court after making an interim payment, he must ensure that this notice of payment in states that the interim payment has been taken into account (Ord 29, r15) if he wants to put the plaintiff on risk for the aggregate of the two payments.
If he pays in first and then has to make an interim payment and he wants to make that payment out of the money in court, he must ask specifically for leave to do so and also to amend his notice of payment in so as to refer to the fact that some of the money has been paid out.
Where the defendant has made a voluntary interim payment before proceedings, the plaintiff must still plead the whole of his claim including any special damage for expense paid for by the interim payment.
If he does not, and the defendant aggregates the interim payment with his payment into court, as he is entitled to, the plaintiff will be doubly put at risk.
The court has the power to include interest on an interim payment but will rarely do so.
There is no provision for it to order a payment on account of costs.
1.63 The trial judge will deduct the interim payment from the final award for damages.
The way this is done can affect the award of interest.
If the interim payment was specifically assigned to one head of damage (eg on account of nursing services or the cost of a specially modified bungalow for a quadraplegic) there is no difficulty, and the note at para 29/11/2 of the 1993 White Book encourages the court to assign the payment to special damages to simplify the calculation of interest at trial.
1.64 In Chambers v Karia where the order had not assigned the payment to any particular head of damage the whole of the interim payment was deducted just from special damages and not applied pro rata to all the heads of damage awarded, which does seem to be the correct approach.
Difficulties can arise when there is more than one defendant.
Order 29, r17 provides for adjustment at trial between a defendant who has made an interim payment and his co-defendants who are found liable to the plaintiff.
The court must bear the difficulties which may arise then in mind when deciding whether to order a payment at all and, if so, from whom (Breeze v McKennon & Son (1985) 32 Build LR 41).
The court's jurisdiction to make joint and several orders against several defendants in respect of the same liability and the same sum was upheld in Schott Kem Ltd v Bentley.
The court must, of course, be satisfied as to the liability of each of the defendants against whom  the order is made and payment of the whole award by one defendant will relieve the others of their liability.
1.65 By s50 of the County Courts Act 1984 and CCR Ord 13, r12, the County Court has power to order interim payments in cases where the plaintiff claims more than £500.
As in the High Court the power is not limited to personal injury cases.
The procedure in Ord 13, r12 is the same as that in the High Court save that the summons and affidavit have to be served not less than seven days before the return date of the application.
Interest
1.66 The plaintiff's right to interest on damages in personal injury cases is now conferred by s35A of the Supreme Court Act 1981 and s69 of the County Courts Act 1984.
It is mandatory for the court to award interest where judgment is given for personal injuries or death which exceed £200 unless the court is satisfied there is a special reason.
This section makes two important changes.
The first is that it now seems the £200 must all be for personal injury or death and not just include such damages.
The second is that there is no longer any reference to a "trial" of the issues.
This resolves any remaining doubt about whether the court has power to award interest on an interlocutory judgment whether on default or acknowledgement of service, notice of intention to defend or pleading or on an admission of liability.
RSC Ord 18, r8(4) provides that the plaintiff must specifically plead his claim for interest in a statement of claim (CCR Ord 6, r1A corresponds).
Contrary to the suggestion in para 18/8/10 of the 1993 White Book, it has been held that a claim for interest under s35A is sufficiently pleaded even if it only appears in the prayer and not also in the body of the pleading (McDonald's Hamburgers Ltd v Burgerking (UK) Ltd [1987]FSR 112).
It is probably wise to include a prayer for interest in the general endorsement on the writ as well, if it is to be served separately, although there is no requirement for such a writ to include a claim for interest (Edward Butler Vintners Ltd v Grange Seymour Internationale Ltd [1987]131 SJ 1188).
The wording should be "…and interest to be assessed pursuant to s35A of the Supreme Court Act 1981" or 's69 of the County Courts Act 1984"if the proceedings are in that court.
1.67 The original working rules for courts when awarding interest were laid down by the Court of Appeal in Jefford v Gee  [1970]2 QB 130, but have been modified in Cookson v Knowles [1979]AC 556; Pickett v British Rail Engineering Ltd [1980]AC 136; Birkett v Hayes [1982]1 WLR 876 and Wright v British Railways Board [1983]AC 773.
The principle remains the same, however, which is that the trial judge must itemise the award of damages and the appropriate rates and periods for interest.
The rules at present are as follows:(1) General damages for pain and suffering.
2 per cent from service of writ to judgment (see Birkett v Hayes, confirmed by the House of Lords in Wright v British Railways Board).
(2) Damages for bereavement.
This head of damage was created by the Administration of Justice Act 1982, s3 which inserts a new s1A in the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
That section gives claims for bereavement to the deceased's wife or the parents of a legitimate, or mother of an illegitimate, unmarried minor.
The sum is presently £7,500.
Interest is payable at the full rate from the date of death (Prior v Hastie [1987]CLY 1219; Khan v Duncan (1989) unreported, Popplewell J).
(3) Special damages or past loss of dependency under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
The general rule is that interest is awarded at half short-term investment account rate from accident to trial (Jefford v Gee [1970]2 QB 130).
This approach is designed to cover cases where the bulk of the special damages comprises separate items of loss (eg weekly wages) occurring fairly regularly throughout the period from accident to trial.
It is not satisfactory where a significant separate item of loss is incurred at a particular time.
In Prokop v DHSS and Another [1985]CLY 1037, May LJ stated the relevant principle clearly in the following passage: On the facts in Jefford v Gee the relevant loss of earnings continued throughout from accident to trial, and indeed went on thereafter…it is, I think, quite clear from the judgment, and indeed from the application of arithmetical commonsense, that the half-rate approach there referred to is only applicable to cases where the special damages comprise more or less regular periodical losses which are continuous from the date of the accident to the date of the trial; these are more often than not lost earnings.
If there is any general view in any quarter that the interest on special damages is in any event to be calculated at half-rate, when the losses do not continue from accident to trial, then I think that this is wrong and should not hereafter be followed.
We submit that this approach is preferable to the subsequent decision of the Court of Appeal in Dexter v Courtaulds Ltd [1984]1 WLR 372 which was given in ignorance of the earlier decision in Prokop.
In any event, practitioners should heed the advice given by Lawton LJ in Dexter's case.
Where a plaintiff contends that his is a case justifying a departure from the general approach that contention, and the facts relied upon to support it, should be pleaded.
(4) Future loss.
No interest at all, as the plaintiff has not suffered the loss by the date of trial and accordingly been kept out of his money.
(5) Interest is not taxable whether it forms part of a judgment debt or a payment in or a settlement (Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988, s329).
Automatic directions
1.68 Automatic directions now apply to the interlocutory stages of most personal injury actions in the High Court and personal injury actions in a county court.
The automatic directions, as previously stated, do not apply to Admiralty actions and High Court medical negligence actions.
The automatic directions are to be found at RSC Ord 25, r8 and for the county courts at CCR Ord 17, r11 (see Appendix 0).
They have the same force as an order of the court although they are not peremptory.
They establish a conventional pattern and timescale for basic interlocutory stages in personal injury litigation.
In the High Court and county courts express provision is made allowing any party to apply to the court for different directions, a provision which should not be overlooked, particularly given the new provisions for early exchange of witness statements, if there is good reason for departing from the normal rule (see RSC Ord 25, r8(3), CCR Ord 17, r11(4)).
Before considering the automatic directions, it is as well to remember that (although they will be sufficient in most instances) they are only the bare bones of the directions the parties may need in a personal injury case, and do not prevent the parties seeking any further directions they may need under Ord 25 whether set out in PF51 or not.
Examples of such additional directions are for amendment of pleadings, further and better particulars, discovery by a defendant excused from this step under Ord 25, r8, more medical or other experts than Ord 25, r8 allows, trial out of London or not at the  trial centre for the District Registry in which the action is proceeding.
1.69 The automatic directions provided for by RSC Ord 25, r8 come into effect at close of pleadings which is 14 days after service of defence, reply, or defence to counterclaim, and are as follows (material differences in the corresponding CCR Ord 17, r11 are noted):(1) Discovery within 14 days (28 days in a county court) and inspection of documents within seven days after (see para 1.48 above in relation to actions in which liability is admitted or actions arising out of a road traffic accident).
(2) Experts' evidence.
The parties have to disclose, within 14 weeks, the substance of the experts' evidence on which they intend to rely, in the form of written reports to be agreed if possible.
Where both parties intend to rely on experts there should be mutual exchange, medical for medical and non-medical for non-medical.
Unless the reports are agreed, the parties are at liberty to call experts whose reports have been disclosed, limited to two medical experts and one non-medical expert of any kind.
In the county court there is no positive obligation to disclose expert reports but the right to adduce expert evidence is lost unless disclosure is made within 10 weeks.
Failure to disclose means that the leave of the court or agreement of the other parties must be obtained before expert evidence can be adduced.
(3) Witness statements.
Each party has to serve within 14 weeks (10 weeks in a county court) written statements of all such oral evidence which they intend to adduce. (4) Photographs, sketch plans and the contents of any police accident report shall be receivable in evidence and must be agreed if possible.
(5) Setting down within six months (see below for the equivalent county court provisions).
(6) Venue.
Trial in London if the action is proceeding there or trial at the trial centre designated for the District Registry in which the action is proceeding, unless the Crown is a party.
(7) Mode of trial will be by judge alone in category B, which is a case of substance or difficulty.
(8) The estimated length of trial must be notified to the court on setting down.
The rule requiring automatic exchange of witness statements in personal injury actions came into effect on 16 November 1992 and  is one of the single most significant changes in the pattern of litigation to have taken place in recent years.
Exchange of witness statements is to be the norm in all actions, not just personal injury actions.
In the High Court supplementary provisions dealing with witness statements are to be found in RSC Ord 38, r2A(4)—(16)(see Appendix C) and in the county courts in CCR Ord 20, r12(A) (4)—(16).
Evidence will now have to be prepared at a much earlier stage.
The normal course of trials is likely to be different as the court will often direct that a witness statement stand as the evidence in chief, or at least part of the evidence in chief, of its maker and, in any event, a witness statement may put to the maker in cross-examination.
Where a party fails to comply with the direction for exchange of witness statements, he will not be entitled to adduce evidence to which the direction related without leave of the court (RSC Ord 38, r2A(10)).
Although the rules do not make this absolutely clear it would be extraordinary if they were interpreted as preventing a party from adducing any oral evidence, even that which had been set down in witness statements served in compliance with the direction, simply because he attempts to adduce additional oral evidence at trial which he should have included in an earlier witness statement.
Nonetheless the parties may stand or fall by the evidence as disclosed in their witness statements, although a witness will always be free to give evidence in relation to new matters which have arisen since the statement was served on the other party.
The direction only applies to evidence which a party "intends to place reliance on" and so cannot apply to new evidence which only comes to light after the time for serving statements has passed.
RSC Ord 38, r2A deals with the form of statements.
Where a party is unable to obtain a written statement from an intended witness it will probably be necessary to apply to the Court for directions.
Where the maker of a witness statement served on the other parties is not called at trial, no other party can put the statement in evidence.
Although no specific provision is made by the rules it can be anticipated that a practice of serving supplementary or additional witness statements will arise in cases in which the evidence cannot be finally settled at an early stage, a paradigm example being personal injury cases in which there may be a permanent or continuing disability or a slow recovery.
Practitioners concerned that the other parties may hold back supplementary evidence unless obliged to serve supplementary witness statements can attempt to agree arrangements for exchange of  further statements and apply to the court for appropriate directions in the absence of agreement.
In a county court, unless a hearing date has already been fixed, the plaintiff should request the court to fix a day for the hearing within six months of the close of pleadings (CCR Ord 17, r11(3) (d)).
Although the effect of that direction is not peremptory, the plaintiff must be sure to request a hearing within 15 months of close of pleadings.
If he does not the action will be automatically struck out in accordance with CCR Ord 17, r11(9).
Failure to make the request will be fatal to the plaintiff's claim if the relevant limitation period has expired, unless an extension of time is granted.
It is uncertain whether an application for extension of time can possibly be made once an action has been automatically struck out.
Pursuant to the Practice Direction (Transfer of Action)[1991]WLR 643 (see para 1.35), every action set down under automatic directions will be examined within seven days by a master to determine whether a transfer should be considered.
If the master feels that a transfer should be considered, he will direct the court to give notice to the parties to attend court for consideration of the matter.
1.70 The following points should be borne in mind.
It is still necessary to issue a summons for directions in an admiralty or medical negligence case.
It may be necessary in any other type of personal injury case.
The important difference is that the party who issues a summons for directions in a case to which automatic directions apply must be prepared to justify his summons or run the risk of losing his costs of doing so.
The time limit for setting the action down for trial runs from close of pleadings so that it is possible to set the action down the day after the plaintiff's solicitor sends off his list of documents.
Automatic directions under RSC Ord 25, r8 will apply to claims for provisional damages when they are at the immediate damages stage, unless the plaintiff wants to call more than two medical experts.
The plaintiff must issue a summons for directions after he has given three months' notice under Ord 37, r10 that he intends to apply for further damages.
Experts
1.71 Personal injury cases are unique in that they almost always involve at least one expert: the doctor.
As we have seen  they may involve other types of expert as well.
Under Ord 38, r36 (see Appendix C), neither party may adduce expert evidence, whether medical or non-medical, at trial unless one of the conditions imposed by the rule is fulfilled.
Hence expert evidence is inadmissible unless:(i) the automatic direction, or a specific direction, relating to expert evidence has been complied with; or (ii) all parties agree to it; or (iii) the court gives leave; or (iv) the evidence can be given by affidavit.
Order 38, r40 has been revoked and the evidence of motor engineers is no longer treated differently to that of other experts.
1.72 When automatic directions apply, the court will not now have the opportunity to consider the admissibility of experts' evidence before the trial.
Even when it has that opportunity, because directions have to be sought, it is clear, as we have seen above from Sullivan v West Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive, that it has no power to exclude such evidence at the interlocutory stage other than to limit the number of witnesses.
In Burton v Chemical Vessel Services [1984]CLY 1527 the defendant was granted leave to call two engineers in an industrial injury case, even though one of them had originally been instructed by the plaintiff.
The spirit of Ord 25 was to save time and costs and there was no evidence that two similar experts would waste either.
1.73 In a medical negligence case, where a summons for directions is necessary an application for a direction in relation to expert evidence should ordinarily be made at the hearing of the summons for directions (see 1993 White Book, para 38/36/1).
If an application is not made the court will consider matters relating to expert evidence of its own motion (RSC Ord 25, r3(1) (a)).
The court should not limit the number of medical expert witnesses dealing with liability or order disclosure of their reports prior to trial.
1.74 It is now clear from Ollett v Bristol Aerojet Ltd [1979]1 WLR 1197 that the substance of an expert's report, which the rules require the parties to disclose as a condition precedent to calling him at trial, includes his opinion, which is, after all, the whole reason for calling him.
Although the usual direction relating to expert evidence, where both sides will rely on such evidence at trial, is for mutual exchange (Aston v Firth Brown [1984]CLY 1520), the court is not precluded from ordering sequential disclosure where it is desirable to do so (Kirkup v British Rail Engineering Ltd [1983]1 WLR 190).
1.75 An important point of practice was recently considered by Turner J in Groome v Norman Motors (Wallisdown) Ltd on 3 July 1992.
A personal injury claim was commenced in the High Court when, in accordance with the High Court and County Court Jurisdiction Order 1990, it should have been brought in the county court, a fact which the person bringing the case in the High Court knew or should have known.
The action was struck out, Turner J holding that that course of action was mandatory by virtue of s40(1) County Courts Act 1984.
There was no discretion to allow the case to proceed by transfer to the county court.
[This chapter, substantially amended by Peter Mantle, Barrister in this 5th edn, was originally written by Mr Alan Hughes, Solicitor, in 1979.]