

 "Do androids dream of electric sheep?" 
Isomorphic relations in reading science fiction
Peter Stockwell
Abstract
A principle of isomorphism is identified as a feature of the reception of texts in the reading process.
Principally a mapping of elements or domains, this can be seen to underlie the textual features of explicit surface metaphors, implied metaphors, metaphoric readings of texts, perceived co-operation and coherence.
The latter two levels are less obvious examples of isomorphic phenomena, and a model is adapted and developed to explain the pattern-matching involved in resolving meaning from a reading of a text.
This resolution of meaning is seen as an effortful activity on the part of the reader, which is balanced against the likely pay-off in terms of satisfaction gained from the reading.
The theoretical perspective of reader reception is supported by practical reader-response experiments on science fictional texts.
The results of these are reported in terms of the isomorphic procedures already outlined.
It is observed that the characteristics of readers determine readings as much as the characteristics of texts.
Keywords: coherence; co-operation; cost; Dick, Philip K.; isomorphism; metaphor; pay-off; reading; reception; satisfaction; science fiction
1 Introduction
Science fiction is typically larger than life, and so perhaps articles dealing with it should be cosmic in scope.
That cannot be promised here, though a holistic perspective is taken on literary stylistics in addressing science fiction.
This approach follows van Dijk (1977) in regarding not only sentences but also textuality as the proper study of linguistics.
In this, continental European researchers have generally been more broad-minded than those in Britain, and it seems to me a view that should be adopted more widely.
Linguistics ought to be simply the study of language, and if the pragmatic, cognitive and procedural dimensions of language study which have become apparent in recent years mean that linguistics (as an institution and a discipline) has to take these dimensions on board, then so be it.
This article will also be concerned with empirical approaches to literary response (also more common practice in the rest of Europe than in the UK).
Empiricism is principally the use of replicable experimental techniques, applied to texts.
The vast majority of empirical investigation in the area of textuality has been psychological in orientation and based on the responses of readers.
 "Readers', in this case, usually means large population-samples of" ordinary people", rather than a few professional readers (critics, reviewers, literary academics, professors and the like).
The motivation and advantage of using such a method as a research tool is that it finds a middle way between idiosyncratic subjectivism and claims to objectivity that have been increasingly questioned in the past twenty or so years (by writers from Derrida (1975) to Lakoff (1987)).
The middle way seeks to formalise, or at least make explicit, normative patterns in the general activity of reading.
It seeks a consensus among analysts which can be accessed by publishing the "raw" data and the methodology, which is thus available for validation by replication.
However, if there is anything clear in the muddied waters of postmodernism, it is that there is no such thing as "raw" data.
Information is always and only perceptible in one configuration or another, and so is always theory-driven or theory-moulded.
If empiricism is claiming to be the study of the observable and explicable, then it is no more than behaviourism returned, vampire-like, to seek new life in the fear-ridden haunted village of modern academia.
It doesn't have to be this way.
The garlic, wooden stake and silver bullet (to continue this fantastic metaphor) are provided by the application of a more modern approach to science than that offered by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century paradigms.
Einstein was unable to observe relativity, and was prevented from seeing the effects of travelling at the speed of light by the irritatingly inconvenient circumstance of its impossibility.
Einstein's solution was to fall back on the old Romantic notion of the Imagination, suspending his disbelief in order to conduct what he called a "thought experiment" .
Even the largest-fanged empiricist rarely refrains from engaging in some form of thought experiment, either in framing the terms of reference for the data collection or in the discussion of results.
The present article is written in this spirit.
A reader-response experiment is reported in association with thought experiments, a method which allows discussion, if not of truth, then at least of validity and illustration.
It is the best our haunted community can hope for.
Even the least perceptive reader will also by now be aware that I will be talking about metaphor.
This will be concerned both with metaphoric forms in texts, and with metaphoric strategies in reading.
Of course, the models of analysis are metaphors too, and it is the recognition of this unavoidable fact that points to the linkage of isomorphism across the reading experience.
By this I mean any process or phenomenon that involves a mapping of two or more elements.
The most obvious examples of this are in surface textual metaphors, but I will argue that the processes involved in the perception of textual co-operation and coherence are also fundamentally isomorphic in this sense.
Finally, the process of reading itself involves a basic mapping between text world and real world that can be characterised as isomorphic as well.
Examples throughout are taken from science fiction (hereafter SF) texts, since the relationship within that genre between the world evoked by the text and that of reality seems potentially interesting.
There are also other available mappings afforded by SF: between reality and fantasy; scientific and "literary" discourses; fixed knowledge and speculative imagination, and so on.
The space for insight in this very popular genre is potentially enormous.
2 The cline of metaphoric form
This section elaborates the concept of a cline of metaphoric form introduced in Stockwell (1991a).
The cline is represented in Figure 1.
This descendant of the model owes its features to comments and discussion arising out of an academic conference (PALA 1990, Amsterdam University).
Briefly, the original model placed the surface syntactic complexity of metaphorical expressions along a cline which, I suggested, corresponded to the relative ease and difficulty of processing the metaphors in reading.
Here, this suggestion is extended to cover what I have called invisible metaphors: that is, those metaphoric forms in which one domain is not linguistically realised on the surface of the text, and therefore has to be inferred.
The basic suggestion is that, all other things being equal, the degree of difficulty experienced by the reader increases from left to right along this scale.
Surface metaphors are those in which the mapped domains are represented directly by linguistic tokens, and are thus visible on the text (e.g. Juliet is the sun, in which both domains are realised).
Shallow metaphors and deep metaphors require inferencing to access the metaphoric domains, and can thus be termed invisible metaphors (an example would be I love the sun, taken to be an utterance of Romeo referring to Juliet).
In an alternative universe, this cline would form the basis of an entire article itself.
(By a mysterious twist of space-time, it can be found in Stockwell 1991b.)
However, it is recapitulated in brief here in order to focus attention on the variety of possible surface realisations of that type of isomorphic relation we know as textual metaphor.
Christine Brooke-Rose (1958), in her A grammar of metaphor, provides a classification of forms of metaphor.
However, her categorisation is unprincipled in the sense that it does not really relate types of metaphor to each other, and is thus no more than a typology of poetic examples.
They can, though, be placed along the cline (with some additions) to indicate the degree of resolving effort required in each case.
The best way to explain this is by way of example.
In the original article, I mentioned Carl Sagan's (1981: 279) use of a very long, extended metaphor that explained the evolution of the brain through the historical development of the communication infrastructure of New York City.
The basic metaphorical proposition that underlies this is BRAIN IS CITY.
(It is my position that all surface metaphors can be thus expressed propositionally in an equative form in ordinary language.
This is not to claim any existential reality for the underlying proposition; it is merely a convenient expression.)
It should be possible to express this underlying proposition in every linguistic realisation.
The following list represents such a set of possible realisations, in increasing order of difficulty (i.e. left to right along the cline): The cline is, of course, a convenient idealisation.
In any actual reading, there are a number of factors that push the location of any particular metaphoric form leftwards or rightwards (in other words, make it more or less easy to resolve).
These include: mention of the proper term; textual distance from a clue to resolution; reader familiarity with the base domain and degree of unfamiliarity with the target domain; and so on.
Finally, the effort required of readers is to some extent always dependent on the amount of energy they are prepared to expend in any given situation.
In other words, the disposition of the reader is a factor in moving along the cline in either direction.
A reader "trained" in reading according to conventional interpretation (by means, typically, of an English degree in an institution of higher education) would probably be more disposed towards resolving invisible metaphors than someone reading simply to pass away a boring train journey.
3 Co-operation and coherence
This last point raises the central question often posed to literary scholars by the non-specialist public: Why bother?
Why go to all the effort of perceiving other hidden meanings, finding new interpretations, applying alternative readings?
Why bother with all that effort, when a meaning can be found fairly easily and obviously?
An economist would frame this question in terms of a cost-benefit analysis: the maximisation of returns for the minimum amount of effort injected.
The optimum point of balance is to resolve the coherence of the text as quickly as possible.
The actual point at which this occurs for an individual reader depends on their disposition.
This term is meant to cover their disposable effort (the effort they are prepared to expend) and their ability or competence in matching the perceived text-world to their cognitive universe (based on their previous familiarity with the patterns typical of the genre).
Eikmeyer (1989), in a paper from a conference on coherence, points out that reader interpretation depends on the depth of understanding the reader requires.
This will vary greatly between someone reading a novel on a train and someone reading it as part of the study for a PhD thesis.
Eikmeyer goes on to develop this sort of variation among readers in terms of the perceived variation in assistance provided by texts in their resolution.
He plays what amounts to an ingenious thought-experiment with the Co-operative Principle, producing a formalised representation of the perceived relationship between readers and authors in texts.
In other words, he provides a systematic model of comparing readers' intuitions.
The value of the model is not only in recasting the traditional notion of the Co-operative Principle (from Grice 1975), but also in describing the resolution of meaning as a principled negotiation between text and reader.
The resolving strategy involved is isomorphic since it attempts to match the experience of reading the text with the reader's sense of satisfaction and enjoyment.
The principle outlined in the previous section, of degrees of effort matched with formal realisation, is modelled here at a higher interpretative level.
Of course, part of the enjoyment of a reading depends on a perception of the text's difficulty, and this often involves consideration of the types of metaphor, as mentioned above.
I will re-present Eikmeyer's model here, with adaptations for the present purpose.
Eikmeyer's fundamental insight is that co-operation and non-co-operation are not simply polar opposites along a scale.
This can be proved by seeing co-operation as composed of a cost (c) and a benefit or pay-off (p).
Evidently there is a cost both to the producer or utterer of the discourse (U) and to the interpreter of the discourse (I), and also a pay-off to both of these entities.
Since some effort is required in both uttering and interpreting, c has a lower boundary.
And since both production and reading resources are not limitless, c is not infinite.
Co-operation is an idealisation of the optimisation problem of minimising the cost and maximising the pay-off (so that both utterer and interpreter are satisfied).
The cost and the pay-off of a text are somehow mutually constraining, and so one is dependent on the other.
This can be formally expressed as: Since both U (utterer) and I (interpeter) have to be taken into account in this relationship, there is always an ordered pair: When all of these parameters are in place, the representation in a network of co-operation and non-co-operation begins to look very complex, as in Figure 2.
The centre node represents prototypically co-operative behaviour, with the other eight nodes representing different kinds of non-co-operative behaviour.
The total pay-off is an ordered pair (pI and pU), so the top node represents autonomous behaviour and the bottom node represents mutually dependent behaviour.
The three nodes to the left represent behaviour dominated by the interpreter (in other words, they represent the position of the reader who has to devote much processing effort to find coherence).
The three nodes to the right represent behaviour dominated by the utterer (in other words, the position of high authorial control, with minimal reader-effort).
With prototypically co-operative behaviour (the centre node on the network), the satisfaction gained by the reader (pI) is dependent on a combination of the processing effort (cI) and the cost of production (cU).
The satisfaction gained by the author (pU)(besides monetary payment, of course) is similarly dependent on his or her own cost of production and the reader's cost of processing (cI).
The writer gains satisfaction from knowing that the reader is satisfied, and vice versa.
This perspective produces a conception of the overall communicative process involving an utterer and a receiver, very much in the implied spirit of Grice's (1971, 1975) projection of that communicative situation.
However, the ordered pair of functions (f1 and f2) that are associated with each node for possible text assignment, can only be judged from a vantage point external to the communicative situation.
In other words, only an omniscient analyst can judge the degrees of cost and pay-off to both utterer and receiver.
This is even more the case when, as often in literary discourse, author and reader are considerably separated by space and time.
Eikmeyer (1989: 27) concludes his paper by introducing a subjectivity condition by which the participants judge the values of each parameter.
He says that each ordered pair is "judged by either [the interpreter]or [the utterer]and these judgements may differ" (my emphasis).
Clearly in his "either/or" formulation, Eikmeyer does not admit the possibility of the omniscient analyst who is capable of judging the effects of a text on both the author and the reader.
This is an important point to make, since many theoretical positions both before and after the work of Grice have assumed that omniscience in analysis is a possible option, and analyses are produced that claim to speak for the general reader while also using biographical information on the author from an asserted privileged position (much of the methodology and work of F.R. Leavis (e.g. 1936, 1967) and his followers is characterised by this approach).
The two (realistic) perspectives remaining are positions based respectively in either the author-oriented judgement or in the reader-oriented judgement of the communicative situation (but not both simultaneously).
Since I can have no access to the author's intentions and thoughts, it is the latter perspective that I am interested in.
Thus, in what follows, the point of view of the reader's judgement of parameters is taken.
Deriving from (and slightly correcting) Eikmeyer (1989: 27), the prototypically co-operative parameters for the reader are: where J is the judgement or subjectivity condition.
This orientation of reader judgement applies to all of the nodes in the network in the same way, disregarding the authorial-judgement (JU) orientation which would obviously double the number of parameters (such an author orientation would be textually constituted by, for example, an interview with a writer on his or her own books).
The sections that follow (3.1–3.9) provide ordinary-language characterisations for reading experiences located at each of the idealised nodes on the network.
3.1 Prototypically co-operative behaviour
In ordinary language, this ordered pair can be rendered as follows: the satisfaction of readers is dependent on their judgement of the processing effort required to derive a reading as well as on the perceived effort put into the writing of the text; the reader's judgement of the author's satisfaction is similarly dependent on the perceived costs to the writer as well as the notion of the writer gaining satisfaction from the reader's effort and enjoyment of the text.
(Remember that the reception slant in this formulation is derived from the subjectivity condition being assumed here, and based on the reader's view point.)
My enjoyment (pI) of the text is a function of the amount of effort involved, as outlined above, as well as my judgement of the effort involved in the text's production (cU).
Readers usually know something about authors whose books they have read, and even if they don"t know anything, it is natural to imagine an author figure, which amounts to the same thing.
3.2 Autonomous behaviour
The uppermost node of the network in Figure 2 can be characterised as communicatively autonomous behaviour since the formal description expresses no interdependence between I and U at all.
The readerly subjectivity condition marginally complicates the issue, but the autonomous nature of the situation remains.
In ordinary language, this node expresses the situation in which readers judge their own satisfaction as being solely dependent on their own processing efforts; and they judge the author's satisfaction as being purely a matter of the authorial effort of writing.
In other words, readers will only derive more or less enjoyment by putting the same amount of effort into reading; and readers think that the author is unconcerned with readerly responses to the text.
One such case of this node would be a readerly conception of a cynical author, perhaps, one who writes only for financial return or with disinterest or contempt for his or her readers.
The reader's conception of the text in this case is the worst possible communicative situation.
Reading experiences that would tend to be placed at this node would probably be characterised as unenjoyable readings, and the text itself would be described as boring or obscure and pretentious.
The primary effect of the nodal description above is of inaccessibility to the reader.
Alternatively, this node can also characterise a text which returns as much satisfaction (pI) as effort committed, and a conception of an author writing, not for conventional financial and aesthetic returns, but for different, perhaps programmatic, reasons.
In the SF field, much of the work of Brian Aldiss, with its postmodern subversion of language by fragmentation of form, would be located at this node for these reasons.
3.3 Mutually dependent behaviour
Reading experiences expressed by this node are characterised, in ordinary language, by the total dependence of the reader's satisfaction on whether he or she thinks that the author has enjoyed writing the text, on the basis additionally that the reader thinks that the author is satisfied by the enjoyment gained by readers' interpretative efforts.
The mutual dependency expressed here can be seen in an almost completely uncritical reading experience.
Fan letters, fanzines and the many SF conventions around the world can be seen as responses to such experiences of reading SF.
3.4 Autonomous reader-dominated behaviour
The leftward nodes represent situations in which the reader is required to expend a lot of effort in deriving coherence from a text.
The difference between these nodes is the degree to which the reader thinks the author has provided a text from which some meaning is recoverable.
This upper leftward node indicates a lesser propensity on the part of the reader to make the effort than for the two lower leftward nodes.
This is because it stands in a position closer to totally autonomous behaviour (at the top) than the others.
Text readings around this position are more likely to result in a complete abandonment of the reading on the grounds that too much effort is required to make sense of the story.
This effectively risks a breakdown in the Co-operative Principle (CP), though the CP can only really break down by a reader stopping reading.
This node therefore represents very uncooperative behaviour.
3.5 Reader-dominated behaviour
This is characterised by the perception of an author requiring a reader to make an effort in reading, but the text is seen to be maximally facilitating the search for coherence.
There is more reliance on inferencing here than at any other node.
The readerly effort (cI) that dominates this nodal formula represents "memory space used and processing time needed" (Eikmeyer 1989: 25).
3.6 Mutually dependent reader-dominated behaviour
This node could characterise a reading of a text with a surprise ending or a twist in the tail, which are common occurrences in SF short stories.
Obviously, such a reading experience is at the lower left node of the co-operation network only on a first reading.
The pleasurable element of surprise is at least partly lost on a second reading.
Therefore, a second reading would be pushed further to the right side of the network, requiring less reader effort (cI).
All three leftward reader-dominated nodes represent text interpretations which tend to involve much inferencing work.
The dependence on I-interpretation means that texts assigned to the left tend to be potentially ambiguous or multiply interpretable texts.
They might typically include many invisible metaphors, requiring much inferencing effort.
3.7 Autonomous author-dominated behaviour
This and the following two rightward nodes represent U-dominated behaviour, as judged by the reader.
U-dominated readings tend to involve relatively little reader effort.
There is hardly any inferencing to be done, and no ambiguity at all.
The purpose of the narrative (the "moral" ) is often explicitly stated at the end.
The reader in this case might imagine that there was little planning or effort involved in the text's production (cU), and that the author's satisfaction (pU) is based mainly in the financial rewards of publication or in his or her own sense of personal effort (also cU).
3.8 Author-dominated behaviour
This node can be characterised by a judgement that the pleasure gained from reading is directly a result of the well-craftedness of the text.
However, the author does not leave much room for ambiguity.
Such a description accounts well for the situation of SF for children, who do not yet possess the relevant textual or literary competence to perform advanced reading-strategies such as implicature, bridging and high-level interpretation.
As these skills are acquired, by normal developmental socialisation, children will be able to handle successfully texts further to the left of the network.
3.9 Mutually dependent author-dominated behaviour
As with the previous node, the reader in this position gains satisfaction from a judgement of writerly effort, but here has slightly more work to do to achieve coherence.
The author is perceived as having written the text with a fairly uncritical readership in mind, but the reader enjoys this sort of escapism anyway.
This characterisation of the node would be fulfilled by many of the early SF pulp-magazine stories from the 1920s and 1930s.
In the pulps (so called because of the low-quality paper on which they were printed), explanations and morals are often given explicitly.
The narrative is frequently interrupted by passages of scientific exegesis in a completely different register from the surrounding discourse.
This node is diametrically opposed to the top left node.
There the reading risks abandonment by being too obscure and incoherent; here a non-fan of SF might stop reading because the text seems too obvious or "given" , without much concession to the reader's own processing strategies.
The network thus provides a relatively systematic means of comparing intuitions about texts.
Readerly judgements about the degrees of co-operative coherence pertaining to texts are seen to be determined by bundles of textual features as well as contextual factors.
The placement of a text to the left or right of the network, for example, involves judgements based on textual factors such as the narrative point of view (Fowler 1986: 127–46; Simpson 1990), the presentation of verbalisation (Leech and Short 1981: 318–51), the degree of non-actualised propositions (Leech 1981: 154–6), as well as the form in which metaphors are realised, and so on .
So, a text containing a first person narrative by a narrator involved in the story claiming things about the world by indirect inferences would probably be found more to the left of the network than a text told in the third person by an omniscient narrator directly asserting claims about the world.
Of course, such comments are very generalised, but it is the accumulation of factors, and their manner of processing, that accounts for the reader's judgement of the relative co-operativeness of texts.
It is important to realise that the nodes do not simply represent a typology of texts, but represent a variety of communicative situations around texts.
So, the network can simultaneously represent a single reader's conception of nine different texts, or nine readers' different reactions to the same text.
It is possible, for example, to place nine of my readings of SF texts at the nine nodes, according to my judgement as a single reader.
I could do this for you, but it wouldn't be of much interest unless you were familiar with the stories I read.
It could be usefully applied across large samples of readers to discover normative patterns in perceived co-operation.
The differences between reading experiences are often perceived as being fuzzy, and so a more realistic representation of a greater number of texts would have loci at points within and between the nine prototypical nodes.
The main advantage of the network model is, though, in representing text readings relative to each other, and in providing a schematic tool for linking structural textual features with procedural reading processes.
This actualisation of text structure into a dynamically perceived world of discourse involves isomorphic procedures of matching the text world with schematic knowledge about the real world.
An important point to emerge out of the network model is that aspects of non-co-operation seem to be more common than prototypically co-operative behaviour from a reader's perspective, at least as far as SF is concerned.
This is not simply a matter of maxims being "intentionally" flouted, as modelled in Grice's work.
The eight non-central nodes of the network figure types of outright non-co-operative behaviour rather than prototypical deviance mitigated by co-operation.
Thus Eikmeyer's network prompts the re-evaluation of the Co-operative Principle concept in terms of text variations from a prototypical case, matched by readers' efforts to process back towards the centre by finding coherence.
This supports the notion of defamiliarisation: a degree of incoherence is a vital component of SF discourse.
4 Reading and effort
It would be possible to test a large sample of readers, who would read nine texts and place them on the network.
This could illustrate the degree of convergence among different readers' intuitions about particular texts.
However, there is a simpler way of comparing variations in readers with variations in readings.
This is reported below.
Thirty undergraduates, all English students, were given a questionnaire.
They were first asked to label their own reading experience of SF on a five-point scale: 1 (never read SF), 2 (have read a small amount of SF), 3 (read SF sometimes), 4 (read a lot of SF), and 5 (read nothing but SF).
As you might expect, there was a bulge in the distribution of replies, with a bias towards non-SF reading.
This was to be expected in a sample of mainly female English students (generally speaking, non-readers of SF).
The informants were then given a list of 50 items made up of the names of writers and book titles, arranged in alphabetical order.
They were asked to tick those that they associated with SF.
The choices ranged from central SF authors and works such as Ray Bradbury, Arthur C. Clarke and The time machine, to less central or non-SF writers and books such as Enid Blyton, Salman Rushdie and Dracula.
I also put in some choices that only SF readers were likely to recognise: Hugo Gernsback (an early pulp-publisher), Clifford Simak (a prolific SF writer), and Stanislaw Lem (the foremost Polish SF author).
For this small test there was a significant correlation between experienced readers of SF and the scores for identifying SF writers and books.
Those who read most SF included more elements within the genre (i.e. scored in the high 30s and 40s).
Those who read little or no SF associated relatively fewer items with SF.
Similarly, when the informants were given five sets of words, and asked to list them in order of the likelihood of appearing in SF, the experienced readers included "dreams'," drugs', "consciousness'," identity "," information "(all themes of recent SF) while the inexperienced readers marked only" Martians', "flying saucers'," ray-guns', "robots'," mutants'.
Having established which informants were the most experienced in the SF genre, all the informants were given the passage reproduced below.
This is the opening from Robert Heinlein's Stranger in a strange land.
Informants were asked to circle the first SF element in the passage.
Quite predictably there was unanimous agreement on the keyword "Martian" , though one respondent circled the phrase "One upon a time" before crossing it out.
However, they were then asked to put circles around every word or phrase in the passage that they considered to belong to the genre of SF (all choices made have been italicised in the passage above).
There was a very considerable consensus on the elements selected, and these choices, in the order in which they appear in the text, are given below along with the percentage (rounded to the nearest integer) of the informants who identified each one.
@TAB1 = Element selected % @TAB1 = Martian 100 @TAB1 = human expedition30 @TAB1 = Mars 67 @TAB1 = Terran 100 @TAB1 = human colony 87 @TAB1 = Luna 100 @TAB1 = interplanetary trip 97 @TAB1 = free-fall orbits 97 @TAB1 = Terra to Mars 87 @TAB1 = Terran days 67 @TAB1 = Mars 24 @TAB1 = planets 47 @TAB1 = return orbit 100 @TAB1 = space station 87 @TAB1 = Envoy 50 @TAB1 = Mars 10 @TAB1 = reaction tanks 90 The mean average across all of these percentages is 72.94%.
In other words, there is very nearly a three-quarters consensus among the 30 informants as to the elements in the passage that are specifically associated with SF.
In fact, some of the lower percentages represent a distorted picture: for example, "human expedition" and "Mars' are scored separately, though 83% of respondents circled one or both of the items in the whole phrase" human expedition to Mars'.
Therefore, the consensus figure is actually even higher.
The lexical items marked by the informants can be seen as the linguistic realisations of elements in the readers' constructed text-worlds, which are used isomorphically to perceive the coherence of the reading.
The list of reported elements above delineates the readers' discourse models of the text world, taken together with the predicate relations between the elements in the network.
The relative percentage scores listed above can be taken as a very rough indication of prototype awareness, illustrating the radiality of the knowledge system.
Those elements scoring highly across informants ( "Martian" , "Terran" , "Luna" , "interplanetary trip" ,"free-fall orbits', and so on) are the elements which are more central to the SF schema in operation.
A second group of elements (the first mention of "Mars'," human colony "," Envoy ", and so on) are less central, and a final group (" human expedition ", the second and third individual mention of" Mars', and"planets') are peripheral.
The first, central group contains the best examples of SF elements, which are most likely to instantiate and substantiate the schema (the keyword header "Martian" is in this group).
The second group contains elements that could overlap with other familiar schemas; for example, "Mars' is a lexical realisation of a real object in our world knowledge," human colony "is close to past imperialist notions on Earth, and" Envoy"could also plausibly be the name of an Earth-bound ship.
The third group contains elements that are peripheral to this schema but could be more central to other schemas, such as our current conceptualisation of the solar system.
The dynamic nature of the schema application is evident in the falling level of reportage of occurrences of"Mars' as the text progresses.
The associated keyword "Martian" is marked by 100% of the informants.
The first mention of Mars is identified by 67%, the second individual occurrence by 24%, and the final mention scores only 10%.
The high level of marking of the first two occurrences ( "Martian" and"Mars') can be explained by their foregrounded status in being located near the beginning of the schema instantiation.
The conceptual entity Mars is thus invoked into the active discourse model, and remains active throughout the whole of this relatively short text.
So, the next mention of"Mars' appears familiar to most (76%) of the readers, and is not marked as a focused SF entity.
By the time the readers reach the final mention, the concept has become so familiar in the discourse model that it is hardly noticed at all as a foregrounded element.
Of the three informants (10%) who marked it, at this late stage, as an SF element, two indicated that they only read a small amount of SF, and the other said that she never read anything of the genre.
These informant profiles support the view that past experience of the text-type determines the quality of interpretation.
This is further confirmed by the fact that it was the same three informants who did not mark"reaction tanks' as SF elements (which could otherwise be characterised as central examples of an SF world).
Some other apparent anomalies need to be explained.
The decreasing recognition of "Mars" as a central element applies only if the individual mention of the item is taken.
 "Mars" also occurs in collocation with "Terra" ( "Terra to Mars'), and the whole phrase is marked by 87% of informants (thus disrupting the diminishing sequence of scoring for" Mars".
However, I would suggest that this score is inflated by "Terra" , a proper name that I have only ever seen in a science fictional context to refer to the planet Earth.
This explanation is supported by the high score (100%) when "Terran" is mentioned on its own, and similarly for "Luna" , another term (for the Moon) peculiar (in the English language) to science fiction.
Similarly, it might have been expected that "space station" would score even higher than 87%.
However, the non-markers again included the three informants who read very little science fiction, and the fact that the phrase occurs towards the end of the passage suggests that readers have become accustomed to the science fictional discourse model to the extent that elements of it display diminishing values of foregrounding.
(It was also pointed out to me, by José-Luis Martinez-Dueñas, that space stations are actually now part of our real world, and so may have diminished as perceived science fictional objects in recent years.)
These results were tested again by giving the 30 informants the passage that opens Arthur C. Clarke's 2001: a space odyssey, a novelisation of the film screenplay written by Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke (1968).
This passage cannot be characterised as prototypical SF.
It does not deal with aliens, space, technology, or science (though later episodes in the novel do).
The results so far suggest that those informants who described themselves as infrequent and inexperienced readers of SF would not regard this as SF at all; whereas those informants who did read SF would characterise it as such.
Accordingly, they were asked the direct question: "Would you describe this as science fiction?" 
The questionnaire gave three response options for selection: "Yes'," No ", and" Not sure".
The absolute figures (Yes 17%, No 37%, Not sure 46%) are not really of any interest here.
However, if the response pattern is compared with the degree of the respondents' experience of the SF text type, a significant correlation becomes apparent.
Of those (6 of the 30) who said they read a lot of SF or nothing but SF, all but one replied that the passage was SF.
Conversely, all but three of those who read a small amount or no SF (14 in all), asserted that the passage was not SF.
The 14 respondents (46%) who could not decide included the 10 informants who said they sometimes read SF.
The correlation exhibited by these findings corresponds with the predictions made above.
The respondents were also asked a supplementary question designed to elicit their rationalisations for their decisions.
Those who answered "Yes" or "No" were asked why they made their decisions.
Those who were "Not sure" were asked what made it difficult to decide.
None of the latter gave any reason for their choice.
However, the replies of both the affirmative and the negative respondents were remarkably similar to each other.
Most of those who answered "Yes' pointed to the creation of a" new world alternative to our own, in the past "that was" beyond the realms of contemporary knowledge"as a characteristic of SF.
Most of those who answered "No" similarly pointed to the fact that the passage describes a world in the past that is different from our own but is still 'set on Earth".
Many also stressed that "there was nothing essentially futuristic" in the passage.
(Incidentally, a further supplementary question,"Is it like any other type of writing you know?
What does it remind you of?", received a virtually nil response rate.
Only two respondents answered, citing the "natural history documentary" and the "historical journal" text types respectively.
Neither informant had ever read any SF.)
Taken together, even with this small sample, these results seem to indicate a significant correlation between readers' familiarity with the SF genre and their likely perception of the meaning and coherence of the text.
This is revealed most tellingly when informants are given a passage that appears incoherent.
The following passage is the opening to the short story Mozart in mirrorshades by the cyberpunk SF writers Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner.
The informants were then asked: "Is there anything that tells you this is a science fiction story?" 
The presupposition here (that it is indeed SF) merely makes explicit what is implied in including this passage in a questionnaire on SF.
The question was intended to discover the reasons why it might be perceived to be SF, given that it already is so perceived.
It was formed to elicit an open-ended response, which cannot be quantified, other than to note that only two of the respondents answered negatively.
Of the others, most indicated that there was a mismatch of some sort evident in the passage.
The majority of these focused on the clash (judged from their own knowledge of the world) between the eighteenth century and the petrochemical refinery.
This could not be explained, other than to say that the two things caused the passage to "jar" .
Most succinctly, one respondent wrote: "There weren't petrochemical refineries in eighteenth- century Salzburg" .
Five of the informants who answered affirmatively located the mismatch in the linguistic texture of the passage.
One pointed to the collocation of "past and modern vocabulary" as well as the"unexpected sense of description.
One expects Salzburg to be uncontaminated and clean".
Another said that the clash"must be imagery.
The petrochemical refinery stands for something else".
This response represents the isomorphic struggle to resolve meaning, at the level of metaphor.
Here the incoherence has been identified as probably resolvable by a metaphoric reading, but the respondent obviously feels it is too invisible for her to be able, as yet, to resolve it successfully.
Three more informants identified the clash of registers in "the sort of description you expect of old Salzburg and the simile"  "like a half-eaten lunch"  "" , which, again, they were unable as yet to resolve.
The focus, expressed in these quotations, is on the fact that some aspects of the passage did not conform to the readers' expectations.
Clearly, the coherence of the passage is judged isomorphically by measuring its text world against the readers' knowledge of the real world.
However, none of the informants offered any explanation for the incoherence.
 "It doesn't make sense" , was a common complaint.
Having answered this part of the questionnaire, the informants were then given the next paragraph of the story: The informants were then asked whether this explained the mismatch of the previous paragraph.
All but one of those who previously answered affirmatively said that the discrepancy was resolved.
Several wrote that "it now makes sense" .
One of those who identified a stylistic discrepancy pointed to the phrase "half-eaten lunch" as being explainable as the idiomatic form of expression of the character, Rice.
In other words, almost all of the informants perceived incoherence in the first paragraph, when mapping the discourse model of the text world onto their own knowledge of the real world.
The reading of the second paragraph enables the resolution of the discrepancy and the achievement of coherence.
In cases of incoherence, when the text does not seem to be co-operating in providing access to a resolution of its meaning, readers have two strategic options.
They can abandon the reading, characterising it as obscure or nonsensical (this would be the autonomous reader-dominated node of the network).
However, these readers were students of English, which means that they were used to reading texts for tutorials that they might not have chosen to read on their own.
They were also in a test situation, and were aware that the passages they were reading were to be followed by questions.
Therefore, abandonment was not really open to them.
The other option was to proceed with the reading, trying, with more and more effort, to find a resolution.
This scale of increasing effort brings us back to the optimisation mechanism of Eikmeyer's network of co-operation.
The variation in reading interpretation across readers operates at all levels of meaning of the text.
At the level of metaphoric form, there are variations in interpretations of visible metaphors, and variations in the interpretations of allegories and fiction.
The response results I have outlined indicate that this variation can extend even to the decision of whether a particular passage or set of words is assigned to the SF genre or not.
The potential for divergent interpretations of visible metaphors, requiring relatively little resolving effort, is fairly minimal.
None of the informants, for example, drew attention to the easily resolvable metaphoric mappings underlying "phallic pumping station" , "ruler-straight elevated pipelines', or" expandable bubble".
However, the further rightwards along the cline a metaphor is located, the greater is the potential for multiple interpretations.
It is likely that this is because the invisible domain has to be inferred, and so there is more interpretative room for manoeuvre.
Disagreements at the (rightward) effortful levels of allegory and fiction are the basis of literary criticism.
5 Science fiction reading
The final comment of the previous section suggests that there is greater space for interpretation as the potential for incoherence increases in reading a text.
This is apparent in the wealth of critical responses to fantastic and non-real literature over time, from Piers Plowman to Waiting for Godot.
Even realist literature, by its status as "alternative" to the reader's own experience, allows for plural interpretation to some extent.
The evolving genre of SF has mirrored this concern.
Early pulp-stories mixed the registers of western adventure and scientific exegesis with a strong didactic element, reflecting the relatively unsophisticated juvenile readership.
Later SF, in its "New Wave" (1960s and 1970s) and "Cyberpunk" (1980s and 1990s) manifestations, has become more "invisible" and "difficult" , and has extended itself beyond the boundaries of the genre.
SF incoherence has been adopted by mainstream writers — from Borges to Rushdie, Doris Lessing to Woody Allen — as literacy and literary competence has developed and spread, and readers are prepared to accept more incoherence in texts and make more effort to resolve meanings.
Though the processing cost is high, the pay-off in satisfaction, information and entertainment seems (if only from the evidence of the market demand for films and books) to be correspondingly great.
Film and print literature that are valued in our culture (within the canonising institutions of cinema/bookshop distribution, advertising, reviews, articles, critical works, and even recommendations of friends) seem often to be those that are perceived to have "hidden" or "multiple" meanings.
By way of final illustration, in 1968 Philip K. Dick wrote Do androids dream of electric sheep?, an SF novel dealing with a twenty-first-century bounty-hunter who "kills' or" retires' androids.
The distinction is important since the androids are becoming so lifelike that they differ little from humans, being able to be programmed with memories, emotions and empathy so that some androids even think themselves human.
Let us take two possible readings of this: the first, most obvious and least effortful resolution of the fiction is that of Ridley Scott, who filmed his reading of the novel as Blade runner in the early 1980s.
Though David Newnham, in the Guardian (24 July 1990), calls the film "post- modernism: the movie" , Scott's version is little more than a violent adventure story.
Indiana Jones in the twenty-first century, it stars Harrison Ford as the android hunter, with Rutger Hauer (the man in the British TV Guinness adverts), as his robotic adversary.
The central question in my reading of the novel, concerning the philosophical definition of humanity, empathy and memory, is virtually absent from Scott's film.
This is most apparent in the change of title Scott thought was necessary.
The question, Do androids dream of electric sheep?, is the central philosophical question in my reading, and a great deal of effort is required to resolve it from the text.
There are several isomorphic mappings between text world and world knowledge to be made, to make the question relevant to the here-and-now.
Where Scott's reading presents designer chaos, my reading perceives the cybernetic construction of artificial intelligence taken systematically to its logical and difficult conclusion.
In the novel, humans keep animals to demonstrate their empathy and differentiate themselves from the robots, but the irony is that radiation has killed off almost all real species, and the goats, horses and sheep which people keep are electric androids as well.
The electric sheep on the bounty-hunter's roof-top is a pitiful symbol of human hope against the terrible consequences of our technical cleverness.
The androids are created in our own image, and turn out to be as good, and as bad, as us.
So: do androids dream of electric sheep?
There are two answers: literally, no, they don"t; metaphorically, yes, we do.