

International encyclopedia of linguistics edited by W.Bright, 1992, OUP, New York, 4 vols., Vol.1, pp. xvi + 429, Vol. 2 pp. viii + 440, Vol. 3, pp. viii + 456, Vol.4, pp. viii + 482, ISBN 0 19 505196 3
This is a splendid production.
Comprehensive and easy to use, the encyclopedia manages to map the central concerns of contemporary linguistics in such a way that outsiders will not only be able to find what they are looking for but will also be persuaded to explore further.
Bright states in his introduction that the "audience is seen as academic and professional, but interdisciplinary; thus articles are designed to be intelligible and useful to people in related disciplines" (Vol.1, p. ix).
Perhaps inevitably, this means that some of the detail of particular research has been omitted, but the general clarity of the articles and their accompanying lists of references are such that intelligent readers are given a clear view of their particular interests and encouraged to delve deeper should they wish.
In making this judgement, I have assumed that an encyclopedia has to meet three essential criteria: it should be easy to use; have a wide coverage; and be both accurate and up-to-date.
The first of these criteria is primarily a function of good editing and production.
These four volumes are of a convenient size to fit on an average-sized desk.
They can be moved (one-by-one) without too much trouble, and they lie flat when open.
Although set in double columns, the typeface is comfortably large and easy to read.
Such features may have increased the cost slightly and perhaps put the encyclopedia beyond the reach of individual purchasers, but they should be of great help to reference librarians and readers.
Each volume is prefaced by a list of abbreviations and symbols, while Volume 4 contains a 77-page glossary, a directory of contributors, a synoptic outline of the contents (including a list of the languages of the world) and an index.
The glossary (by David Crystal) is referred to in Bright's introduction and serves as a very useful brief dictionary of terms.
The synoptic outline might have been more serviceable had it been separated from the list of languages and moved to the first volume.
It is a (relatively) brief and convenient guide to the main topic areas, with a list of subtopics in alphabetical order.
In some respects, it serves an as abbreviated index without the page and volume references and might have been more helpful as a kind of contents list.
However, because it groups entries alphabtically according to the areas of responsibility given to particular topic editors, it can be slightly confusing.
 "Applied linguistics" (Topic Editors: R.B. Kaplan and H.G. Widdowson) lists "style: applied stylistics" (R. Carter) as one if its subtopics; "Literature and linguistics" (Topic Editor: W. Frawley), on the other hand, lists "style: literary stylistics" (R.H. Cureton).
The two entries are adjacent to each other in the body of the encyclopedia under S. Obviously, this makes sense in that different readers approaching the synoptic outline from different disciplinary perspectives will both end up in roughly the same place, but it is slightly disturbing to find that while there is a main entry for "Applied linguistics" (which cross-refers readers to "style" ), there is no matching entry for "Literature and linguistics" to help the reader coming from a purely literary discipline.
However, the detailed cross-referencing is usually quite adequate to take care of such problems.
The index seems to be comprehensive.
I checked two items at random.
The first, Interlanguage, produced four references.
One of these was to the main entry on "Interlanguage" (M.Sharwood Smith).
Of the other three, two gave a cross-reference to the main entry.
The third, in an article on "Obsolescent languages" (N.C. Dorian), did not, although it did refer the reader to the main entry on "Bilingualism" (K. Hakuta).
On checking this out of curiosity, I discovered that although there was no specific mention of the term Interlanguage, Selinker's (1972) article called, simply, "Interlanguage" was listed in the bibliography.
It would be rash to conclude too much from this, but it does indicate that while the index has been compiled carefully and thoroughly, the cross-referencing could be slightly inproved.
Interestingly, "Interlanguage" does appear in the glossary.
The other term, Cognitive linguistics, was not indexed as a single unit at all, although there were a number of compounds with Cognitive as the headword.
The second criterion (coverage) also seems to be fulfilled.
The authors come from a wide variety of backgrounds and owe allegiance to a wide diversity of schools of thought.
Wisely, Bright has included biographical entries of dead linguists only.
Chomsky, who is probably the most widely known living linguist, is listed, but readers are immediately referred to "Formal grammar" , which indicates a proper emphasis on ideas rather than personalities.
It would be difficult to think of a linguistic topic which is not covered in some form, although I will admit to a passing irritation with the way in which my browsing (and the book is eminently browsable) was constantly interrupted by a brief listing of some exotic language-family.
As a complete neophyte in this area, I attempted to establish the criteria according to which some languages were listed under their language families while others had separate entries.
The editor's introduction gives no real guidance on this, but it seemed as though standardised languages were given individual entries and the rest were included as members of a family.
I came to this conclusion after being asked by a student for some information on Occitan.
Although it is not listed under O, there are a number of mentions in the index.
This leads me to believe that the encyclopaedia is comprehensive, although it may be more accessible to readers who have some minimal knowledge of the area they are investigating.
The third criterion (accurate/up-to-date) is met with variable success.
I tested this in three ways: by looking up an article on a subject which I feel I know reasonably well; by looking up an article on a topic with which I am familiar; and by looking for information on an area which I have heard about but of which I am largely ignorant.
Carter and Cureton's entries on "style" seemed to match the first brief and I found they complemented each other in interesting ways.
Although Carter's is shorter, he manages to touch on the major theoretical preconceptions which underlie current pedagogical applications of stylistics without obviously privileging any one.
Indeed, one could almost accuse him of being too modest for not making rather more of the claim that applied stylistics may "lead to the fuller integration of language and literature in the curriculum of both L1 and L2 situations" (Vol. 4, p.81).
Cureton's entry opens with a detailed and well-referenced history of stylistics, but suggests that it may have been suffering from a loss of confidence in the recent past.
However, he lists some areas where he feels that the aesthetic and the linguistic are making tentative advances towards each other and suggests grounds for hope (and research).
Perhaps more interesting than the individual entries is the way in which they are cross-referenced to so many other entries in the encyclopedia.
Is this because stylistics feeds off other, more clearly defined, areas within linguistics rather like a poor relation, or because it is in some sense at the interface of these other disciplines?
Carter's entry suggests the latter, Cureton is more cautious.
Whichever, both entries fulfil my third criterion.
My second choice was the entry on "Acquisition of language" .
This is divided into three sections, "Meanings and forms" , "Phonology" and "second language acquisition" .
The first of these, by Eve Clark, feels curiously tired.
It tends to ignore some of the more interesting theoretical issues concerned with the ways in which Chomskyan notions of Universal Grammar interact with the immediate linguistic, cognitive and contextual features that are the properties of individual children and fails to suggest how research into language acquisition is developing in other areas.
Its most recent citation is to a work published in 1987.
This contrasts strongly with M.H. Long's lively entry on "second language acquisition" .
He offers a concise history of recent work, indicates clearly what issues remain unresolved and suggests the directions of future research.
His most recent reference is dated 1990.
The entry on phonology (by Lise Menn) also suggests that it is a lively area of research, although it is disheartening to learn that there is very little current research into developmental intonation.
Fortunately, the main entry was cross-referenced to "Psycholinguistics" (W.J.M. Levelt), and much that was lacking in Clark's entry is dealt with adequately there.
Finally, I decided to try and find out more about cognitive linguistics.
By chasing the index entries under Cognitive, I was able to put together some disparate information on cognitive approaches to language, but I am still unclear whether there is a definable school of linguists working under that name.
If there is, it would suggest that the encyclopedia is not entirely up-to-date.
The few reservations I have expressed about the encyclopedia are not intended to detract from its excellence.
Above all, it seems to fill a gap in the reference material available to non-specialist researchers who need comprehensive, contemporary information on any area of linguistics.
If you cannot afford it yourself, you should at least urge your library to buy a copy.
Tony Bex University of Kent, UK