

Rhythmic Phrasing in English Verse by Richard D. Cureton, 1992, Longman, London, pp. xviii + 460, ISBN 0 582 55267 2
In this very substantial volume Professor Cureton presents an important new approach to the rhythmic analysis of poetry.
His motive for doing so is that he thinks that English verse has been ill-served by prosodists in the past.
Most theories of rhythm have concentrated on metre and metricality, and while it has long been recognised that the rhythms of the spoken language give variety to what occurs within a given metre, the functioning of these rhythms in poetry has never been adequately investigated.
It has been assumed that all we needed to know was the effects of the variable rhythms of the language on the regularity of metre.
This view, Cureton argues, does not do justice to the complexity of rhythm and has meant that the study of non-metrical verse and of rhythmic prose has been neglected.
Furthermore, while linguistics has certainly been useful to the study of rhythm as it has to all aspects of poetry, there has been an unfortunate tendency to suppose that the language of verse is itself rhythmic.
In fact when we say a piece of language is rhythmic we mean that we as readers have a rhythmic response to it — rhythm is a perceptual not a physical fact.
Almost all prosodists will acknowledge this in theory; in practice they have continued to examine only the linguistic surface of poetry and to regard its prosodic elements as themselves elements of rhythm.
Cureton's aim is to construct a theory which will account for, and model our rhythmic response to, the linguistic surface of the text.
Cureton states: "rhythmic structures are cognitive representations of the flow of energy in the stream of our experience.
The essential feature represented in these structures is relative prominence, and the major vehicle for this structuring the well-formed hierarchy"(p. 121).
 "Relative prominence" implies that for us to have a rhythmic response to a piece of language we must perceive some of its constituents as strong and some as weak relative to each other.
The familiar beat and offbeat of metrical analysis are an example of this, each beat having an associated offbeat which is contiguous with it (Attridge 1982).
But Cureton also regards as constituents of the rhythmic hierarchy syntactic groupings such as the association of main and dependent clause, or those of poetic form such as the octave and sestet of a sonnet; in such cases the strength of the strong element is obviously informational richness rather than physical strength.
The hierarchy is arranged so that groups of strong and weak elements at the lowest level themselves form strong or weak elements at the next level up and so on throughout the hierarchy, somewhat in the manner of the hierarchical structure of syntax.
However, whereas it is possible for a higher-level unit in the syntactic hierarchy to be a constituent of a lower-level unit, as when a relative clause forms part of a noun phrase, this cannot happen in the rhythmic hierarchy.
This principle Cureton calls strict levelling.
Cureton draws heavily on music theory where, he claims, rhythmic analysis has always been handled with greater sophistication than in analyses of poetry.
Following Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983) he believes that rhythm has three components: metre, grouping and prolongation.
"An experience is rhythmic if it contains any one of these components.
Most rhythmic perception involves more than one rhythmic component, however, and poetic rhythm…often contains all three"(p. 123).
Metre is a perceived regular pulse (analogous to the time signature in music).
Grouping "divides the text into a hierarchy of groups" which need not be coterminous with metrical boundaries and "each of which contains a grouping peak" (p. 124).
Prolongation is our rhythmic response to points of tension and relaxation in the text.
The unit of metre is the beat.
In the metrical hierarchy, at the lowest level beats simply mark out a pulse.
Beats at the second level are stronger beats which alternate with the weaker beats at the lower level.
Higher levels add stronger beats still (for example the strongest beat in a line or stanza).
Beats at any level must be separated by either one (duple metre) or two (triple metre) beats of the next level down.
It is usual for a given level to be entirely duple or entirely triple (although variation across levels is more common).
A poem with a very regular beat is one which is strongly organised hierarchically, so that there is metrical organisation beyond the line; each line, stanza and possibly group of stanzas has a beat which is its strongest metrically, up to the stanza level or possibly even higher, as in many nursery rhymes, for example.
More literary verse usually has fewer levels of metrical organisation, thus allowing the poet a more flexible use of language.
As all this implies, metre in Cureton's definition is an implacably regular pulse; what is traditionally thought of as "metrical variation" is not in fact variation of the metre.
There may be a mismatch between the metre and the linguistic surface of a text.
For example, in Cureton's analysis of iambic pentameter in Chapter 5, all lines metrically begin weak-strong-weak, even those having what is traditionally called a reversed first foot.
Thus in the line from Yeat's When You are Old, "Murmur, a little sadly, how love fled" the first weak beat coincides with no syllable and the second weak beat with two.
This definition of metre takes getting used to: in music the idea that one note can realise several beats is obvious — it's the first thing anybody learns; but the idea that in poetry one syllable may do so is far less familiar.
But it is, I think, justified in the context of the theory as a whole: variation inheres in grouping and prolongation and in their interaction with this invariant metre.
Grouping is a more variable segmentation of the text than metre.
It is the "chunking" of the text at various levels in the grouping hierarchy, and the groups at a given level are, unlike metrical measures, not uniform in length.
Groups at the lowest level will themselves form constituents of groups at the next level up, and so on through the hierarchy.
Except when a group has only one constituent, one constituent of every group will be identified as the strong constituent for whatever reason: Cureton gives rules for establishing the grouping structure of a text.
These rules are of two kinds: well-formedness rules and preference rules.
Well-formedness rules are rules that all permissable groups must comply with.
There are just nine of them, and the constraints they impose are not over-specific about what groups may look like.
For example grouping well-formedness rule (GWFR) 2 states: "Groups with relatively weak constituents must contain one and only one relatively strong constituent" ; but there is no constraint on what form that constituent may take.
Constraints are specified by preference rules.
Preference rules give guidance on how to choose between alternative possible grouping structures.
Preference rules may be broken; in fact it would be very difficult not to break them from time to time as some of them conflict.
For example, grouping preference rule (GPR) 2: "Prefer a peak that is linguistically/physically"  "heavy" can easily conflict with GPR 3: "Prefer a peak that is in final position in a group" .
The point is that preference rules give a justification for choosing any well-formed grouping structure which the circumstances of the text seem to warrant; they provide a guide to weighing up the various claims of syntax, informational focus, prosodic shape and so on.
There are very many such influences on grouping structure, so that rigid rules would be almost impossible to specify.
This fuzzy, probabilistic approach is a sensible one.
As Cureton says (p. 432), it "overcomes the problem of phrasal variability by making this variability a design feature of the theoretical system" .
A contradiction of a rather different order is contained in GPR 15: "Prefer a group whose span coincides with a metrical projection" .
Grouping and metrical structure cut across each other all the time as Cureton obviously recognises, hence the rule.
We prefer congruence between the two in the sense that its lack sets up a tension, but that tension is the source of most of the interesting facts about rhythmic structure.
In other words, although the rule is broken all the time, it is broken deliberately for particular effects, which we would not perceive if the rule did not have some psychological reality.
There is, however, a flaw in Cureton's method of grouping.
Each level in the grouping hierarchy is numbered but "For some levels I will replace these numbers with names that are mnemonic of the correspondence of groups at this level with the rhythmic medium (e.g." 'syllables "" or "" tone units "" )"(pp. 137–8).
At the lowest levels this does not matter: syllables can be identified from the text, and syllables group into clitic phrases, consisting of one lexically stressed syllable and any unstressed syllables which are immediately associated with it, either by being in the same word or by being proclitic or enclitic to it.
Since the composition of clitic phrases is determined by lexical stress and syntactic structure, they too can be identified from the text.
But Cureton then groups clitic phrases into what he considers the intonational structure to be.
There are two problems here.
First, he draws a distinction between phonological phrases (composed of clitic phrases) and intonational phrases (composed of phonological phrases) but offers no theoretical grounds for the distinction, nor do any of his examples give any clue as to what it is.
Second, although Cureton states (p. 257): "constraints on the linguistic composition of these prosodic units are very loose.
In particular, I do not claim that the text "" presents "" these units", in practice he picks out intonational units from the text as if they were given (albeit he sometimes admits to ambiguities of prosodic structure).
Sometimes his segmentation is highly contentious.
For example, to return to the Yeats line mentioned earlier, he believes it should be divided into three tone units thus: "Murmur, /a little sadly, /how love fled" , which is perfectly possible but not certain.
Cureton would surely do better to rely on syntax to determine rhythmic grouping at this level.
For although he rightly states (p. 122) that syntax as such is not rhythmic, syntactic units can intermittently form rhythmic groups — the nineteen "tone units" Cureton identifies in the Yeats poem could just as easily, and more satisfactorily, be defined as clauses and phrases of various kinds.
The third component of rhythm, prolongation, "represents our rhythmic response to anticipated points of structural resolution/completion" (p. 124).
The idea of completion or the achievement of structural goals is a familiar one.
The end of a sentence is a familiar and obvious example of syntactic completion, while the achievement of a structural goal is an acknowledged feature of poetic structure.
The octave of a Petrarchan sonnet, for example, usually presents a problem and an expectation of its resolution, which the sestet then provides.
In reading a text we habitually thus anticipate closures, which then arrive.
Cureton's achievement is to give prolongation its full place in a theory of rhythm.
(Its importance in enjambment, for example, has long been recognised but never codified.)
He formalises structures of this kind into a prolongational hierarchy.
The unit of prolongation is the prolongational region.
Within it the structural goal is known as an arrival, a movement towards it an anticipation.
An arrival may be elaborated on; any such movement away from an arrival within a prolongational region is called an extension.
Anticipations and extensions are optional components of prolongation regions; when either exists they are weak components relative to the arrival.
Cureton identifies three kinds of anticipational or extensional movement: equative, additive and progressional prolongation.
Unfortunately these are not well-defined.
The difference between them is given in syntactic terms: "Equative prolongation…is usually articulated by overt repetition or apposition…
Additive prolongation…by parataxis or conjunction…
Progressional prolongation…by subordination, both syntactic and conceptual"(pp. 147–8).
These syntactic structures are exponents of, respectively, "movement that does not significantly move" , "structurally analogous experience" and "some strikingly new experience" .
What, though, is "conjunction" ?
Is it a synonym for co-ordination?
And what is the difference between apposition and parataxis?
Isn't one subsumed by the other?
The beginner in prolongational analysis will surely tread very uncertainly.
(This is not, incidentally, so in the Lerdahl and Jackendoff analysis of music, where the three analogous kinds of prolongation are carefully defined in terms of movement within and between keys.)
In the analysis of both grouping and prolongation Cureton uses a procedure he calls reduction.
It is obvious that as we descend the grouping and prolongational hierarchies the structure becomes more elaborate.
We can, in fact, see each successive level as an elaboration or ornamentation of the one immediately above it (since the text is successively further analysed).
Cureton argues that in grouping structure weak constituents are informationally dependent on strong ones and in prolongation anticipations and extensions are dependent on arrivals.
That is, the dependent constituents are informationally contained in the independent.
The reduction process consists of gradually filtering out the dependent constituents at successive levels until what is left is the most important grouping peak or the prolongational arrival which completes the argument of the entire text.
In this way, in Chapter 5, The Windhover is reduced to: in both grouping and prolongational reductions.
Now this is easy enough to do formally.
And one can (within limits) take Cureton's point about informational containment.
But the process doesn't work (that is, accord with our intuitions) anything like as powerfully as it does in music.
In music the end of all grouping reductions is the tonic chord of the key the piece being analysed is in.
As Lerdahl and Jackendoff point out: The key of a piece is one of the main facts we want to know about it; it is often part of the title.
Do reductions of poems have anything like the same psychological reality?
Cureton unfortunately does not always write very clearly, especially in the theoretical chapters.
He has a tendency to give abstract theory in unnecessarily dense language without examples; this is difficult to absorb, and consequently, when we reach the extended analyses in Chapter 5, there is a temptation constantly to flick back to the earlier chapters to try to clarify the theory.
Despite this, Cureton has made a very important contribution to the study of poetic rhythm which should set the tone for rhythmic analysis for some time to come.
His theory and exhaustive descriptive model make possible a thorough account of the differences between verse styles; such accounts up to now (e.g. Fowler 1971) have been vague and partial.
Cureton has provided a theoretical account of our intuitions about rhythm.
Prosodists should take it as a manifesto for investigating the links between those intuitions and the linguistic surface of texts, particularly at the phonetic level: rhythmic analysis still needs its empiricists, and Cureton has given them plenty of work to do.
Tom Barney Lancaster University, UK