

Language in Popular Fiction by W. Nash, 1990, Routledge, London, pp. xii + 162 ISBN 0 415 02944 9
In this book Nash brings together those works of popular fiction (hereafter popfiction), which are traditionally conceived of as lying outside the literary canon and linguistic theories pertaining to discourse analysis and the stylistic analysis of fiction.
The reader of Language in Popular Fiction will in the main find it easy to follow the author's witty, and in places very amusing, stylistic analysis of popfiction texts.
The excerpts used are well chosen and Nash's elaboration of the subject contributes on the whole to a thorough presentation of this genre of writing.
The investigation of the language of popfiction is here conducted, in the author's own words, at three levels: "a level of verbal choice and organisation, a level of narrative structure, and a level at which stylistic options and devices are related to the ideologies of manliness and womanliness which we either bring to our reading or derive from it" (p. xi).
Throughout the book the first two levels of analysis are discussed in close relation to the study of theme and characterisation in fiction.
At the third level of stylistic analysis authors and their devices are also brought explicitly into the discussion.
The subject of ideology is given a secondary position in the book, subordinate to that of style which is here treated as being only "incidentally touched" by ideological issues.
The book comprises five chapters and a Postscript which are bound into a cohesive whole with the aid of the image of an intercontinental flight that functions "as a sustaining narrative device" (p. xii).
Transitions from the "flight narration" to the subject of the book and back are to be found at the beginning and end of each part.
These transitions are in the main successful in linking different phases and details of a flight with the central themes and prominent linguistic features of popular fiction which Nash treats as being the "airport literature" par excellence.
In the course of the book Nash delineates popfiction by comparing it with the classics and tabloid journalism (Chapter 1), with naturally occurring conversation (Chapters 2 and 3), and finally with narrative techniques pertaining to film-making (Chapter 5).
These comparisons are presented, almost invariably, in terms favourable for popfiction and thus augment the value of this "disposable" type of literature.
The two subgenres of popfiction, "romances and thrillers" , which are in essence the subject of the book, are also regularly measured against each other in a series of detailed comparisons.
The first chapter of the book provides an introductory discussion of the nature, prominent features and merits of popular fiction as these emerge through an extensive comparison with serious (classical) literature.
In "Prelude" the issues of identity construction and perception of gender relations in society are mentioned.
Although closely related to the subject-matter of the book, these recur only as underlying issues in the chapters to follow.
In the course of the book Nash seems to adopt a rather detached stance on the above matters, describing rather than criticising, and mentioning rather than challenging the given situation.
However, it is my contention that a careful reading of the book can reveal indirect ways in which readers are invited to ponder on the issues and reassess the status quo for themselves.
In this first part of Language in Popular Fiction Nash introduces an interesting narrative device, that of defeating the reader's expectancies by presenting excerpts from serious literature in those parts of the analysis where there would normally be examples from popfiction.
This deviant manipulation of texts throughout the discussion is a very powerful way of increasing the readers"interest in, and involvement with, the subject under investigation.
In general terms, the first chapter of the book manifests Nash's intention to treat popfiction, "the art that easily diverts us" , with respect, and to defend it against those readers who scorn it and deny its merits.
In the second chapter, which is the most elaborate and linguistically sophisticated part of the whole book, Nash examines stories from the so-called "women's magazines" and also romances of the Mills & Boon type destined again to be read (almost exclusively?) by women.
In this part of the book Nash discusses the narrative structure of the above stories as comprising Relation (i.e. description of places and events), Dialogue and Dilation, a word used in an extended sense to denote and signify a blend of the two previously mentioned narrative types.
In order to illustrate the relation of these three elements, Nash resorts to tabulation (a device employed in many parts of the book) which bears resemblance to the model for the analysis of fictional discourse (Moves) devised by Burton (1980).
Chapter 2 also contains a thorough investigation of "popstyling" at the level of lexicon and syntax.
The syntactic analysis revolves mainly around the study of adverbial and participial structures in the narrative.
Most of this linguistic investigation however is carried out at the semantic level, with emphasis on lexical fields, componential analysis, which Nash often employs as a start up for humorous argumentation, and agent shift.
Dispersed through the above discussion are also elements from a kind of linguistic analysis which transcends the traditional syntactic and semantic processing.
Examples of this are the brief discussion of Free Indirect Speech, and the extensive investigation of turn-taking in popfiction in a vein similar to that of Conversation Analysis.
The second chapter of Language in Popular Fiction ends with Nash lightly criticising the stylistic conventions of magazine stories.
In the next chapter Nash turns to "man's business" and examines the style of the "actionbook" .
This subgenre of popfiction is delineated by long descriptions of some commonly found story-lines and its style is successfully contrasted with that of magazine stores and romances.
The tools used for the dissection of the style of actionbooks are similar to those found in the previous chapter and include a comprehensive analysis of lexis ( "the machoman's lexicon" ), and a discussion of Relation types ( "intensive" versus "extensive" style) and other narrative elements.
The novelty — and most interesting feature — of this chapter lies in the examination of issues that refer to the author-to-reader level of discourse in fiction.
In his discussion Nash includes analyses of various authorial devices and the effect they have on the reader, concerning both the cognitive (character perception and plot comprehension) and affective (development of empathetic feelings) aspects of reading.
After discussing romances and thrillers in their entirety, Nash continues with a more detailed examination of the two subgenres: in Chapter 4 he deals with the beginnings middles and ends of magazine and action stories, while in Chapter 5 he presents an account of some "standard ingredients" like "places, faces, fights and embraces" found in readings of this type.
In "Beginnings, middles, and ends" Nash seeks to establish patterns in the writing of popfiction stories concerning plot development and characterisation.
The beginnings examined are interestingly compared with those featuring in films, whereas the exploration of middles and ends includes a study on theme patterning in "popstyling" , characterisation as it emerges from fictional discourse, and a functional typology of dialogue (which is interesting, but unfortunately inadequately substantiated in terms of textual evidence) in "actionbooks" .
Tabulation and presentation of long passages are again characteristic elements of this part, but detailed linguistic analysis seems to have yielded to a more abstract discussion in the style of traditional literary criticism.
Chapter 5 constitutes a rather tedious juxtaposition of "the most popular things in popular fiction" , as it consists mainly of long lists of those ingredients that have the highest frequency in popfiction.
This part is also characterised by minimal linguistic analysis and a tendency for barren description rather than interpretation.
Its only positive feature is perhaps the brief discussion on the stylistic effects of thematic organisation in fictional discourse.
Although a disappointing part of the book, it is followed by a hilarious "Postscript" which epitomises stylistically all the preceding analysis of the language of romances and thrillers.
 "Postcript: and so to bed" , an unmistakable token of its author's skill and wit, is presented in the form of a short story narrated from two viewpoints, His and Hers, which allude to the style of actionbooks and romances respectively.
Its humour derives from the juxtaposition of the two diametrically opposite narrative styles Nash adeptly presented in the earlier parts of the book.
Language in Popular Fiction is, on the whole, an interesting and enjoyable book in which Nash demonstrates that popular literary readings and linguistic stylistic examination of (fictional) discourse can weld together and generate an informative — and most entertaining — discussion of the characters and themes of popular fiction.
Angeliki Tzanne Lancaster University, UK