

Ways of Reading: Advanced Reading Skills for Students of English Literature by Martin Montgomery, Alan Durant, Nigel Fabb, Tom Furniss, and Sara Mills, 1992, Routledge, London, pp. 257, ISBN 0 415 05320 X
This is a collection of practical materials for teaching and learning.
The title is admirably precise as a statement of intent.
The book is complementary to Durant and Fabb's Literary Studies in Action, published by Routledge in the Interface series in 1990, and in many ways it could serve as a useful introduction to that volume.
The authors put the materials together while they were all working at the University of Strathclyde, primarily on the Programme in Literary Linguistics.
After the ups and downs of critical theory and fashion, the pedagogy of literary linguistics is an area into which only a few intrepid explorers have so far dared to venture, and the results here deserve to be widely and warmly welcomed.
The book is in five sections: basic techniques and problem solving; dimensions of language variation; poetic uses of language; reading figures of speech; aspects of narrative, and beyond the text.
Within this framework a wide range of other headings is covered, from gender to register, from implied reader to cinematic techniques, from deviation to rhyme, sound and rhythm.
The materials are very clearly targeted towards a British undergraduate readership, and each of the 25 units involves practical activities to follow up the input presented.
Inasmuch as this constitutes a methodology, it presupposes learning aims which many students will not necessarily have an awareness of.
The opening chapter faces up to some of the questions involved by asking about "the intended meaning, the text's own meaning, an individual meaning, the general properties of meaning, shared social meanings and critical social meanings" .
In the present educational climate in the UK this involves an important political stand, opening up problems of language awareness, discourse, text, and tradition.
Ways of Reading invites its readers to think about the whole field of English Studies, and the closely related areas of cultural studies, linguistics, stylistics and, to a lesser extent, criticism.
It cannot be accused of privileging advertisements and popular songs over canonical texts, a favourite put-down by critics of an eclectic approach to text and discourse.
Its range of text samples is indeed admirably wide-ranging and eclectic, taking in The Rape of the Lock and Edna St Vincent Millay, The Battleship Potemkin and advertisements for Lil-lets and Famous Grouse.
Perhaps a moratorium should be declared on some of the standard authors preferred by materials writers in this field: Hemingway's very short stories and the poems of e.e.
cummings and Edwin Morgan are, however, splendidly useful, and if practitioners keep coming across the same texts, it has to be remembered that students may very well be meeting them for the first time.
Shakespeare gets a fair crack of the whip, but as text samples to be read, examined closely, and evaluated, rather than as monolith.
I am reminded of a line in Tony Kushner's play Angels in America, "as a monolith it is not unimpressive." 
Shakespeare is in no way diminished by a consideration of how tragic irony works in the final act of King Lear.
Ways into reading text, strategies for coping with monolithic texts as well as texts considered to be of less "value" are arguably as vital a part of the educational process as any learning about text.
Critical discourse might have been given more space, especially in the context of the brief discussion of "canon" , but it is well handled in the earlier volume by Durant and Fabb, so can be picked up again in a course which focuses more clearly on literary texts using that book.
Ways of Reading is a valuable and immensely usable book.
For many overseas readers it will be less immediately accessible, except at postgraduate level, without a good deal of preliminary work.
But it is a sign of the times that in many universities around the world this kind of approach is actually ahead of the British system, largely because language awareness can be built into reading courses as part of the overall language-learning curriculum.
Many younger academics will use this book as a springboard and an inspiration for their own work in the field.
In the UK context the book more than fills a major gap, and will, I hope, be widely used.
John McRae Univers ities of Nottingham and Naples