

Discourse analysis, pragmatics and the dramatic "character" : Tom Stoppard's Professional Foul
Neil Bennison, Lancaster University, UK
Abstract
Is there any way in which characters in dramatic texts may be considered a worthwhile object of criticism?
The dearth of recent critical material in this area would suggest not, but the aim of this article is to demonstrate that the study of dramatic character may be effectively achieved by the application of theoretical principles derived from the linguistic analysis of conversation.
The difficulties of accounting precisely for how readers of the play text get from the words on the page to judgements concerning the "personalities" of characters are overcome, to some extent, by the analysis of their conversational behaviour and using the powerful interpretative apparatus of discourse analysis and pragmatics to this end.
As a focus for discussion, the character of Anderson, in Stoppard's play, Professional Foul, has been chosen, and a wide range of approaches taken from discourse analysis and pragmatics is used to identify in particular scenes the ways in which four prominent character traits are deducible from his conversational behaviour.
The analysis begins with an examination of turn-length, turn-taking and topic-shift before applying pragmatic theories such as Grice's co-operative Principle, Brown and Levinson's Politeness Phenomenon and Leech's Politeness Principle.
In addition, this article addresses the problematic notion of character "development" and argues that this may be accounted for in terms of a change in the conversational strategies used by a character, from which changes in attitude are inferable.
Keywords: character; Co-operative Principle; discourse analysis; Politeness Phenomenon; Politeness Principle; pragmatics; Professional Foul; Stoppard, Tom; topic; turn
Introduction
One result of the influence of structuralism and post-structuralism on modern literary theory has been the rejection of the analysis of literary "character" as a valid part of critical practice; but among readers of drama and theatre-goers at large there is still a widely held view that the playwright's "characterisation" is a vital part of the dramatic work's whole.
The term is problematic, and to date very little work has been done to determine the means by which it is possible to reach qualitative judgements about dramatic characters.
Recent developments in sociolinguistics and pragmatics, however, have produced work which can throw light on this grey area of literary study.
The basic premise upon which much of this work is based is most succinctly expressed by William Downes: While Downes's statement alludes to an unfashionable humanist notion of dramatic character, it does provide us with a valuable starting point for the present discussion.
If, as he further suggests, characterisation "involves the manifestation of inner states, desires, motives, intentions, beliefs through action, including speech acts" (1988: 226), then it becomes clear that the methods of analysing conversational behaviour in the real world are also readily applicable to the world of the dramatic work.
Recent linguistic work on characterisation has used the principles and analytical techniques of pragmatics and discourse analysis to considerable effect.
Geoffrey Leech has used the Gricean Co-operative Principle and his own politeness maxims (Leech 1983) as an insight into the characters and relationships in Shaw's You Never Can Tell (Leech 1992), and Mick Short (1989) has used discourse analysis to elucidate the role-reversal in Pinter's short sketch, "Trouble in the Works" .
Further work includes Paul Simpson's (1989) application of Brown and Levinson's politeness analysis (1978) to dramatic criticism in his examination of the power shift between pupil and teacher in Ionesco's The Lesson.
Very little work has been done, however, in accounting for the development of an individual dramatic character in pragmatic or discourse terms.
This article attempts to provide some explanations for how readers of the play text or the audience of the dramatic performance are able to recognise character traits, and how these traits are themselves affected by the action of the play.
As the object of my attention I have chosen the character of Anderson in Tom Stoppard's (1977) television play, Professional Foul, though I must point out from the outset that it is the dramatic text which is the focus of my attention and not the BBC Television production, and my comments will reflect this to a large degree.
A very basic synopsis of the play follows in order to contextualise the analysis.
2 Professional Foul: plot summary
We first encounter Anderson, a professor of ethics, on board a plane for Prague, where he has been invited to speak at a philosophy conference.
He is engaged in conversation by McKendrick, another participant in the Colloquium, but does not reveal to him that what attracts him to the conference is the opportunity it affords him to go to the World Cup qualifying match between England and Czechoslovakia (scene one).
Once booked into his hotel, along with McKendrick and another academic, Chetwyn (scene two), Anderson is approached, in his room, by his former student, Pavel Hollar, who attempts to persuade him to smuggle his politically sensitive thesis out of the country.
After some argument, Anderson refuses the request but, in response to Hollar's worries about being searched on leaving the hotel, agrees to bring the document to Hollar's apartment the following day, on the way to the football match (scene three).
After a chance meeting with two of the England team members, Crisp and Broadbent, in the Hotel lift (scene four), Anderson attends a part of the conference before leaving early to visit Hollar's apartment (scene five).
He arrives to find it being searched by the Czechoslovakian police.
Hollar has been arrested.
Anderson, confused by the situation, attempts repeatedly to assert himself, but is allowed only to listen to the match on the radio.
After being detained for over an hour and interrogated by the police captain, he is finally permitted to leave (scene six).
Anderson, shaken by what he has seen, returns to the hotel where he finds out the result of the match — a heavy defeat for England — from two English sports journalists (Grayson and Chamberlain) in rooms adjacent to his (scene seven).
That evening, Anderson, at a subdued dinner with McKendrick and Chetwyn, argues with McKendrick about ethical problems before being approached by Hollar's wife, whom he had met at the searching of the apartment (scene eight).
At a park near the hotel, Anderson promises Mrs Hollar, by means of her son, Sacha, translating, that he will do what he can to help her husband (scene nine) and returns to the hotel where he finds McKendrick drunkenly baiting some of the England team in Grayson's room.
He borrows Grayson's typewriter, with which he rewrites the paper he is due to give the next day (scene ten).
Anderson's new lecture (scenes eleven to fourteen), which is interspersed with scenes of his room being searched by plainclothes police, satirically comments on human rights under the Czechoslovakian constitution and causes annoyance and embarrassment to the Colloquium chairman, who brings the session to an abrupt end by staging a false fire alarm.
At Prague airport, Anderson is searched thoroughly for Hollar's thesis but nothing is found (scene fifteen), the explanation being, as Anderson reveals to an indignant McKendrick once they have boarded the plane (scene sixteen), that he has hidden it in McKendrick's briefcase.
3 Initial observations on the character of Anderson
The play text of Professional Foul begins with an extensive set of stage directions, among which Stoppard provides the reader with some brief descriptions of Anderson.
He is an "Oxbridge don" who gives a "somewhat fastidious impression" , a point which is almost immediately confirmed by the dramatic action when the stage directions tell us "ANDERSON dabs at his mouth with his napkin and puts it down" (p. 43).
Both the general comment and the action suggest a stereotypical old-fashioned academic figure to whom Anderson conforms to some extent.
Anderson is, to begin with, absent-minded; Stoppard describes his "manner" as being "a little vague" , and this is evinced in his confusion in a number of scenes.
This being the case, we can expect pragmatic and discoursal behaviour to be important means of identifying the different ways in which Anderson is "vague" in conversation.
Discourse analysis may also elucidate another area of Stoppard's characterisation: the loquacity which Anderson displays in some scenes, though, significantly, not in all.
Anderson's greater interest in some topics of conversation above others is something which can be more accurately described through analysis of topic- shifts, turn-taking and turn-length in the different conversational situations in the play.
This analysis may also help to assess the extent to which the central contradiction in Anderson's character, his apparently greater interest in football than his academic field of ethics, displays itself in conversation.
Two other areas of Anderson's character, his pomposity and his urbanity are describable through discourse analysis, though we must also examine the complexity of his utterances and the level of formality he uses in particular speech situations if we are to establish the consistency of these traits.
In addition, there is the important question of whether Anderson actually "develops" as a character as the action of the drama progresses.
There is a strong sense that he is not unaffected by his experiences, and emerges as a slightly different character at the end of the play, where he appears more direct and less polite.
One of the tasks of my pragmatic analysis is that of identifying more precisely how our perception of the "development" in Anderson's character emanates from Anderson's changing conversational behaviour.
4 Analysis
4.1 Turn-length
The statistics for the length of Anderson's conversational turns are revealing but must be treated with caution.
The statistical data is not sufficiently large to enable satisfactory significance tests to be performed.
Having noted this, the figures for Anderson's turn-length are worth examining as evidence of change in his conversational behaviour.
Anderson's contributions are generally shorter in the later scenes in the play (from scenes seven to sixteen Anderson's average turn-length is 8.4 words/turn compared with 14.3 words/turn in scenes one to six).
The figures thus lend support to any intuitive sense we have that the effect of his ordeal in scene six is reflected in his being less willing to talk at length.
However, Anderson's loquacity is only partially suggested by the statistics, for the differences in average turn-length between his utterances and those of the other interlocutors are not always very wide.
In scene one, for example, Anderson has 14.9 words per turn in comparison to McKendrick's 11; a fact which neither suggests Anderson's total domination of the conversation nor his loquacity.
In scene two, he actually has fewer words per turn than his ex-student Pavel Hollar (11.5 against Hollar's 12.3), and in scene nine, less than Hollar's son (8.2 against 13.6).
Statistics for average turn-length alone are liable to mislead, however, and what is likely to be more immediately conspicuous to the reader, is that in a number of scenes Anderson has by far the longest turn: in both scene one and three, for example, Anderson produces turns of over 100 words.
These are not, furthermore, isolated examples; in scene four, Anderson has the longest turn (86 words compared with the next longest, McKendrick's 47) as he does in the final scene (53 words against McKendrick's 14).
If we discount Anderson's lecture in scenes eleven to fourteen on the grounds that he is actually reading from a prepared script, rather than speaking conversationally, this turn of 53 words is the only long turn taken by him after scene six.
Tabulating the percentage of "long" turns (over 40 words) out of Anderson's total number of turns taken within each scene yields some revealing results.
Table 1 is an extract taken from the complete table, showing the distribution of turns greater than 40, 60, 80 and 100 words respectively.
Any intuitions we may have about Anderson's loquacity and the way in which it is affected by the events of the play are thus lent support by the results of tabulating the distribution of long turns.
The absence of any figures for turns longer than 60 words after scene six is suggestive of a change in Anderson's conversational behaviour, to which we will return later.
In the context of the generally unremarkable figures for his average length of turn (with the exception of scene five there are no scenes in which it exceeds 14.7), these large turns stand out sharply.
Anderson is not consistently loquacious, but he does produce occasionally lengthy utterances, which themselves suggest the vagueness Stoppard describes in his initial stage direction.
Anderson's occasional bursts of verbosity implicate a sudden urge to speak on a particular topic and this is most noticeable in scene four where he surprises the two footballers, Broadbent and Crisp, with a turn of 86 words giving unsolicited advice on the Czech team's tactics (p. 59).
It is also visible in scene three when he produces two of his longest utterances as comments on Hollar's philosophical thesis (p. 55), and in scene one, where his identification and development of a linguistic paradox generated by a photograph of Anderson in the Colloquium brochure ("Young therefore old.
Old therefore young "(p. 44)) precipitates his longest turn in the scene (beginning," The second glance is known as linguistic analysis…"(p. 54).
A consequence of Anderson's greater interest in certain topics of conversation is that it leads him, on occasions, to create conversational confusion.
Anderson's identification of the linguistic paradox, referred to above, violates H. P. Grice's simply-stated maxim of relation, "Be relevant" (Grice 1975: 46), because, in doing so, he fails to return McKendrick's greeting.
By saying, "How odd" in response to McKendrick's giving of his own name he fails to provide the second pair part of the adjacency pair (Schegloff and Sacks 1973) which constitutes a greeting.
Anderson's long turn, therefore, amounts to an extreme example of what Brown and Yule describe as 'speaking on a topic ", rather than 'speaking topically" (Brown and Yule 1983: 84), in that it ignores the previous speaker's utterance in order to develop a new topic.
If we are not to infer from Anderson's breach of Grice's Co-operative Principle that he is deliberately being rude (unlikely, when McKendrick is a complete stranger to him) then it is most likely to be seen as evidence of his vagueness or, less favourably, his self-centredness.
4.2 Topic-shift and topic-control
Anderson also changes topic in a very disorderly way in scene one.
In the same conversational turn, he changes the topic to a lengthy, rhapsodic utterance on the flexing motion of the aircraft's wings: Anderson's sudden topic-change and subsequent change of register in the very lyrical statement about McKendrick's cigarette smoke, is partly explained by the fear of flying which he admits to here, and which is indicated just before the topic-change in Stoppard's stage directions —"…
He glances uneasily out of the window"(p. 44), but it is also a noteworthy example of his conversational meandering.
This becomes more apparent when the topic-shift is repeated later in the scene (p. 46), where, at the end of an extremely disorderly and uninformative turn, he again 'skip-refers "to the wings through the minimal comment," Wag, wag".
This turn also begins with Anderson mistaking the topic of conversation.
In responding to McKendrick's question, "Do you know Prague?" (p. 45), he fails to notice the topic-shift away from the figure of Andrew Chetwyn, to whom McKendrick has earlier drawn his attention.
The absurd irrelevance of his immediate reply —"Not personally.
I know the name"— is partially explained by the fact that the stage directions suggest he is still looking at Chetwyn, but we infer Anderson's absent-mindedness from his response because any confusion over the referent of the question is unlikely, assuming that Anderson, as a participant in the Colloquium (albeit an unenthusiastic one), knows that the venue is Prague.
Some of the clearest indications of Anderson's vagueness occur at the level of topic-control.
When, in the opening scene, McKendrick tries to initiate a new topic, by referring to the "fictions problem" (p. 46), Anderson fails to take it up because he fails to realise that McKendrick is referring to the paper which Anderson himself is going to give.
When he does realise what the topic is, he implicates a significant lack of interest in it by changing the topic to that of his "ulterior motive" in coming to Czechoslovakia.
Anderson's behaviour appears even more extraordinary when, having initiated this topic he immediately closes it.
When asked to be more specific about his "unethical" behaviour, Anderson is extremely uncooperative: Anderson's initiation and subsequent withdrawal of this topic repays our attention not only because it is a striking example of the problems he causes through his disorderly conversational behaviour but also because, like his earlier reference to the linguistic paradox, it suggests that Anderson enjoys "playing" with language, a point which will be returned to later.
4.3 Turn-allocation and turn-taking
Anderson also appears occasionally reluctant to talk in scene one.
We have already noted that he is loquacious on certain topics, but he implicates an attitude of, at least, indifference to McKendrick by the way he appears not to take up turns allocated to him enthusiastically, and to allocate turns to McKendrick infrequently.
Mindful again of the difficulties of testing the significance of the data statistically, we note that in the first scene Anderson only allocates a turn clearly to McKendrick six times out of 43 turns (14 per cent).
We may contrast this with scene three where he allocates 28 turns to Hollar (mainly through direct questions) from 58 turns (48 per cent).
To some extent this reflects the power relationship in the scene, because both participants still act as if their former tutor/student relationship still exists, but it also indicates Anderson's greater interest in what Hollar may have to tell him.
Just as his attitude to other characters in the play is implicit in his turn-allocation, so too is his interest in certain conversational topics.
The latter is indicated in scene eight by his greater turn-allocation (11 instances out of 15 turns) which indicates his interest both in what Chetwyn was doing when he missed the afternoon session of the Colloquium, and in McKendrick's academic topic of philosophy and catastrophe theory.
This is, however, a rare instance of Anderson displaying any interest in McKendrick and the change in his attitude towards him at the end of the play is confirmed in the figures for his turn-allocation.
The contempt which Anderson seems to have for McKendrick in scene sixteen (which, as we shall see later, is also suggested by the level of politeness he uses) is strongly marked by the fact that he allocates no turns to him at all.
4.4 Hesitations and uncompleted turns
The comparison between the number of hesitations found in Anderson's utterances in formal, public speech situations and informal, private ones is interesting.
In scene five, for instance, Anderson, attempting to leave the lecture theatre, is caught off-guard by the chairman, who selects him to put a question to the lecturing professor (p. 63).
The stage directions ( "ANDERSON is caught like a rabbit in the headlights" ) suggest that his initial surprise is betrayed to the audience by his physical reaction.
The visual comedy of the episode is obvious, but in discourse terms Anderson is faced with a serious public loss of positive face (Brown and Levinson's term for one's desire to have one's wants and conduct approved of by others) if he is unable to produce a question which appears intelligent and serious, and he is thus under considerable pressure as he speaks.
Remarkably, following an initial embarrassed hesitation, he is able to produce a "question" which is not only long and linguistically complex but free from further hesitations or other slips in performance.
Similarly, in scenes eleven and fourteen, Anderson is extremely assured in his performance when giving his controversial lecture, despite a major interruption from the chairman.
One inference we can draw from this is that, setting aside the question of his academic commitment, his public speaking ability appears more impressive than his informal conversational ability.
Apart from the sixth scene, where Anderson's frequent hesitations are largely predictable from the confrontational nature of the situation, evidence of this difference is provided by scenes three and four.
In scene three Anderson, in conversation with Hollar, does not display the same degree of assuredness in linguistic performance.
Out of a total of 58 conversational turns, he hesitates 13 times (to varying degrees) and fails to complete an utterance on 3 occasions.
Clearly, in informal discourse situations less importance is attached to linguistic non-fluency but Anderson's frequent performance errors here suggest his unease.
This cannot be due to the dynamics of their relationship, for, as we have already noted, Anderson, as Hollar's ex-tutor, has the greater power.
More significant is his predicament of not wishing to agree to Hollar's request for Anderson to smuggle his politically-charged thesis out of Czechoslovakia, but, at the same time, not wanting to jeopardise their friendship.
Such a conflict of conversational goals is the domain of pragmatics and will be dealt with later, but its seriousness is strongly implied by Anderson's very flawed linguistic performance even as he resorts to a higher lexical register to excuse his actions.
Anderson attempts to abnegate personal responsibility by assuming the role of tutor, treating his own behaviour as if it were an ethical test case, and invoking more complex philosophical arguments to support his position: His uncertainty, however, undermines his attempt to fob off Hollar with philosophical justifications.
The impressive performance which characterises his "question" in scene five is absent, with the result that Anderson fails to convince, particularly where his arguments are so insipid.
Similar uncertainty afflicts another of his attempts at persuasion in scene four.
Dedicated football fan that he is, Anderson attempts to give advice to Crisp and Broadbent in a long and excited utterance, but this is only a part of the whole picture because his enthusiasm for the topic, implicated by the length of the turn, conflicts with the hesitancy he also displays.
The uncertainty of this utterance is indicated strongly in Stoppard's stage directions.
The hesitations are clearly marked, but Stoppard's last comment is also important in that it suggests a lengthy and embarrassed silence which implicates the reason for Anderson's hesitancy.
Throughout this turn, he is waiting for a favourable reaction from the two footballers and, in significant contrast to his argument with Hollar, adopts a much less formal register in order not to alienate them.
He corrects himself, earlier in the scene, when using the word "Colloquium" and replaces it with "bunfight" (p. 59), and in addition speaks in short and simple sentences.
The absence, however, of any encouraging response from his interlocutors, even the minimal one of backchannel, indicates how unsuccessful he is in giving his advice.
Anderson's performance errors here are again reflective of a conflict within him, although of a rather different kind.
The topic he is speaking on is one which interests him greatly (much more so than his own lecture topic) but it is also one on which he is not recognised as an authoritative speaker.
This contrasts with the situation in scene five, where he has considerable academic credibility.
His advice, therefore, may be rejected as uninformed and undesirable by the footballers (even though events prove it to be correct).
As in scene five, Anderson risks a loss of positive face, but in this instance he is not under an obligation to take a turn.
By self-selecting he actually creates the risk of face-loss himself, a fact which is reflected in the lack of assuredness in his utterance.
What is remarkable here, then, is that Anderson chooses to give advice at all.
The implicature we can draw from it all is that Anderson's enthusiasm for the topic overrides his concern for his positive face, but that the conflict between these two concerns remains, and is visible in the nervous flaws in his linguistic performance.
In scene four, Anderson's uneasiness is ultimately of his own making, but in scene six it is the confusing and confrontational nature of the speech situation he finds himself in which unnerves him.
Stoppard's authorial comments at the end of the scene, stating that Anderson is "out of his depth" (p. 66 and p. 73) and "afraid" (p. 73) are actually in evidence throughout the scene in his numerous hesitations (17, out of 52 turns, or 32.7 per cent, compared with the mean figure for his hesitations in all scenes of 13.9 per cent ), longer pauses (4 instances) and unfinished turns (5 instances).
Three instances are especially worth noting.
His initial unease is indicated in his hesitant reference to being on the way to an engagement (p. 65), and his fear and powerlessness at the end of the scene reflects itself in his abandonment of his turn as he "decides abruptly to leave" (p. 73).
More significantly, Anderson's hesitancies undermine his attempts to assert himself in the situation.
Mid-way through the scene, his anger at the taking of his wallet by one of the policemen is apparent in the disjointed nature of his outburst, but his turn peters out timidly as "MAN 3 gently pushes him back into the chair" (p. 67).
The difference between Anderson's words and deeds here is a telling example of the emptiness of many pompous statements he makes in this scene.
Scene six is, as I have already suggested, the pivotal scene for Anderson — the point from which we can see a considerable change wrought in his character.
The first difference we may note is the reduction in the number of performance errors he makes.
The data for scene seven onwards is very revealing on this point.
Apart from in scene nine, where Anderson displays occasional discomfort through his hesitations (4 instances, most notably when explaining to Sacha why he came to the Hollars' apartment (p. 81), and when giving assurances of what he will do to help Pavel (p. 83)), we find very few instances of hesitations or unfinished turns (no more than one instance of each in scenes seven, eight, ten and sixteen).
Even taking into account scene nine, the percentage difference between instances of hesitation in the first six scenes (43 instances) and the last six (5 instances) is 860 per cent, a figure which would suggest that the difference would be perceptible to the reader or audience.
The figures' significance may, of course, be challenged on the grounds that the number of turns taken by Anderson in the last six scenes, and the length of those turns, is considerably smaller than in the earlier scenes, and we would therefore expect to see fewer performance errors.
However, the fact that there is a reduction in these figures is itself indicative of a change in Anderson.
They confirm our impression that, following his traumatic encounter with the Czech police, he becomes considerably less talkative.
Ironically, the most noticeable example comes at the end of scene ten, when Broadbent admits that Anderson's advice on the Czech team's tactics has proved depressingly sound: Anderson's laconic replies implicate his loss of interest in the topic, following scene six, even now that Broadbent actually shows interest in what he had said earlier and allocates a turn to him twice.
A comparison of turn-lengths reveals a marked contrast between the weariness he implicates here and his uncontainable enthusiasm for the subject in scene four.
Examining Anderson's linguistic performance thus provides some major insights into the development of Anderson's character through the action of the play.
The fact that we find fewer performance errors after scene six, coupled with a lesser tendency to talk at length, suggests that he has been shocked out of his absent-mindedness and emerges, at least for the rest of the play's duration, as a more direct speaker.
It is also possible to find support for this reading by considering Anderson's interruptions of other speakers.
4.5 Interruptions
The degree to which characters in dramatic texts are prepared to interrupt other speakers is an important indication of their power and confidence in a given speech situation.
Anderson's interruptions are evidence of both his power with respect to other interlocutors and the level of his concern to remain polite to them.
In the first scene, where he has only marginally greater status than McKendrick (his university is more prestigious), but where McKendrick is a stranger to him, he does not risk threatening McKendrick's negative face (the term used by Brown and Levinson (1978) for the individual's desire not to have one's freedom impinged upon by others) by encroaching on his conversational space through interrupting.
The differential power relationship, however, between Anderson and Hollar in scene three, is visible in Anderson's three interruptions.
When Hollar begins to apologise for intruding, Anderson is able to interrupt to minimise the threat to his negative face, posed by Hollar's imposition on his time (p. 51).
Similarly, in Leechian terms, he upholds the Politeness Principle when he interrupts Hollar again (p. 54) because he does so to affirm enthusiastically that he too remembers Peter Volansky, thus obeying Leech's maxim of agreement, "maximise agreement between self and others" (Leech 1983: 132).
Only in his last interruption (p. 56) is Anderson actually impolite and this reflects his priorities in terms of conversational goals.
While he is generally careful to uphold the Politeness Principle, he wishes above all to preserve his own negative face.
Thus when Hollar asks him to smuggle his thesis out of the country and proposes a solution to Anderson's ethical objections ( "But if you didn't know you were smuggling it" ), his determination to preserve his negative face is demonstrated by the fact that he interrupts Hollar's proposal in order to uphold the maxim of quality at the expense of the maxim of agreement ('smuggling implies knowledge",(p. 56)).
This uncooperative attitude to Hollar is a far cry from that which Anderson displays in scene nine.
Here, his unequivocal response to Mrs Hollar's pleas — "Mrs Hollar, I will do everything I can for him" (p. 82)— is made more emphatic by the fact that he interrupts her in order to say it, and its effect is to affirm his commitment to help at the expense of any considerations for his negative face, a change in priorities which is central to the development in Anderson's character.
A further change in Anderson is visible in scene eight.
His attitude to McKendrick, never very positive but growing ever cooler as the play progresses, is partially indicated by the vehemence of the one interruption that he makes.
His outburst, following McKendrick's denial of the existence of absolute moral principles (p. 78), impolitely reverses the agreement maxim to emphasise his disagreement and although in his next turn he apologises for his outburst, the impression made by his interruption remains strong because it is accompanied by a violent gesture: The importance of physical gestures as a part of the dramatist's characterisation is indicated by this episode, for, as Stoppard's stage directions emphasise, Anderson's anger is strongly conveyed through the one physical action.
Stoppard's stage directions are so explicit here that we do not have to watch the TV production in order to appreciate the impact of Anderson's action.
The interruption is so violent that we are led to infer other reasons for such a display besides his annoyance with McKendrick himself and, significantly, Stoppard's comments hint at this in the words "uncharacteristic" and surprising".
Although Anderson's attitudes towards his interlocutors may have changed in the example above, we actually find few interruptions because the speech situations dramatised in Professional Foul are generally co-operative.
Scene six, though, is a clear exception, and its confrontational atmosphere is reflected in the nature of Anderson's interruptions of the Czech police captain.
Two out of the three instances ( "I don" t believe any of that… "(p. 71) and" How could I have told him that?
I don"t speak Czech (p. 72)) reverse the Politeness Principle by emphasising his disagreement and carry with them the clear implication that he believes the captain to be lying.
His interruptions therefore coincide with his rejection of the principles of politeness to which he has hitherto adhered quite consistently.
5 Politeness
In examining politeness I will take an eclectic approach, borrowing from Brown and Levinson's work on the Politeness Phenomenon (1978) and Leech's Politeness Principle (1983).
I do not favour either approach above the other but am using each where I feel it is most illuminating.
Thus, in the first scenes of the play Anderson tends to favour positive politeness strategies (complimenting the addressee's positive face) and among these, Leech's approbation maxim is prominent: in both scenes one and two he praises the universities to which McKendrick and Chetwyn belong, and thus, by association, the academics themselves.
What is at question, though, is his sincerity.
Anderson's praise of McKendrick through praising Stoke University is undermined by the fact that, only one turn before, he reveals that he does not know which university McKendrick works for, despite beginning as if he does ( "And how are things at…er…" ,(p. 47)).
His lack of knowledge of McKendrick and his field implicates to the reader that his praise is superficial, McKendrick's work being, as far as Anderson is concerned, both uninteresting and unimportant.
Likewise we suspect, from the ignorance he displays in scene one of Chetwyn and his work, that his praise of Chetwyn's university, in the next scene, is given merely to uphold the approbation maxim and thus the Politeness Principle.
His praise of Hollar, in scene four, and Crisp, in scene five, by comparison appears more sincere.
Anderson seems genuinely pleased to see Hollar when he appears outside his door (as indicated by his unequivocal directive to him to "come in" ,(p. 51)).
He does remember Hollar from ten years ago and that he did get a good degree (p. 52), and his enthusiasm for the fact is indicated by the emphatic nature of his approbation —"Of course you did.
Well done, well done".
However, a telling indication of how greatly Anderson values his negative face is visible in the reduction in the level of politeness he uses when Hollar asks him if he will smuggle his thesis out of the country.
Apart from interrupting him, Anderson threatens Hollar's positive face by peremptorily dismissing as "childish" (p. 56) one of Hollar's ideas of how to get around Anderson's "ethical" objections.
The inconsistent level of Anderson's politeness here reflects Anderson's awareness of his greater power in the speech situation.
He knows that he is not obliged to be polite, and he exploits this fact.
Anderson's praise of Crisp, in contrast, reflects his different perception of the power relationship in scene four.
There are telling indications of his almost awed nervousness before he compliments Crisp.
He pauses once and then hesitates again before making the statement, "I" m a great admirer of yours "(p. 58) and the level of formality he uses to introduce himself (giving his own name after using the formal vocative" Mr Crisp"to gain his attention) is absurdly high for the situation.
That he displays such politeness is extremely ironic considering Crisp's and Broadbent's own rude behaviour, early in the scene, ignoring Anderson while discussing their 'scoring"opportunities off the football field.
Anderson's respect appears undiminished, however, and is further indicated in his upholding of the modesty maxim.
Before giving his information on the Czech team's tactics, he hedges twice (I realize it's none of my business' and "…you may think I" m an absolute ass, but… "), apologising in advance for giving them potentially faulty advice and for threatening their negative face, while at the same time criticising (in Leechian terms," maximising the dispraise of") himself for doing so (p. 59).
He uses the same strategy in scene one when he realises that he has failed to infer from McKendrick's prompting that he should have recognised him.
Trying to repair the damage done to McKendrick's positive face, he asks to be excused for his own inadequacies: Anderson's upholding of the modesty maxim is augmented by the emphasis he puts on the sincerity of his apology (the tonic syllable in the first sentence falling on "am" ), stressing that he is fulfilling the felicity conditions (Searle: 1969) for that speech act.
At this stage in the play, Anderson displays concern not to infringe the Politeness Principle and this is also the case in scene eight.
Even after his violent outburst (p. 79), he makes an apparently sincere apology (Stoppard's stage directions tell us that Anderson is "chastened" when he makes it).
By the final scene, however, we infer his dislike of McKendrick from the fact that having seriously impinged on his negative face by placing Hollar's thesis in his briefcase and putting him into a situation of considerable personal danger, he makes no apology for his action whatsoever.
Whereas in scenes one and eight, Anderson strives to uphold the agreement maxim, he now makes no attempt to minimise disagreement and threatens McKendrick's positive face by emphatically stating "No, no, don" t be ridiculous."
(p. 93).
The absence of politeness moves might, in other circumstances, be regarded simply as evidence of a narrowing in the social distance, but here, because of recent negative statements Anderson has made to others about McKendrick (notably his invitation to Broadbent in scene ten, "Go ahead and clout him if you like" (p. 83)), we are more likely to infer his contempt for him.
If scene sixteen is notable for the absence of politeness, scene six is remarkable for Anderson's inversion of the modesty maxim.
The scene contains the strongest examples of his pomposity as Anderson repeatedly attempts to assert himself.
This is noticeable in his regular use of metalinguistic directives demanding the attention of his interlocutors (for example, "Now look here…" (p. 65) and "now listen to me…(p. 69)) and his emphatic use of what Searle terms" illocutionary force indicating devices"1969: 30) or IFID's (as abbreviated by Levinson 1983) when making his demands.
By making their status as speech acts clear, these statements are both more direct and more impolite.
Anderson attempts a show of strength by using the IFID, "I demand" five times and "I insist" once, but his insecurity is indicated by the fact that he has to support his demands by asserting that he has the status permitting him to make these speech acts.
Anderson initially gives his academic status — "I am the J. S. Mill Professor of Ethics at the University of Cambridge" — invoking both his personal position and the prestige of his academic establishment, but the pomposity of such a reversal of the modesty maxim is absurd when his interlocutors speak little or no English.
When, later, he addresses the English-speaking captain he again reverses the modesty maxim when stating,"I am a guest of the Czechoslovakian government.
I might almost say an honoured guest "(p. 69), but these, and further modesty maxim violations now function as statements of the felicity conditions upon which he bases his threats: Anderson" doth protest too much", however, and the forcefulness of his language is a far-from-convincing attempt to conceal his insecurity.
He feels it necessary to emphasise the closeness of his connections with the government by the reference to having played host to an MP, and also stresses the sincerity conditions ( "I speak the truth…" and "I assure you…" ) for his speech act of threatening.
The ineffectiveness of his threats has, however, already been indicated by the captain's ironic question, "Do you know the Queen" ?
The "question" violates Grice's maxim of quantity in that it requests information which the captain neither needs, nor is interested in, and implicates not his concern at Anderson's threats but rather his awareness of the professor's empty pomposity.
Moreover, the fact that he fails to realise the ironic force of the question, and rushes into affirming that he does know the Queen is ample demonstration of the extent to which, beneath his posturing, he has lost his composure under the pressure of the situation.
Although Anderson does not demonstrate a similar degree of pomposity when interrupted by the chairman, in scene eleven, it is here that he shows the most glaring disdain of politeness moves.
His substitution of a new paper for the one he was invited to give is a major impingement on the negative face of the conference organisers and his audience, yet he does not use any redressive action to limit the damage.
His only polite response to the chairman's objections is to uphold the tact maxim ( "minimise the cost to others" ) superficially by claiming that his paper is not a "technical" one (p. 88) and stating that he will 'speak a little slower".
In contrast to the early scenes, Anderson violates the agreement maxim, arguing that he "wasn't invited to give a particular paper" and his reformulation of the chairman's description of his action being a "discourtesy" into being merely "bad manners" implies his disagreement over the enormity of his transgression.
Before, Anderson has attached some seriousness to the question of "bad manners" , telling Hollar that "the history of human calumny is largely a series of breaches of good manners" .
But here his use of the expression is used to much more ironic effect.
In addition, Anderson appears even more impolite when replying to the chairman because he appears not to be upholding the Co-operative Principle either, thus implicating his antipathy for the Colloquium.
6 The Co-operative Principle and Anderson's language
I have used pragmatic principles derived from Grice (1975) already, but the maxims of quality and quantity are of immediate concern to us here because, in scene eleven, Anderson fails to provide the chairman with an adequate explanation for why he has chosen to give a new paper.
The only "reason" given by Anderson — "I changed my mind" (p. 87)— clearly violates the maxim of quantity in providing too little information, and his excuse, that he "didn't realize it mattered" , violates the maxim of quality because, being a Cambridge don who has been to a number of overseas conferences, he will be well aware of the procedures involved.
As in scene six, Anderson withholds information but there are important differences in his reasons for doing so here which implicate a major change of attitude.
In scene six, he demonstrates his absent-mindedness when, talking to the captain, he unwittingly alludes to his primary motive for coming to Czechoslovakia.
His response to the captain's surprised question, 'so you came to Czechoslovakia to go to the football match, Professor? "(p. 71) is, initially, to violate the maxim of quality (" Certainly not") and then to imply that this is not entirely the case by violating the maxims of quantity and relevance when he provides three excuses for not attending all the sessions of the Colloquium instead of admitting the truth.
This is noticeably similar to scene one where he repeatedly violates the maxim of quantity to avoid admitting that he knows nothing about Chetwyn: In both scenes, Anderson attempts to avoid divulging information which could compromise his academic credibility.
He is as determined to preserve his positive face here as he is to defend his negative face in scene three.
One deduction we might draw from this is that the examples of Anderson's modesty noted above, when seen in the context of his more pompous utterances and these attempts to preserve his academic credibility, are more likely to be viewed simply as superficial politeness strategies than as being genuinely meant.
Another important point in relation to Anderson's infringement of the Co-operative Principle emerges from Anderson's argument with the police captain, where he occasionally reveals too much about his conversation with Hollar.
This unwitting co-operation prompts the captain to spring awkward questions on him unexpectedly, and Anderson's flustered reaction is to implicate his reluctance to co-operate any further by twice flouting the maxim of relation ( "I believe you implied that I was free to go" and "I insist on leaving now" (p. 71)).
On both occasions the violation of the maxim, in contrast to earlier instances we have examined, is deliberate, and asserts his wish, indirectly and politely at first and then by a bald on-record demand, to leave the speech situation altogether, a fact which strongly implicates his insecurity in it.
This is a major area of difference between the two scenes, for Anderson's assuredness in scene eleven is indicative of a preference for the formal speech event in which his utterances are prepared in advance and where, crucially, he has the greatest speaking rights.
His awareness and exploitation of these rights enable him to achieve some success in making criticisms of the Czechoslovakian government.
Also crucial to the accomplishment of this aim is his awareness of the potential ambiguity of language, an awareness which reveals itself on a number of occasions in his conversational behaviour.
The urbanity which we perceive as part of Anderson's character is frequently related to his violations of the maxim of manner.
It is immediately noticeable when he fails to return McKendrick's greeting and draws attention, aphoristically, to the linguistic paradox emerging from their comments on the photograph of Anderson ("Young therefore old.
Old therefore young.
Only odd at first glance"(p. 44)).
It is, though, more overtly apparent when he attempts to limit the damage to the atmosphere of the conversation caused by McKendrick's accusation of his insincerity when praising Stoke university: Rather than make a straightforward denial, Anderson tries to diffuse the tension with humour by playing on the literal sense of McKendrick's accusation. his display of urbane wit brings about some laughter from McKendrick but it also elicits a sardonic comment which is a valid observation on Anderson's character.
He describes Anderson's "verbal felicity" as "an occupation for gentlemen" and evidence of a "higher civilization alive and well in the older universities" (p. 48), and correctly identifies the ingenuity but superficiality of Anderson's playing with language.
Anderson himself, in scene five, remarks on the fact that language allows him to 'show off a bit"(p. 63) but this comment occurs in the context of his longest turn, which is the most obvious example of him violating the maxim of manner.
The sophistication of this turn is indicated in its formal lexicon and its syntactic and semantic complexities (both visible when he reverses Wittgenstein's famous statement to produce his own aphorism, "Whereof we cannot speak, thereof we are by no means silent" ) but he uses this complexity deliberately to obfuscate the sense of his utterance and to enable a swift escape to the World Cup qualifier.
The success of this violation of the maxim of manner is indicated in the uncertainty of the chairman, and Professor Stone's admission of his confusion — "Well, what was the question?" (p. 63).
Anderson's urbanity is an amusing, though rather negative feature of his character.
We sense that beneath the linguistic competence which he displays in the play's early scenes, he is not actually committed to anything beyond language itself, apart from football.
He occasionally uses his verbal felicity as a means of protecting his negative face, just as he does when he makes his ethical arguments for turning down Hollar's request deliberately complex.
However, one of the most important areas in which Anderson's character changes is the way he uses his command of language to markedly different effect in his lecture in scene eleven.
This change can best be described in terms of a shift away from the Interest Principle, as defined by Leech, towards the Irony Principle.
Whereas in the examples taken from scenes one and three, Anderson fulfils the Interest Principle by merely 'saying what is unpredictable and hence interesting"(Leech 1983: 146), in later scenes he uses irony to implicate propositions which might be too face-threatening to be made directly or ironic understatement to be deliberately impolite.
An example of the latter is Anderson's condemnation of McKendrick's drunken and hypocritical criticism of the footballers ( "May I remind you that you profess to be something of a pragmatist yourself in matters of ethics." 
(p. 85)), but the irony of his lecture has a much more serious aim, criticising, as it does, the human rights record of the Czechoslovakian regime.
The enormity of the face-threatening content of Anderson's lecture provides the reason for his failure to provide the chairman with a proper explanation for deciding to give a new paper.
When he does produce these propositions he does so through ironic positive politeness, more precisely through superficially observing the approbation maxim: Anderson's irony here is much more successful than that which he uses when arguing with the captain in scene six (where his ironic statements concerning human rights in Czechoslovakia actually prompt the captain to ask further awkward questions (pp. 70–1)), because he exploits the potential ambiguity of the academic discourse appropriate to a lecture.
He uses the indeterminacy of language to convey, through a single utterance, two very different propositions to the audience.
His lecture is a very good example, therefore, of "pragmatic ambivalence" (Leech 1983), conveying, on one level, an academic argument which is appropriate to the speech event, but on another level, a strongly political protest which is not, and which he may deny was intended if challenged.
Although his lecture is curtailed by the fake fire alarm devised by the Czechoslovakian authorities (itself an indication that the ironic force of his lecture has not been lost on the audience), Anderson's calmness (significantly indicated by Stoppard in his stage directions, p. 91) as he gathers up his papers, not only contrasts sharply with his panic in scene six, but indicates that he feels he has made an effective protest.
That he has used his linguistic skills to make such a protest, where before he has been content merely with linguistic cleverness, marks an important development in his character and it leaves the reader with a distinctly more favourable impression of him at the end of the play than at the beginning.
7 Conclusion
What I hope to have shown in this article is that the use of discourse analysis and pragmatics to reveal significant areas of Anderson's character proves very successful in explaining more precisely how Anderson's vagueness, loquacity, urbanity and pomposity are evinced in his linguistic performance.
The analysis has also shown that the level of formality used by a character in conversation with other characters may be a revealing area of study in determining a character's sense of his or her own power and confidence in a given conversational situation.
Such analysis provides is with a relatively precise, and theoretically sound methodology for dealing with perceivable changes in character.
What the analysis of Stoppard's characterisation of Anderson also reveals, however, is the enduring importance of stage directions and authorial comments as an influence on the way we interpret a character's behaviour when we read a play.
Stoppard's comments on Anderson, for instance, at the beginning of the play are very likely to influence how we interpret his uncooperative conversational behaviour in scene one, even if , in later scenes, we infer different motives.
Finally, although characters within the play itself cannot be treated as objective observers, there are occasions, as with McKendrick's sardonic comment on Anderson's urbanity, where their statements on others in the play may be accurate and influential on our interpretation of characters.
The perspectives of other characters are important, and one shortcoming in this incomplete analysis lies in concentrating analysis on one character.
It is, perhaps, rather artificial to interpret character "development" almost exclusively in terms of that character's own behaviour and motivation and to ignore the influence of other's actions and statements.
It might also prove illuminating if we adopt a dialectical approach, considering, for instance, the conflicts between different characters' conversational behaviour.
The degree to which, for instance, McKendrick's "breezy" manner contributes to the conversational confusion of scene one is an important question not answered by analysing Anderson's behaviour alone.
However, such concerns are beyond the scope of this article, and although we are not always able to separate out the different areas of linguistic interest in the characterisation of an individual in a dramatic text (many individual character traits are receptive to a number of different linguistic approaches), the large number of insights into characterisation offered by discourse and pragmatic analysis indicates the large extent to which they may be used effectively by the student of dramatic texts.
Moreover, the fact that characters may be successfully interpreted by means of these linguistic approaches presents a strong case for characterisation once again being regarded as a legitimate object of the critic's attention.