

Reading the language itself: some methodological problems in D.C. Freeman's "According to my bond" : King Lear and re-cognition".
William Downes, University of East Anglia, UK
This note has been occasioned by Freeman's article which I believe illustrates certain fundamental problems in the study of language and literature.
Freeman constructs a highly schematic reading of King Lear in terms of a cognitive theory of metaphor, which views metaphor as a mapping from a source domain which is ultimately derived from bodily experience onto a target domain which is more abstract (Lakoff 1987, 1989).
Viewing metaphor in terms of an underlying "analogue model" , which characteristically maps the concrete or understood onto the abstract or unknown, is not new (see Black 1962: 222, Black 1979: 31; Gentner 1982).
Constraining the analogy, as a matter of psychological structure, to a schematisation of real or vicarious bodily experience is new.
It is part of a general theory of cognition developed by George Lakoff, based on Mark Johnson's notions of bodily experience as the ultimate basis for, and explanation of, conceptual structure (Lakoff 1987, 1989; Johnson 1987).
Lakoff views this theory as part of an "internally realistic" set of claims about the mind (Putnam 1978, 1987; Lakoff 1987).
That is, the theory aims to be "really" true of human minds, a true way of characterising cognition, but relative to some conceptual scheme.
Thus other true ways are also available, conceptually relative to other schemes.
In fact, both Lakoff and Freeman present cognitive theory as some sort of philosopher's stone, an ultimate explanatory vision in which "meaning" is finally grounded,(Lakoff 1987: 269).
As regards metaphor, the cognitive approach appears to share something of both semantics and pragmatics.
Metaphor is not just a matter of semantic features — it has to do with the above large-scale schemas.
But neither does it appear inferentially open like "creative" or "poetic" metaphor viewed pragmatically (Black 1979; Sperber and Wilson 1986).
This is because metaphorical mappings, and hence readings, are ultimately constrained by what appear to be universal cognitive structures.
These forms underlie and explain both individual figures and the overall structure of the play.
We are told that the two abstract "image schemas" , BALANCE and LINKS, explain how we can and should best explicate and understand King Lear, because that is how both overall pattern and individual metaphors and actions are objectively structured by the human mind (see section four of Freeman's article).
The strategy that Freeman is following is similar to that of classical structuralism (e.g. Lévi-Strauss 1963) now melded into a Lakoffian brand of cognitivism.
We ought to be suspicious of claims to such a privileged interpretation.
Freeman readily admits that he is "interpreting" .
He nevertheless insists that the "range of plausible" and "scale of valid" interpretations is constrained by the theory to which he adheres, although argument is admissible and he himself has progressed in understanding within the constraints imposed by the theory (rejecting the PATH schema in favour of the BALANCE one).
To the complaint that cognitive linguistics unjustifiably limits how one might legitimately understand the play, Freeman might reply in the following ways.
First, the cognitive model which structures the mental space in terms of the schemas of BALANCE and LINKS admits of diverse more superficial realisations, for example the "financial-numerical" metaphors of the play, and this diversity means that a number of alternative image schemas could also arguably explain the patterning.
We can present arguments and evidence about this.
Second, that Lakoff (1987: 317) certainly admits of a limited relativism as between ways of conceptualising a domain within the same language, since the system is not monolithic.
(This is the intra-language consequence of Putnam's internal realism.)
Finally, however, when the chips are down, Freeman would have to claim that any true account that was incompatible with his — that makes his false or irrelevant in some sense — would be a misinterpretation of the play's intrinsic structure, that cognitive model which really underlies it.
Ultimately, Freeman must reply, following Chomsky (see Freeman's note 16), that we are working towards a true theory of the rich structure of the mind, and if this constrains possible interpretations, that is simply the way the mind works.
The best cognitive theory we have motivates the best valid interpretation we can get.
What about other proposed understandings?
They must be "conceivable" in terms of our cognitive theory otherwise they couldn't arise at all, or if they did, would refute our theory (see below).
But the permitted alternatives that do arise must be: There are a series of methodological and philosophical problems in this framework of assumptions.
Let's try to disentangle and clarify some of them.
Those who employ linguistics to study literature form some kind of social network with distinct practices and a skeletal institutional framework, defined at least by overt inter-disciplinary norms.
This definition is much too facile if one considers the multiplicity of practices, the history, the sociology and institutional settings of this inter-disciplinary area.
The many acceptable practices of "our community" might fall under two general headings, theoretical and interpretative/critical, as illustrated in Table 1.
Empirically, there are myriad contexts of text consumption.
For example, one might listen to a radio play while cooking, send a sonnet to a lover, or answer an exam question on the play or poem at A-level.
One might write a witty and savage review for The Observer.
Table 1 suggests some of the definitive things that people do with texts in the linguistics and literature community.
Put this way, 2A, the practice of reading language itself, self-conciously understanding a text as an illustrative example of one's linguistic theory, is an extraordinary and peculiar hermeneutic practice.
Just how culturally specialised it is, is shown by the fact that the vast mass of literate persons, or indeed, literary persons, wouldn't be able to recognise nominalisations or instances of passive voice in a text.
Similarly, before reading Lakoff and Freeman, most readers, myself included, couldn't tell their inventory of image schemas from their elbows.
Presumably, approaching a text from a linguistic point of view only ceases to be extraordinary, when one compares it both to the complex peculiarity of the other ways texts are handled, and the fact that the "naive" reader is a mythical beast.
Still, the linguistic approach is peculiar enough to have to offer rationalisations for itself.
What is unusual about "reading language itself" is that a text is self-consciously perceived, interpreted, explained as a tokening of a theory of language.
This string is a "restrictive relative clause" ; that string is 'structurally ambiguous three ways as represented by these three phrase markers'; this string forces "the re-analysis of the preceding string as its conjoin" ; all these utterances "violate the quality maxim, and given these premises we can deduce these implicatures" ; this definite article "presupposes existence" ; that 'semantically anomalous phrase demands a mapping, taking x as an "" analogue model "" of y "; this mapping" conforms to a schema of BALANCE which originates in bodily experience".
And so on and so forth.
Now this practice is prone to appearing always and automatically correct.
If a text which is palpably linguistic is construed with a linguistic theory as its most immediate context, then the text must, indeed, illustrate the features of the theory of language in question, as long as the surface marks are not inconsistent with the categories of the theory.
The text is deducible from the theory,(and certain secondary assumptions).
But that doesn't prove that the theory is either correct as a theory of language, much less as a literary interpretation.
As is well known, data under-determines theories.
That is, no set of observations ever entails their explanation.
Just observing something doesn't tell you how to explain or understand it.
The other side of the coin is that the same observations can be deduced from alternative theories.
Science wouldn't exist without such under-determination, since nature would dictate its correct explanations.
Similarly, and for the same reason, it is of the nature of text to under-determine its interpretation, particularly so in the case of literature, so that a text is objectively compatible with an open array of readings relativised to different contexts and interests.
A text would entail its interpretation only if meaning was exhausted by sense, the coded or literal meanings studied by semantics.
It is only because a text formally under-determines its interpretation in context that a space is created for pragmatics.
And this also makes possible the minor type of conceptual relativism in which texts are construed in different ways.
Freeman's position is inimical to this view.
He assumes that there really is a limited range of valid interpretative schemas for the metaphors of King Lear, revealed by him, and caused by deep cognitive constraints.
The actual language of the text, shaped by these constraints, warrants the interpretative/explanatory application of the categories that theorise the mental constraints that purportedly cause the language to take the shape it does.
You can correctly understand the play only in the light of cognitive theory and its schemas, which ultimately find their source in the projection of bodily experience.
This framework presumably imposes interpretative limits.
If it is to have empirical consequences it must rule out many other ways of understanding the pattern of metaphors.
We must conclude that this uniquely valid account of King Lear only became available to us with the theory of cognitive metaphor and the publication of Freeman's paper.
It is perhaps more likely that Freeman has been deceived by the fact that the linguistic patterning of King Lear so under-determines how it is to be interpreted that it is compatible with his and a large number of other theories of metaphor which all equally predict it, and hence appear to explain it.
The more schematic, abstract and inclusive a theory, the more comprehensively explanatory it appears to be.
In fact, viewed as a social practice, literary criticism takes advantage of this property of literary (and other) texts.
It may be the institutional exaggeration of the property of the under-determination of interpretation by literal meaning that makes the practice of literary reading possible.
A literary text is compatible with an indefinite number of contexts yielding indefinitely many readings and re-readings.
These contexts are created by many different social and personal interests and activities; essay writing, examinations, reviews etc.
Presumably, framing these contexts, there are limits to human conceptual schemes.
But as far as these are substantive we can"t formulate the limits, since we can have no idea of what is inconceivable.
I doubt very much if the limits are reached by requiring that possible underlying systems of analogue-models be restricted to a set of schemas of the sort suggested; to those ultimately explicable as grounded in topological structures based on bodily experience.
That is not to say, by the way, that the patterns of analogy noted in the theory are not common possible strategies of metaphor.
I will conclude with a few general points about the methodological problems raised by Freeman's paper.
One issue involves the status of linguistics as a science and the effect of that status on its interpretation of literature.
This relation bridges the traditional gap between the cultures of "causal" science and "hermeneutical" interpretation.
Part of the problem of Freeman's paper is a stance more appropriate to the former, applied to the latter.
But linguistics itself is arguably not a normal science, in the sense that there is a single agreed paradigm for research or application.
Language is theorised in many different ways by various approaches within linguistics, and across several disciplines; philosophy, psychology, literary theory.
Some methodological disputes are very deep and long-lasting.
Therefore, to assume a sort of (even internal) scientific realism about the results of Lakoff and Johnson's cognitive theory, to claim to have discovered truths about mind and language which give a special explanatory validity to the interpretation of King Lear, is to impose one view of linguistics, one view of science, and one view of how a literary text is to be interpreted on the text.
I have argued that to present an analysis in this way is inappropriate.
The assumed realism of linguistic theory is problematic in literary contexts.
First of all there is the lack of paradigm consensus among those studying language.
Then there is also the continuous historical revisions within linguistics itself.
A methodology that consists of the application of successive linguistic frameworks as an interpretative grid over literary texts makes hollow claims to definitiveness.
The linguist will predictably return again in ten years time with a new philosopher's stone, a true theory of the mind and meaning.
So the attitude of definitiveness is inappropriate.
Yet in one sense every interpretation makes a claim to truth of some sort, or rests on premises and presuppositions treated as true.
This is a symptom of quite a deep property of language use.
Every statement makes truth-claims — a prerequisite for literal meaning to be constituted — even if the speaker is not committed to the truth of what is said.
Furthermore, science proceeds as if each successive theory is true, or an approximation to the truth.
This is probably one reason why linguists are inconsistent, making definitive claims they know that they themselves will shortly supersede.
However, let's grant that the linguistic theory is true.
It still remains the case pace Freeman that a literary text like King Lear is not definitively explicable.
The context of literary interpretation — for example, explicating a system of poetic metaphors — demands that the text be "open" .
The literary context in our culture creates a situation where relevance may be achieved in alternative ways, so as to constitute this"openness' for criticism.
Perhaps this conflicts with the realistic thrust of scientific linguistics, if this results in definitive interpretations based on the real nature of language.
A definitive interpretation of the metaphorical structure of King Lear would 'solve "or" explain"the play, which would then lose all further interest.
A realistic linguistics of literary texts which yields interpretations of this sort is incompatible with the institution of literature as it presently stands.
We can profitably ask if realism in linguistics is incompatible with"openness' in textual interpretation.
If what I said above is true, since any observationally adequate linguistics describes the superficial form of the text the unique source of linguistic insight must reside in the deeper explanations offered by the linguistic theory.
Hence, "rubbish in, rubbish out" in linguistic interpretation.
The central act of faith of our project is that theories of language itself provide a context of interpretation which yields insights of value applied to literary texts.
That is, we construct the relevance of our linguistic readings by the mobilisation of belief in our theories.
But we have to be aware that other contexts of interpretation, other ways of reading, are also constructed by the institution of literature.
These readings may view the moral, political, personal or socio-historical as constituting more central contexts defining the relevance of texts.
When the linguist claims superior insight based on a realistic linguistic theory that yields a definitive account, linguistics could be viewed as being in a rhetorical power struggle with the other relevancies constructed by literature.
The linguist is claiming the interpretative authority of a scientific understanding.
This threatens the other contexts, personal, political, historical, mentioned above.
And to the degree that the claim is to definitiveness, it threatens the complete "closure" of the text to further interpretation.
Instead, what linguistics owes us is an account of how textual"openness' is possible within the social and psychological context of literature, and hence how alternative readings can be explicitly accounted for.
Linguistics shows that literary interpretation is not ineffable.
Its explicitness clarifies and deepens interpretative understanding.
The linguistic theories also create striking alternative contexts for understanding, and explaining other understandings — how they might have been arrived at.
Freeman's account seems to have a number of unfortunate consequences.
It appears to follow from his realist and essentialist assumptions that other interpreters over the centuries must have lacked real insight into the metaphorical structure of King Lear.
This is because the denizens of the past didn't have access to the theory of cognitive metaphor, and that way of understanding language.
However early performers and audiences construed the metaphors or the financial/numerical language, it is fairly certain that they didn't explicitly understand them in terms of Freeman's image schemas, or as explicable in terms of their bodies.
To the degree that Freeman's is the best and correct understanding of the play's real and essential structure, earlier interpreters misunderstood it or understood it less satisfactorily or more superficially.
This would be true of Shakespeare himself and his audience.
This seems an absurd consequence and signals that something is wrong with Freeman's basic assumptions.
Equally absurd in this context — although not in the domain of syntactic knowledge — would be the Chomskyan argument that Shakespeare et al.would have unconsciously known the requisite schema, although this knowledge would not have been introspectively available.
That is, previous readers would have grasped the play in Freeman's terms, in so far as they validly comprehended it, but they would not have been aware of so doing, meantime foolishly talking of it in irrelevant, non-explanatory, "folk" ways.
Finally, let's be mischievous!
If the mind is constrained to produce and understand metaphor in terms of this inventory of abstract grounding, derived from bodily experience, aren't other understandings of any figurative structure literally inconceivable?
Hence, Freeman is refuted since presumably other explanations are conceivable, even if it turns out they aren't very interesting.
Or maybe any conceivable account is translatable into cognitive theory, which then loses all empirical content.