

Literary Pragmatics edited by Roger D. Sell, 1991, Routledge, London, pp. xxiii + 264 ISBN 0 415 05601 2
Literary Pragmatics aims to establish a common interdisciplinary ground of research for linguists and literary scholars by looking at the "writing and reading of literary texts as interactive communication processes…inextricably linked with the particular sociocultural contexts within which they take place" (p. xiv).
In the introduction to the thirteen papers presented at the symposium held at Abo Akademi University in 1988, Roger Sell tries to weave together the different strands by highlighting their central common core, namely that literature is a communicative discourse strictly related to ideology and power.
The volume puts forward the case for a new discipline.
However, the essays presented tackle the issue of literary texts as communicative events from very different perspectives, which undermines the core assumption that a separate discipline called literary pragmatics could ever stand as distinct and self-contained.
It is even unclear whether the individual contributors see their particular expertise being subsumed into this new academic category.
Nils Enkvist opens the collection with "On the Interpretability of Texts in General and of Literary Texts in Particular" .
Enkvist dismisses the connection between interpretability and syntactic well-formedness and argues that literary communication should be defined in social and dynamic, and not in linguistic terms.
By asserting that "a text is interpretable to those who can, under the prevailing circumstances, build around it a text world — or scenario" (p. 9) he focusses on the relationships between text and the reader's response and the text and the world created by the text itself.
Despite its discursive nature the strength of the article lies in the emphasis placed on the dynamics of the communicative process in which the reader plays an active part and the text is the spring-board for the creation of the textual world.
Also concerned with the reader's response to the literary text is Richard Watts' "Cross-Cultural Problems in the Perception of Literature" .
With specific reference to the complex Swiss-German linguistic and educational situation, Watts suggests that the reader's response to English literary texts is marred by "the reality set of the sociocultural group to which that reader belongs" (p. 28).
Although first language acquisition is strictly related to the development of social identity, Watts' conclusions that a certain set of perceptions is characteristic of Swiss-German readers (p. 37) and that it "may be traced back to the kind of socialization into literacy" (p. 39) are debatable mainly because the presented responses seem to be applicable to various categories of readers.
In addition, given that  "little or no empirical data can be given…the ideas must be taken as well-formed speculations" (pp. 28–29)(my italics).
Thus, in spite of its potentially innovative ideas, the article needs to be taken cum grano salis.
Adrian Pilkington's "Poetic Effects: A Relevance Theory Perspective" challenges the conventionalist position and moves away from the social relativity of the definition of literature.
By adopting a text-based approach he searches for an explicit and comprehensive communicative theory which can account for the psychological effects created by poetic texts.
Sperber and Wilson's Relevance Theory (1986) is adopted for the discussion and evaluation of two different interpretations of a Robert Frost poem in terms of optimal relevance.
The article convincingly argues for the adoption of Relevance Theory not only for its explanatory but also for its evaluative applications.
In her impressive article "How Indirect Discourse Means" Meir Sternberg challenges the traditional water-tight typology of reported speech and thought on a threefold basis: formal, semantic and perspectival.
Sternberg argues that the lack of fit between the canonical types of reporting modes and the actual textual evidence creates ambiguities which are functional since "communication also provides a counterset of disambiguating mechanisms and processes" (p. 93).
Starting with a quotation from Larkin's account of the writing of a poem, Peter Verdonk's "Poems as Text and Discourse" aims to link the formal features of poems to the dynamic communicative process existing between the author and the reader in the process of the creation and of the consumption of literature.
However, two major objections can be raised.
First, the analysis focuses mainly on the textual features of Larkin's "Talking in Bed" thus only partially highlighting their communicative value in the author-reader interaction and, as a result, re-proposing the formalist idea of foregrounding only with a veneer of novelty.
Second, the whole analysis is based on the mistaken assumption that the poet and the reader's text worlds are identical, an assumption which is not only difficult to prove but also in contrast with the core ideas of the collection.
In "Understanding Metaphors in Literature: Towards an Empirical Study" , Gerard Steen states that his article is concerned with "the actual behaviour of real readers" (p. 110), that is with usage versus the idealised use of the language.
Steen outlines a theoretical model for approaching empirically the problem of understanding metaphors, i.e. of how their identification, appreciation and evaluation is determined by the reader's cognitive process and by their linguistic structures.
Having rejected the sceptical opinion that "anything can be literature" Willie van Peer supplies a rigorous and objective answer to the question: "But What is Literature?" 
The article defines literature in opposition to other language uses as "a body of symbolic objects expressed in human language, possessing textual qualities of a non-institutional, homiletical kind" (p. 138).
Such an aseptic definition, however, seems rather sterile as it focuses mainly on literature as text thus ignoring its socio-cultural values.
The most successful article is "Two-Way Pragmatics: From World to Text and Back" where Ziva Ben-Porat traces the movements between literary representations of reality and the world by looking at the concepts of Jerusalem and autumn in Hebrew literature.
Ben-Porat clearly shows how literary tradition can prevail on the objective conceptualisation of reality and how it influences the reader's weltanschauung.
 "On Free and Latent Semantic Energy" , by Claes Schaar, is based on informants' interpretation of fragments of language in isolation, such as literary quotations, maxims and sayings.
Schaar distinguishes between those fragments which possess "free semantic energy" , i.e. which are interpretable out of context, and those which possess "latent energy" , i.e. those that need contextual information in order to be processed.
The research however does not take into account the readers' literary competence and the analysis of the responses tends to be rather impressionistic.
Balz Engler's "Textualization" and Jerome McGann's "What Difference Do the Circumstances of Publication Make to the Interpretation of Literary Work?" investigate specific aspects of text production which are relevant in the interpretative process.
Engler rejects a notion of pragmatics based on the distinction between text and context and defines textualisation as "how a work of verbal art may become a literary text" (p. 182).
However, despite its title, the article does not investigate the complexity of the issue, limited as it is to the historical aspects of textuality, such as spelling, punctuation and typography.
McGann argues that extrinsic factors, such as the circumstances of publication, are relevant to the hermeneutic of a text by analysing two examples: Blake's Address to the Public and Byron's Fare Thee Well.
The article shows that the interpretation of a text cannot be limited to a purely linguistic analysis and advocates the case for the "bibliographical and productive histories of the poems we read" (p. 205).
A review of politeness from the Augustans to the latest linguistic theories is offered by Roger Sell in "The Politeness of Literary Text" .
He discusses the politeness dimension not only in the relationship between the fictional personae in the textual world, but also at the macroscopic level, i.e. between reader and writer.
Also concerned with the communicative process in literary texts is Ernest Hess-Luttich's"How Does the Writer of a Dramatic Text Interact with his Audience?
On the Pragmatics of Literary Communication".
This outlines a theoretical framework for future empirical research specifically geared to analyses of dramatic performances (versus dramatic texts).
Although the model presented is meant to be "a step towards the combination of a semiotics of media and a sociology of communication" (p. 239) an assessment of its value must await its implementation.
This book is testament to the strengths and weaknesses of an edited volume, especially in this case where the articles are the proceedings of an international conference presumably outside the control of the editor.
Despite the common cause announced in the introduction to the volume it is difficult in the present state of the art to see how the different methods and purposes can be said to constitute a unified and coherent approach to the literary text and thus to conceive of literary pragmatics as an "antidote to the fragmented specialization so characteristic of the humanities in the 20th century" (dust jacket).
The varied articles presented introduce the reader to some of the most recent strands of linguistics and literary studies but they cannot be thought to constitute a unified discipline.
However, although the collection does not fulfil its ambitious target, the eclectic nature of the essays can be seen as a positive feature, as the volume highlights the complexity of literary communication and indicates areas for further research.
Sonia Cunico Lancaster University, UK