

Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative Theory by M.L. Ryan, 1991, Indiana University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis, pp. 291, ISBN 0 253 35004 2
Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative Theory provides an interesting and accessible account of the state of the art in the theory of fiction and the semantics of narrative.
This is the author's own statement of intent in the Introduction: Ryan sees the essence of fictionality as an act of "recentering" , whereby the world of reference of a text is shifted from the actual world to an alternative possible world, which functions as the actual world of the universe projected by the text (Chapter 1).
The potential of a possible-world approach to fiction is successfully demonstrated in a typology of genres based on the nature of the accessibility relations between the actual world and the worlds functioning as actual in the universes projected by different types of texts (Chapter 2).
The marriage between logical semantics and textual semiotics does not, however, prove equally felicitous when the approach to the truth-conditionality of counterfactuals developed within modal logic is extended to the semantics of fictional universes by means of the "Principle of Minimal Departure" (Chapter 3).
The basic claim of the Principle is plausible enough: in constructing a fictional universe we rely on what we know about the actual world unless instructed otherwise.
This explains, for example, how, faced with the sentence "Babar the King of the elephants went to a restaurant" (p. 52), we project our experience of real human beings onto the fictional character, and infer that the reason for Babar's action must be the aim to satisfy his desire for food.
By the same token, however, says Ryan, one would have to conclude that the world of "Jabberwocky" contains computers, and that Little Red Riding Hood could, if so inclined, peruse the writings of Aquinas.
The provisos and conditions that Ryan adds to the Principle in order to rule out such possibilities are as clumsy and ad hoc as the questions that they aim to answer, at least to the non-logician.
Apart from the fact that a possible-worlds approach inevitably runs into problems if it insists on the logical completeness of fictional universes, it seems to me that what is a valid issue in logic does not necessarily have to be a valid issue in poetics and narratology.
If one's priority is an account of fiction as a cultural rather than as a logical phenomenon, the problem of how readers deal with Babar's behaviour is worth considering, whereas the problem of the library resources available to Red Riding Hood is not.
In order to avoid unnecessary complications, the Principle of Minimal Departure needs to be inscribed within a cognitive theory of comprehension, or within a typology of fictional genres such as the one suggested by Ryan herself in Chapter 2.
Following a tradition dating from Searle (1975), Ryan emphasises the illocutionary rather than the ontological dimension of fictionality, and devises a formula aimed to capture the essence of what she calls the "fictional transaction" .
This consists of a set of rules expressing the author's intention that readers construct a discourse situation taking place in a non-actual reference world, and involving a "substitute speaker" and a "substitute hearer" (Chapter 4).
In Chapter 5 Ryan shows how her formula can be used as a "fiction automaton" , that is as "a machine built for the purpose of telling fiction from non-fiction" (p. 80).
A rather mixed array of verbal and non-verbal phenomena (including metaphor, "tall tales" , drama, paintings, etc.) is systematically put through the test, in an ambitious attempt to provide a survey of the range of applicability of the notion of fictionality.
Not surprisingly, the results are not always convincing: lyric poetry, for example is labelled as non-fictional even when it includes references to non-existing objects (such as blue deer in Georg Trakl's poems), while narrative and nonsense poetry are assigned to the fictional domain.
As far as drama is concerned, it is claimed that its only truly fictional element lies in the relationship between the actors on the stage and their audience.
The problem here, as far as I can see, is not so much the definition of fictionality in itself, but the fact that such a definition is applied in a rigid and almost prescriptive fashion, with little consideration for the way in which texts are actually perceived in their own contexts of production and reception.
It is unfortunate that a "prototype" approach, although repeatedly mentioned, is in practice largely sacrificed to a view of fictionality as a discrete and strictly defined category.
In the second part of the book, the possible-world approach is extended to the description of narrative universes, which are attributed a modal structure consisting of a world presented as actual and a wide array of private worlds resulting from the character's mental activities (Chapter 6).
Within this framework, Ryan makes two main proposals, both extremely interesting: first, that plot-advancing propositions can be defined as those that affect, directly or indirectly, the relationships between the worlds that make up the textual universe (Chapter 7); second, that the aesthetic value or "tellability" of a story partly depends on the degree of diversification of such worlds, i.e. on the richness of the virtual situations and events that only exist in the minds of the characters (whether they are explicitly mentioned in the narrative or need to be inferred by readers)(Chapter 8).
Computer science makes a dual contribution to Ryan's approach to narrativity: on the one hand, it is a source of useful concepts and metaphors for the representation of narrative boundaries (Chapter 9) and of plots (Chapter 10); on the other hand, it is presented as an exciting (although impervious) testing ground for models and hypotheses concerning the production and interpretation of narratives (Chapter 11).
Ryan's proposal for a program for automatic story generation which fulfils her three criteria of creativity, aesthetic awareness and understanding will probably remain beyond the boundaries of feasibility for a long time, but it does demonstrate both the need for a greater contribution of ideas from poetics and narratology to developments in artificial intelligence, and the insights that can be gained from the attempt to shape one's ideas about narrative into a form that can be learnt and applied by computers.
Ryan's final chapters show that progress in this field will not so much be a threat to novelists, as a potentially rewarding challenge for narratologists.
Elena Semino Lancaster University, UK