

The Language of Jokes: Analysing Verbal Play by Delia Chiaro, 1992, Routledge (Interface Series), London, pp.x + 129, ISBN 0 415 03090 0
After Cicero's De Oratore, there appear to have been very few analyses of the language of humour, comedy and joking, until the twentieth century: at least, judging from Milner's (1972) account, cited in Delia Chiaro's bibliography.
Milner implies that only the development of modern (structuralist) linguistics has made this possible, and certainly the work of Hockett (1977), Milner himself, Nash (1985) and now Chiaro (who draws quite heavily on Hockett) provides detailed linguistic and structural analyses of the different kinds of word- and sound-play that are exploited in jokes.
Such play of language is the particular subject of Chapter 2 ( "Inside Word Play" ), but, as the subtitle suggests, is really one of the main themes of the book.
How to define the topic for discussion is obviously a difficult one, as Nash admitted in his own study, which had ostensibly a broader subject for its title, but which also had a great deal to say about jokes.
In her Introduction, problems of definition are not discussed, but all of Chiaro's chapters have "word-play" in their titles, not "joke" ; this suggests a feature, however, rather than a genre — which the term "joke" normally implies.
So, word-play is found in many other kinds of discourse type, especially in Britain and British English, such as advertising, and headlinese: it is actually so prevalent as to be inescapable ( "It's enough to make your kin scrawl" — Crayola).
It is therefore not surprising that Chiaro occasionally has recourse to quoting from advertising campaigns (e.g. the Perrier eau advertisements, p. 39).
The term "joke" itself covers a wealth of different kinds, and is difficult to distinguish from (related?) genres like graffiti (much quoted from here) and cartoon (one produced on p. 81, but not discussed as a type).
Are limericks jokes?
To Chiaro they are "jokes in verse form" (pp. 58–60).
Jokes are clearly an important part of our popular, oral culture, from play-ground to night-club, that only partly translate well into print (in cartoons and comic postcards), outside children's joke-books.
Like other kinds of popular culture, authorship is not important.
Jokes, especially riddles and 'shaggy dog "stories, are part of a collective consciousness; although many comedians have an idiolectal repertoire, a distinctive" brand"of joking style (contrast Les Dawson with Paul Merton, for example).
What distinguishes one repertoire from another is not primarily dependent on language, of course: subject-matter plays a part, as does age of teller and audience.
Chiaro, inevitably, finds herself distinguishing "dirty" jokes from "Irish" ; "political" jokes from "sick" ; and it would be very interesting indeed if a book could be written from a more socio-cultural perspective on such topics as subject, teller and listener.
(63 per cent of Londoners enjoy jokes about sex and politics; only 33 per cent like practical jokes.
What kind of jokes are currently in fashion?
What age groups swap them?
Where do they circulate: in public or informal circles; the media; "fringe" theatres, etc?)
Chapter 5 ( "Word Play in Action" ) promises at least a look at the socio-linguistic context of jokes, with particular emphasis on, and analysis of, real joke-capping sessions; and Chiaro is to be commended for tackling an interesting aspect of joke-telling, in relation to discourse analysis, that has generally been neglected in book-length studies.
It is a pity that she could not have elaborated on several points, and provided a fuller answer to the question she herself raises on p. 101: "When is it…perfectly appropriate to tell jokes and play with words?" 
This is a particularly pertinent question for foreign learners of English, who are undoubtedly the main target-readership for her book.
We cannot assume there are "universals" of joke-production, any more than there are "universals" of joke-themes (although Chiaro tells us there are some).
The only real answer she provides is the joke-capping session itself, which then forms the topic of the rest of the chapter; but more could be said, for example, on the functions of joke-telling (for breaking down taboos, reassuring, releasing tension, passing the time, indirect criticising, etc); and on the relation of joke-telling to questions of "power" and "solidarity" .
As Frank Muir (1978), notes, the longevity of the riddle is probably due to the fact that, shaped in the form of a question–answer pair, usually"it gives the asker a tiny superiority.
He [sic]knows something which the party of the second part does not know and has to admit that he does not know…
"
Jokes are also an important aspect of intimacy: it is difficult to joke with someone you hardly know; many jokes are "in-group" jokes, or politically hardened into jokes of "us" versus "them" .
Perhaps the most obvious omission in this chapter, however, which analyses joke-capping sessions involving both men and women, is any consideration of the topical question of the relations between male and female discourse, with particular reference to any differences and similarities in joking conventions, in single sex or mixed company.
Two common folk-beliefs are that women have no sense of humour and cannot tell jokes (clearly Chiaro's subjects do); it may well be that certain kinds of jokes are preferred by men: the "shaggy dog" kind or narrative type that begins with formulas like "Have you heard the one about…?" or"A man went into a pub…
"
Research suggests that women prefer the witty comment or anecdote on the spur of the moment.
Virginia Woolf in her Collected Essays writes that women's humour tends to make serious what appears insignificant to men, and trivialise what is important to them.
J.B. Priestley thought that women were good at deflating social pretension: Victoria Wood's jokes certainly do this.
As in other professions, women comics have to be extra-talented in order to compete with men, and have to adopt an aggressive approach (Jo Brand, Ruby Wax and Joan Rivers are three that come to mind).
In the related genre of graffiti-writing, women tend to be more restrained than men, apparently, in their language, although just as preoccupied with sex!
(Not so much with football, or with "tagging" , acts of identity.)
Research in child development suggests that there appear to be no differences between male and female humour, at least until school age, where boys go in for practical jokes more than girls.
My own personal experience of joke-telling sessions in the primary school classroom and of collecting jokes from children aged 5–12, as well as composing jokes for this age-group, would find little difference in the kinds of jokes preferred by boys and girls; although what appeals to children soon palls to adolescents.
There is no doubt, for instance, of the huge popularity of "knock, knock" jokes among young children, with their delightful punch-lines which, as Chiaro puts it (p. 35) combine "the formation of new boundaries with a form of distant homophony" .
Surprisingly, to this reader/joke-writer at least, Chiaro find this kind of joke "irritating, rather than funny" ; perhaps it is her example: Knock knock.
Who's there?
Felix.
Felix who?
Felix-ited all over!
That I am amused by such lines as "Noah/ good place to eat" ; "Doughnut/ask me silly questions" or "Theresa/fly in my soup" (Wales, 1990) raises the important question, of course, here as elsewhere in the book, and equally evaded by Chiaro as by Nash, of whether a joke is still a joke if the listener fails to appreciate it, or if there is no reader- response; is the perlocutionary effect, in other words, part of its definition?
Is this why so many comedians are double-acts, to frame and define the joke, by providing the necessary response, if no one else laughs?
To be speculated on also, is the relation between metaphor and joke in relevance theory terms.
Crudely, the more effort involved in processing a metaphor, the "better" , or the more poetic, the metaphor is supposed to be.
This seems to work in quite the opposite way for jokes, where silence, or a comment like "I" m sorry, I don "t get it" are negative responses to processing effort.
There is no doubt generally that children love jokes and riddles that are predictably structured and heavily formulaic, whatever the fashionable subject-matter.
Chiaro in her chapter on "Framing Word-play" says "There must surely be as many joke formulae as there are people to tell them" (p. 61); "surely" I think not, or there would be no sense of the formulaic.
As the vastly popular so-called "elephant" jokes reveal, freshly discovered and rejuvenated by each generation of children, there is a restricted set of favoured syntactic patterns that tend to recur: "What is…
";
"How do…
";
"Why do…
";
"What do you call…
";
 "What's the difference between…" ;"what do you get if you cross…
":
Such syntactic formulae are not confined to elephant-jokes, and their pervasiveness warrants further consideration and analysis, I think, especially in projects for foreign students of English.
Chiaro herself notes the "What do you get if you cross" formula only indirectly, and then in its "adult" variation as exploited for sexual innuendo by The Two Ronnies (p. 72): What is particularly characteristic of elephant-jokes and their kin is not only their proneness to formulae, but also their semantic anomaly.
This feature is barely touched on by Chiaro, perhaps because she does not see her sub-title "word-play" in terms of semantic violations.
To be fair, it is not dealt with by Nash either, but it is too important an aspect of children's jokes to be ignored or dismissed lightly.
To the adult mind, the shifts of logic that are often involved do not come easily; but children accustomed to personification in fairy tales, or to the surreal and fantastic, can accommodate elephants who do house-work, or noisy peanuts, and the occasional Dali-esque touch: What is soft and yellow and goes round and round?
A long-playing omelette.
Interestingly, it is the semantic anomaly that probably makes this kind of joke far easier to translate from English into another language than the jokes which depend on sound-play or polysemy.
Perhaps Chiaro should have considered this, in her otherwise innovatory, if rather over-long, chapter "Translating Word-play" (Chapter 4), again focused on the needs of the foreign learner, but inevitably raising the perennial debate about whether true translation is possible.
The problem of the culture-specificness of jokes is an important one, and as she illustrates, has implications for the industry devoted to the sub-titling of comedy films.
There are, in fact, whole areas of English popular culture which, because of word-play, are alien to foreign speakers, including advertising, mentioned earlier.
But it is not only word-play that has to be explained: humour may depend deeply on cultural knowledge, on knowledge of famous people, customs, music, literature, and so on: What do you call a bald Cheshire Cat?
Yul Grinner.
How do ghosts like to travel?
By British Scareways.
Advertisements similarly depend increasingly for the understanding and appreciation of the "joke" on the reader's knowledge of other aspects of culture, frames of reference, texts.
Foreign learners increasingly need access to dictionaries of "English Language and Culture" (for example, Longman 1992) not only for literary texts, but for London Underground posters.
Take one of the current series advertising Thomson Holidays "City Breaks" : Florence.
Magic.
Roundabout £189.
The native (adult!) speaker takes the simple collocation of three words as simultaneously the name of a character and a classic children's television programme.
Intertextuality is pervasive in British joke-telling and humourous genres.
The graffitist who scrawls: Mr Kipling writes exceedingly good books will hope that the reader knows of Rudyard Kipling the writer; but the joke is lost unless the reader also knows the syntactic frame of the advertising slogan Mr Kipling bakes exceedingly good cakes.
This kind of intertextuality is indirectly noted by Chiaro on p. 37, with reference to Typhoo tea.
It is a kind of parody, of course, another source of humour and word-play.
It reappears in the kind of "shaggy dog" joke, much popularised on BBC radio in the 1960s, in the series My Word.
Long, rambling jokes led to the inevitable punch-line and climax, which was a parody of a well-known quotation: for example "A thing of pewter is a joy forever" ; "With all her vaults I love her still" ; "The aitch of chivalry is gone" .
Joking apart, there are a few errors, mainly of pronunciation and transcription, that mar Chiaro's otherwise very readable book.
The final syllables of Pistacor (p. 33) are surely /teik /not /telkr /with no final /r/ in any case, in RP.
Coincidentally, at the bottom of the same page, the last sentence is meaningless.
The riddle J28 on p. 39, does not, I think, in British English, depend partly for its effect on the insertion of /r/ after the syllable in Weetabix; in fact, it would spoil it: What do Frenchmen have for breakfast?
Huit-heures-bix!
(Weetabix) In her rendering of a Cockney rabbit's speech on p. 53, I feel that it is more likely to be "'ere, I ain't 'arf 'ungry" , rather than "" ere, I "m n" arf "ungry" .
The transcription of the word"Wales' on p. 71 is given as /ueilz/, rather than /weilz/.
Perhaps I don "t see the joke, but the rendering into German on p. 97 of: Is rugby a game for men with odd shaped balls? does not work with" Eier ", even if it is an informal variant of" testicles "(it also means" ovum "!), because it does not mean" ball"as well.
And I can find no word Bellen to mean "balls" anyway, only Balle.
This must be the first review ever to end with a load of balls!