

So you're doing trade at the moment in er agricultural economics I think Bob  has asked you  to  prepare some data on er wheat and cotton  trade.
Before we come on to to look at that, can somebody tell me what's happened to world trade say in the last century, what are the major trends in world trade?
Right O K yeah, that's the first thing to note, yeah world trade has increased dramatically  any other features?what's happened to the composition of world trade?
Manufacturers has had an increase trade 
Right O K yeah  that's the other major erm  feature is that agriculture's share of world trade  has declined and manufacturing  er  share of world trade has increased and I've got some er  some numbers here   erm  so it says  before the first world war agriculture's share of world trade was over fifty percent, today it is less than fourteen percent   okay, so agriculture's share in world trade is declining and has been declining er essentially over the  the last sort of seventy years or so.
Right, okay any other features about world trade, it's been growing in volume, er, composition has changed,anything else  how about the prices of agricultural goods?are there any characteristics?
as quickly as the manufacture of goods
Right okay yeah the produ there  in actual fact they're, they're relati , yep, you, you're correct in that they   they may well have risen, right, over that period  erm  but relative to manufacturing prices they have fallen  erm  let's just see if there might be some data in there er  erm  I thought I had some.
I thought I had some information here on prices  I can't seem to find it  no    no, can't find it, never,never mind  I've got some  figures here  that looks at erm  the growth in in trade,er  it's quoting, it says   between nineteen eighty and nineteen eighty nine  the volume of agricultural trade grew by twenty six percent   alright,however that was  that represented one third of the growth in manufacturers     so agricultural trade is rising  but it's rising much less rapidly than manufacturers   here are the prices, at the same time, so between nineteen eighty and nineteen eighty nine  er food export prices fell  the prices actually fell  from eleven percent,t , by eleven percent  whereas the unit value of manufactured exports, so essentially the prices of manufactured exports   rose on average by twenty percent  okay  so over the, over that period  agricultural prices were actually falling in real terms but if we widen  erm  s the window  that we're looking at, erm,agricultural prices probably haven't fallen  er say  over the post war period or  if we er go back to the beginning of the century, agricultural prices probably haven't fallen  erm  but relative to manufacturing they certainly have  okay.
So what can account for er  this changing composition  of trade?
Why, for example are  as manufactured trade increasing in importance?.
Can this be  just because er incomes have risen ?
tt right, yeah, incomes have risen throughout the world    and that impacts  both on  the demand for agricultural products and also the demand for manufactured products   but what do we  know about demand elasticities  for those two products, income elasticities    what's the income elasticity of manufactured goods?
Greater than one  less than one.
Yeah, that's right  income, income elastic manufactured goods,as a result  manufactured erm sectors will be growth sectors simply bec , because as income  per capita rises, people spend proportionately more of their increased income on manufactured goods  and as a result  we witness a marked increase  in trade in manufactures.
We would only need to witness a marked increase in trade  and there will certainly be an increase in demand  why do you think trade has increased?and trade isn't a necessary condition  it's just that trade has tended to grow at the same time as  erm  as demand is growing.
Why might trade be growing?
Because of transport
Okay, yeah  better transport technology   a hundred and fifty years ago it was impossible t erm, to transport meat across the Atlantic  it's er, very straightforward now  so the advent of different types of, er, transport technology and improved transport technology  erm, has made tr , facilitated trade  okay.
Any other reasons?
The increase in trade in manufactured goods has taken a particular  form of trade.
There was
 intra industry trade, yeah  good  so what is  intra industry trade?
Yep, its as, yeah, the simultaneous import and export  of a similar good, or the good of as , of the same industry.
Right so we could think of erm, cars for example erm, you know we both export cars and import cars.
okay Why do you think that  intra industry trade has risen, say over the last fifty years?
Then why aren't we self sufficient in car production?
People want more choice unclear 
Right 
That's right.
As people get wealthier  right, one of the, they not only demand more goods, but they demand a wider variety of what is essentially  or what can be classified as the same good.
clearly a  Skoda is  markly different from a Jaguar  right, but as far as, er, classifying trade goes, they'll both go under automobiles  right   okay.
One of the main reasons why intra industry trade has risen, right, is not only that consumers want to purchase different varieties and different qualities  of the same good  erm  that it , it's very easy to differentiate the product in manufactured goods  right.
We've only got to put a go faster stripe  on a Skoda and chan , change the wheels and we've got a different product   we've got a diff , yes, we've got a fast skip as opposed to a slow one,alright.
So because we can differentiate manufactured products very easily, and because consumers want differentiated products, alright   get increase in demand  for manufactured goods  right.
The reason why trade has risen, one reason is because, erm, transport costs have declined in real terms  and secondly w , why  can you think of anything else that may have increased trade in manufac manufactured goods?
Better technology in production.
mm 
Okay, so what, what are you er, hitting on about there Adrian?
Better use of machinery and tractor and erm  farmers are at risk of  I know  that manufacturers who could have to progress these capital  to get better returns .
That's right, I mean we, we've got decreasing  erm, oh sorry, increasing returns to stay off decreasing costs.
Right now with manufacturing  er in manufacturing, there are economies of scale, huge economies of scale   this is why we find  look at cars again  that Toyota plant in Derby  produces all the Toyota Corollas or whatever for the whole world, it's not just for the U K market  alright.
So  cars produced in Derby are exported  back to Japan , right cos all the , all the er production of that one car, is focused in one plant, why is that the case?
It's because there are economies of scale, alright, now if there are gains to be had from specialisation  right, and consumers want specialised products  and the best thing to do is to, erm, focus production in a single location  right, for lots of different  variants of this product  right.
So we see massive car plants  right.
Why are they so large, because their economies of scale to be reaped  right  companies are trying to erm, to accrue those economies of scale  right, cos if they don't, they'll go out of business, because their competitors  alright  will produce, erm, a superior or a lower price product  okay.
So that's been very important, economies of scale are very important in the  erm, the growth of manufacturing trade, which is essentially  an increase in  intra ,in  intra industry trade, as, as opposed to inter industry trade which is  erm  the simultaneous import and export of  er products from different industries like    produce capital goods, so  cars  and in return you will import  erm  food products  but the  majority of the increase in world trade has come from this  intra industry  variety.
Can I just turn over  let's look at th the other side of that coin, right, because it has  all the explanations  er as to why agriculture, agricultural trade has declined in relative terms  right.
Let's just think about  well first of all the incoming elasticity argument  right, manufactures greater than one  agriculture less than one  right, that's one reason why agriculture is a declining sector  right, it's also a declining sector in world trade for the same reason  that it has got a low income elasticity  whereas manufacturing had a high income  elasticity    now, consumers like variety  in food just as much as they like variety in manufactured goods  alright, but what's the problem with agricultural goods?they're essentially homogenous alright  wheat is wheat   sugar is sugar.
Now although we can differentiate the products  er agricultural products, we can only do that  at the very final stage in processing,by and large, where there's much less scope after product differentiation  right, at the er the raw material erm level, which is where most agricultural trade continues  er, most trade in agricultural products is in the raw commodity, not the refined commodity  the refining, there might be the processing and the manufacturing, tend to occur in the country of consumption and not in the country of production   a number of complicated, erm political reasons  erm   alright, but the but because there isn't the scope for product differentiation  alright, we haven't witnessed an increase in  intra industry trade in agricultural goods whereas we have done  for manufactured goods because there is scope for  intra industry trade  er   yeah  scope for product differentiation.
Okay what about economies of scale?
Are there economies of scale in agriculture?
Are they in to the same extent, or lesser extent than manufacturing?
experience the  optimistic  small 
That's right, I mean why di why have we got the structure of agriculture as we have, you know why   why do we still have an  atomistical industry  right, it's not just a, a freak of nature, there are economic laws, erm,and opinion  that s , that structure the industry and it's because you just don't get economies of scale staying in agriculture.
If you did get economies of scale then we wouldn't see  small, erm,small independent producers  right we, we'd see a, an increase in the concentration of the industry, like we have witnessed in virtually every other sector
Not like  the population grows faster than the food so
mhm
the population would demand more manufactures because food can't keep up
Say that again, Marthus 
 Marthus said that food production cannot keep up with the population increase 
Right mhm
And so the population increase would  they wouldn't be able to.
That's right, that's what you said in  in you saying that populations were going, growing geometrically agricultural production was going arithmetically, as a result a population crash is inevitable, alright, but we know that isn't true  right, because what, when  Marthus was writing, erm, Marthus was writing just before in the agricultural revolution in the U K so  agricultural technology hadn't improved very much in  sort of five hundred years right, but in the next hundred years  agricultural production, erm, or productivity grows far faster than erm,than population.
 Marthus didn't actually foresee this erm, this leap in from technology and as a result he was basing his predictions on past trends so if past trends had continued would have been, he w , he would been correct but because erm, agriculturalists started to erm, use technology  and at that time it was a very sort of low technology, but nevertheless it would, would've  production dramatically  you know, you don't think of drainage as being particularly high tech but it can   increase the, the yield on a crop sort of four or five times and so si simple drainage systems would be introduced  erm  ro rotations were being introduced, again rotations you think of being fairly straightforward but  erm  prior to the agricultural revolution rotations weren't used  rotations can improve the fertility of the soil and er yields as well right  okay, so  agriculture produces a homogenous product, by and large and er as there isn't the scope, the product differentiation, and there isn't the scope for specialisation  because we'd need a farm  the size of Europe to feed the world with,w with wheat.
Now clearly  it makes no sense you might be up to  producing the Toyota Corollas in a three hundred acre plant, erm, near Derby  right but we can't employ the same techniques in production  er when we're making agricultural  why not  well essentially we're using land, we're using land intensively  alright  and there comes a point when, erm you reach dis-economies of scale and start  er accruing dis-economies of scale in agricultural production and that scale of plant is very, very small  but after about  well it depends what type of production  er what type of product you're making but, you know, there aren't many farms over five thousand hectares, now five thousand hectares is a huge farm, it's massive  alright  but it still only produces a fraction of, say U K output  cos there's  several million  hectares of erm   but the reason why you don't see these very large farms is that  you just don't reap the economies of scale  alright, because essentially we need land  erm  and you're farm gets so big that it would take you half the day to drive your combine harvester over to the, the other side of th your farm  just to erm, to harvest the, the wheat  right.
Hasn't there been a move into much larger farms now?
Oh yes, there ha , I mean there are economies of scale in agriculture, it's just that they're, the scope of them  er, is less than er the scope in manufacturing  so I mean, farms used to be a lot smaller and throughout this century, this last century we've witnessed an increase in farm size  alright, but the  I think the optimal, the optimal farm size  is  erm, I think it's about three hundred hectares  okay, er  erm, with three hundred hectares you'll produce a, a pretty  squit proportion of erm total output   but farms used to be  sort of one, two, three, ten hectares in size as we've gone through the farms have amalgamated and increased in size and that's primarily due to economies of scale  , but there are a great deal of economies to be reached, once you've got a combine harvester, once you've got big machinery  alright.
You can't really improve your productivity much beyond that.
So if you just look  at this  the arguments for  er  manufactured, or the increase in manufacturing  er trade  alright  are exactly the opposite to erm, that explain the decrease in erm, the relative decrease in agricultural trade  okay.
Any other  one other factor that might be important in, er explaining this relative change  composition of trade between agriculture and manufacturing?something that's in the news at the moment 
mm yes  get us at a much more  er  er effective role in reducing tariffs on manufactured goods than it has on agricultural goods  and it's only in this last round of G A T T talks, the Uruguay round  that agriculture has been brought into the frame  alright.
Prior to erm Uruguay round negotiations, agriculture was always excluded from the negotiations  right, whereas manufactured goods have been in there from the start, and as a result we've seen a reduction in tariffs  right, on manufactured goods  that's not to say that erm,protectionism on manufactured goods has fallen, it has in certain cases but not in all  cases.
What's happened is that   policy makers 've  shifted the emphasis instead of protecting  tariffs  they're protected using long  long tariff barriers  right which are a lot more invisible to er, to G A T T   don't come under  erm  G A T T regulations, what those tariffs do  nevertheless, tariffs have, have come down in manufactured goods  right, erm, since the second world war when G A T T was er, was established.
But because agriculture hasn't been in G A T T or up until recently hasn't been in G A T T agricultural protectionism has grown throughout that period  right.
Why might protectionism  diminish trade?
Increases confidence
Okay,wh what do you mean there Helen?
Erm,
Okay so that will inhibit consumption consumption essentially 
 
That's right, this is the, this is the effect.
Whether ther there's a  there's a t two pronged effect the first of which is that high tariffs   consumption because prices are higher and therefore consumption will fall  and secondly, if high prices are also charged  farmers to domestic farmers  right then they'll increase their output.
Now if they increase their output  alright  that will displace imports  alright, so protectionism leads to  self sufficiency and by and large self sufficiency is protectionism's raison d'etre, that's why it's there  right it's to increase domestic output of this particular product   .
Does anybody know why agriculture wasn't in  erm  the G A T T it's never,t discussed in the G A T T why it hasn't er included in  like manufacturing is   reason why that is?
Too political
Yes, you're right.
What do you, what do you mean by that Adrian?
That's right it's a poli politically sensitive erm  er, sort of industry  right not only is there  the element of strategic  there's a strategic dimension  right which political importance  right, erm and also  er,s an electoral, specifically electoral dimension.
There's also this thing which is called agricultural fundamentalism  right and the  most developing c , most developed countries, most of the population  live in urban areas  and the  they see erm  er rural areas as being sort of the backbone of society, sort of the  salt of the earth type of  element in society that although they don't participate in themselves  would like to maintain  right and so even consumers may well be   would not want see erm agriculture  obliterated from er, from their country  right because they like the products that erm  that agriculture produces and they think that  you can  of erm  destroying of the agricultural industry would, would pose an unacceptable burden on  the fabric of rural society  and as a result are quite happy to see  protectionism  er fo , for that industry.
Now whether that's true or not I don't know.
I think   erm  the tide is changing to a certain degree er on that point, but agricultural fundamentalism as it's called erm,tt is quite an important er aspect is political  erm  is political motivation for a support or for protectionism  okay.
Erm  right so because trade in er trade in agricultural goods has fallen, one one of the reason for that is because there's been a lot protectionism on  er agricultural goods  the other side of that coin is that protectionism in manufactured goods has has fallen  okay.
Right   why should we be bothered about  protectionism  y'know  why is  G A T so important  presumably there must be gainers as well as losers  from protectionism so   the gainers and the losers  domestic farmers  gainers or losers?
Gainers
Good, they're the gainers.
Domestic consumers  right losers okay  tax payers?
Losers
Yep, losers
Sorry
Yeah, it depends, yeah it depends wh what type of system of support you actually employ  er some systems of support  burden tax payers other  him  er.
The general  say the tax payers  er also lost  erm  third country exporters?
Losers  
Yep they're losers, big losers  erm  third country importers?
No they  they'll probably benefit in actual fact  right there are som there are  third countries don't all suffer  right   exported third country you will suffer but if you're an importing third country you will benefit  right.
Now agricultural    erm  one of the reasons why agriculture hasn't been included in the G A T T is because  governments  right from all sorts of countries have said hands up why agricultural policy, this is a domestic policy, it's got nothing to do with international trade, right there's no international dimension to it  right, you can't  come in here and t tell us that we're  erm  disbanding these protectionist measures  right.
It's a domestic policy, hands off  right and this was one of the arguments  one of those potent arguments that they've used in the last forty years  right but it's incredibly naive  because any domestic policy will have an international dimension  I remember the  about  European Community  right but it wasn't for the operation of the common agricultural policy  countries in the European Community would be net importers of agricultural goods as we were  ten years ago   bec because er of protectionism we've now increased our self sufficiency to the point where were a net exporter of agricultural goods  what implications has th does that have for international trade?
Well if we're  producing more of our own goods, we are importing  less of somebody elses  alright and if we actually become a net exporter  then  we've  erm closing down the markets  of third country exporters  right so not only do we er consume less of er New Zealand lamb than we might do otherwise, right.
Because we're  er a net exporter of lamb  we're also u erm try enter into the, the markets where New Zealand  is er, is exported to  Australia  alright.
So domestic policies will always have an international dimension to them  alright, there are a large number of beneficiaries and losers erm to this policy er to protectionism  alright.
Now just to give you some numbers  erm  on er who gains and who loses  right  erm    right  for the world as a whole  right, erm  the study conducted by    right   nineteen eighty nine  I looked at the cost of some benefits from agricultural support alright, in nineteen eighty six to nineteen eighty seven  in just one year  one crop year  alright.
Now it says on average for, and then essentially we looked at the three main  support of erm  protectionist powers, like the E E C, U S A and Japan  right, and they said that on average  alright  for every one dollar benefit  alright  for every one dollar benefit, one agricultural support,right it actually costs  right  one one fifty dollars   of the general   statistics in order to give a pounds worth of support to domestic farmers, we  er have to  find one pounds fifty  right.
With any protectionism, right, when you, when you, when you protect something that you're doing, you're  erm, you're introducing a distortion  a distortion in the system which leads to a misallocation of resources  alright.
That is effectively we're paying this extra fifty pence  right   resource misallocation  we there is always what's called a dead weight loss  right to intervention, right it's an inefficiency loss or an efficiency loss, due to the fact that we're asking t , in this case farmers, right to using, use resources but farmers aren't the most efficient people in  resources but  in to erm, high tech computer  companies, alright  and if we gave pounds worth of support to a high tech computer company they would be able to produce more value as a result of that pound er than if we gave one pound to a farmer, simply because  erm  that, sort of the high tech industries are more productive, they're more efficient.
Agriculture isn't particularly efficient   economic sense  technically efficient but not  efficient.
Right, so let's just get back to some numbers  erm  looking at the European Community  right, the producer benefits  alright, the European Community   common agricultural policy produces benefits thirty three point three  billion dollars presumably  yes, billion dollars.
Thirty three billion dollars of support  goes to erm  er European farmers, right.
Consumers  a thirty two point six billion dollars  right, this is every year, this is nineteen eighty six, eighty seven  right.
So consumers  foot the bill  right, to the extent of thirty two point six billion dollars.
Yeah, into consumers  in terms of higher product prices
Right
why consumers pay  er in the European Community, it's because we paying them two or three times more for our food than we would do if we purchased it on the world market  erm .
However tax payers are also involved  right.
Net cost to tax payers is fifteen point six billion, right.
Although we do erm get some revenues  from er import tariffs, as agriculture is increased its production and we've become more self sufficient, right, we're importing less, right so we get smaller and smaller tariffs  right and tax payers pay erm  y'know  your V A T for example,where do you think your V A T's going?
Seventy per cent of it is going into farmer's pockets, right, even on goods like m m manufactured goods, we pay V A T on  er manufactured goods and that V A T pays for our contribution to the European Community   and most of that contribution, about seventy per cent of it, goes to farmers  tt erm, right so the next economic costs  to European Community right are fourteen point nine billion  alright that's the size of the dead weight loss  that's the inefficiency  right, of agricultural support  right, losing fifteen billion dollars a year, right, just  going down the er, the  Swanny okay   Just a couple of point just before we er  before we close.
What effect does agricultural support have on world prices?
Does it increase world prices?
Reduce world prices?
Make them more stable or more volatile?
Well t , in general, I mean there are some types of support, er  more susceptible to  but in general .
Reduces 
Yeah, it reduces world prices, why why does it do that?
Erm  it allows domestic farmers to produce their  so they go on to the world market and they've got  everybody else  these things 
That's right.
That's right  you know, we as consumers hav , consuming more of our own products, more of our own agricultural products, therefore we're importing less  right.
As a result, supply supply is increasing  right in the face of re falling demand, right demand falling off because prices have are high.
Simple  supply and demand right now but this is the demand  who say European Community  as is the supply term  erm what we call excess demand occurred   rest of the world.
Are we slap a tax on, tariff  on there that reduces consumption  right, what with world prices, world prices they used to be here  they're now down here  alright.
Effec essentially  supply we we've got over s , over supply and that brings down agricultural prices, erm  and so wor world prices tend to be a lot lower than they would would have been in the absence of support.
Now just to give you  some figures  I mean   same tariff  that's the world price supplied  the rest of the world, in fact the tariff on it  show them that the operation of a a tariff can affect erm world prices  and  just to give you some idea  erm  ah, can we just  you know when we were talking about the net economic costs  well they're within the European Community, those costs.
We can add also to the fact that fifteen billion dollars a year  right, is lost by er third country exporters, alright so we still add another fifteen on there  per year that is  erm  errr oh yes, same study  again  erm  suggest that in nineteen eighty six, eighty seven the year they look looking at, over forty percent, right of support to U S farmers, forty percent, nearly half of all support to U S farmers, quote merely offset the losses created by policies of other industrialised countries alright  so nearly half of the support given to farmers in the U S  alright we t to get them to stand still in in er  in numerative terms, right.
Because the European Community have been heavily heavily subsidising its farmers  right, they were having in order  farmers were too successful, we've had wine lakes, we had erm  er  butter mountains, we had to get rid of that, that was subsidised on the world market, as a result of that world market prices would come down  right  and that induced the agricultural government sorry the er American government to support its agriculture  right and these chaps estimate that nearly half of the support  given to the U S farmers merely offset their losses caused by essentially European Community and Japan subsidising their farmers.
Prices are also made a lot more volatile  right simply because the world market becomes a residual market, instead of everybody buying and selling through the world market  right, if virtually everybody becomes self sufficient, the world market becomes a bit of a misnomer  right, there isn't such a thing as a world market in that in that particular case  it it may just be a few very small countries trade on the world market, it becomes very small market and therefore prone to supply erm fluctuations in any one country and as we know, supply fluctuations on inelastic demand causes price volatility.
So prices have tend to have fallen on world markets for agricultural goods because of support right, and they've also become a lot more volatile and that, and that is the er the source of the international frustration with erm  the common agricultural policy and this is why we've got agriculture er being introduced into the G A T T. Not only does it impose huge costs on domestic tax payers and consumers, it also in incurs erm  a large cost on third country exporters, right now if you think that most of those countries may well be developing countries and agricultural output is their only source of foreign exchange  erm  then er the policies of the rich countries in the West  are erm  a actively  erm  hindering the development prospects of developing countries  alright and that may not be the desired intention.
Okay, thanks very much.