

In your own minds, now, I want you to think of a famous building or a famous site or perhaps a famous street or avenue yes a a statue would be fine, erm or something that's famous, like an animal perhaps, or a park erm or a zoo, although that might be a bit difficult.
You'll see why in a minute.
I'd like you to think if I say building that will give you the idea.
If you think of a famous building that you associate with London okay we are doing life in the city, we all live in London okay, think in your mind of a famous building for example Saint Paul's, what I want you to do, and we'll go round the class, is that I want you to describe yourself
Yourself?
Erm yes if you were that if you were that building
Oh
okay, pretend that you're that building and I want you to describe yourself and and I want the rest of the class to see if they can guess what it is and how long they take it they take to guess okay, and if you think you know what that person is, put your hand up don't don't shout out.
So, for example, if I was doing  there's no writing involved, just a speaking thing.
So for example if I was doing Saint Paul's I'd say right erm  erm  I'm a building in the City of London, very old, very big and extremely famous on of the most obvious things that really stand out about me is my very large domed roof with a little cross on top of it.
Princess Diana and and Prince Charles were married in me.
Shorts


Right, so then you'd guess that I was Saint Paul's Cathedral.
Right I I've taken one of the more obvious ones.
You needn't do that
Yeah, yeah, no.
Do you think you can do it quite well?
Yeah, no, Yeah
you're looking a bit unsure.
Yeah, yes sir.
Don't you want to do it?
Yeah  
Open that window  Sir, can I open that window, please?
Let's try it 
Oh sir 
The reas the reason 


Listen please.
The reason why it's quite a good thing to do is because it gets you into descriptive language okay and thinking about how you describe things, adjectives are describing words.
But take a little bit of time now to think of a building, or a thing, or a place or an animal or a street  Right


Let's start with erm you got one?
I got one.
whose gotta good one?
Yeah let's start again let's start with you.
You gotta good one.
Now if you think you know what  building or place is, put your hand up, but I think what we'll do is actually let him get to the end of his description first.
What if somebody erm, erm thinks of one that somebody else has thought of
erm, now that's a good question 
 
In that case
describe it differently.
Well, you could describe it differently yes, or try and think of another one, all right, right let's start again.
I'm big, and I've gotta a hole in the middle of me all the lines and it's green all the best teams
No let him finish okay, we're gonna let him finish.
what am I?
I couldn't even hear that properly.
okay can we have it again, nice and clear  could you close the door please for me please 
 
Oh yeah an' I'm the best one in England.
I know.
Right,jus just do the first bit again.
I'm big an' I gotta hole in the middle


You're big and you've got a hole in the middle and what's the next bit.
there's grass wiv lines on and whenever  play games


and whenever  get somefink and I'm the best one in England.
Right, I think I know what it is and there's a forest of hands erm they know what it is.
Erm right, Louisa, whatcha think  building or thing is?
Wembley.
Wembley.
Yep did everybody think that?
Yeah.
Yeah, I did too.
That was that was a good description then.
I think the best in England gave it away and the lines in the grass.
The hole in the middle was obviously
When you look down on top 
When you look down, when you are seeing it in on the television pictures, you look down from an aerial view.
Yeah, right, okay very good.
Erm right erm let's have a lady now 
Yeah, yeah I'm, I'm quite big, I used to do  They used to do ballet in me.
They did Cinderella in me, erm


erm I'm not a  featre , I'm a library as well Erm..
Oh, I know what it is.
Erm
Ssh, don't interrupt  .
Erm I'm near a MacDonalds, erm I'm quite kinda   that's it.
What am I?
All right, erm


Erm 
Erm, the Civic Centre.
yeah
Where, where's the Civic Centre 
Old Kent Road.
Old Kent Road, okay, good.
Erm, can we have yours please.
Right, I'm a place, erm


No, there's no need to laugh of course she's a place, that's fine go on listen to her.
Erm got animals, erm got shops and things are expensive in there, you have to pay to get in, it's very big and its got aquari aquariums
Oh that's easy.
Anything else?
No.
No.
Very good.


Erm Daniel.
London Zoo.
Yeah.
London Zoo, Regents Park.
Buckingham Palace.


Right, erm let's have another boy, Stuart, nice and loud and clear
I'm a large place on the river bank


I've got very expensive things in me.
Oh, I know.
Don't have a heart attack 
an' if  somefink flew away I'd fall down.
What am I?
What was that last bit?
I know what it is.
What was that last bit, Stuart?
If  somefink flew away, I'd fall down.
If something flew away, I'd fall down.
Claire
Tower o' London.
Yeah.
Is she right?
She is.
What do they say about the ravens?
if they flew away it would fall down.
Right, okay.
Who's next?
Katie.
I'm very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very tall.
Very well, Claire


I think that was a dead give away that was.
Right 
I, I, I'm a tall building, I've got a bell in me
A what?
every hour I ring out.


Big Ben.
Yeah.


Tall building with a bell in you?
Yeah.
Right, okay.
An' he rings every hour.
Right, who's got a good one.
Oh just 
Louisa.
Nah, I've forgotten it.


Oh, no.
Oh, no I haven't.
Go on then.
Right, I, I'm quite a small building, erm, I got scary stuff in me.
London Dun , London Dungeons 
Sir's house.


Thank you very much.


Right, London Dungeons.
Right, okay go on then.
If you look upon me from an aerial view, I'm open.


Yes, thank you very much Year Seven, carry on Katie.
There's grass in me wiv lines on it.
I know what this is.
This is a bit like  but go on.
And erm a very good team play there and
Arsenal won by the way.


Not Millwall.
I got one, I got one.
No, sir, I got one.
Erm erm I wanna think of one that isn't too easy.
No, sir, I've got one, I've got one that's not easy.
okay, okay, here's one.
I am quite old,
How 


I used to generate lots of electricity.
I'm by the river bank an' I've got four
I know, I know
great big towers which are painted an off white colour, an' I'm featured, an' I'm featured on the front of a very famous album by Pink Floyd.
Who?
Aha, you see you don't know this one do you 
Oh, er.
Sarah  Sarah  's hand was up first.
Banksides Power Station.
Banksides?
Yeah.
No.
What's it called?
Stuart.
Battersea Power Station.
I think, I think there is one at Bankside, but Battersea Power Station was the one I was thinking of.
 
I haven't done one yet.
Let me do one.
Right, Yvette first, she's done one.
Right  right, I'm erm very big, I'm like a football ground, but I'm not and erm lots of crickets have fallen on me before  
 
I'm near erm Kennington
I know, I know.
Please.
and Ian Botham is very popular in my in my place where I am
Please, Please.
Please, please, sir.
Er all right I think you better ask him.
The Oval.
The Oval.
Sir, sir I got one.
Oh yeah .
I  fought you said you 
Have you done one, Stuart?
Right  which one  best one  go on .
One more then we'll do something different.
I fought you said 
Have you got one, Stuart.
Well 
Right, you have as well, which, which one of you's got the best one I wonder.
Go on .
in me
What?
like a crystal
Oh, I know.


Le.. let's let's reach the 
Er .
and yeah it's almost  where  


I can't actually hear  description.
 
Hang on a minute, hang on
That's what he said.
Since when have Center Parcs been in London.


Oh, yeah.


Stop, stop.


Listen, okay.
What I want you to do now is tell me what you've been doing with Miss  this week  Tuesday.
Oh.
Put your hands up please.
Right, Sarah.
We've been erm talking about different transport and  some poems erm  and we do like  what else.
like 
So you've done a transport poems


Right, have you done advantages and disadvantages
Yeah, yeah
No we ain't.
Erm I did some of that with you erm you've written to


Right, I think what we are going to do having done you're doing most of your inner city stuff with Miss  it now, an' I wanna give you some basic skills sheets


You said there's no writin'.


All teachers are the same, that they go back on their word.
Oh, please sir.


 

Right Sarah, could you share with Katie, and you two share as well 
Right, I wanna do something all together now okay, so you can't go right now  Right.
Okay Year Seven, Year Seven, I won't tell you again, you're being too noisy.
Now, the sheet in front of you even if you've got a bundle of sheets is entitled Writing Dialogue, okay.
Now, learning how to punctuate dialogue is not easy because there are a lot of things to remember and I want to see whether or not you can do this okay.
So, first of all, look carefully at the sheets, and if you're sharing with somebody else, look at what you've got between you okay, and, Gemma, stop doing that now.
You don't need to fiddle with your pens or clatter around with pencil cases, I want you to listen.
Right, or rustle the paper even, you're not looking at it are you?
Right, that's better.
Writing dialogue, follow as I read please.
You may think writing dialogue, recording the actual words people use is difficult, it's quite straightforward really.
Look at the diagram and then try the exercise.
I want you to have a look at that diagram and read it to yourself quietly now.
Look at the labelling, which the rules, those labels being the rules for writing dialogue.
Hold on a second please.
Look at it carefully, you've gotta  between you 
Should I start it?
Don't start it just yet
Has everybody read it?
Yes sir.
Right.
I wanna do this together first of all before you write it yourself.
Erm who can do the first sentence for me.
Oh what, change it?
Yeah.
Take this pen, come out here.
On the board?
All right.
Make sure everyone can read it.


I want you to write the exercise and now try this and see if you can do it.
Here, I'll hold it for you.
thanks the the first line.
Yep, the first, the first sentence.
fullstops.
I know, you've gotta put all the punctuation in.
Oh.
The re , the rest, the rest of you look at this and see if he's right.
quiet please 
okay just do what you think's correct  Right, gimme the pen.
Thank you.
Erm next sentence, who wants to do it?
Don't correct anybody else's, you just do the sentence as you think it's right.
 



 



Is anybody beginning to see some mistakes.
Yeah.
I can see a mistake.
should be a fullstop where 
Right, next sentence please.
doctor.
Ethan.
 
 
You all right?
Yes, sir.


Erm not really.
fullstops in .
Right.
 
 
Right, next line.
Erm Stuart.
You said line.
Well, I'll tell you later.
you get it all right.


Hold your breath.
That's a sentence 
That's the end of the sentence, is it?
Mm
It's not.
Sir, I know  finish
Sir, you said line.
okay, sentence, sentence, I want to the end of the sentence.
Can you do to the end of the sentence.
 
Well, you write until you think that the sentence is finished.
Well, if that's what you think, write it down 
All right, Stuart.
Leave it there and the pen.
Now I'm gonna leave it there, 'cos one thing that's emerged is that even though you've had this sheet with the diagram to tell you how to do it, you can't do you can't do it yet.
I know 
You can't write , you can't write in dialogue yet.
So I'm just go through 
Sir, I know what was going wrong.
with you the mistakes.
I want you to pay attention.
Then you can get a chance to do it again in your book.
Now, first of all
No, don't speak, just listen please listen  that includes you.
Right, one thing that you need when somebody speaks is inverted commas okay or speech marks, name, if you read it out aloud name ask the doctor, the inverted commas come here because name is somebody speaking and it tells you that somebody is speaking here, it says asks okay  say asked.
Asked.
Say asked.
Asked
Asked
It's not  aksed , is it?
Sometimes you say that.
Asked.
All right.
Asked.
Yvette, you say asked.
Asked.
Asked.
Gemma, say asked.
 Aksed 
 Aksed .
Say again.
 Aksed .
 Aksed 
Asked.
Asked.
Georgina say asked.
Asked.
Ethan say asked.
 Aksed 
Say again.
A a  aksed 


Victoria say asked.
Asked.
Asked
Stuart.
 Aksed , aksed .
Asked.
Asked.
Asked.
Asked, asked, asked.
okay, okay, all right year seven, that was just by the way.
Right, name asked the doctor.
Now the way he asks that is as a question.
So,
 
So, look,.
Now as your sheet tells you and as you should know if you read it carefully, punctuation marks where someone is speaking come inside the inverted commas, so, the question mark is a type of punctuation, isn't it, obviously, so it comes within the inverted commas. okay?
Sir , there's  somefink wrong there, 'cos she says Blenkinsop  and it should be just Blenkinsop.
Yeah, there there are lots or mistakes, there are lots of mistakes all the way through 
sir,do it.
Start a new line if a new person is speaking.
Yes, well, we'll come to that.
We haven't got to that yet.
Sit tight for a moment and we'll get to it.
Now, name question mark asked the doctor now that is the end a sentence, so we have a fullstop there.
And we have a new line because
Somebody else is talking.
Somebody else is saying Blenkinsop so what I'm gonna do is rub this out
That's not fair 
So, name asked the doctor fullstop, Blenkinsop , Blenkinsop
Replied
Replied the patient 
Blenkinsop replied the patient.
Pardon, have you noticed something?
Yeah,
What?
Yes, speech marks, what else have you noticed?
Comma.
Comma or stop.
Where does the comma come?
after Blenkinsop
Yes, where else?
 
It comes, the comma comes inside the inverted commas.
What else have you noticed about the lines?
You start a new line when someone else is speaking.
Yeah, it does say that here.
You start a new line every time a new person speaks.
They've all got capital letters.
What's all got capital letters, Stuart?
Well, the names an' that.
We know that names, we know that all names have to have capital letters.
An' 
Everything in the speech marks has a capital letter to start it.
Yes, that's right, or to put it the other way round, Sarah, whenever you start speech, whenever you start writing down what the wor the words somebody actually says, Louisa, Yvette, concentrate hard you always use a capital letter.
okay.
So, pardon and Blenkinsop and name all have capital letters.
okay the n, b and the p.
Name asked the doctor, Blenkinsop replied the patient, pardon, new person speaking I said Blenkinsop.
Now, I've done that, you're gonna do the rest yourself in your books.
I need a new book.
Yep.
Sir, I need a new book.
You've got your books haven't you?
yes, go on.
Sir, can I have one 'cos 
Good grief you've got through your books very quickly.
okay I'll have to give you some paper actually.
here's a book.
Sir,
Sir can we do the diagram?
Sir.
Yep.
What do I ?
No don't copy out the diagram, just do the exercise which starts like this
You mean this bit in the middle?


No.
You know where it says now try this, I'd like you to do that exercise, putting in all the punctuation.
Punctuating the speech.
What, re-write the passage that one?
Ye-es.
Yes, it's this one.
I've done the first bit for you.
You, you carry on from where I've left off.
Or, rather, include that, do that first, an' then finish it yourselves.
You don't need to talk to do this.
Sir, you said 
Yes, we are.