

What number are you dividing by if you ?
If I'm halving by ten.
The number .
Ah, right.
Now, that sign which we call in maths, a divide sign or a share sign, doesn't mean halving it, right, it only means halving if you are dividing by what number?
No, not quite.
Well if I, if I have ten pounds for example and I want to halve it, what would the answer be?
half of ten
Mhm, five, what number what number have I divided by.
ten
No not ten, cos you see, ten divided by ten would be one wouldn't it?
So  If I do this, ten and I halve it and I get five, what number have I divided by?
One.
No, ten divided by one, I'll tell you is ten.
Because you are saying how many ones go into ten.
Let me write this down for you, ten divide by one is ten, because you are saying how many ones are in ten and the answer is ten, okay?
Now when I said if you halved ten pounds and you get five, what number must go there?
Any ideas?
five?
Then you'd are saying how many fives in ten, the answer is two.
We know the answer is five 
ten divide by two equals five.
Good.
Two.
That's right.
Yes.
two in there, okay.
Now  that's called halving by dividing by two, that's halving.
But when you see that divide sign, it's not always halving is is it?
Were you halving here when we were dividing by what number.
So that sign means divide by or a lot of school people talk about sharing by, sharing by, dividing by.
Right,so over here then, do you think that's your final answer?
Right okay.
Erm  I wonder if you've remembered the short cut of this.
Has anyone ever told you about moving the decimal point?
See we've done it all without decimal point on the calculator, and we never done .
Right, so we need to really think about all this from scratch don't you, mm, pity the others aren't here actually .
Erm  right, okay, I'll tell you what, copy down  onto there.
Put, can you put a heading along there, decimals, decimals, if we can get you understanding this, you can help a few other people.
Erm 
Who are you logged in as?
My name.
Right.
Move down on to the second page then.
Oh it's S F O nine, yes.
So we select it, now do page down, Danny.
Now it's going to the main menu.
That'll be all right now.
okay?
Right,, what we'll do is we'll get you thoroughly understanding this and you might be able to help the others .
All right?
You want to space this out  so space it out.
Suppose we've got  this decimal here  now, can you tell me what have we got two of, what have we got two of?
. We've got things like tens, millions, millionths, tenths, tens, what is it that we've got two of.
Sorry.
Forty-nine.
Forty-nine?
Why do you say forty-nine?
cos there's another one there.
Right, we've got forty-nine there haven't we, but here there's a two, okay?
Now what is it that we've got two of?
Well, let me give you a clue.
Erm  this here is forty, that's four tens, four tens are forty.
They're tens, four tens are forty.
What is it that we've got nine of here?
Think   What is it that we've got er nine of?
Nine?
Er well I think I'll have to show you .
These are ones here, you see that's saying we've got four tens, forty, and then we've got nine ones, so that's how we get forty-nine.
Now if we go to the right of the decimal point, are these  bigger things or smaller.
They're smaller.
They're smaller things, good.
Now what is it that have got two of?
Tens, ones, smaller than ones?
Nought.
Not nought  I can understand why you said nought.
half
Aah, they're fractions, aren't they.
They're fractions.
Danny it's just occurred to me because we're tape recording we'd better just stop print just at the moment, we'll just leave that off line  we can do it later.
Erm .
halves
Right, now you're thinking it's fractions, tiny, smaller things.
Erm but we, we've got to  tens and tenths, hundreds and hundredths, thousands and thousandths, so it's not halves, but it's 
Quarters.
No, not quarters.
fractions
It's a decimal system, it's what we call a decimal system, decimals.
It's all centered around tens and tenths, hundreds and hundredths, right, so what's the first fraction that you put here then?
Just use ones and zeros, you can't use anything else.
Ones and zeros.
Ones and zeros.
Can't have a quarter, cos there's a four there, can't have a half, cos there's a two there.
One.
One, but we want a fraction  One over  what's the bottom number going to be?
Nought.
Not nought.
Ten.
Ten.
These are tenths, yes.
tenths. okay? and then what are these?
Getting smaller, but you can only use ones and noughts 
Nine
You can't have a nine, only ones and noughts.
Erm 
Right, you've never, I don't think you been shown this have you really?
thousand.
Right, good, only can have ones and noughts.
Now, if we go on, what would the next one be.
How many zeros?
Erm 
One, two, three 
Five.
One, two, three  why did you suddenly leap up to five
One, two, three, four.
Four.
Yes, that's right  Next one.
Right.
How do we say these things 
Hundreds.
Hundredths.
Hundredths.
Yes.
This is thousandths, yes.
How do we say this one?
Ten thousandths.
Well done.
Now, can you just say it again?
Ten 
Ten thousandths.
Yes, you've got to put a th on the end.
Ten thousandths.
Right.
One ten thousandth.
And then this one 
A hundred thousandths
Well done, yes, a hundred thousandths.
Yes, that's right.
And then I haven't got space now, but here you'd have a millionth, six noughts that'd been a million.
Right, now that's what a decimal is  a decimal is, that's what a decimal is, and there are some people think we should write them like this, or you couldn't, you couldn't do this.
It's nice just to see it once, that er really  that nine should be written smaller and then that two should be even smaller still, and that three should almost be unreadable because those things are smaller and smaller aren't they, as you go along there, these are getting tinier and tinier.
Right now   
nice and quiet 
Yes Erm 
You don't have a lighter by any chance, do you?
I'm afraid I don't smoke.
No.
Sorry.
It's all right, I just wanted to see whether this little boy is concussed or not.
Oh.
He's had a terrific bang on the back of his head and 
Yes
I don't know, that's the old time honoured way of doing it, isn't it?
Oh, right
Oh
has an ambulance been called then?
No, he doesn't want to go home.
Is he feeling all right?
Yes, but it hurts when he turns his head.
He's got ever such you know a lump on the back of the head.
I think he needs looking at.
I've told him to go and sit quietly.
Right, how's he up here then.
Why is he up here?
Well, cos I'm Florence Nightingale.
Hah cos I bet, yeah where is he?
Danny, come here a minute love.
He doesn't want to go home 
Yeah, I did.
Right.
Thank you  right now  a really clever thing then that you should know about is if I want to times that number by ten right.
Everything in it will get ten times bigger won't it  Right, and this is why the short cut works, because a really clever way of  timesing that by ten is to make that number come here, that number come there, this number come here, right, this number come here, and this number come here.
We move every number, promote each number, make it go higher, right then we've multiplied that number by ten haven't you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Now, look what's happened to the point.
goes after the nine there, but it's now after the 
Two.
Two.
So some people like to think that the point has moved one place to the right.
What's really happened is that all the numbers have moved one place to the left.
Right, but it's easier to see the point moving than the numbers really.
So the quick way, then, of doing these decimals is just to move the move the point.
Yeah?
Now, if you're doing a divide, you want to demote all the numbers, don't you.
You want to put them one down.
Yes.
So, if you're doing a divide, you want instead of four tens, you just want that to be four ones, don't you?
So, if you're doing a divide, the four will go there, the nine will go there, the two will go there, the three will go there, and the four will go there.
So look what's happened to the point.
It was after the nine, but now it's after the four 
Four .
So that divided forty-nine point two three four by ten and it's as if I've moved the point one place back.
You understand?
Have you met this before?
Not this way.
No.
It's interesting isn't it.
cos you're Year Nine now, and I would have thought somewhere along the line that you'd met this.
Right.
Well, I'll tell you what then Erm How about you  constructing your own worksheet on this.
Would you like to?
It's all right.
On the computer and then you can actually do this.
All right? okay?
Erm so do you want to log in perhaps over there, log in over there , erm and I'll show you what to do and then what, the sheet you do you right, we'll produce for other people, couldn't we.
Right, so, rather than me just do some boring stuff there.
All right?
Just  okay  Right  So if you log in now I think we  will go into Word, right, we'll do this in Word, all right, Word for Windows  so connect to network  Log in as you.
Oh, before we go any further, yes, sorry, no, you're right  Liam can you make sure that computer's on please that one.
Otherwise, oh, it's just the monitor that's off is it?
It's just that otherwise when we choose the printer, we erm  can I just see your screen, Liam.
That's it, press when it comes up connect to network press return, we must get beyond connect to network.
All right?
Now, hold on,we'll just choose the printer before we go any further  Can you just put the printer off line, Liam.
How do you do that?
Just press the top button  Right, we'll select S S F O nine, select printer.
Right?
Mhm.
Page down.
Yeah, takes you to the end of this menu and we can return to the main menu, and er we won't er have to select printer again will we
That's what I did.
sir 
Did you?
That's why  space  
I've saved it on .
You did.
Oh good .
Right, word full stop word  Erm   right, press return a few times  then choose centering button and table, insert table, and now we're going to have a table whe where I thought we could have a number and it can either be times or divide by something and then the answer, so we want how many columns?
Three.
Three so number of columns three, and I'm not quite sure how many rows we want, how many questions we get on a page but perhaps try for thirty something like that, okay okay, now table isn't showing, go to view, oh, go to tables sorry table and you see grid lines is not clicked so click on grid lines, and if the table doesn't show that's usually why.
Erm  right,word in there  decimals in capitals decimal
How'd you spell decimal
D E C I M A L   And then  well you're still in that  put your mouse on there.
Erm  how strange  Oh, I know what's happened, you've still got the centering icon going so it's centering these .
Erm  multiply or divide by, multiply or divide by  M   M U L T I P L Y  space, space or
Or?
Yes do it small or, do it small letters  space, space, then divide.
Mr  there's a telephone call for you.
Do you know who it's from?
Yeah.
okay  
What you doing young man?
Oh, right.
What you doing Danny?
Oh, I see.
Is this on now?
Right.
And what are you doing?
How do you spell divide, miss?
Divide?
What's it start with?
D
Right
I
Mm.
I.
D, right, now what d'you put on the end that makes an I sound I, the magic 
E
Right.
okay.
Divide, that's right, no.
Multiply or Divide with an e on the end
What goes in the end column.
What goes in the end column after you've got decimal multiply or divide?
On here.
Have you done this one, Danny?
What's that, miss?
What goes in this end column, here?
Erm  I think it's the equals I dunno but
Have you done this one?
Don't think so.
Have you done this one, David?
Erm 
What about matey over there.
Have you done this one?
What goes in this end column here?
Decimal, multiply, divide 
I dunno
Might be answer, miss.
Did Mr  tell you and you've forgotten.
No.
Right, well, you'd better wait, ah here he comes
Mr  's on the 'phone.
Mr , oh, lovely, right that's Danny's dad.
Right, okay.
I couldn't tell  what to put in that end column.
Ah, right, right, okay.
Sir, it is alright if I do that art quiz, while I'm waiting to print off my work?
Yes, yes, okay.
Right, Erm  multiply and divide by, put the word by, okay  and then erm answer A N, yes capitals,A N S W E R  Good, now  we've printed this  come out with grid lines, we got to format it so what we do is  
 
table, select table yes,, select table, select
Tables, er   
 
undo table, yes it's a very useful facility.
If you make a mistake with Word, right, then you can always undo it, right, if you ever make a mistake don't panic cos you can always undo it but you only get the one chance if you go on working then you can't undo it.
So what we do is erm  your your cursor must be in the table somewhere, so you then go up to table, select table, then you've got to format, border, and grid  so we want the grid lines to show then in fact you can chose what we want for the outside border one of these    Right,okay   Now what I want you to do is set the questions, right?
Now, what we'll do is this  Erm  Get into your table and put a decimal there, now you can choose, I don't mind what you have, right? so you're going to do some like that right.
Here you're going to tell people what to multiply and divide by.
Now, don't make it too difficult, the big problem with kids sett setting sheets they that they make it far harder than the teacher ever would so do don't be over ambitious, let's have a few easy ones to start with, right.
You leave that blank, because that's where they are going to put the answer.
Right?
Can I put any number like four, three point whatever?
Yeah, you can choose any decimal, it doesn't have to even start with numbers, cos it could start with zero, it doesn't, doesn't have, doesn't have, it doesn't have to be bigger than one, it can be smaller than one.
okay?
Now just so that they see whether to times or divide we've got to tell them, it's no good just putting a ten there is it I've got to say it's a times or divide okay?
So, what I would suggest is  erm  times is easy because you can just use an x for times small x I think.
Leave some space there I think, you need to make a space, that looks good.
The silly thing is there is no divide on here and  the only thing I can suggest really, there is a divide symbol in the computer that we can drag out but to drag it out every time it's too boring really so I'll think we use this I don't like using this, but you see this symbol here, that's what they really use for divide, so if you do that and a couple spaces, people will learn that that means divide, it's all we can do really
Or we could if we could be bothered we could write the word divide.
In this box here?
All right?
Sir, could I  a  a million.
Yes, you can have millions if you want it.
Yes.
Erm  this first two we'd tell people the answers to, so what answer would this one be that times by ten and all that happens .
All that happens when we times by ten is that the point moves one place to the right, so what will be the answer can you tell me the answer to that one?
Will it be twenty-three nine point eight seven.
How do you say that number?
Twenty  erm two hundred and  firty-nine point eight seven.
Good, well done.
This one  is a bit tricky for a second question, I think I might revise this actually.
Erm  made this a bit too hard to start with.
One like that, you see we'd have to move the point two places to the left, so we'll have to introduce another zero.
Yeah, I I've done that.
You've done that.
Now let's get  sheet .
Right, now, what erm what would the answer be here
That would be thirty-four  four  er point seven one eight.
Right now you've only moved the point once.
Oh,
so what will the answer be?
It'll be three point
Good.
well done
this is simple
Sir, I can't get into Windows.
Right, I'll come and help you .
Erm  would you like to carry on with that?
Put all the answers in?
No, we'll leave those for the people to put in.
You just set the questions.
Right, David, what's the problem?
It won't go into Windows.
Erm 
What's that  a gun.
No 
Hugh.
That's a rocket calling out to the crew of the lifeboat, but it's a lovely day.
There's no wind and a boat can not be in danger.
I know, but that they are 
There are.
there are ships 
Sharp.
sharp rocks just under the water and a  
S 
sailing boat might have been cor 
Car 
carried on by the tre 
Ti 
tide 
That's it.
My dad, my dad's on the lifeboat.
Let's go down and watch it go out.
Well done.
The two boys raced down the harbour, when 
Where.
where the crew were 
Gathering.
gathering.
There's my dad.
Hello, boys, a fishing boat has br 
Broken.
broken down and we're going out to tow 
Well done.
them in.
When 
Wan 
Want to come for the run.
There 
There's 
There's room and it won't be dangerous.
Well done.
Are you with me?
Yes please.
Come on.
Su 
Super.
Super.
Once they were cl 
Sorry 
Clear.
Clear of the harbour, Ron's  farver took them to see the 
Eng 
Engines.
Well done.
Twin 
Yes.
Dis 
Diesels, twin diesels.
Diesels.
They are 
Sealed.
sealed so that they can work even if follo 
Flo 
Flooded.
if flooded, that's it.
with water.
There even 
There, there's enough
Enough power to keep the boat going, as fas 
At
As full 
At
At full speed even in the s 
Stro 
strongest gale 
Well done.
They
The.
Then they say, saw the 
Search.
Search lights 
Search lights 
At the loud 
Loud.
Loud hil 
Hailer.
Hailer and the V H F radio, with which the crew can keep in touch with airc aircr 
Aircraft.
Aircraft and helicopter 
Well done.
Half an hour later, Ron pop 
Po po point.
Pointed to a boat dead a 
That's it dead ahead.
Dead ahead.
It was the o 
Oak leaf 
Oak leaf It was the Oak Leaf
A loc 
Local.
Local fishing boat which the lifeboat had came out to helped him 
Don't forget the full stop.
Ten minutes later there were close even 
Enough.
Enough to use the rocket pi 
Pi.. pi.. pistol 
Pistol 
That's it.
it's that 
Threw.
Threw a line across to see the fishing 
Across to the fishing 
Fishing boat and the fisherman was there 
Were then
Were then at 
Able.
Able to put a 
Pull
a har 
Heavy.
Heavy turn 
tow.
Tow rope on boat.
Board .
Board .
They were able to pull a heavy tow rope on board.
Only it 
Once.
Once it had been tri 
Tied.
Tied strong 
Well it could be, but it's securely.
Securely.
Once it had been tied securely.
The captain of the fishing boat waved his hand and the 
Powerful.
Powerful engine of the lifeboat 
R roared.
Roared into life.
It was just in time too as both boats were drifting slowly to 
Towards.
Towards some sharp rocks 
Funny how you go through a line like that beautifully, isn't it.
You know, really well.
Wish 
While.
While this was going on, Ron and Her 
Hugh.
Hugh were call 
Care ful 
Careful to stay out of the way.
On the run back to the harbour, Ron's dad asked, did you enjoy that, boys 
Well read.
Yes, can we join the crew of the lifeboat when we grow up 
Well done, so you haven't done that card before?
No.
I drew up the list, you've got it written in there.
So we'll do the questions now.
Go through them  
Question one.
Question one.
The noise Hugh heard was a
Rocket, gun, backfire, rocket.
So the answer to A, is one A.
Rocket.
Rocket.
You keep that writing up like you done that  it'll look lovely on that page.
R O C K E T 
K E T. Right, that's good.
To get to the harbour the boys A
Raced, cycled,sa 
Sailed.
A. They raced.
Yes, they raced, because you can remember that from what it says here.
Good.
Number 3.
The lifeboats' engines are sealed 
To get more power
To give more power
So they work if flooded.
So they used less fu 
Fuel.
Fuel.
I  fink it's so they worked if flooded 
You're dead right.
B. It's good, you see, that you're remembering what you've read.
It's all very well to read through something, but the main part about it is to remember what you've read.
if flooded F L O O D  E D
Flooded, that's right.
Question four 
Four .
In bad weather the lifeboat 
Has to stop, can only go slowly can go as
At.
At full speed.
I think it's C. 
You're dead right.
Can go  at full speed.
S P E E D
That's right.
Number five.
A line was thrown by 
A catapult, a fisherman, a rocket per 
Pi  pi.
Pistol.
I fink it's C. Rocket pistol.
So do I.
I don't think they had a catapult out there.
A rocket 
Pistol.
That's right, now you've only got one.
Let's see if you can get the hundred per cent.
At the end of the trip, the boys 
Wanted to go home, felt sick, wanted to join the crew  C wanted to join the crew.
That's it.
Hundred per cent.
Wanted
to
To join the crew.
And that is very neatly done.
Now  we'll see if we can find out these words, and then we'll write them in, write the answers in.
So it'll start off with one, but you remember, we do it across the page.
That's it.
So you just start off with number one.
And we are trying to find a word which means men, we're finding the word in the story, which means men who sail in boats
It's number three.
Yes.
Thank you.
Men who sail in boats in number three.
No Hu 
Hugh 
Hugh .
That's a rocket calling out the crew, crew 
That's the word.
Crew.
C R E W  That's one, now number two is another word for pushed.
Pushed, in number five, in chapter, and that's in paragraph five.
I know, but there are sharp rocks just under the water and a sa 
Sailing.
Sailing boat 
Might.
Might have been 
Carried.
Carried  Is that it?
It is.
You're right, it's another word for pushed, you see, in this story.
It could, because you could put and a sailing boat might have been pushed on by the tide.
But it, was, it's more correct to say carried on, but that's another meaning okay?
Number three ran quickly.
Well we know what that is.
Don't we.
Because I think we've already said, we've already put it in two A.
Raced.
Yes, they raced.
Two boys raced.
So you got the same answer for two questions.
Four.
Coming together.
They're coming together.
That's also in six, oh well then so the two boys raced down the harbour
With the
Where the
Where the crew were gath 
Gathering.
Gathering 
That's it.
So they're coming together.
The word is gathering.
Can you get it in there.
G .
G A T H E R I N G 
Yep.
Just.
That's it.
Gathering.
That's good.
Filled with water  Another word to cover the words filled with water.
And you've got to come down to eleven for that.
Only 
We'll read it from here.
They are certain 
Sealed 
Sealed so that they can work even if flooded 
Well done.
As soon as you get to the word, you know it.
F L O O D E D 
And you know how to spell it.
cos it's there
Oh, that's all right.
Doesn't matter, doesn't matter.
Six  very powerful torches  okay, if you'd been in the war, you know what the answer to that was.
Very powerful torches in eleven.
Erm, start there.
They.. then 
Then.
They saw the sec 
What's that.
Oh,sear 
Search.
Search lights 
That's a very powerful torch, isn't it.
S
That's a long word   C H L I G H T S  That's it, well done.
Erm that's powerful torches, seven  showed with a finger .
I think I know what that is and that's in twelve.
Showed with a finger erm  Showed with a finger  oh, crumbs,oh yes, look it's in the first line.
Half an hour later, Ron prom 
Poin
pointed 
With a finger.
Pointed.
P O    I N T E D  Pointed.
Number eight, tightly.
Another word for tightly and that's also in twelve.
Erm I think you can start reading here.
writing  Erm 
Once 
Once it had been tied 
That's fine, we'll do, we'll do, Paul Paul listen, don't be distracted.
We'll do the functions of building afterwards, okay.
At the moment we're doing what buildings are made of.
Right.
Stone, brick, mud, what else could they use?
I've got a classic one, why did London burn down in 1600s, because all the houses were made of?
Look, look, you're 
No, I'm not, I'm helping you understand 
I'm on about 
Listen listen to me.
You can't talk about present day, right.
I'm not on about that, I'm not on about that .
Until you understand 
I'm not on about houses I'm on about main buildings like St Paul's an' all that 
Yeah, but the old churches were made of wood and stone it's important to think about that
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know what I mean 
Yeah, yeah, yeah 
A lot of the buildings in London are hundreds and hundreds of years old.
Yeah, yeah, yeah  
We'll do types of  in a minute so wood, mud, brick stone, anything else, marble  erm wood, mud, brick, stone
copper
no they didn't build metal houses did they?
yeah but that's roofs that's not a structure is it.
I know structures,will you write bridges too
bridges
iron, iron bridges, I reckon that's a good start.
Okay now this is materials, modern materials, okay, right tell me some of the things they make buildings out of now really big 
glass 
Yeah, good one Paul glass what else, what else they make them out of 
Metal
Metals.
Erm reinforced concrete big one for the sixties.
Reinforced concrete.
What about prefabs, what are they made of?
Prefabs?
Fibreglass?
board.
erm what else did they make them out metals, glass, reinforced concrete  
I mean like office blocks like that over there all that that crap
They still use brick don't they?
Yeah, they still use bricks.
Cos that whole building is like looks like metal and er glass though doesn't it?
Yeah.
I think glass, metal, reinforced concrete, fibre glass, brick are about it, can't think what else they make a building out of these days
So we've done our materials, let's do our  what sort of buildings did they make.
What, what were the buildings.
What are we talking about.
We are talking about houses.
buildings.
okay, we're talking about institutions and what comes under institutions?
apartments
institutions, schools anything paid for by the government, government buildings like you said, like town halls, libraries, theatres
yeah
What is a really important part of London architecture?
What is there on every corner?
No, building on every corner, which you can go in and have a jar?
Public houses.
Pubs are a really important.
I did a seminar on pub architecture.
Excellent, do you know what my research was?
No.
I had to go to lots of pubs,
Oh great.
Pubs really good one for London.
Erm what else?
Schools, government buildings, libraries, theatres, pubs, houses, what else did they build?
Oh I know churches, what else?
What other old important buildings can you think of in London.
I can think of a really good one, Buckingham
Mm.
monarchy buildings 
what about so yeah royal buildings or palaces.
Palaces, what's another big palace, one of the oldest buildings in London just off Tower Bridge, it's called the
Tower of London.
That's right, the Tower of London is a palace, the king used to live there.
Palaces.
What else?
Right, let's do some modern buildings.
What do they build these days?
Let's put uses and give me some different ones.
When they build these days, they build one really obvious one which Canary Wharf is
office
Office block.
They build office blocks.
What else do they build Paul, prisons.
I've thought of a really good one, factories.
Those old weird factories, with metal windows and not much light.
Wharves, wharves for storing grain on the river, wharves.
What are wharves these days turned into.
apartments
Luxury flats.
So that's a good one


Put wharf here.
Put wharves and put erm what was the other one I said?
Factories.
And then you can put over here office blocks, flats, they didn't have flats pre sixties not till  thought of it.
That's really important write down 
What
This guy, this guy right, this French guy okay in the twenties and the thirties yeah okay this guy and he invented the idea okay
of towers.
He invented the idea of communal living like flats okay and everyone was supposed to be the same.
It was like communism everyone was supposed to be the same, everyone would have the same house, with the same shed, everyone would have the same stuff in their house, all their doors would be colour co-ordinated and that's what flats were, the original idea of flats were like co-ordinated living okay.
This is great, this is tremendous
But it doesn't work like that does it, cos what happens in flats.
People change all their things.
Exactly, people stick on big oak doors don't they.
People cook fish
People cook fish and irritate each other because they live too
Close and it is unnatural for people to live too close.
Ah ha, but in the old days they used to have
balconies 
In the old days they used to have little houses close together called begins with T
tensions
Tenements
Tenements
Which are like your back to back.
My grandmother, right, had a back to back  No listen, this is funny, she lived in a tenement in er  which isn't there anymore actually just up by the river, up by the Angel, and there was nine people living there in two rooms and they had a lodger and the lodger, so they did have
My grandad used to live in Char Charles Dickens's house.
Did he?
Yeah not there anymore.
He had fourteen, his grandmother there was seventeen of them.
My God, well, I've got to at like, quarter to.
Right we've got half an hour so right what else do they build which they never used to build..
We build office blocks, we build flats, we build
They re re re thingy re-furbish
They renovate.
Renovate.
That's good refurbishment, renovate, good lad, renovation
Of old 
Yes, this is a very key key point.
Okay so they base, we're talking about style now
Oh yeah  wait, wait, wait a minute, let's put this .
Well, put these ideas over .Let's do this.
I'll remember that idea for you.
Office blocks, flats, they renovate places, what else do they do, what do we build.
What's this school is it new?
They build colleges and universities, educational buildings and many more.
What do we have that we didn't used to have?
Supermarkets no, no.
Yes, no, that's important.
Supermarkets, like shopping malls.
Oh yeah.
Arcades, what are they called?
Shopping centres.
Shopping centres, we're doing it together that's good.
Office blocks, shopping centres, universities, new flats, renovated flats, office blocks, office blocks, they don't really build churches much anymore cos they don't need them, erm what else do they build?
hostels for the young
Yeah, hostels, hostels as opposed to hotels.
Oh, yeah.
Hotels.
Youth hostels.
you see the thing is Paul what you I could help you do is there are several modern buildings round here which we could investigate.
There is the youth hostel and I know who built that cos he's a friend of mine.
Oh, so he just like built  did he?
No, built that and I know the guy  so I could get to the plans.
They were but it's the recession and no-one's building at the moment.
Erm right what you were talking about, just leave that.
We've got a basis for our knowledge haven't we.
We realize that, right, now how is style okay what a building looks like related to 
They're based on  fings aren't they?
How is style related to use cos the thing is it is really glib I think to say modern architecture's crap.
I should go to the design museum.
Ancient architecture's beautiful, you should.
Design museum doesn't have a lot on architecture though.
So style what you were talking about when they base ideas, just concentrate on what you are doing cos you're doing some good work you know when they base ideas on the past, that is looking back, yeah, like see this word retro, going back, right.
So retrospective, when you are a spectator, what are you doing?
Looking.
Right, so spective is looking, retro is back, so retrospective so there's some styles, some modern art is retrospective.
okay, it looks back.
That's one new word for you.
Think of a piece of modern architecture that, I think, personally, is all retrospective, I think everything built on the achievement of the past yeah  I don't know, what is the actual question?
What is the actual question she gave you?
It ain't a question, it's my own study.
Your own study, and how are making this media studies how is architecture media studies?
Argument.
It's just s'posed to be an argument but this will lead to up, like an argument of like them kind of buildings, are not like buildings, like tradition, to keep with the tradition.
So you wanna look at Prince Charles' book don't you.
Prince Charles' book, you wanna think about this guy Le Corbusier
I'll have to go to the library for that.
Think about this guy, I might have stuff on him, about flats and what they are for.
What are they for?
Erm  Shh  Hang on.
Think about this idea this word building okay.
Cos you've got a building and then you've got the idea of building on past knowledge and experience.
There's a good, there's good language games you can play with that, because modern architecture builds in a way on the architecture of the past, cos that Canary Wharf  is actually, what's on top of it?
A pyramid.
and when were the pyramids built?
I dunno last week weren't it?
In Egypt, do you see what I mean, so that you can have and put that down as an example, so you can have.
You've got a pyramid on top of Canary Wharf, so that is classical reference
Yeah,, I know, I know what you mean
So if you can think about it like laterally but we gonna have to work out an argument
What we wanna do is think of some buildings and describe them to ourselves and then work out what style, cos the thing is since the 1960s, styles like we want, like a progression of styles till the 1990s and see what's changed and what's stayed.
Last lesson.
Oh.
Where, where, what have you got last lesson?
technology
Tomorrow.
What have you got tomorrow?
What have you got first lesson.
Mrs ,, Miss  English  what about, next lesson, second lesson
Yeah, it's all , don't worry about it.
No what have you got?
No, but what have you got?
Nothing important.
No, but I just want you to tell me.
Science.
With whom
I don't know
When are you supposed to come up here again?
Tuesday next.
Only once a week?
Do you want me to sort out some stuff.
Er
I mean material that we can use.
Right this guy's really important and that'll be helpful, Prince Charles book.
Right, we wanna think about style, how it's changed since the sixties.
When you think of sixties architecture what do you think of?
Ugly blocks of concrete.
Ugly blocks of concrete, okay.
e.g. okay and whenever you describe this style you wanna think about right, take ugly blocks of concrete, okay ugly blocks of concrete, right, what is it and why do you think it looks like that?
 
And what's it made of.
Right, so what is it, it's flat
old-fashioned it's not modern
Ah, but it is in your context, you defined modern.
 
So, why it's quick to build, space saving, what else is it, what is concrete that marble isn't?
Attractive
No concrete, what is concrete?
Oh, it's erm stone.
I mean erm money money .
In comparison, how much does a block of concrete cost to a block of marble.
Buy much concrete to a block of marble
Exactly, so what is it, Paul, it is
Cost .
Cost
Cost ec 
Economically.
Economical.
So it', I'm looking for a really simple word.
It's ch ,ch 
 

Cost consuming.
Cost effective, economical cheap do it the simple way, so it's cheap and we've got what it's made of concrete.


So it's cheap, space saving
Quick.
Quick.
And that's it basically, so you've explained why ugly blocks of flats in the sixties and you even know cos why post-war reconstruction of London.
So the important thing about this  is that you cannot, you cannot just say modern equals bad, and trad is good because you must in order to argue Paul examine the
situation
yes, situation or more complicated word for situation the
modern arch context
you must examine the context because the situation relies on the
this is more art, it's like art.
No, you must  
They like , they treat it as like pieces of art.
But you ca but people do.
The thing is, the trouble with that is when you try and understand or argue about something like that you can't treat it as a work of art cos it isn't it's a functioning building 
I'll have to change, I'll have to change my thingy
You've got to think about why is it there what is it made of.
What does it look like, can you explain, where does it come in history, and post-war, pre-war, think about the context, it's really really really really really really really vital
Does this help you in some way?
Yeah of course it does
Right what about if we
wrote this instead of I don't think you work well from  diagrams they keep confusing.
Write it in a list
Things what I have to set out and like er put bits in
Only do a yeah, only do one little bit at a time
You put big heading Paul, what did we do first, what did we talk about first?
How weird.
What did we talk about first Paul?
Listen, what did we talk about first?
Erm
What was the first thing we did?
What was the first thing we did?
We wrote traditional and then we wrote modern and then what did we do, what did we decide for those two categories?
I can't remember, serious
What did we decide, we gave them a, what was the important thing, we gave them a
Erm
Was the important thing we them a
Erm, I don't know
Look if I write that does that help?
Oh yeah
So we gave them a
when, why, what situation
So what did we do first?
The
The time line
The time we're looking at, so we decided traditional was from civilization to World War Two and we decided that World War Two to ninety four was modern okay.
Now you can define modern in lots of ways but that will do for our purpose.
 
Right then we decided that we look at materials and what.
So under the heading of what first thing we looked at was materials.
Okay now I want you to make a list there for traditional of all the materials we put around there, so make that list there okay  and make it easier to look at.
Make a list of these words that are around materials
Right, oh then I do
and then you can do uses or types of building and you can make a list of all those things as well so types
in your old college
now concentrate, what?
fire, I saw loads of people running down
Where?
When?
the other day  
you're losing your concentration, it's very interesting but materials list there, types of building list there and I'm going to the loo and I'll come back.
is that why you work so quick?
No, cos it's quick if I have to keep your attention
 
No you're doing that first, you're doing it now, do that and go and see her afterwards
see what they do is they start you off and then they give you now what action do get from these words.
Look at the words they're actually putting in, passion, loving, potions, you see what I mean
why should they put in those sub-headings you  what's the point of putting passion, what's the point of your sub-heading loving and potion.
It is really isn't it?
To grab your attention to keep your interest you've got another 


and you gonna keep on reading.
So what you need to do is rather than have a big block of writing okay which is going to look not really in the format of this kind of newspaper is it?what you tend to get in the tabloids is loads of these little ones.
See.
Having said that of course quite a lot of the stories in the tabloids are actually quite small.
what you need to think about  and you're gonna keep your readers' interest engaged, keep on want to keep reading, your pictures are gonna do that to a certain extent but that's what your sub-headings goes over, so think about, pick out, read through your main story, pick out your main ideas and see if you can slot in one of those emotive words that's passion, that's stirring people's emotions 
The new college which cost eighteen million to build was destroyed  there was a death toll, what about a final death toll was, it's a bit more than there was a, it's a bit boring, see what I'm saying?
yeah
final you've gotta be a bit more dramatic, you've gotta think of the words that are dramatic words, final death toll amounted to twenty twenty dead, forty three injured.
Towering inferno at Bacon's
I'm still trying to get the headline
You gotta, you gotta try and think what your headline will be
right
no ideas, not yet 
not yet 
well well keep working on that what about erm the length of this piece
I'm looking for, on A three aren't I
tends to be a little bit on the first page then it goes onto pages like two, three,all different pages with small sections
yeah
yeah, right will go from that to that
so all that writing is actually surrounding your picture isn't it, you've come up with your sensational picture and then you surround your sensational picture with your writing,I was saying to him with these little sub-headings like trapped, right, cost, holiday, okay which actually keep your reader hooked and make them want to read on.
So again you've got to come up with your main heading what kinds of words do you think you've got to have in your main heading?
basic words to do with the subject
yeah more than that, what have they got to be these words they gotta be words which really what, which really make you feel what?
as thought you want to hear them
and
appeal to a
we're dealing with a horrendous fire here, we gotta have, shocking, don't you think some quite shocking words some quite horrifying words, if you want to grab people's attention
yeah
so think about that, what the tabloids do okay, think about your sub-headings and think about your main headings
yeah
okay, and the vocabulary you're gonna use but to start off with terrified that's that's really good.
Right Sam what are you up to?is that not yours?
Alright, you not got far on this
No
Shall we go onto, Kelly let's see what's she's been up to 
is there two there? show us the other one
I don't know, it's the same one
what's the one at the back
It's the just these other, okay.
That's good, don't you think, I'm impressed.
I am impressed, I am impressed.
Right Kelly tell me what you've been up to 
that's just  they're the people I'm going to interview okay then you've got example yesterday at approximately nine twenty Bacon's technical college at  went up in a barrage of smoke taking one life which is believed to be that of the caretaker who was having a last minute check before leaving the building in the evening.
It was thought the cause of the fire was a student leaving a bunsen burner on at the end of day.
It is while the caretaker was in the science and humanities wing he turned on the light which caused the college to explode.
Mr.  the caretaker leaves behind a wife and three children, two of which were twins blah, blah, blah.
Bacon's college which cost around a quarter, around eighteen million to build, has now been open, has only been open since September 1991, and they're just more details which I've gotta add while I'm writing it, that's just the beginning  write on the front page
I don't know, my my feeling, my instinctive feeling is is that's not  tabloidy enough, you know it's not erm horrific enough it's not, it doesn't grab me enough to be a front page of a tabloid.
I mean I haven't seen there what you've got, what do you see as your main heading
that's not gonna be the heading right
you're not gonna use inferno at Bacon's, you haven't actually thought of the words?
It's really important I think that you turn that into something more horrific and shocking.
At the moment I mean that is quite a boring sort of report
It's more of a story than a
It is it's more of a little story and it's not a front page shocker which I think is what we said we'd set out to write, a front page shocker okay so I think you've got to think about the kind of words you use.
Now what kind of words do you think should go on a front page if you're dealing 
I dunno , but the sentences have gotta be shorter,
Yes you're right, they have
It's gotta be er more, like more snappy more to grab ya, ain't it really
and what's gonna grab you
I dunno yet 
think about it
how are you gonna grab me? what kind of words are you gonna use to grab me
er
bodies, victims, flames what do those words do to me as I'm reading
I think I might, I dunno I've gotta think of ways to change it so there's more than one line taken
You're gonna make the actual statistics worse okay yeah you can do that  but it's the vocabulary that's not strong enough
yes
isn't it
yes it's more it's just going through the motions of a story at the moment rather than 
you're, you've got quite a good backbone there but you haven't got anything that really grabs my emotions.
You haven't shocked me, you haven't horrified me, you haven't made me want to cry yet
I'm gonna talk about the son here
If we're dealing with a front page horror story that's exactly what your journalist is gonna have to do otherwise his editor says it's not good enough  you know go away, rewrite it and you got shock 'em you gotta make 'em cry and you're not, not yet 
It's back to the drawing board
back to the drawing board you've got a backbone but you've not got anywhere near a shocking front page.
Vicki?
Some what's your time line do you think?
When have you got to finish it by?
Half term
Half term
so what's your subject?
school on fire
this college on fire, eighteen million goes up in flames  mind you that's a boring headline really.
right so in your thinking, what sort of things are you gonna put in that story?
What is your reader gonna want to know about?
how it started
right how it started, what else?
erm, people injured
yes
erm, information about the fire
how quickly it spread, who was trapped, who was burnt, how many fire engines, all those kind of things that people love to know.
Has anybody got into the who was to blame bit?poor old caretaker who is to blame.
Yes, the kind of gruesome details that people want to know when they're reading these kind of stories, okay.
Shock and horror is what sells these kinds of newspapers, unfortunately and they do a roaring trade, think about it, think about the vocabulary you gonna actually use.
Right you two over here what are you up to 
have you got a headline?
Bacon's burning
Right look at the Gazette, twenty million college goes up in flames, out of control chemistry experiment wrecks school.
Right are you gonna have a picture underneath?
Yeah
Is your front page just gonna be all headline and picture, or are you gonna have a bit of story
Okay so you're gonna have some statistics right, got a picture
I'll probably make the headline look smaller
Can you can you tell me or have you got a pic , where does the picture usually go? does it go right at the top or do you usually have a bit of headline what happened in that Mirror one there?


The size of it, what's the size of the picture on that one?
Teeny, weeny little ones on that one
Do you think you actually look at the words first or the picture first?
Words
Picture
both, really I think they both hit you at the same time
I suppose if it's a colour picture
Like with that the picture's more distorted so you more read the words.
I think it depends what the picture's really like
Depends what the story's about
and how big the picture is
how many of you are gonna try and do this in colour?
yeah
you can do right okay
you gonna have to insert your pictures do a cut and paste job on the pictures, okay so what have we got here then?
Bacon's burning oh nice one sizzle sizzle.
Can you, if you use your language cleverly can you play on the bacon as in frying
grilled
that's pretty, yeah grilled that's really gruesome isn't it but you could, I mean really that's the sort of ghastly thing people do isn't it in headlines which you could use it as you've used the actual word Bacon's in your headline you could play on words keep using that idea.
So what other sub-headings have you thought of?
I keep having to remind you lot about your sub- headings.
You're good on your headings but not on your sub- headings yet.
What else could you put on that front page?
city of the terrified, looting as thousands see that was good, looting wasn't that a good word to start with.
What was that word you started with 
terrified
terrified, he actually kicked off with the word terrified, this one's actually kicked off with the word looting.
this one's kicks off with the word the
the, boring, unimaginative anybody else got a good word to start 
tragic
tragic that's a good word to start from  it's the first thing they're gonna look at after the headline so it's pretty important that that the first word, I think looting was an excellent choice here.
nightmare
nightmare, that would go well yes.
Right, subs, are these the sub-headings here? yes look reports and dramatic new pictures pages two and three.
One man's story of the L A quake page nine.
Tent city springs up, Britons fly home , beware of doing too large of making blocks of writing too large.
Okay that does not fit in with this style of newspaper.
Also have you noticed something else folks, boys, if you look at this how many different sizes of font have you actually got there on that page.
one, two, three, four, five,si 
what the whole story 
well the whole page look at the differences, look at the variations there
ten
well it could be as many as that I mean sit and count it, but there's a lot of variation, there's a lot to catch your eye, I mean the more things contrast with each other, the more you notice them, isn't that true.
When we looked at the Telegraph and the Times things seem so samey, there's just this uniform effect everything seeming to look the same whereas here they've really used such a variety of styles the curly, the straight, the blocked plus your black blocks across the bottom.
Well you've taken the colour out there obviously in photocopying it but you've also got to be crafty and think of things like that as well.
So bear that in mind, even the beginning of this story look at that first paragraph it's in a darker type it'll make me filthy, a darker and a larger size.
So bear that sort of thing in mind as well.
Girls how far have you got.
This looks good.
It's hot in the kitchen, Bacon's burning, now she's used the same sort of thing, it's hot in the kitchen Bacon's burning, you too could use the play on words for the idea of bacon and burning and cooking and sizzling if you want to be really gruesome.
Make it very clever, she's got her woman on the front page boys.
that's money there
what is she covering herself with money.
So we got bingo, we've got the word naked on the front page, she's dead crafty this girl.
Okay what about you?
Let's have a look 
Fire, fire, Bacon's college ablaze.
Can we just hold up your front, yes come on, come on, evaluation of front headlines now, what have you picked, have you got yours?
Have you thought of yours?
How many of you have actually got your main headlines? what was yours?
Goodness gracious great balls of fire 
goodness gracious great balls of fire, I like it  girls have you thought of yours
not yet
you've got, what have you two got, go on show
Bacon's burning
twenty million college goes up in flames, Bacon's burning, come evaluation, which do you think the most effective so far  repeat, what was it? goodness gracious great balls of fire, fire fire Bacon's college ablaze, it's hot in the kitchen, and yours were
twenty million college goes up in flames
and yours was
Bacon's burning
right, those of you that haven't done one yet which one do you like best?
dunno 
why? explain
cos it's a bit sick 
come on what do you both say
it's cleverer, isn't it?
mm
Yes, you give him ten out of ten for effort there.
We like your cleverness  Has he given it more thought, he's just come up with a really clever idea I think there
he said that first day, didn't he?
he did, he came out with it straight straight away.
Right good words in headlines then, any which words grab here.
You two
hot
hot
I think, with the kitchen though it kinda makes you think that's the fire's going in the kitchen which it's not
yeah but I used kitchen cos bacon
yeah, but that in which case I think you should try and tie the story in with it became in like the canteen
yeah but 
in the kitchen in the canteen
it says hot in the kitchen then it's got Bacon's burning.
yeah, but obviously the canteen is part of the college and could've have still burnt down the college.
And with the kitchen in it I think it could tie into the story with it being in the headline.
Well you mean so if she, if in her story  
 
you know, it would make it better cos I got the impression of reading the headline, it meant that you know from the kitchen
So if his story now isn't going to be in the kitchen this is a mislay misleading headline.
yeah
right what've got here?
Fire, fire, is that, what do you think of that for a start, fire, fire.
fire, London's burning
So you gonna really, you're gonna use the quote at the front, that could be good.
It's certainly the word fire is the one that goes with ablaze, is ablaze a good word?
mm
do you like that word?
it's different to what everybody else is using
bit more sophisticated actually isn't it, maybe too sophisticated for this .
Mm what have we got over here then, what do we make of yours?
Again just Bacon's burning, is your fire going to be in the kitchen?
mm no
you just like the idea of bacon cooking you picked up on the same idea.
And what we did we have.
Now this is totally different, what do you make of this one?
What do you think of this? girls.
I don't think that's kind of less what you'd find in the Sun because of twenty million college goes up in flames.
I think, I dunno whether it's more political more you know people think well why was twenty million wasted on a college you know and saying like that I think you know which is less the Sun.
He's actually called it the Gazette so we don't know if it's political 
But you're right yes it's sort of erm drawing your attention to the fact that this college 
the money 
costs this horrendous sum of twenty million pounds political slant to the story
and it's only been open for what two or three years
what a waste 
you know 
and then they didn't build it well enough to withstand fire
exactly especially  you know
ooh, ooh, interesting out of control chemistry experiment wrecks school
well this a science orientated college and they shouldn't be allowed to get out of control.
cos it's a C T C
yeah
even worse, you can build on this idea, couldn't you?
I think he's got a good idea here but if he takes that slant to his story you could do rather well.
Do you like that idea?
Yes.
I think that could go quite well.
Which which words then are actually grabbing you there.
twenty million
definitely
yeah and then the flames