

Right, you w you want thirty seats on that flight?
No no no can't be done  haven't got a clue  oh dear.
Anyway
Just thought I'd mention the Stansted  leading forward
That's that's the same thing as  says, it's reducing the catchment all the time
What was it before?
Seven 0 five
Yeah well the thing is that something's gotta shift because we've got  we've got all these bloody flights going out the same time
Well I know but
And they can't cope
Every time you lead it forward like that those early hours will just reduce
Well that's what I said, it's nearly half an hour later
Well actually it depends on the weather don't it?
It depends on the
Alright well if you've got any little any little points like that then you ought to er say like, we won't actually be much longer.
We'll be er five ten minutes or so
Oh, is that all?
Yeah.
You can sit and wait if you want to
Erm, okay thanks, as long as I don't to er put you off or anything 
Yeah, yeah you can sit and wait if you like oh no  go away and come back again.
Erm when any little any little points like that then we ought to er flag up yeah?
But I think w I think  corridor communications  something like that yeah?
Well he's not around for a while is he?
I don't know where he's gone actually
Where is he?
he's gone on his holidays to the States  Right then  okay, so that's point twelve.
That brings us to the end of the normal agenda.
Any other business?
Right well the office
Right we'll leave that a minute, okay?
Can I just erm, no I've got one more regarding communications.
Just on the shall we say off-chance I asked  what the situation was regarding additional lines between Norwich and Crawley as between Stansted Norwich and Crawley to see if there was anything under way and what the approximate cost would be because erm well I know there's more D D I facilities now.
The tie lines are so congested it isn't true, especially with  accounts being at Stansted and apparently there has been a proposal in since last March with all the costings and everything which is still waiting on an answer for improved lines which would actually take some of the computer lines and everything.
Erm, I'm just surprised that that's taking that long
Well it isn't 
Apparently the individual costs of the lines are staggering and they reckon that the cost of the calls does not outweigh it but what I think  is certainly outweighed is the cost of all our time trying to get through on these lines
Tie lines?
Yeah
Oh well
Something came up in respect of the tie lines which I'd just like to mention while we're here in respect of.
There's been a little bit of shall we say erm not as good co-operation as there might have been, especially between  and  recently.
Now  are aware that  are losing the agency stuff therefore services should improve generally but this is mostly  and the business travel, you know duty travel, cruise positioning that sort of thing, to the extent that erm   and two of the ops people paid a visit to  last week for a liaison meeting and one thing that I thought was absolutely remarkable that came out was in respect of complaining that they could never get through to anybody in erm in , they couldn't get a reply from the extensions and they couldn't send messages or anything.
They weren't aware that we have in the internal telephone directory all the direct dialling lines listed.
They weren't aware the  were on  that they could send them messages.
It's absolutely stagger it's such a basic thing that you know that you know 
well well it's 
erm it seemed so disappointing to me that I mean we go to the bother of producing what a fifty odd page telephone directory and people don't even look at it
Yeah well that's
Erm I'm g one thing I'm gonna do is ask  if she'll flag major changes when she produces the new telephone directories.
Maybe just a little front page you know wh look at the big revisions for the sales department or something like that instead of just, when you get a new telephone directory, putting it in your folder and binning the old one, make certain people realise there've been changes.
I think it's worth identifying cos it might sort of alleviate this sort of problem
Mhm
Okay, that's it
Alright
Apart from the subject that you're coming back to 
yes we'll come back to that in a minute.?
Erm right just t message on secretaries clubs, going to put them on a back burner for a while then in terms of actually forming a club as such
Well we need t we need t we we need to establish ah I hope we do it.
Right
In a set format that is circulated and where's the administrative back up?
That's what you want isn't it?
Mhm
But I mean I  fuck  question the the er the t question of the validity of the secretaries club in the Ambassador Hotel when it's in bloody Receivership
Yeah well that hotel but there are other ones
Yeah  Well it's it's it's a it's a bit of a weighty subject that.
I think we ought to er
Yeah okay
Why don't you and I talk about it separately then
Yeah alright
If you want
Yeah okay
Yeah?
Next time we're in the office
Right
Secretaries clubs and and what's required and what's done.
The worst thing you can do is set these things and then cock it up because secretaries is people that pride themselves on being administratively perfect
But you know they do, they do pull people in
The one in Yorkshire that used to meet at erm hotel on the A one near Pontefract, used to get people over from Hull for that.
What?
Sixty miles they used to come over for a good evening at those and maybe two principles
presentations but certainly
You all reckon there's good  to that
The other thing I had this idea of erm you know customer relations erm in fact we give tickets away when people have had problems.
We've had times when we've written to commercials and given them free tickets to dig ourselves out of a hole and things.
I wondered if we could look at particularly customer relations producing some sort of voucher worth fifty pound or hundred pound or twenty five pound and er we have a stock of those printed up you know
oh Christ it's the print money 
and if we have a chap who's erm had bad experience on the plane what we would do now is is give him two free tickets.
For instance that chap you gave those tickets to to Munich
Yeah
You know to encourage him t well why not just send them a voucher for seventy f seventy five pounds to go towards an  ticket next time they book?
No no no  so
Or twenty five pound
My my my
My
just like they do the two for one
No my philosophy with customer relations has always been that you don't give somebody a refund, you give them some tickets to fly again so it's keeps them flying
Yeah we don't give them a refund, I didn't say a refund, I said a voucher
Well a voucher's cash
no a voucher to use
against a flight
against an  flight, all branded 
How do they do that?
accounting problems.
What's your objective here?
What're you trying to achieve?
Just pl placate somebody?
to stop giving away free seats when these people are prepared to pay
Oh only give them partial you mean
Yeah in other words yeah, we we you're gonna complain and to not send them a cheque you give them two free seats which we know the cost of that is is minimal.
Nevertheless if they were going to fly again they were gonna pay for a seat and they're only looking for some recompense towards a new new ticket what's wrong with sending them a voucher y'know, a properly produced voucher that we c that's controlled properly by  and all they do is guarantee any travel at their normal travel agent, do the business, attach the voucher to the B S P
Well he'd have to process his  direct like the two for one voucher or something like that
Why couldn't  do it?doing it
Well the trade would be benefiting because when we give away free tickets we're taking commission away from them.
This way we're s we're not.
We'll give them the full commission on the full ticket
Yeah, but it is another procedure and
Well they complain doing two for ones I mean never mind this
They'd get the full commission  on the ticket
oh God 
And just clip the
Perhaps the best  way of doing it would be to give th erm them an N C O
Why not give them a duty free voucher next time they fly?
gonna be worth a lot of money, with some people  you've got to give them a couple of free tickets
The duty free voucher though would go to the passenger whereas the th erm the company which most of these will be for
We send it to whoever needs it, the company or the passenger 
yeah but if it was a duty free voucher
give someone a twenty five duty free voucher some of these people are gonna want
Yeah but it's something personal 
Yeah that's what I mean
It's like air miles isn't it?
Well it's low this is lower cost than what we're doing currently , we're giving away, we're getting nothing only a cost of of twenty five quid on the seat.
I'm suggesting we send that man a voucher for fifty pound that his company or he puts towards the next time they buy a full fare or an Apex and then we actually get fifty quid or a hundred and fifty quid.
You're actually giving away nothing.
You've only got the cost of printing a voucher.
I think I think we give away far too many free tickets
Well I m d done it myself I mean I mean
Not us  not us, every time I speak to somebody about something, you know marketing can do it, y'know everybody's d giving away free tickets as a way out of y'know compensate the people, re-dressing the situation.
Why not just send them out with a n y'know a nice letter and the  voucher.
If we sent y'know what's w c y'know other companies do that.
If you g if you have a problem with Burtons y they don't send you a free suit, do they?
They send you a Burton's voucher to the value of whatever you're looking for, be it ten quid or f and you go in there and you buy a suit you know and everybody's happy.
What's the difference?
Why do we give away  Not only are we incurring the cost of what we're giving away but we're losing revenue with people that would have flown with us anyway
Well I think you need to follow that one up actually.
If you wanna follow that one up with customer  it needs  how it'll work
you bring it up at the update and get some feedback from that
Well maybe
You've got the er people like  
I'll bring it up voucher for er
If  y'know if it's possible  t 
I would have thought M C A might be the easiest way of doing it but I'll think about it because the passenger could hand the M C A over to the agent, together with a little note that we have attached to it.
Dear mister travel agent please accept this as part payment of so and so.
You will receive full cash on the ticket
Yeah, agent's happy, taken, we're making money.
In fact I believe 
I'll check with  how we'd go about it administrative accounting wise 
And then of course the agent 
I'll just put down voucher for compensation case to be investigated
Next?
No, that's it
That's it ?
Nothing?
No A O B. The only A O B I've got is trade mags and subscriptions.
Right, I'm gonna get one of the girls in the office to send out a note and find out who gets what trade mag cos the supply of T T G's and Travel Weekly's has sort of dried up and I don't know who gets them.
I don't know whether reps get them at home, do they?
Some of them do yeah
Do they subscribe to them themselves?
Yeah
What, and pay for it themselves?
No no no no  would pay on the credit card
What d'you mean credit card?
Pay on the  credit card, subscribe  visa card
What, their own visa card?
No no 
We phoned up T T G and Travel Weekly and they've only got five or six names on on each list
Well they're the ones who get it then
I wanna send a circular out.
I want people to tick off what they get and what they don't get right?
round robin?
Yes well
Well that's no good
I get the T T G delivered to my home cos I subscribe for it and I get the business one that you do when  
yeah well I did that centrally you see.
Yeah
Everybody gets one and I wanna s I don't wanna I wanna I wanna bring these in-house via the sales office and have them all centrally distributed cos it's no good well if you read the T T G and the Travel Weekly it's already taken two days.
If you don't get it there and then it's not worth reading 
 
Well there's no point in bringing them in-house then because the people need them at their homes
administration of it in house
Oh I beg your pardon right  
the addresses will be home addresses yeah.
So   got that as a little project and on that subject let's talk about 
They won't send them to home addresses free?
No
T T G and Travel?
We don't get any free.
Now cut all back all free copies
Have they
Yes.
You get four and that's about it.
Everything else you pay for.
I don't mind, I'll pay for it.
I'm not bothered about paying for them
Okay
I'll just make sure that er we get them.
Alright sales office then.
What're we gonna do about ?
I've spoken to  right er and  owes me a few favours and I've said er would you consider her completing her  training until the end of May middle of May which she does at the  and then if she's any good, take her on, providing she gets a driving licence.
Old mate, old pal.
what did he say 
He said yes
I said I said cos you don't know  but she's a n she's a nice girl, she looks alright in uniform, she's not very bright but she's brighter than some of the ones you've got er give her a meet and greet job where she just has to smile and point people in the general direction of the bogs and things like that, er, I said and she'll be alright
She looks bloody smart in uniform
He said but she'd be considered along with all the others but she ain't gonna get a job with terminal full time when her contract runs out on May the eighteenth if she doesn't get her finger out and get dr driving test passed and buy herself a car.
Of course, this is a catch twenty two situation because she hasn't got the money to buy a to have the driving lessons or the money to buy the car cos she gets crap wages 
get er terminal 
Yeah shifts shifts.
No public transport from  mate at five o'clock in the morning if not earlier.
I can't say, can't do more than that.
He's prepared to consider her application extremely favourably.
on site  time- keeping and sickness is low but at the end of the day when it comes to the middle of May then she ain't gonna get a sh she ain't gonna be employed anyway to be quite honest, unless she pulls her finger out.
But sh you know what she's like.
spoken to her, spoken to her, spoken to her, she doesn't get the message.
And she's now getting extremely bored with that job.
It's fairly obviously and her heart's not in it.
She's not really enthusiastic about it and of course no doubt we're getting problems again, stuff going missing, stuff like that, whatever
Yeah
I think all I can say about that is I think the introduction of the new part timer  the new , two or whatever you wanna call her.
I mean she's shit hot she does I mean she's pretty efficient isn't she?
And  pretty good anyway so we've got two good part-timers in there
That was the best thing we ever did, taking on two part-timers
Yeah yeah justifying their own sufficiency
Despite getting 
I don't think that was a good idea
And I I can't understand it and I still haven't got to the bottom of the reason why  is doing, seems to me to be doing a lot of work herself
Yeah well she's never been shown how to delegate 
to delegate yeah well I mean that's this is why I think I should bring forward a supervisors course for , for , for , for 
Yeah
And get it done as soon as possible
Yep
right a and get them some of the skills that're required and hopefully that'll help  out
We'll have to watch  one's sickness the week  away
Yeah she's started to go off sick a lot but she seemed a lot better when she came back after Christmas
Yeah
A lot more enthusiastic.
Did you get that impression?
yeah yeah well I know she was getting that way towards Christmas.
She was sort of c getting over the getting over the disappointment and she was getting a little bit more user- friendly and she 
 
No no but er they they are  seems to be a bit better er about it.
I think it's because she's got a little pal now with the other 
Surely it's just
cos they smoking together in the afternoons y'know
Surely the the erm y'know harmony in the work place and all that.
It must there must be it must be possible to speak to her about the fact that she's not communicating.
I mean that can't be right.
Surely it
We've had this before
Surely we shouldn't allow that c to continue and surely that's er that's er can be made into quite a semi-formal type of that's not on is it?
What?
Well it's not disrupting work.
I mean how can you justify talking to her about that when the efficiency is improved since she hasn't been talking to people?
Well that's only because it was terrible before though
Yeah but it's still improved
Yeah
She's gonna turn round and say you can't  complain about my work rate and we're not complaining about her work rate.
Her work rate's improved.
Yeah but what stand are you gonna measure against ?
No but  well erm I'm not sure I follow the logic of that.
I mean if you're saying that by not communicating everybody's performance gets better, let's tell them all not to talk to each-other
Well in theory that's the way most typing pools works
Yeah but it's not a typing pool, is it?
Well it is to a certain extent it's a bit of a typing pool as well as a sales office but in
Well okay
in theory they should not be able to talk to each-other because they're either answering the phone and talking to somebody else bloody getting on looking at the screen and typing
Yeah but you know what I mean don't you?
Yeah I know what you mean but it's not it doesn't necessarily work out that way cos
Is  still intent on looking for another job do you know?
No she she's been looking but I don't know if she's still looking, I don't know.
She's probably looked and found she couldn't get anything better.
That's probably nearer the truth
Well I think, I've gotta say that I think it might be ha it might be working better now with  there but when  not there and we go to  and say can you tell me where X Y Z is, the response you're gonna get is I'm sorry I don't know and the reason she won't know is that she's never bothered to ask because she's not talking so it's okay while  there but it won't be when she's not because I've had that, sorry  I don't know.
I don't do that you know
Well she's not gonna be co-operative because she's not being paid to be the supervisor
Well surely this is something we've got t it's got to come out and come out come out and say
I don't I'm not at the moment I'm quite happy.
I'm as happy as I can be.
If we can if we can shift  aside erm and get rid of that problem then I think that's the s probably the priority rather than the  situation.
It hasn't affected your area has it?
It's not ideal because erm there's been a number of minor instances where when they don't speak to each-other, you speak to one or the other and
Well you see the thing is
across
If I sit down and talk to  I've said this and I'll say it I've said it ad nauseam.
It's  job now, getting paid to be the supervisor  gotta supervise the office right?
Yep
and I can't do it, that's the whole point of having a supervisor
Yep
therefore if I talk to  then it's no good
Put it this way  if I was having a problem with a member of my staff, or  was, and we felt we wanted your help then you would come in and talk to them
Well what you're saying is that me and  ought to talk to her
Yeah  in the first place.
I think this is what you're saying is that
Huh?
erm  is not talking to  in the first place
No surely
not ideal so we say to you it's not ideal so  the supervisor, so you have to say to , this has gotta be sorted, this is not ideal, this isn't gonna work when you're not here.
If she then requires your help or whatever then that it has to go from there.
I'm not suggesting that you, you're right, I don't think you should speak to  but I can't see that that's well maybe they're more efficient now they bloody well ought to be, there's twice as many people in there.
I think the way it should be tackled is speak to  about it, say that we still believe that y'know it can't go on forever obviously it can't go on forever because I think the longer it goes on the worse it'll become in all honesty
Yeah I mean it's gone on long enough I mean I don't mind giving her a couple of weeks or something
Do you do you not think it would be better for us both to speak to ?speak to her and say  obviously you were upset about not getting the job but this non- communication thing is not really erm going to you know be good for the sales office in the long term.
Is there something you want to say?
Or, you know, how are we gonna solve this problem?
I think we've gotta tackle it like that cos it won't go away will it?
If anything it'll get worse because it'll be more of an effort to re re-communicate
It's the new year now
oh well, what d'you think?
D'you think there's anything further in me considering my ideas of them having half an hour not working session a week?
if they're not speaking to each-other
No but they'll have to then won't they?
They can't just sit there and saying nothing.
They'd have to talk about things.
Oh well that's another thing for  to get under her wing isn't it, how she's going to integrate her department?frankly  won't know anything about motivating people
Well you see I sit down on a I sit down on a fairly regular basis with  now and try to give her direction and er point out, and I do make the point, about  every time and , right?
Er and   complained about her pay, right, so I've got her upgraded.
Erm hopefully upgraded.
We'll get the fax in the office in the next couple of weeks hopefully er you know it's all it's all winning by inches
there's no grand great play  that's gonna work with that.
It's gonna be erm bit by bit isn't it?
It's going to put the erm actual availability up quite a bit of people having that fax there
Yeah that's right
Yeah well it is it is and also we might get to a situation where by er you know people are slitting each-other in the throat at this rate
no way 


no way 
but y I can't I have to say and I know  right can't give her what she wants is somebody to sit down somebody to sit her down and talk to her and you can't give her the benefit of that because it's a little battle right between the two silly little girls if you like and if that j if that happens  had won right and that's the way  will feel it
No
Oh yes  oh yes
I don't follow what you mean, how d'you mean?
well   playing the game  playing the game and th and she's prepared to sit it out and play it as long as she can.
If she's hauled in the office with me and  there she's she's as far as she's concerned she's won.
The situation would deteriorate after that.
I don't think it would get any better.
Well okay
cos she'll say ha ha ha they've cracked they've cracked
It's not acceptable as it is, is it?
I don't think it's acceptable as it is.
If she wants to go down the road making life more unpleasant then then we got down that road as well and she'll be the loser
Well the thing at the end of
and  we don't we needed her before because we had one typist, we don't need that now, we c we can cover 
the thing is that
yeah but she's one of the best typists I have to say.
I can trust  more than I can some of the others, some of the mistakes you get
Well okay but I mean that doesn't that  
well I don't know I mean I think  pretty good, the new  is pretty good, not a problem
I've had problems with 
She's not as good as the new  two
fax numbers and things put on but that alright let's give   she came back to me the other day and said I cannot get this fax through and  had actually typed down the wrong fax number
two or three mistakes recently and not dictated mistakes, copy mistakes.
On the whole she's very good and she's very very quick
I mean I get the impression that  likes working for  and myself and she likes her own sphere of influence right which is fair enough as far as it goes
yeah
but when she's not there then I have real problems.
When she was away for those ten days I mean certain things just couldn't be done because no-one knew  
well no because  hasn't hasn't
I can recollect the brief you gave to   and we all agreed it is that everybody would be able to do  
yeah 
she spoke to  and said we've discussed it cos I asked  whether she'd done that, she said she'd spoken to  and said we've discussed that we should share the work more equally and  said no I'm happy with the way things were and  left it that way
it's like when she asked her whether she would change her hours from half past nine to six to cover the office and  said no I'm quite happy doing what I'm doing and  couldn't have coped with the confrontation you see.
This is where  is lacking in a little bit of er you know authority or she's not quite sure right.
Changing somebody's hours is a little bit different but  
one of the things I'm thinking of  in the longer term and I I bounced this of  er  was that if groups moved to Stansted  could not be moved across to groups to sort this problem out because I think she's getting bored in what she's doing
Groups to do what?
one of the groups people
what, pick up the phone and sell on the phone?
well it's not selling is it?
I mean it's t a lot of it's order taking and quoting
I thought you wanted her to be more pro-active?
yeah but you'll have one or two people more pro-active because the bulk of the job the three other people who will be there will be order-takers dealing with allocations and this sort of thing and you'll need somebody to erm
no it's not addressing the issue but I said in the longer term that could be one of the options
I don't 
yeah I couldn't have somebody in my team who wasn't bloody talking to somebody else and that's what
I think whatever you do  I think it's gotta be done and if she can if she thinks she's won and all the rest of it
it's pride now actually cos what's
of course it's pride, it's been pride since the start.
It's been pride since the start and it's pathetic silly little girls isn't it?
I mean that's all it is being very very er childish
girls have a tendency to do that sort of thing don't they?
They don't they bear grudges don't they and they don't go away but
yeah but that's that's fair enough but that doesn't mean we have to er
alright well I'll have a I'll have another chat with  when I get the flipping chance and then
because I don't speak to  at all now and that can't be right and the reason I don't is because I know the response I'm gonna get, blank look
Well I mean you never actually got much of a response before to be quite honest with you
well no I didn't but that only was because she was focusing her attention on  and  work so I never had need to
I'm quite happy with the service  giving
well maybe maybe that's the answer
are you ?
well I think she's been fully occupied with your stuff since she came back, she hasn't touched any of mine up to last night
really?
well to be quite honest I mean th that sounds like good er justification as far as I'm concerned for moving a moving her work to somebody else or moving her on to somebody else
you see up to now she hasn't had a chance to okay maybe it's erm
what d'you mean by that?
irrelevant now
can do your work  can do your work or  can do your work, whatever, maybe that'll maybe that'll mix it up a bit 
well something we've gotta do something I think do something
well to be quite honest I'll I'll state my point of view at the moment.
I don't give a damn.
I mean I think it's wor as far as I'm concerned I'm g w I think we're all getting out of it what we want
I would agree with that
Yeah we're getting out of it what we want.
The fact that there's like a sort of stand off position between two individuals in the office, the stupid thing about it is she's blaming  for what's happened to her and  had nothing to do with it
no I know  
I mean that's 
the thing is  tha the stand up position has been created by us
yeah but  talks to me.
Still
I know we crea we've created the stand up between them in so much as s she blames  for what's happened t to her.
It's us that promoted  and surely if we created the situation it might work in our favour but it I mean it can't be very pleasant for other people
yeah but the scenario is it's like er  gets the national accounts job without interviewing everyone else and someone
yeah but I deal with that don't I?
that's what I mean, that's what the scenario is
yeah I'd deal with it
you wouldn't allow somebody else who'd got the sulks on because they weren't interviewed
no exactly and this is not what we're doing in this case
yeah because the person er who's job it is to deal with the sulks for want of a better phrase there is not is preferring not to tackle the issue because as far as she's concerned it's not affecting the efficiency of the office, that's what I'm trying to say and it's not, in fact it's added to the efficiency of the office if anything.
I know what you mean I mean
alright well we'll ask this question again then after  gone on holiday to the States and see whether
how long's she away for?
ten days
is  acting supervisor then?
if it doesn't  
is  acting supervisor then?
Oh well that's er that's a classic isn't it?
Exactly.
Who's gonna run the office then when  is not there then?
That means  gotta brief  of what there is outstanding
cos that's when you find out the efficiency of a department isn't it?
That's like when you find out how good my department is or , when we're not here
yeah
run on or does it come to a grinding fucking cock up? and that's what I think will happen when  is not there
well that's always what's happened in the past
exactly
that's why we made her the supervisor
exactly, so if it still happens in the future we haven't moved full forward have we?
We've promoted  and nothing's changed.
I agree with that statement you've just made that's indefatigable logic
big word 


when are you hoping to get the supervisory courses?
A S A P well at the end of the month
oh I see it end of this month?
well end of Feb more like it
is it gonna be before or after that was all.
I mean why  a position to do the work prior to her going away
As it stands at the moment all we've done is thrown numbers at the typing
yeah
yeah so we create a supervisor, we've thrown numbers at the er the typing, swopped around a few hours, changed a bit here, changed a bit there, it's all cosmetic stuff around the edges 
phase one to use your words in res


now we need phase two I think
alright then, fair enough I I I yeah I agree I can't I have to buy that one
good
but I think  needs probably some training before we attack phase two
and ?
well yeah
okay well I'll get that supervisors course I'll give N H A a ring and see how fast they can do it yeah cos  really needs it as well doesn't she?
yeah
yeah?
Alright then okay erm it's five o'clock now.
Erm
It's the most productive meeting we've ever had I'm sure
well
for a long time
numbers dictate these sort of things but anyway now I'll be absolutely crushed hour  now, five o'clock on a Friday.
six hours.
Yeah er
Okay then I've as far as I'm concerned draw the meeting to a close now.
The next meeting erm
Thursday?
which is Feb tenth.
I think we'll have it in Norwich actually cos I wanna w want a few words with  the day after so while I'm in Norwich Norwich and  can hobble to the meeting  Okay, you've got all your dates for your appraisals.
We shall stick to those and er I'll sort of see you all er anon.
Right?
Okay?
Right, thanks a lot for your attention and I shall see you when I see you.
That's it my man you can switch it off now
Great, thanks very much for your help
That's alright
see the result
free flight to New York or something