

Okay what can we do for you?
Erm  I don't know where to start to tell you the truth.
I take it you're the expert on employment law?
I do a fair amount of employment  yes.
Well that that is what I'm solely here for.
Mhm.
Erm  I work for a company  Limited
Mm.
or or did  erm  for the last five and a half six years.
Three and a half years ago I was promoted to manager.
Yeah.
Last September  erm  I was accompanied  by another manager so in effect there's two managers  running the place.
Was he a new er appointment?
I beg your pardon?
Was he a new appointment?
That's right yeah.
he'd worked for  before?
Erm  yeah for a short period of time  perhaps about two years ago.
It was very very short and certainly not in that capacity anyway.
Right.
When he came along  erm  was about  he was more or less asked what terms he wanted and  said that he was no to show no favouritism.
I was given a pay rise because they wanted him as well, you see.
Part of that was a company car.
Erm  I'll men I'll mention him by name, it is a Mr .
Mr?
.
How do you spell that?
  

Yeah.
Erm  at this stage for the simple reason that together with the  erm promotion package, together with the wages package, we was both given a company car.
Now  at this point  Mr  after having his either his third or fourth dri drink drive,just come out of court six month   had come out of prison after doing a three month stretch  for drink driving.
Mm.
S but  what they say is part of his managerial status demanded him having a company car  to which I was given one as well but in effect that then became his wife's because he was still banned for drink driving.
Yeah?
Yeah.
You with me so far ?
Yeah go ahead.
Erm  on the  on the twenty third or thereabouts on the twenty third of March of this year   I myself got stopped for drink driving.
It was erm  close, very close.
Do you know what the reading was?
Erm  I think it was either forty four or forty six.
Mm.
Er  the blood blood count, because it did go for blood count, the blood count was er ninety three.
Yeah, okay.
Erm 
So you got a twelve month ban  ?
Well  I then .
don't make the appointments you see .
Mm.
And I spoke to   erm who appointed Mr  to  take the case for me.
Mm.
As  as a direct result of it erm  without  anything about it  erm  Mr  in court  just wanted to get in and out.
He accepted the twelve month ban, fair enough.
I see.
I I got a twelve month ban anyway.
Erm  the managing director  in front of Mr   erm  said to me, It won't affect your wages  but what we will ask is that you give the company car back until a period of time that your wife passes a test  in which case  it can be  given to your wife as indeed managerial status   Mr .
Yeah.
Mm.
On the seventh of June  it took this long to get to .
On the seventh of June  I got my statutory twelve months.
Yeah.
Erm  on the seventeenth of June  I was told that there was gonna be a meeting on the eighteenth  erm to which I would have to appear concerning my drink driving.
On the eighteenth of June attended this meeting erm perhaps this  on rather than you jotting down  
 
Perhaps  enlighten you more.
But   although this says   minutes of the meeting  it's not actually minutes of the meeting.
It's just notes taken because after things that appeared on here.
You don't accept them as being accurate?
N no they're quite accurate but the relevant details are missing.
Okay let's have a look.
What does  do?
 
aerials and satellites 
   

Er C T D what does that stand for?
Er that's the managing director's initials.
What's his name?
Er Charles  .
Does seem a bit ironic that he disapproves of drink driving and then   prison sentences 
Precisely.
 

Well  I don't know but it's there's certainly a lot of favouritism there.
Erm  so basically he's still there and they've got rid of me  making it as an excuse but  Charles as partner  is his brother, Nicholas .
Now whatever Nick brought up doesn't appear in there as if Nick  never spoke.
Wh what did he tell you?
Erm  it's hard just off hand but h he mentions several several things.
What they're saying is that Colin  was purely administration.
I mean I've never needed a new licence for the last three and a half years but Nicholas   erm  prior to this in the countdown  to me appearing for my drink drive which is in a matter of about ten weeks I believe  in the countdown to that, Nick  said on several o two occasions anyway while other members of staff were present, Well this is a way of getting rid of him without having to pay him redundancy money.
and that was in front of witnesses.
But all the while I was led to believe by this statement  another thing is that   the day that  made the made the appointment for me to appear, sorry are you reading?
No carry on, mm.
The day that made the appointment to see  and Co, Nick   after coming out of that meeting with Nick , we called in at the office, myself and my wife, and whilst  I was tidying some things up because I'd got the remainder of the afternoon off, Charles' wife said to my wife, my wife actually broke down in tears, and she says, What's up?
Is  is it just because of this drink drive? and my wife Lorraine said, Well it is yeah.
And she says, Well don't upset yourself about it because worse things has happened than this.
Think of Colin  and his predicament.
Also it may be a godsend to you because as soon as you drive that car becomes yours.
Straightforward conversation wife to wife, well  again she must have been told that by her husband to even mention it.
What's his wife's name?
Shirley.
Is she er involved in the company?
Yeah she's erm company secretary I believe.
When you say that er   said that this was a way of getting rid of you without paying you redundancy who was present at that  who overheard him say that?
Erm it was myself, Paul  an employee, erm  a couple of other employees who I believe to be Dave  and  .
Any of those still with the company?
All three.
Do you have a copy of your contract of employment or terms of employment.
No that's another thing.
I've never had a contract of employment in the six years that I've been there but erm   less than forty eight hours after all this happened every employee was issued with a contract of employment.
Now Paul  this is what I've found out since you see, Paul  erm said to them, Why suddenly this? and he says, Oh we've actually had them printed for the last two years but we've never had the time to give them out.
Mr  's status is identical  his abilities are different and it's necessary to have a manager who is mobile .
What's the difference between you and Mr ?
Well Mr   never been  before at least I've done it for the first few years that I was there.
Been out in the field done all the  erm   and worked my way up to it you see.
This R A F Wittering job that they are referring to  S S W F C
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
Right.
Erm  do they involve you travelling out there on a regular basis?
Well  on the Wittering job   he said he wanted somebody there  you know er myself as manager to oversee the job  but on the Sheffield Wednesday job, incidentally I'd I got the contract from them both, the Sheffield Wednesday job was done I'd only ever had to visit it once and that was at my request not at anybody else's and either way  both erm the Wittering and the Sheffield Wednesday er there have been other drivers going.
Er I have never had to  go solely on my own so to speak.
Have you actually gone solo?
Er I've followed them down but the vehicle  I could have got in another vehicle.
Isn't the argument gonna be that  you make sure everything's okay and then you come back again.
I have spent all day there .
 
All the lads leave at the exactly the same time that I leave.
But that's how it's been happening anyway.
Mm  a bit more information.
Erm can you give me your full name and date of birth.
It's Geoffrey Alan 
Is that G or J ?
G. 
And date of birth?


And your address at the moment?
street,.
And are you on the telephone there?
.
Now after that
Erm whoa whoa can I have some more information off you please 
I'm sorry 
first.
Er  what were you originally employed as by the 
Aerial engineer.
And three and a half years ago y you were promoted to manager.
What's what's your actuals  title, is it just manager or is it something else?
It's in a reference here to something.
Manager.
Internal field manager.
Manager stroke coordinator.
What's your pay?
Wh what ?
Erm  two fifty basic
Per week?
Per week, plus commission.
And what was your average take home?
Erm  it touched  it touched twenty grand last year.
Or nineteen and a half something like that.
And you got a company car as a benefit as well?
Yeah.
Was there a pension scheme?
Erm  yeah, but  it was there was something that only certain employees   that time  the start of the pension like myself, erm  I have to pay five pound a week after tax for my pension.
It is a contributory scheme?
That's right and they paid some child 
Any other benefits  paying erm  BUPA?
No.
Private health?
No.
Telephone home telephone?
Okay.
Erm normal hours per week how many hours a week were you working?
Ooh  erm  hard to say.
That that figure does include overtime erm 
Yeah.
The basic  hours are forty two and a half
And when did they actually terminate the employment did it take effect from the eighteenth of June or what?
No that was that was the Friday and as it says th well I don't know if it says there or not, but they said  what would happen, they'd think about it over the weekend and they'd contact me the Monday afternoon  erm  to make a final decision.
The Monday evening they phone me up and said that  I was to attend another meeting on Tuesday which I believe were the twenty second   to which they said, We've thought about it and we've decided not to continue your employment.
And a formal letter will follow.
Have you ever had any discipline problems at all in the past?
Not that I can remember.
Okay.
On the Tuesday I went in and they said that a letter would follow  right  that was on the  Tuesday the twenty first something like that, then I never heard nothing from them until  this came lunchtime post this Monday  recorded delivery.
Twenty eighth.
What we're saying here is er if you take an ex gratia payment you are not entitled to apply to the industrial tribunal.
I couldn't understand it because it contradicts itself twice.
Yeah  saying that they're entitled to dismiss you without notice.
We are going to give you one week's pay in respect of each couple of years of servi , years' service.
If they've made you redundant that's what they have to do.
They have to give you a week's pay for each year  that you have been employed them a as pay in lieu of notice.
That's redundancy as opposed to dismissal.
So they're saying this is an ex gratia payment in other words they're offering you that payment as er  some compensation for the fact that you've losing your job.
But it says here should a tribunal require them to pay a basic award for compensation then that payment is on the basis that it's offered and accepted in satisfaction  er towards those payments.
It's very clumsy language but I think what what they're saying is that  if you go to the tribunal and you get compensation, anything they pay you now is going to have to come off that.
Erm but then later on th they're saying that you you're accepting it in full and final settlement.
contributing towards 
towards these yeah it's not full and final settlement it's towards these payments.
I don't understand this bit  to pay a basic award of compensation following an order  .
A tribunal will either re instate you or it will say they have to pay compensation.
Mm.
It won't be both.
I I just didn't understand it that's  come for the advice for you see.
Well 
Well you got you got three months from the date  of termination which you can take as effect from the twenty second of June to make a claim to the industrial tribunal.
Erm it's very much what I would term a fifty fifty case.
The strongest argument we've got is that  has got a driving record worse than yours and he has been taken on despite that record.
Erm you are of equal management status your abilities are the same  erm why should you be differentiated  from him.
Er that's your strongest argument.
If he wasn't there then I would say that you you'd be on a sticky wicket, because most terms of employment say that if you er have a driving licence and you lose it then your employment will automatically finish.
Mm.
And virtually all contracts of employment where anybody is required to to drive during the course of their work should contain that clause from an employers point of view.
Mm.
Now you've never had a  a contract of employment so that goes in favour as well.
Erm we're entitled to ask them for er entitled to ask the tribunal to say what terms of employment wou w should have been.
Erm the tribunal may well say that one of those clauses should be if you lose your driving licence you lose your job, so it's a fairly dangerous thing to apply to the tribunal to get terms of employment sorted out.
The best advice I can give you is simply to go for unfair dismissal on the basis that you've got two managers who do exactly the same job, there's no need for you to go on site, there are other drivers that could get you there, therefore it's not necessary to finish your job simply because you've lost your licence.
Erm even if we're wrong in that then they should have looked at alternative positions within the company which didn't require you to drive  erm   that's the basic advice at the moment.
Yeah.
Th the the other thing erm reference that  this other manager has not  at no occa on no occasion has that car been used for company use.
Right.
Not even as f far as getting him to work in the morning.
Some other employee has to go and fetch him in the morning
Yeah.
deliver him to work, take him home in the evening.
That company  company car has never been used for company use.
Then the other argument  as I can see is that they've  led me to believe, I don I know you said that  it's automatic twelve month ban, but  we just accepted that because I was led to believe that my job was safe.
In certain circumstances if it is close it has been  
Sorry say again?
I in certain circumstances if your job's on the line and that  
Only if only if you're a  totter 
Erm 
If you've had speeding disqualification er speeding points and you were up for disqualification because you'd totted up twelve points
Mm.
then  you can argue what's called special hardship.
You can't do that when it's a drink driving.
You can't.
I see.
It's an automatic twelve months.
Yeah.
Nothing you can do about that.
Has to be a ban.
Mm.
So I can't criticize  the decision of the court on that or  or the way the solicitors  dealt with it.
I mean twelve months is is the minimum period it could have been more.
Mm.
You can't argue hardship on a drink drive.
No.
Right well erm so y at the moment have they paid you up to date?
What they've paid me  wha what I'm entitled to  is erm  obviously my week's wage  that I've worked, fortnight's holiday pay
Mm.
and then we have what we li call a floating week which is made up of five rest days, you can have them at any time  yeah to 
Yeah.
make your third week.
Now I've had two of those rest days  prior to all this so I would be owed a fortnight's holiday pay plus three rest days.
What they've sent me is erm  a week's wage and my three rest days but no holiday pay.
you're not  this so called ex gratia payment.
No.
I've not contacted them.
I mean I suppose I could contact them and say yeah I'll take that.
I think you've got to be careful how you word the letter on that because what I don't want you to do is to say yes okay and then find you're blocked on an industrial tribunal application.
Mm.
So what I would suggest is that we reply to to this for you.
Puts them on notice that you've been to see a solicitor.
They may withdraw it then.
Yeah they might.
Mm.
That's a risk.
At the end of the day it's a matter for you.
I mean if you want to make sure you've got that in your hand I would simply say to you 
You see 
make sure it's done so that you're not prejudicing your industrial tribunal case by saying that you'll accept the ex gratia payment but you also reserve the right to take legal advice about the termination of your employment.
Something along those lines.
Mm.
You see er what I'm worried about is that  erm   basically I wanted to see you first  before I even answered it before I phoned them up and say yeah okay or wha what have you.
Erm the simple reason is I've been signing on, erm they've suspended my unemployment.
I've got a wife and two children.
Yeah.
Does your wife work or not?
No.
Y y you could say no.
How old are your children?
Er  four and nine.
I've got one I pay maintenance on as well.
And how much are you paying in maintenance?
Well th that's not a court order that's just straight out out of my bank account into her bank account.
What do you pay?
Ten pound a week.
So at the moment with the earning  that they paid you up to date two hundred and fifty quid I can't give you reduced advice under the legal aid system at the moment because you're still being paid.
As soon as that stops and you've got no income 
Well that was last week.
I've had nothing this week.
So you've got no income  as of today's date.
Er well I don't know.
I don't know if I've got that fortnight's holiday pay to come or what.
 

Have you got any savings at all anywhere.
Er ha  well I've got a bit in my building society account 
Does th those savings exceed one thousand six hundred and thirty five pounds?
I think there's about two grand in there but 
Mm.
I Alright I'll just stop you there.
I can't give you reduced cost advice at the moment but it may be that in two or three weeks' time your s situation  has changed to the extent where I can.
Yeah.
Now I can advise you in the office under the green form system  if you are eligible for it because you  you've got no income coming in and your savings are below one thousand six hundred quid.
Right.
That covers me for office work to negotiate to try and settle this case.
It covers me for the preparation work to an industrial tribunal.
It will not cover me for the hearing.
Legal aid is not available in any form for industrial tribunal hearings  erm so what I usually say is that we assist the client up to the stage  where s it means going  er to the tribunal itself.
Yeah.
And then if er you want a so solicitor with you on that day we'll have to come to some arrangement with you privately about the costs.
But  today's date even that doesn't apply because you you're category's above the level at which I can give you advice.
Yeah but that's only because I er I owe a grand in poll tax you see.
Right well as soon as you can come to me and say, I've no longer got that amount
Mm.
we can you sign you up to one of these green forms.
I can't do it today.
Mm.
Erm  er basically I'm going to h have to boot you out because I've got somebody else waiting for me .
Right that's fine .
Erm you've got to make a decision what to do.
Er erm I wo obviously make sure you keep hold of those cos I'll want copi of those if you want me to do anything more for you.
Mm.
Erm I would suggest that if you are going to contact them yourself about this, that you make sure it's done without prejudice.
Put it in writing marked, Without prejudice
Mm.
erm to your rights to apply to an industrial tribunal.
Erm and then y you know you get your cash and   three months from  twenty second of June to do something about it.
Yeah.
Right.
But  you would certainly accept it for now then?
Yeah I think you've got a case worth pursuing.
Mm.
I don't know how strong it is because as I say, erm most contracts of employment do  include a provision that if somebody h has a driving licence and loses it and driving is part of their work, even if it's only a minor part of their work, then the employer can  erm  dismiss.
Well what they said to me was 
But your advantage is you've got no em contract of employment.
But wh what they said to me was although  erm  although it's not a driving is not a major part of  and your role was changing and whatever that means 
And you didn't know that did you?
Well plus plus the fact that erm  it's not that you haven't got one, or it's not that we'd need you to drive  it's that you're denying us the privilege  of being able to send you.
Mm.
Well there is some argument in that, but, you know they should be looking at alternatives  somebody to drive you out  the sites where they , the  whole time they would take you there and bring you back.
Mm.
It seems to apply doesn't it?
Plus that other thing that  was at  you know that it  it stated it's a way of getting rid of him without redundancy.
Yeah sure.
I mean if you can come up with the witnesses that are prepared to stick their head in the noose and say that.
That's going to be your problem because they're all still wor working for the company.
Mm.
But if you can get somebody to come along and say that then er erm y your case gets a lot stronger.
Okay?
So I'll leave it with you.
It's just that I I'm finding it  well I'm not.
My wife's getting  very upset about it, the whole affair and everything like that
Mm.
And er I don't know whether to  it's it's the money aspect of it because if my  unemployment's stopped
Well we'll stop  
I mean 
at eight weeks, say they stop it by erm 
Twenty six 
twenty six, it's  these days
Or up to twenty six anyway .
Er do  they should give you income support as opposed to unemployment benefit .
Yeah but even that it's  it's ridiculously low.
Yeah.
Erm.
In terms of h h what's your objective.
Er do you want to go back and work for them, is that the m the main thing so you've got your job back, cos if you claim compensation th the basic  award is equivalent to redundancy which it sound as though they may well  pay about of half that to you.
Erm that's if you prove your case.
You'd get a basic award equivalent to what would happen if you were made redundant.
On top of that you get compensation which is a maximum of ten thousand pounds and depends on  erm  whether you've got another job, erm  whether you've contributed towards your own dismissal, and I think th the tribunal would knock something off for that.
A at a guess I would think they would probably give you about three to six months' worth of pay  as compensation, if 
Mm.
you proved your case.
Mm.
So it's not a vast amount in comparison with having no job.
No no but it goes somewhere near half way I mean 
a question of whether you can go back 
the the reasoning being that  I've gone into the aspects of  erm income support and that and  basically i it's about seventy pound a week to live on .
Yeah, yeah.
Now which is upsetting my wife.
But in the mean time my wages I've had last week have been spent
Mm.
I don't know   I don't know how long income support's going to be, I don't know how long my next pay packet's gonna be or what have you.
The sooner you're on income support again I can sign you up to one of these green forms, so I can give you some advice on that.
You can?
Yeah.
I can then  advise you.
Well I filled all the forms in and that 
 
it's just a matter of delivering .
Yeah.
Your capital at the moment takes you just over so  you know once your capital's below sixteen hundred quid
Mm.
I can then sign you up to that.
Mm.
It won't cost you for my advice.
Well what I'll do is I'll stick it in my diary for a couple of weeks.
Yeah.
Would you 
Y 
Would you recommend that  I got rid of some of it then by  paying my poll tax or  doing something with it or use the money to live off?
It's very difficult to advise you isn't it?
I d th the natural inclination is to say  use it t to live off  because you don't have a problem over the next twenty six weeks.
Mm.
Mm.
And then again  if they pay me this money  as an ex gratia payment.
You have to tell the D S S.
Or, I've got to  get rid of that as well haven't I?
Mm.
But I think you've got a case which I  I would say is fifty fifty.
It's one  that we can perhaps put a bit of pressure on if we issue an application for you by getting ACAS involved and seeing whether ACAS can either get you back there or er  get you a compensation off them.
Yeah.
So  
 
they'll be in trouble to start with cos they had no contracts of employment out at that time.
Yeah.
So  what do you want me to do for now then?
Well  you follow up what you want to do with the company when you've thought about what I've said to you
Yeah.
erm  let me know what you do
Yeah.
erm and then I can put together
Contact you within the next fortnight something 
Yeah.
like that?
Yeah and I'll put together er a tribunal claim for you.
Get it to you  for checking.
Thanks for your help.
Okay.
Okay then.
Right.
 
Just let me know what you want to do and  we'll put it together for you.
Okay then.
Thanks then.
Cheers.