

your duty.
What is your position  in all of this.
Are you   
regarding this you mean?
Yeah.
We  there's Don and myself  two individuals who have been on the course for incident training with  Fire Brigade.
Right.
That's why we've come to be the two individuals who are, in inverted comma, Responsible for whatever happens during an incident.
How long ago was the course?
.
Oh god my certificate's in the office somewhere  .
What we talking about?
Five years?
Four years?
No no no no it's .
wha what'll it be about  er about two years I think  
Right.
and that's a shot in the dark  
quite a current 
Oh yes yes yes 
by all accounts 
we were sent by the racecourse here you see
Right.
the pair of us on a  course over there.
Erm  now  in my wisdom I I thought that  obviously considering we're now classed as incident stewards the o the thing to do was to put the certificates up in a prominent place so that everybody who visited the site knew who were the incident stewards were .
Right.
So I left mine to be  done with and er where it's gone since then  is anybody's guess.
Right.
Because it was before just before we moved the offices  but it's kicking around somewhere in an envelope with my name on the front of it but where I wouldn't know.
But Don apparently took his 
Right.
but I said to Don, Well I would have thought they have had to have been displayed  er to support the fact that they do have incident s you know trained incident stewards on site.
Did you draw that up?
Along with erm Robin yes, yeah .
 
It's quite comprehensive isn't it?
Really but er to be out of date 
It's out of date in certain areas, there are cer We'd never  you see  what we did  we knocked up a rough copy.
Then we e enhanced it and then eventually  er  Robin knocked this up you see  from all the work we'd done, but we never sat down and went through this.
 
Now there are one or two little things in here which have become contradictory  you look at it but  he'd alread he'd passed this over to the  fire service who were very happy with it
Right.
and that's the way its it left we left it but of course as I  mentioned to him we'd completely omitted  Tats which of course we we we hadn't done  Tats at all.
Mhm.
Er erm  we have since had the alteration in our structure here which of course puts quite a bit of it out of date.
Yeah.
But i if you you see  a all he said to me , Tats is closed at the moment, he said er 
Yeah but  
but Tats is gonna be open in the summer and if anything happen in the summer 
Mind you its its open now because 
W 
the fish and chips are there
absolutely 
and if there's gonna be a fire it's likely to happen in that fish and chip shop .
but t to me it's the biggest fire risk we've probably got on the site.
Yeah.
pay attention  to get the Tats list 
Yeah y yeah yeah yeah 
and and get some money that's  responsible for Tats.
Yeah.
can't have erm  Mr  doing that cos nobody would understand him would they?
So  to be a steward or somebody that .
is generally at that end of things.
I think what we've got to do, one of the things we've got to do is is it's alright talking about  a steward  as an A N other, but I think we've gotta know where the A N other is.
We don't name him but whoever is in a particular spot should be responsible for a certain area, which  in in  fundamentally it is done that in quite a number of instances but I mean one thing that springs to mind is that  a lady shall clear the ladies toilets.
Mm.
What lady, where from?
Who 
specify from one of the bar, a particular bar wasn't it.
Yeah but is there a lady in that bar always?
Generally yes.
Generally.
But   it it's sods law that it will happen there isn't a lady there behind the bar.
Well, really if there's a fire does it matter whether it's a lady or gent that  ?
I don't think so but we've specified in here a lady shall.
see upstairs we say,The steward will clear the toilets.
Well what do you reckon Mandy?
I mean if you 
matters if it's a
If if the fire alarms going off and you're in the ladies loo
an and a bloke sort of is shouting from the doorway  to clear the place
Mm.
I think in a er incident like that I don't it matters whether it's male or female  .
No I I I do agree with you, but I  
a lady in there.
Yeah.
There's only one thing that struck me when I was reading through it but  a as I say, we we  got to look at this from point of view are we going to date this as it lies at the present moment and add to it pieces that we want, or do we start off by having the pieces o i its its now whe w w 
I would have thought first of all we've got to update what we've got as it  
Yeah yeah.
I think it's a good document.
Secondly then  we've got to add 
To it.
to it.
 
The areas that have  been  demolished and 
Yeah.
and
Yeah.
changing meeting points and things.
The other thing I  I wasn't sure  and this is just my thoughts on it, you are using the stewards as as points where  they're going to be  you know coordinating people and everything.
With so many visiting stewards all the time we haven't got a regular pattern of of any stewards that's going to be responsible.
A absolutely.
So it's it's all  in all must be done by staff.
Yeah yeah yeah.
It must be.
You cannot rely on stewards because you know they're  they're not here all the time.
Er what we have got to do you see a as I have said we really got to designate a duty to a position 
Mm.
as opposed to an individual, because  our staff is switching round all the time 
Yeah.
the they  day staff, so consequently whoever's in a =pec specific position has got to have the responsibilities that go with that position.
the sta the static point are the bars
Yeah yeah.
so  
That's .
using Don upstairs  
Yeah yeah yeah 
using Ray and Jenny 
Yeah.
and Mike and Geoff
Yeah yeah that's fine 
and as licensees
Yeah.
they're also very much aware about evacuation procedures anyway .
Yeah yeah yeah.
So  I think we ought to  you know use that.
But then you see you've got places like  the weighing room, jockeys areas which  basically y you've got temporary staff there, or casual staff.
Erm.
which sometimes does fluctuate, not always.
You've got temporary staff on the gates 
Right.
erm  that's why er you know really i it is essential that certainly who ever is going to be in that position knows what  .
Right first of all
There's one generally static person in the weighing room .
Yeah.
That's the clerk of the scales
Yeah yeah .
I know he's only casual staff but he's always on the same  always
Yeah.
the same job.
But yeah, clerk of the scales yeah.
What do you reckon.
Ted or the clerk of the scales?
Yeah.
Not Yeah what do you reckon?
Ted or clerk of the scales?
I I think y yes I think this is sensible.
Er  if we can  put people in positions where we know they're always gonna be there a as a permanent fixture a as part and parcel of their job.
So whoever is clerk of the scales  bend to his  
The poi point about him is he's a he's always based in the same place.
Absolutely, yeah yeah.
Right and  and he got a radio
Yes.
so he's in touch with erm everybody because 
Yeah.
he's got he's got the main radio hasn't he?
Yeah.
Erm  so he can be  a a point to the  erm  what am I looking for?
Well really w w we're  
to the  of the course.
We merely put the onus on him don't we  to say, Right if an incident should  occur it gives you responsibility whether you  delegate somebody to assist you to make sure that all that area, the jockeys rooms and 
Yeah.
e everything  .
Is that all ?
Erm i it it will be covered but 
free to do it though cos he isn't ?
Mm.
I don't know whether he might be a bit funny about it.
I don't know whether it would be a bit better having someone like Ted?
You know do you know 
I know what you mean.
Do you know what I'm getting at?
yeah.
The on the only thing is  sometimes if you a if you ask some of these people to do these things I know it's not a lot of responsibility but do you reckon it goes to his head?
Yeah oh yeah I know  I know what you're saying.
as it is.
He's the only other sort of like 
Erm.
static  one there isn't he?
You see now  all that was left before  to the office staff.
Cos the offices were down there
It was all adjoining wasn't it?
you see.
So it was all you won't find it in here because as erm Robin said, the office staff are there, that'll be the central  position where everything's happening and they will make sure that the area's clear.
But now that we've changed the thing we've got to this is something we've got to add into it
Yeah.
the fact that the offices are no longer there but somebody's gonna have to make sure that all that block is cleared  and the only person  permanent fixture is  clerk of the scales as you quite rightly said.
Yeah.
We'll do it as clerk of the scales and er  we'll inform him that that's on you know one 
Yeah.
of his duties as clerk of the scales  and we'll have a notice put next to him as well about the procedure
Yeah.
and give him a copy of all his  
Oh yes yes yeah yeah.
Now he he will see that the whole of that block is cleared.
Not here.
Where would they be evacuated to?
To the the paddock?
The everybody evacuates to the  paddock area behind the main stand.
Yeah.
Er  after deliberate first we wondered whether they ought to go through  onto the racecourse  and then we decided no probably the best place for them would be  round the back of the main stand.
Mm.
Erm  now whether  in  by doing this  virtually the safes spot but it's the easiest spot to disperse them from and it's the easiest spot to get them to
Yeah.
the if there's a a large number of people.
Er  they're  easily shepherded there because there's no obstructions.
If they're going through the course they've got to cross the course, they've got to cross the fences.
Yeah.
That could create a problem.
Erm  if we're gonna move them out to the back there there's firm standing f to get them out there, the  
 
firm would get there without any great problem  and once we got them there we can di disperse them without any great  they're not in the way of essential services if they want to come in.
Yeah you're not encouraging people to go to where the cars are being parked.