

The New Internationalist
Read the NI and get an instant monthly briefing on today's world and how it affects you.
Save time and effort in the daily struggle to keep up with major issues.
NI takes one subject each month — from overseas aid, trees or food to masculinity, Southern Africa or personal violence — and gives you the overview: ideas, arguments and analysis neatly distilled into 32 pages, enhanced by graphics, interesting charts and vivid photos.
You get a lot of information you won't find elsewhere…but the NI is not a dry economic or political journal.
It's sometimes shocking, occasionally infuriating but always informative and entertaining.
Why Professor John Kenneth Galbraith thinks you should read New Internationalist: "It's a magazine with a purpose we can all applaud and must support" 
Try the NI FREE for three months and make up your own mind.
Whether or not you decide to subscribe, you can keep the free magazines, and we'll also give you a full colour map of the world PLUS another gift.
The New Internationalist started originally with the backing of Oxfam and Christian Aid.
Today the NI is independent with over 65,000 subscribers around the world, making it the largest-selling magazine on development.
Its material is widely used by teachers, researchers, aid experts, action groups, UN organizations and individuals who want to know more and do more about the causes of social injustice.
NI writers are development specialists and journalists who do not shy away from controversy.
The NI has a raw edge and a unique perspective that may not always make comfortable reading.
Challenging
The double page of facts in each NI is a cornerstone of the magazine's success, backing up arguments by transforming dull data into vivid visuals that make the facts unforgettable.
Factual
NI is a campaigning magazine.
Its issues on population, child sponsorship and babymilk sales have spurred individuals and organizations to action.
Hard-Hitting
NI regular features include the Letters Pages; Reviews; Updates and  Brieflies with a round-up of news; Letter from China; Endpiece and the Country Profile sketch of a Third World country.
Something for Everyone
It's not just the NI's colour front cover that grabs your attention.
Inside, liberal use of first-class photographs, imaginative illustrations and visual pages enhance the articles and invite you to read them.
Eye-Catching
NI takes a different subject every month, making its a valuable part-work which builds up into a library on development, a handy source of reference.
New Each Month
The NI…the best magazine on development.
Try it FREE for three months and receive a world map and another gift — all yours to keep.
Some issues covered recently or coming soon
New Internationalist
Since its birth Israel has fought tooth and nail to survive…and expand.
Does this mean there can never be a land for the Palestinians, and that Jews and Arabs may not live together in peace?
This NI gets to grips wit one of the most explosive issues of our time.
Whose Promised Land?
People in the West can oppose South Africa's apartheid with little inconvenience to themselves — but it's a different matter for Mozambique.
Mozambique
The car gives us freedom; the car clogs up roads.
It makes life much easier, it guzzles petrol and pollutes.
This issue of NI looks at the car's impact on our lives, our health and our environment.
The Car and the Clear Blue Sky
Forget socialism, individualism is paramount according to the New Right.
NI charts the Right's revolution and points the way to resistance.
Politics of Greed
In times of trouble it is children who suffer most — whether through war or the daily grind of poverty.
We want to help, but child sponsorship can be harmful for the child, her family and community.
NI reveals why and suggests better ways to help.
Children
We consider ourselves civilized but this NI reports that often we treat native people barbarically, plundering their land and resources.
Native People
Images shape our thinking sometimes without us knowing NI looks behind the lens to translate the language of photography.
Photography