

CHAPTER ONE
The process of waking up was painful.
Both eyelids seemed weighted down.
She decided to leave it for a while.
Her head was throbbing so vilely that the effort was too much.
And the weather outside sounded so bad that it seemed wise to stay as she was a little longer.
The howling wind kept firing salvos of rain against the windows, but after a while she stirred reluctantly.
Weather or no weather, if she was awake it must be time to get up.
Steeling herself against the pain in her head, she forced her eyes open, then stared in horror and shut them quickly, her heart thumping.
She lay rigid for a count of ten, eyes tightly closed, then very slowly opened them again.
It was no dream.
The room was still there.
It was small, with a sloping ceiling and a pair of windows set in deep embrasures.
And she'd never seen it before in her life.
She stared, teeth chattering, at white-painted walls, a heavy oak chest, the ornate brass-work of the bed.
As she heaved herself up against the pillows she discovered she was wearing a man's shirt, extra-large and striped, and she'd never seen that before, either.
She thrust back the bright patchwork quilt and levered herself to a sitting position, her feet dangling over the edge of the bed.
She sat very still for a moment, the room revolving around her like a carousel as the pain in her head hammered to a crescendo then receded again to a just bearable throb.
Slowly the mist in front of her eyes cleared.
She breathed in slowly and regularly a few times, then got shakily to her feet.
This last proved more taxing than expected.
The floor seemed to be heaving about beneath her feet like the deck of a ship.
To reach a window she was obliged to cling to the brass footrail of the bed en route.
This was no ordinary headache, she thought grimly.
Seeing an upright chair stationed between the windows, she made a lunge for it and collapsed sideways on the rush seat to lean, exhausted, against the cold wall.
It was some time before she could gather her forces sufficiently to stand up and rest her hands on the chill white plaster of the window embrasure.
As she peered through the double glass her blood ran cold.
Not that there was much to see: only a stretch of close-cropped, undulating turf, broken here and there by protrusions of rock.
And beyond that nothing but sullen grey sky and miles of stormy, heaving sea.
Panic surged up inside her, taking her breath away.
She fought it, leaning on her clenched fists, her eyes closed until the wave of terror receded, leaving her limp and breathless.
Where in heaven's name was this place — and what was she doing here?
She tensed, trembling.
Heavy footsteps were mounting the stairs.
She turned wildly, then staggered, her hands groping for the brass footrail of the bed.
Her breath quickened painfully.
She stared, hypnotised, as the heavy iron latch lifted, the door opened and a very tall man backed into the room, ducking his head to clear the lintel, his attention on the tray he was carrying.
She received a fleeting impression of shaggy black hair and massive shoulders, then the tray was dumped down on the bedside table and she herself dumped in turn on the bed.
‘You shouldn't be up.’
The man tucked the quilt around her then straightened, eyeing her petrified face irritably.
‘For heaven's sake!
I don't bite.’
She shrank away in undisguised terror as he sat on the edge of the bed, reaching for her hand.
She snatched it away, burrowing deeper beneath the covers.
His eyes glittered coldly.
‘You're in no danger from me, I assure you.’
The voice was musical, with a slight cadence it was hard to pin down.
And even in her present state of turmoil she could appreciate that he was a very handsome man, in a sombre, brooding sort of way.
The cold eyes scrutinising her so impersonally were deep set beneath heavy black brows, and shadowed with fatigue.
His mouth was wide and well cut, with a deeply indented upper lip, and a decidedly grim set to it, and there was something about him which kept her rigid with tension beneath the covers.
She cleared her throat experimentally.
‘Where is this place, please?’
She grimaced as her voice, unused for some time by the sound of it, came out in hoarse, rusty spurts.
‘And who are you?’
‘I was just about to ask the same of you,’ he countered promptly.
‘But before we go into all that tell me how you're feeling.’
He leaned forward.
‘Give me your hand, please.’
Her eyes narrowed in alarm.
‘Why?’
‘So I can feel your pulse,’ he said impatiently.
‘I'm a doctor, not a fortune-teller.’
Flushing, she extended her hand.
He held her wrist loosely between long, slim fingers, his eyes on his watch.
‘How's your head?’
‘It's aching.
Badly.’
‘Not surprising.
You've had a nasty knock.’
He looked up.
‘Your pulse is racing — don't tell me you're still scared of me!’
She nodded dumbly.
The movement lanced pain through her head and she gasped, her face contorted.
His hand tightened on hers for a moment.
‘Your head will probably improve if I tell you where you are — and who I am,’ he began conversationally.
‘Answer one, we're on an island called Gullholm, just off the west coast of Wales.
Answer two, my name is Penry Meredith Vaughan, by profession I'm a consultant physician, and I own the island.’
He looked at her commandingly.
‘Now return the compliment, please.
Tell me who you are, young lady, and why the devil you're trespassing on my property.’
She gazed at him in horror.
‘But that's why I'm so frightened, Dr Vaughan.’
Her teeth caught in her trembling lower lip for a moment.
‘I don't know.
My mind's a blank.’
He rose to his feet, tall as a giant in the small room.
‘You expect me to believe you have no idea how you got here?’
‘I'm afraid I do.’
She eyed him despairingly.
‘I know it sounds far-fetched, but I — I don't know who I am, either.
Not even my own name!’
Penry Vaughan studied her in brooding silence for a moment, then glanced at the forgotten tray on the bedside table.
‘I've brought you some soup —’
‘I couldn't eat anything,’ she said with a shudder.
‘If you don't eat,’ he said grimly, ‘you get no medication for that head, nor an account of how I found you.’
She struggled to sit up.
‘Please —’ she began, then clenched her teeth, perspiration standing out on her forehead as the vice-like pain gripped her skull.
She subsided against the pillows, breathing shallowly until the spasm began to subside.
‘All right,’ she muttered at last .
Dr Penry Vaughan nodded in approval as he poured hot, fragrant liquid from an insulated flask into a mug.
‘While you drink this I'll go downstairs and make tea and toast —’
‘No toast!’ she said hastily as she took the mug.
‘As a house-guest you leave a lot to be desired, young woman,’ he said cuttingly.
‘The presence of a semi-invalid is something I neither invited nor desired, so please make it easier for both of us by giving as little trouble as possible.’
He looked down his formidable nose.
‘Drink that soup by the time I get back and possibly, just possibly, I'll give you a mild pain-killer.
If not I'll leave you to your own devices until you see sense.’
She stared after him mutinously as he went from the room, willing him to bump his head as he went through the door, but to her disappointment Dr Penry Vaughan ducked his tall head with the grace and dexterity of long practice.
Alone again, she eyed the soup in her mug malevolently, convinced it would act as an emetic.
For a moment she thought of staggering to the window again to throw the soup out, but decided against it.
Not only was she too shaky on her feet, but by the sound of the storm raging outside anything thrown from the window would be hurled back in her face, courtesy of the wind.
Gingerly she took a sip of the soup, surprised to find it was not only delicious but nothing to do with any can or packet.
Dr Vaughan, it seemed, liked cooking.
And instead of rebelling her stomach gave an appreciative little rumble.
She sipped absently, so desperate to remember who she was and how she came to be here that the mug was empty before she realised it.
‘Good,’ said Penry Vaughan when he returned.
He took the mug with an approving nod.
‘I'm glad you decided to be sensible.’
‘Thank you, Dr Vaughan.
I'm sorry to be such a nuisance.
I feel better already.
I can be on my way soon…’
She trailed away at his sardonic expression.
‘On your way where?’
He turned back to the tray to fill two cups.
‘How do you like your tea?’
‘Milk, no sugar, please —’ Her eyes lit up as she took the cup from him.
‘If I know that — which I do, somehow — surely I'll remember the rest pretty soon?’
‘Quite possibly.’
He handed her a plate containing four small triangles of toasted wholemeal bread, sparsely buttered.
‘Now eat this while I tell you how I found you.’
Dr Penry Vaughan, she learned, had come to Gullholm for peace and solitude to get on with a series of articles.
‘I needed a break from routine rather badly,’ he said as he drew up a chair and sat down.
‘A colleague advised a couple of weeks in the sun, away from it all.’
The girl in the bed glanced towards the windows involuntarily, as a vicious gust of wind drove rain against the windows like a fusillade of shot.
Penry Vaughan shrugged.
‘Not much sun on Gullholm at this time of the year, I admit, but you can't beat it for peace and privacy.
As a rule, anyway,’ he added morosely.
She stiffened.
‘My intrusion was involuntary, Dr Vaughan.
I can't have meant to come here if it's private property.’
‘I found you at first light this morning,’ he said, getting up to take her half-empty plate.
‘Good girl, I'll let you off the rest.
Now drink some of the tea.’
She obeyed, then thanked Penry Vaughan gratefully as he handed her two tablets and a glass of water.
‘These are pretty mild,’ he said as she swallowed them down.
‘But they should take the edge off the pain.
Drink as much as you can, please.’
Once she was propped comfortably against the pillows Penry Vaughan sat down again and went on with his story.
It was his habit to go for a run round his island every day before breakfast, and that morning, because rain was forecast for the rest of the day, he'd taken advantage of the brief spell of fine weather early on to gather up driftwood from the beach after his run.
The shape of the island, he told her, was a rough figure-of-eight, with a narrow neck of land joining the two halves of landmass.
The two inlets either side of the Neck were called Seal Haven to the westward, Atlantic side, and Lee Haven facing the Pembrokeshire coast.
‘On Lee Beach there's a safe anchorage where I keep my old fishing boat,’ said her host.
‘But Seal Haven is a mass of rocks, with fierce currents boiling round them most of the time.
And that, Madame X, is where I found you.’
As the promised rain swept in from the sea Penry had climbed the cliff path from Lee Haven with his bundle of driftwood, but as he reached the Neck a small patch of bright colour had caught his eye far below.
‘Your scarf,’ he told her.
‘I jettisoned the wood, climbed down the path and there, neatly stashed away in a narrow inlet between the rocks, was my castaway, complete with gash on temple, soaked through, ice-cold to the touch and so deeply unconscious I thought at first you were dead.’
She shivered.
‘But how on earth had I got there?’
‘No idea.
I was hoping you'd be able to tell me that.’
She slumped against the pillows, depressed.
‘Well, I can't.
I mean, it's not exactly swimming weather, is it?’
‘Far from it.
Nor, presumably, would you go swimming fully dressed with a small weekend bag slung over your shoulder.’
She stared at him.
‘I came complete with luggage?
Wasn't there something in the bag to say who I am?’
‘I'm afraid not.
It's a small nylon affair with some underwear and a spare sweater and that's about it.
But you should be grateful to it,’ he added.
‘The bag may well have saved your life, first by doubling as a lifebelt, then by getting caught on a needle of rock in the inlet.
Otherwise you'd have been swept away again.’
She hugged her arms across her chest convulsively under the bright patchwork quilt.
‘Do you think I fell out of a boat?’
‘It seems the most likely explanation.’
He lounged back in the chair, a commanding figure, despite his ancient white fisherman's sweater and salt-stained jeans.
‘But what boat?
And where was it heading?’
She shook her head helplessly.
‘I wish I knew!’
‘I've contacted the coastguard and police by radio telephone.
They should shed some light on the mystery once you're reported missing.
As,’ he assured her, ‘you most certainly will be when you fail to turn up at whatever destination you were bound for.’
He leaned forward to take her hand.
‘No rings.
Not that I expected any.
You don't look old enough to be married.’
She pulled her hand away.
‘How old is that?’
His face hardened.
‘It depends.
Marriage calls for a certain degree of maturity.
Some people never achieve it.’
Ouch, she thought.
A sore subject.
‘I don't feel all that young,’ she said tentatively.
‘But you're a doctor.
Can't you tell by my teeth, or something?’
His sudden smile transformed him to an astonishing degree, revealing the man behind the remote consultant.
One who'd probably mowed the nurses down in his student days, too, she thought with a flash of insight.
But the change was fleeting, the brooding mask in place again almost at once.
‘Don't worry about it,’ he advised, then searched in his pocket for a moment before holding out something which glittered in the palm of his hand.
‘This was pinned to your sweater.
Does it ring any bells?’
She examined the silver brooch eagerly.
It was unusual.
And, she knew beyond any doubt, it was hers.
The workmanship was very fine, depicting a lioness and a vixen at ease together on what looked like a sleigh.
‘Strange combination,’ she said slowly, turning the brooch over in her hands.
‘And why a sleigh, I wonder?’
‘I don't think it's a sleigh.
Turn it up on end.’
She did as he said, her eyes lighting up.
‘Of course— it's a capital L!’
She smiled for the first time, wincing as the pull of facial muscles reminded her she'd had a crack on the head.
She reached up a hand to find a dressing near her hair-line.
‘Was it much of a gash?’
‘Too much to leave as it was.
I put a couple of stitches in it while you were unconscious,’ he said casually.
‘You came to in the middle of it, unfortunately for you, but it gave me the opportunity to make a superficial examination.’
She frowned.
‘You shone a light in my eyes!’
His eyes were suddenly intent.
‘You remember?’
‘Only vaguely.’
Her mouth dropped.
‘It's so frustrating — like having someone twitch a curtain aside then let it fall back again before I can see properly.’
She swallowed.
‘I felt a sharp pain and — and the light, blinding me.
Like a fragment of a dream.’
She sighed heavily.
‘What a nuisance for you, having to stitch me up.
I'm deeply indebted to you, one way and another, Dr Vaughan.’
‘Nonsense,’ he said briskly.
‘I could hardly leave you in the condition I found you.
Your clothes, by the way, are all drying on a rack in the kitchen.’
‘Thank you,’ she said politely, her sense of obligation increasing by the minute.
She turned the brooch over in her hand.
‘Since I was wearing this I assume it's mine.
‘L’ for what, I wonder?’
‘There's a lioness on the brooch,’ he pointed out.
‘It could stand for Leonie, or Leonora, perhaps.
Ring any bells?’
She shook her head.
‘Not really.’
‘Nevertheless, my child, you must answer to something, if only for the time being.’
He gave her a wry look.
‘Not that you look remotely like a lioness — more like a half-drowned kitten.’
‘I'll answer to anything you like,’ she snapped, her eyes flashing, ‘other than‘my child’!’
One of his black brows rose tauntingly.
‘Ah — the kitten has claws!
Very well.
If you're leaving the choice to me I vote for Leonora.
Perhaps your father shared my taste for Beethoven.’
She shrugged.
‘I don't, that's for sure.’
Her eyes filled with sudden, angry tears.
‘How in heaven's name do I know I don't like Beethoven, when I can't remember my own name?’
‘Because you're suffering from amnesia, Leonora,’ he said brusquely.
‘A temporary loss of memory due to the blow on your head.
You could wake up tomorrow with total recall.
In the meantime, don't try to force it.’
He got to his feet.
‘I'm going to cook myself some lunch.
Try to sleep.
This afternoon, if you feel better, you can come downstairs.’
She felt a sudden violent disinclination for solitude.
‘Can't I come now?’
‘No.’
He turned in the doorway.
‘You've had a bad experience, Leonora.
You're lucky to be alive.
And because I took the trouble to save this life of yours I insist on seeing you recover properly and make full use of it.
I'm a doctor, remember.
So please follow my instructions.
They're meant for the best.’
Leonora bit her lip in remorse.
‘I'm sorry, Dr Vaughan.
It must be a terrible drag having a patient foisted on you like this — a real busman's holiday.’
She smiled diffidently.
‘I haven't thanked you properly, either, for rescuing me from — from a watery grave.
I'm very grateful.
Truly.’
Penry Vaughan shrugged his formidable shoulders indifferently.
‘Don't mention it.
Now, if there's nothing more I can do for you for a while, I'll leave you to rest.’
‘There is something,’ she muttered, embarrassed.
‘Could you point me in the direction of a bathroom please?’
‘Of course.
Sorry — I should have thought of that before.’
He returned to the bed, holding out his hands.
‘Up you come.’
‘If you'll just tell me where it is I can manage by myself, thank you.’
He frowned irritably.
‘My dear child, is it possible you're embarrassed?
Who do you think stripped your clothes off and put you to bed?’
Her face flamed.
‘Nevertheless, Dr Vaughan, if it's all the same to you I'd still prefer to get to the bathroom under my own steam.’
‘Oh, for —’ He checked himself.
‘All right.
Have it your own way.
The bathroom's just across the passage.
But be careful.
It's an old house, and the floor's uneven in places, so don't try exploring on your own just yet, please.’
‘I wouldn't dream of trespassing,’ she assured him stiffly.
‘Don't talk nonsense,’ he said impatiently.
‘When you get back to bed try to sleep for a bit.
I'll be up to see you later.’
Leonora watched him go with mixed feelings, not really sure she could make it to the bathroom alone, despite her fine words.
If a visit there had been less pressing she'd have been very willing to cuddle down into the comfortable bed and let sleep blank out her problems for a while.
It took her a long time to negotiate the journey to the small, functional bathroom across the passage, but in the end she accomplished it without incident.
Then before she resumed her snail-slow progress back to bed she steeled herself to look in the mirror above the washbasin.
Her face was a great disappointment in more ways than one.
Not only was it unremarkable and rather battered, it did nothing at all to jog her errant memory.
She had a lot of hair, but it was so tangled and matted it was impossible to determine the colour.
And she was skinny.
The shirt hung straight to her knees unimpeded much by feminine curves.
No wonder Dr Vaughan had jeered at her maidenly modesty.
She eyed herself with gloom.
One of her eyes was passable; dark, and a rather pleasing almond shape.
But the other was swollen and half closed, with a Technicolor bruise below it right down to her razor-sharp cheekbone.
By some miracle her nose had escaped a battering.
It was short and straight, which was more than could be said for her mouth, which was curvy and rather wider than it should have been for her ashen, wedge-shaped face.
Leonora shook her head sorrowfully at her reflection.
‘What a scarecrow!
All in all, my girl, you're lucky Dr Penry Meredith Vaughan didn't throw you back in the sea.’
CHAPTER TWO
When Leonora woke again it was dark.
Physically she felt much better.
The pain in her head had dulled to a quite bearable ache, but her mind, she realised in panic, was still a blank.
Her identity, her home, her family were still lost in the terrifying mist in her mind.
And if she was missing from home why weren't her family moving heaven and earth to get her back?
She beat down a gush of self-pity, knuckling away tears as she slid gingerly from the bed to make for the bathroom again.
As she reached the door a tall, dark shape blocked out the light.
‘You're awake,’ said Penry Vaughan, and snapped on a switch, dazzling her.
Leonora blinked at him owlishly.
‘You've got electricity?’
‘My own generator.’
He took a dressing-gown from the back of the door and held it for her.
‘Put this on if you must wander about the house.’
‘I was only venturing as far as the bathroom,’ she said with dignity.
‘I've put a spare toothbrush in there for you, but otherwise I can't offer you much in the way of beauty aids.’
‘Pity.
I could use some — badly.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘I plucked up enough courage to look in the mirror.
But the toothbrush is welcome,’ she added, then hesitated awkwardly.
‘What would you like me to do afterwards?
I can go back to bed and keep out of your way, if you prefer.’
‘Don't talk nonsense!’
‘Don't keep saying that!’ she snapped, then flushed, embarrassed.
‘I apologise.’
He bowed slightly.
‘I should be honoured to have your company at dinner, Miss Leonora X. Whenever you're ready to come downstairs give me a shout and I'll come and collect you.
The staircase is a bit steep.
The last thing you need is another concussion.’
‘Is that what I had?
Does concussion put the memory out of action?’
‘Sometimes.’
He opened the bathroom door for her.
‘Now get a move on.
No more questions until you're downstairs.’
Leonora eyed the bath longingly as she brushed her teeth.
If there was a generator it seemed likely there was hot water.
A sudden need for a bath overwhelmed her.
As the bath filled she inspected the sparse supply of male toiletries, interested to find Penry Vaughan was not a man for sexy French fragrances.
The only things on offer were a flask of shower-gel, a roll-on deodorant and a cake of soap, all from a chain of shops famous for herbal products.
The bath water was brownish, but wonderfully soothing to her quite remarkable display of bruises.
She eyed her body wryly.
Not a sight to inspire any man to raging lust, let alone a doctor.
She had breasts after all, she noted; smallish, but quite respectable, but the rest of her was narrow, with angles outnumbering the curves.
Her bruises stung badly as she anointed herself with gel, but the discomfort was a small price to pay for feeling clean again.
After a moment's hesitation she lay back, plunging her head deep in the water before shampooing her hair with the gel, gasping as her wound smarted horribly.
She sat up quickly, her head reeling for a moment.
When it steadied she pulled out the bath plug and knelt to hold her protesting head under the running water from the tap.
She endured the renewed pain stoically until the water ran clear, then turned off the taps and clambered from the bath, feeling very shaky, but wonderfully, blissfully clean.
Leonora wrapped herself in one of the large white bathtowels piled on a wicker stand, then, afraid to rub her hair, she swathed a towel turban-wise round her head and subsided on the chair, exhausted but triumphant.
A few minutes later, when she'd got as far as wrapping herself in her host's dressing-gown, Penry Vaughan knocked loudly on the door.
‘Are you all right in there, Leonora?’ he called.
‘You're taking a hell of a time.’
She opened the door, smiling guiltily.
‘I'm fine.
I hope you don't mind — I couldn't resist having a bath.’
Penry glared at her wet head.
‘You weren't stupid enough to wash your hair?’
‘I used some of your bath-gel —’
‘Never mind the bloody bath-gel, it's your wound I'm worried about!’
He cursed beneath his breath as he pushed her down, none too gently, on the chair.
‘Let me take a look at it.’
He yanked open the bathroom cabinet and took out antiseptic and fresh dressings.
She submitted meekly to his expert ministrations as he re-dressed the wound, giving her terse instructions to keep it dry from then on until the stitches were removed.
‘I hope I haven't undone all your good work,’ she said repentantly, ‘but I just couldn't exist a second longer without washing myself all over.’
‘I sponged you down this morning, child.
You weren't dirty!’
‘I felt dirty.’
Penry gave her a fulminating glance, then shrugged.
‘All right.
But since you were silly enough to wash that mop I suggest you put a dry towel round your shoulders while we eat.
No hairdryer.’
Leonora complied in smouldering silence, then followed the large figure of her host from the room.
He paused as they reached the head of the stairs, eyeing her bare feet.
‘I can't offer you anything in the way of shoes.
Your own are still sodden.
How about some socks?’
‘Fine.
Thank you.’
He led her back into the bedroom and sat her on the chair while he rummaged in the chest.
Leonora watched him in dismay.
This was his bedroom, then.
Which was pretty obvious, really.
The bed was very large, which was only to be expected for someone of Dr Vaughan's heroic proportions.
It had probably been the only one aired and ready for the unexpected guest this morning.
She thanked him, subdued, as he handed her a pair of stretch-towelling socks.
‘What's the matter?’ he demanded.
‘Not glamorous enough for you?’
‘It's not that — I just realised I've put you out of your bedroom,’ she muttered, pulling on the socks.
‘It's not the only one in the house.
There are three others, plus a sofa-bed downstairs.
Mine happened to be the only one made up.’
‘You're very kind.’
He put a finger under her chin and turned her face up to his.
‘You're wrong.
Get that through your head right now, Leonora.
You were a human being in desperate need of medical care.
I'm a doctor.
I supplied it.
End of story.
Don't invest me with qualities I don't possess.’
‘Right.’
She got to her feet, then tripped over the flapping toe of one of the socks.
Penry sighed, picked her up, and walked with her to the door.
‘Please put me down, Dr Vaughan,’ Leonora said with dignity.
‘I can manage.’
‘Oh, shut up and stop fussing,’ he said forcibly, ducking neatly through the doorway.
‘Tomorrow you can get around on your own once your clothes are dry.’
Leonora lay rigid in his arms, resentful of being carried about like a bundle of laundry.
‘Tomorrow,’ she said tartly, ‘I hope to be away from here and on my way back to wherever I came from.’
Penry carried her carefully down a staircase which led straight into a large sitting-room.
‘I doubt it.
Even if your memory starts functioning by then the forecast is diabolical.
March wind doth blow for some time to come, according to the coastguard, and believe me it blows hellish hard round Gullholm.’
Leonora digested this peace of news with mixed feelings as he set her on her feet.
If he was right she had no alternative but to stay put.
And since she had no idea where to go yet, even if she could get off the island, the only course possible was to take things a step at a time and try not to rail against a spiteful fate.
Besides, she didn't feel so wonderful that she wanted a boat ride to the mainland just yet, even if it did mean staying shut up here with only this moody man for company.
At least she now knew it was March.
She turned her attention to the room, which had obviously been three smaller rooms at one time.
A wood-burning iron stove occupied the hearth of a big stone fireplace at one end.
The rest of the room was crowded with shabby, comfortable chairs and sofas piled with cushions, small tables littered with electric table-lamps, oil lamps, candles in holders.
There were shelves full of books and cassettes, a few water-colours on the walls, a model sailing-ship in a big glass bottle on a side-table.
‘This is lovely,’ she said sincerely, and turned to smile up at Penry Vaughan.
‘You like it?’ he asked, surprised.
‘I do.
It's such a friendly room.’
‘Unlike its owner, you mean.’
Leonora looked at him levelly.
‘You said that, Dr Vaughan.
Not me.’
He acknowledged the hit with a small bow.
‘Right.
Sit on the sofa nearest the stove.
I'll bring in your dinner in a moment.’
‘I'd offer to help,’ she said apologetically, ‘but I still feel a bit wobbly.’
‘For pity's sake just sit there and try not to do anything silly for the time it takes me to fill two bowls with cawl .’
Leonora eyed him coldly.
‘I didn't ask to get hit on the head —or to intrude on your private property, Dr Vaughan.’
‘I'm referring to the shampooing session,’ he said curtly, and strode towards a door at the far end.
The kitchen, I assume, thought Leonora, and swung her feet up on the sofa, chuckling at the ludicrously large socks.
She spread her towel over a cushion so that she could lean her damp, aching head against it, then shivered as she listened to the howl of the wind outside.
The rain had stopped, but the gale seemed to be gathering strength.
The thought of crossing to the mainland, however near it was, brought a return of the panic she'd felt earlier.
She clamped down on it hard, wishing passionately she could tear away the veil in her mind, see behind it to find out who she was and why she was cast away on Penry Vaughan's island.
Someone, somewhere, must be worried to death about her.
If only she could remember who it was.
Who she was!
It was a relief when Penry returned with a tray containing two steaming bowls.
He set it down on one of the small tables, then handed her a paper napkin, a spoon and a fork before giving her one of the bowls.
‘Cawl ,’ he announced, then sat down with his own.
Leonora eyed her bowl warily.
‘What is cawl ?’
‘A main dish soup made with lamb and root vegetables and leeks.
Dumplings, too, when my mother's doing the cooking.’
One eyebrow shout up.
‘You look surprised.
Is that because I can cook, or because I possess a mother, like other men?’
She smiled.
‘Neither.
You're so efficient it seems strange you haven't mastered the art of the dumpling.
Even I know how to make those —’ She stared at him, arrested.
‘There I go again.
My stupid mind knows I can make dumplings, so why on earth can't it tell me who I am?’
Penry continued with his meal, unmoved.
‘It will, in time.
Just be thankful your skull wasn't fractured.
I can't X-ray it, of course, but I'm pretty sure you've suffered no more than a bad concussion.
Once the wind drops I'll get you over to the mainland and get an X-ray done at St Mary's.’
‘St Mary's?’
‘It's a nursing home.
I do a clinic there once a week.’
He looked up from his bowl.
‘What do you think of my cooking?’
‘Wonderful!’
She smiled.
‘When I woke up this morning I felt like death.
I never dreamed I'd actually be sitting up and taking nourishment so soon —and enjoying it.’
‘The human body has amazing powers of recuperation.’
His eyes travelled over her impersonally.
‘There's not very much of you, but you're wiry, and you're young.
You should be fine in a day or two.’
Leonora went on with her meal in silence until the bowl was half empty, then laid down her spoon.
She looked across at her companion, whose gesture at dressing for dinner had been a newer, cleaner white sweater, and slightly less disreputable denims.
‘But what will happen to me if I still can't remember who I am?’ she asked forlornly.
‘Or if no one reports me missing?’
Penry continued with his dinner with unimpaired appetite.
‘You'll just have to stay with me, I suppose.
I'm here for three weeks, barring accidents or terminal boredom.
Until this weather changes you're marooned with me here, anyway.
So let your mind rest.
You'll regain your memory all the sooner.
For the time being you've got bed, board, and a resident physician on hand.
How many castaways can say that?’
She tried to smile.
‘True.
I just wish I didn't feel I was playing albatross to your Ancient Mariner.’
‘Ah!
The lady likes poetry.’
She thought for a moment.
‘I don't know that I like it exactly.
But I seem to remember the poem about the Ancient Mariner quite well.’
‘You probably learned it at school, as I did.’
He got up to put their dishes on the tray.
‘I draw the line at puddings, I'm afraid.
There's plenty of cheese but at this time of night, with that headache, I don't advise it.
You can't have coffee, either.
Too much caffeine.’
‘I'd like something to drink,’ she said wistfully.
‘Weak tea, then.’
Leonora lay listening to the wind while Penry Vaughan was in the kitchen.
After a time she heard him talking to someone on the telephone, but, when he didn't reappear immediately, gathered that he had no news for her.
Dejectedly she ran careful fingers through her hair, resigned to learn its colour was a light ash-brown.
‘Why so down in the mouth?’ asked her host, returning with a tea-tray.
‘I thought I told you to stop worrying.’
‘It's the colour of my hair.’
She smiled crookedly.
‘I was hoping for platinum-blonde, or red, but now it's dry I find it's plain old mouse.’
Penry cast an eye over her hair judicially.
‘I wouldn't have said mouse, precisely.
I told the police just now that you have very dark eyes and golden-brown hair.’
Leonora sat up, swinging her feet to the floor, biting her lip against the inevitable throb from her temple.
‘What did they say?’ she asked eagerly.
‘Has anyone reported me missing yet?’
‘Afraid not.’
He handed her a cup.
‘But it's early days.
I only found you this morning, and reckoning by the tide you couldn't have been there long.
Perhaps no one 's missing from the Irish ferry, which rules out one line of inquiry.’
‘Perhaps I fell out of a plane,’ she said despondently.
‘Out of the everywhere into the here!’
He shook his head.
‘I don't think so.’
Leonora sipped her tea in silence, watching him dispose of a large slice of cheese and several wholewheat biscuits.
There was, she conceded, a great deal of him to fill up.
A large machine like Penry Vaughan's body must need a fair amount of fuel to keep it running efficiently.
He looked up to meet her eyes.
‘I feel I should point out one other possibility, Leonora.’
Something in his tone put her on her guard.
‘What's that?’
‘There are quite a few islands around here.
You could have been making for any one of them in a boat.
And in all probability you weren't alone, which means that either you fell, or were swept, out of a boat someone else has landed safely somewhere.’
Her eyes lit up.
‘Then they'll contact the police and the coastguard as you did, Dr Vaughan!’
He rubbed his chin.
‘Possibly.
But not everyone owns a radio telephone, or a way of contacting the shore.
Which means this wind will have to die down a bit before they can return to the mainland.’
‘So all I have to do is wait, then.’
‘Don't get your hopes too high.
Your companion might not have made it at all.’
Leonora paled.
‘Did you have to say that?’
‘I believe in facing facts.’
She digested the last, unwelcome fact in silence for some time.
‘Will my own things be ready tomorrow?’ she asked after a while.
‘I'll bring them up in the morning after breakfast.’
‘Dr Vaughan —’
‘Let's dispense with the formalities, shall we?
Since I can't address you as Miss Whatsit I don't see why you should keep to the ‘Doctor’ bit — Penry will do.’
‘It's an unusual name.’
‘Not in Wales — means son of Henry.
Until the English clamped down on the custom my forefathers all used the prefix ‘ap’ in front of their names — the last king of South Wales, for instance, was Rhys ap Tewdwr.
Needless to say, my father's name was Henry.’
He smiled sardonically.
‘Here endeth the history lesson.’
‘Fascinating.
Just like the Russian patronymics — though to me it sounds like a sort of spoken misprint — what's the matter?’ she added, as he eyed her speculatively.
‘I was just wondering what you do for a living.’
She shrugged.
‘Who knows?’
She thought for a moment, looking at her outspread hands.
‘Perhaps I'm a chocolate moulder, or a poodle-clipper, or maybe I paint water-colours like those on the wall over there.’
‘Lord, I hope not.
They were perpetrated by my great-aunt Olwen, an eccentric lady with more enthusiasm than talent!’
She giggled, and he nodded approvingly.
‘That's better.
You're beginning to lighten up a bit.
Is your head better?’
‘Somewhat.
It makes its presence felt now and then.’
She smiled at him cajolingly.
‘Could I have some more tablets before I go to bed?’
He shook his head.
‘I'd rather you didn't, Leonora.
Try to stick it out until tomorrow.’
She sighed.
‘All right.
Can I have a book to read, then?’
‘I'm afraid it's no to that, too.
Give your head a chance — count sheep if you can't get to sleep.’
She decided not to argue.
‘Are there any sheep on Gullholm?’
‘There used to be.
This was a farmhouse once.
A trawler-owning ancestor of mine bought the island, apparently convinced he could make a go of farming in a place surround by his beloved sea.’
‘Was he Penry, too?’
He stretched his long frame comfortably in the deep leather chair as he explained that the gentleman in question was his mother's grandfather, a roistering old sea-dog by the name of Joshua Probert, more inclined to raising Cain than crops.
The small-holding had failed to prosper due to the owner's propensity for fishing off Lee Haven, or drinking in the pub across the sound in Brides Haven.
‘Since old Josh's time it's been used as a holiday retreat by various Proberts down the years,’ he added, ‘with some of the land let out for summer grazing to mainland farmers.’
‘What happened in winter?’
‘Ferreters used it in the past.
These days I pay someone from Brides Haven to come over here at regular intervals to keep an eye on the place.’
Leonora was impressed.
‘The island's your sole property?’
He nodded.
‘My mother was an only child, so my grandfather Probert entailed Gullholm on me, which means I couldn't sell the place, even if I wanted to.
He meant me to pass it on to my son.’
‘How feudal!’
She looked at him hesitantly.
‘Do you have a son?’
His eyes went blank.
‘No.
I don't.’
‘Sorry — didn't mean to be nosy.’
‘Not at all,’ he said politely.
‘It's not classified information.
I confess I did have a wife until recently, but, alas, no son — or daughter.’
Leonora felt a sharp pang of sympathy.
The melancholy was explained.
The poor man was here to get over a bereavement.
‘I'm so sorry.’
A cynical gleam lit his eyes.
‘Now what, I wonder, are you sorry for, Leonora?’
‘Why — because you've lost your wife.’
‘I didn't lose her, exactly.
That smacks of carelessness, wouldn't you say?’
His smile set her teeth on edge.
‘Melanie merely lost interest in marriage to a busy consultant.
She required a consort with more time — and money — to spend on her.
The divorce became absolute not long ago,’ he added abruptly, and got up.
‘Would you like more tea?’
Leonora nodded dumbly, wishing the subject had never come up, as Penry Vaughan strode off to the kitchen.
She gazed across the room at the door he kicked shut behind him, biting her lip.
He must have loved the faithless Melanie very deeply to be so bitter over losing her.
Tears welled in her eyes as she wondered about her loved ones.
She must have a family, maybe even a boyfriend, all of them frantic, imagining her missing, even drowned.
She slammed a mental door shut on the harrowing thought.
What she must do was concentrate on getting her memory back so that she could get home to them as soon as humanly possible.
The prospect of being marooned on Gullholm for days with a Heathcliff bereft of his Cathy gave her the creeps.
When Penry returned with her tea, looking withdrawn, as though he deeply regretted the mention of his wife, he put a plate of biscuits on the small table beside her.
‘Eat a couple of those with the tea.
You'll feel better.’
Leonora doubted that biscuits were much of a cure for what ailed her, but she bit into one meekly, deciding that the best policy was to fall in with Penry Vaughan's wishes whenever possible, to keep the peace.
He poured tea for her then retreated to his chair again with a glass of whisky.
‘The weather forecast's pretty grim,’ he said moodily.
‘Gale-force ten in these parts soon, I'm afraid.’
‘Pretty noisy already, isn't it?’
She glanced nervously at the windows, wondering how they'd hold out against fiercer gusts than those already battering the house.
‘Don't worry.
There's secondary glazing everywhere.
Keeps out the worst of it, and blankets the noise a bit too.’
He smiled faintly.
‘It's a good few decibels higher out of doors.’
Leonora shivered.
‘Then I don't think I'll venture out for a stroll before bedtime.’
She swallowed some tea hurriedly, then dropped the cup with a scream as the room was plunged into darkness.
‘Are you all right?’ demanded Penry urgently, shining a torch beam in her eyes.
‘Yes — only I've broken your cup and spilled tea on your dressing-gown, she said breathlessly, running a hand down over the dampness on her chest.
‘What's happened?’
‘The confounded generator's on the blink again.’
Penry struck a match and lit the oil lamp nearest Leonora, his face Mephistophelean over the flame as he replaced the glass chimney.
Leonora felt better instantly once there was light.
She watched Penry moving round the room to light the other lamps, realising now why there was such a plentiful supply of non-electrical light sources everywhere.
‘This happens a lot, I take it?’ she asked.
She bent to pick up broken shards of china, gritting her teeth as her head protested.
‘Too damned often for comfort,’ he said irritably.
‘The generator's old.
I should replace it, but usually it only takes a bit of tinkering to get it going again.
And to be honest I'm rather attached to it.
I'm afraid I'll have to leave you to your own devices for a while.’
He went to the shelves lining one wall and selected a handful of cassettes, then picked up a transistor radio.
‘Would you like some music or a story for company while I wrestle with my old adversary?
I keep a supply of batteries to save the blasted generator, so you might as well make use of them.’
Leonora received the offering with delight.
‘Why, thank you, that's wonderful.’
She scanned the selection of cassettes eagerly, then smiled up at him.
‘No Beethoven?’
He shook his head.
‘I remembered!
And if you don't like any of those look for something else on the shelf, but try to move about as little as possible, please.’
‘Yes, Doctor.’
‘Are you being cheeky, by any chance?’
‘I wouldn't dream of it,’ she said demurely.
‘I'll be good as gold, I promise.
Besides, I've got Prunella Scales here, reading Jane Austen's Emma .
I won't move a muscle until you're back.’
‘My mother left that last time she was here.
You share her taste in reading, obviously.’
Leonora looked up at him.
‘Apparently so.
It's like little bits of a jigsaw, isn't it?’
Her mouth drooped.
‘I just wish the complete picture would fall into place.’
‘Now stop that!’ he ordered.
‘And mind you don't move until I get back.’
It was no hardship to obey.
Lying on the sofa to listen to her favourite story read with such consummate skill, Leonora shut out her worries and closed her ears to the howling wind while Penry went off to apply his healing skills to the rebellious generator.
Leonora lay with her eyes closed, so absorbed that Penry was obliged to turn off the radio to gain her attention.
She sat up with a start, blinking, to find the room full of electric light again, and her host occupied in turning off the lamps, his face streaked with oil and his black hair wildly untidy, but with an air of triumph about him which she registered with some amusement.
‘The patient recovered, I gather?’
He nodded with satisfaction.
‘This time, at least.
Every time it goes on the blink I wonder who'll win.
So far I've come out on top, but one day the damn thing will expire just to spite me.’
‘It didn't take you long!’
One eyebrow rose quizzically.
‘It's an hour and ten minutes since I left you here with Jane Austen.
A mere flash to you, but a long, hard grind out there in a freezing outhouse, young lady.’
She bit her lip.
‘Was it really that long?
I was so deep in the story I never noticed.’
‘While I, on the other hand, was sweating blood to get the contraption going again in case you were frightened on your own in here!’
Leonora looked sceptical.
‘Come off it, Dr Vaughan.
I fancy you've been enjoying yourself just as much as I have.’
Penry smiled, shrugging, then looked down at his filthy sweater in distaste.
‘I need a bath.
Will you and Jane wait there for a while until I'm respectable again?’
Leonora, afraid he'd been about to order her to bed, assented so rapturously that Penry eyed her in amusement as he crossed to the stairs.
‘You're obviously feeling very much better tonight, Leonora.’
She thought about it.
‘Yes — yes, I am.
My head aches a bit, and I still feel battered, but if only my wretched memory would behave I'd soon be good as new.’
‘Be thankful you're as good as you are, Leonora.
You could have been drowned, remember.’
‘Yes, Dr Vaughan,’ she said, subdued.
‘If it weren't for you I'd have been fish-food by now.’
‘Stop that!’ he ordered.
‘Switch the tape on now, please, before I go upstairs.’
This time Leonora was allowed only a short session with Emma before Penry returned, damp about the head, but clean again in navy guernsey and tracksuit trousers, his bare feet in ancient espadrilles.
‘Right, Leonora,’ he said briskly.
‘Time you were in bed.’
She switched off the tape, looking glum.
‘Couldn't I stay down a bit longer, please?’
‘You happen to be occupying the only sofa-bed in the room, young lady, and I need it —’
‘Oh, but I could sleep down here,’ she said instantly.
‘You could have your bed back, and —’
‘Nonsense.’
He held out his hand.
‘Come along.
I want you safely upstairs in bed, not free to wander about down here, keeping me awake.’
Leonora eyed him resentfully, ignoring his hand as she took off the large borrowed socks.
She stood up gingerly, relieved that the room stayed still.
Her head gave a warning thump, but subsided almost at once to the now bearable ache.
‘Very well,’ she said grandly.
‘But this time I go up under my own steam.’
‘It really doesn't matter to me how you get upstairs,’ he said indifferently as he followed behind her.
‘Just as long as you get up there in one piece and stay put all night you can crawl up on your hands and knees for all I care.’
She preserved a dignified silence as she gathered up the trailing dressing-gown in one hand and kept the other on the rail attached to the wall on one side of the staircase.
She mounted the uneven stairs with immense care, determined not to trip or fall, then turned as she reached the top.
‘I shall be perfectly all right now, Dr Vaughan.
Thank you for my dinner.
Goodnight.’
He scrutinised her clinically.
‘Right then, Leonora.
Goodnight.
If you need anything else in the night just call.’
She gave him a gracious little nod, determined to die first rather than do any such thing.
Tomorrow, she assured herself, as she brushed her teeth, she would wake up with total recall of who she was and where she came from.
All she had to do was get a good night's sleep.
By morning perhaps the storm would have blown itself out, and the fog in her mind along with it.
When Leonora returned to the bedroom she found the bed turned down invitingly.
A glass of water stood on the table beside the rose-shaded lamp, along with a torch and a candle and a box of matches in a pretty pottery holder.
If the generator broke down in the middle of the night Penry had seen to it that she'd still be able to lighten her darkness.
Unable to resist a look in the mirror, she gave a despairing sigh.
Her hair, left to its own devices to dry, looked like the business end of a witch's broom.
Hoping Penry Vaughan wouldn't mind if she borrowed his hairbrush, she set to work.
It took some time, and no little resolution, before the tightly curling mass hung round her face tangle-free at last, and she could crawl wearily into bed.
Leonora leaned back thankfully against the piled pillows, listening to the wind, which howled around the house like a hundred banshees demanding entry.
She lay motionless, utterly worn out by her exertions, yet at the same time ominously wide awake.
She would put out the lamp in a little while, she promised herself.
As soon as she felt actually drowsy she would turn it off.
Drowsiness, however, was not forthcoming.
She shifted a little against the pillows, wishing now she'd left her hair alone.
Her head throbbed in rhythm with her bruises, yet she'd hardly noticed any of it downstairs.
She sighed, feeling resentful towards Penry Vaughan for making her come up here.
Which was unjust, she told herself firmly.
If it weren't for Dr Penry Vaughan she might well be dead.
A tap on the door sounded above the wind.
Leonora's eyebrows rose.
Talk of the devil!
‘Come in,’ she called, surprised.
Penry Vaughan ducked his tall head through the doorway and moved to stand at the foot of the bed in the shadows beyond the arc of light from the small lamp.
‘I saw the light under the door, and wondered if you'd like some company for the night.’
CHAPTER THREE
Leonora gazed at him, heart hammering.
She cleared her throat drily.
‘I'm sure I'll drop off soon, Dr Vaughan.
I must have slept too long this afternoon.’
He eyed her narrowly.
‘What's the matter?
You look petrified again.’
‘Your knock startled me.’
‘I'm surprised you heard it above this wind.’
He bent to pick something up, then came round the side of the bed holding out the transistor.
‘If you're wakeful I thought you might like company in the shape of Emma —’ He stopped, his eyes narrowing as he saw the expression on her face.
‘Now what's the matter?’
Praying he couldn't see her agonised blush, Leonora smiled shakily.
‘Nothing.
It's very kind of you.’
Penry Vaughan's eyes lit with sudden, derisive comprehension.
‘My dear little castaway,’ he drawled, ‘surely you didn't imagine I was offering myself as companion for the night?
Ah — I can see you did.’
Burning with mortification, Leonora looked away, sliding lower beneath the quilt like an animal burrowing for cover as Penry sat on the edge of the bed.
‘Leonora,’ he commanded, ‘look at me.’
Unwillingly she raised her eyes to his.
‘How can I succeed in convincing you?’ he demanded.
‘When I said you had nothing to fear from me I meant it, young lady.
I don't know just what kind of monster you imagine I am, but having my wicked way with a girl in your state of health is not precisely my style.’
‘I'm sorry,’ she got out after a painful silence.
‘I misunderstood — which was very stupid.
After all, I've seen myself in the mirror.
You'd have to be pretty desperate to want — anything like that with someone who looks like me.’
‘I wouldn't say that, exactly.’
There was an unsettling gleam in his eye as he got up.
‘You're very appealing, Leonora, black eye or not.
Which doesn't mean I intend to leap into bed with you just because fate washed you up on my beach.
And if you're imagining I pine for the delights of the conjugal bed now my wife's left me, you're a bit off-beam there, too.
I was accustomed to a lonely bed long before she left me for someone else.’
He checked himself, his face suddenly harsh.
‘And why the hell I told you that I don't know.
It's not something I want broadcast to the world.’
Indignation cancelled out any stray pang of compassion.
Leonora eyed him angrily.
‘Your marital problems don't interest me in the slightest, Dr Vaughan.
Why would I want to talk about them to anyone else?’
She sighed despairingly.
‘At the moment I don't even know anyone else!’
Penry's harsh face softened a little.
‘Be positive, Leonora.
In the morning you'll probably wake to full recall.
In the meantime listen to Jane Austen for a while, then try to sleep.’
She shifted her head restlessly against the pillows.
‘I'll try.
Thank you very much for bringing me the transistor — and I'm sorry, Dr Vaughan.
For getting the wrong end of the stick, I mean.
It was pretty far-fetched, really.’
He smiled slowly.
‘Not that much, you know!
But you needn't lose any sleep over it, I promise — scout's honour.’
Leonora smiled faintly.
‘Were you a boy scout?’
‘No — too busy playing rugby.
Were you a girl guide?’ he countered swiftly.
‘Oh, no, not my scene at all…’
She halted, then blew out her cheeks.
‘There I go again.
Perhaps I'll do it by process of elimination; find out what I'm not bit by bit until I know who I am.’
‘Go to sleep, child —’ He checked himself, shrugging.
‘Sorry, Leonora, but you look about twelve or so in this light.’
‘Which is pretty clever of me, considering I feel so aged and infirm.’
She smiled.
‘Goodnight, Doctor.’
‘Goodnight, Leonora.’
He paused before ducking through the doorway.
‘But remember, if you want anything just shout.’
She smiled non-comittally, then turned to the transistor, grateful for the wit and irony of Jane Austen.
After an hour or so her eyes grew heavy and her yawns more frequent, and at last she stopped the tape at a suitable break.
Hoping the generator could cope with one small lamp left on all night, she wriggled lower in the bed, pulled the covers over her ears, and fell asleep to the howl of the wind and the pounding of the waves on the rocks below.
Leonora woke in the night, gasping, her body drenched with perspiration.
Still rigid with the horror of her nightmare, she heaved herself up in bed as the door flew open and Penry charged into the room at a run, his hair on end and his chest bare.
He took her by the shoulders, his eyes urgent.
‘What's wrong?
You were screaming your head off.
Good lord, you're drenched, girl.’
He went over to the chest, rummaging through it until he found a large white sweatshirt.
‘I'll get a towel.
Get back under the covers.’
Leonora fought for calm, her breath ripping through her chest as she clenched her teeth together to stop them chattering.
Penry returned quickly with a warm, dry towel, which he draped round her shoulders as he took her wrist in his.
‘I had — a nightmare,’ she said jerkily.
‘I gathered that!
Quietly now, please.’
He looked at his watch as he took her pulse.
‘Hm.
A bit rapid, but not unduly so under the circumstances.’
He smiled encouragingly.
‘Come on — off with that sodden thing.
This sweatshirt will drown you, but it's warm and dry.’
Leonora's mouth set stubbornly.
‘Did you hear?’ he said impatiently.
‘Get the damn thing off.’
‘Turn your back, please.’
He stared at her in exasperation.
‘Leonora, I'm a doctor —’
‘I don't care.
Turn your back.
Please!’
Penry threw up his hands in surrender.
‘I'll do better than that.
I'll go downstairs and make you a hot drink.’
Leonora shuddered at the memory of her dream as she peeled the damp shirt over her throbbing head.
She struggled into Penry's thick white sweatshirt, rolled the ludicrously long sleeves back, then began tidying the bed.
‘Don't bother,’ said Penry, coming in with an armful of bedding.
He tossed her a blanket.
‘Wrap yourself in that while I change the sheets.’
Leonora watched numbly as Penry, who had now added the navy guernsey to his tracksuit trousers, made the bed with a swiftness and dexterity any ward sister would have approved.
When it was ready she got up, handing him the blanket as she slid wearily beneath the covers.
Penry propped up the pillows behind her, then opened the bag he'd brought with him and took out a small torch.
‘Right.
Hold still now.’
He held up his left forefinger in front of her.
‘Keep watching that while I take a look.’
He shone the slender beam into each eye in turn, then nodded.
‘Pupil reaction satisfactory.
How's the head?’
‘Thumping,’ she admitted.
‘Not surprising after all that commotion.’
‘Lie perfectly still for a while.
I'll get these damp sheets out of the way then fetch that drink.’
He paused in the doorway.
‘Better now?’
‘Yes.’
It was the truth, Leonora realised, when she was alone.
Her desperate, unreasoning terror had left her the moment Penry Vaughan hurtled through the door.
She smiled faintly, wondering what he was like with his patients.
Probably they got better rather than risk his wrath by doing otherwise.
‘You're very clever not to bump your head just once now and then,’ said Leonora hoarsely as Penry ducked through the doorway with a laden tray.
She coughed drily.
‘Listen to me!
I'm croaking like a frog.’
‘You've screamed yourself hoarse.’
Penry handed Leonora a steaming mug, then hooked a large wicker chair near the bed and sat down.
‘Right.
Tell me what you were dreaming about,’ he commanded.
She shuddered, then took a sip from her mug.
‘This is nice,’ she said evasively.
‘What's in the milk?’
‘Just sugar and a pinch of cinnamon.’
Leonora took a few more sips of the hot milk, then met his eyes.
‘It didn't seem like a dream.’
‘It sounded like a full-scale nightmare from downstairs.’
She breathed in deeply.
‘I think my subconscious found a way of telling me a bit of what happened, Dr Vaughan.’
Penry leaned forward to take the mug from her.
He put it down on the tray then captured her hand, suddenly very much the professional consultant.
‘All right, Leonora, take your time.
Was anyone else in the dream?’
‘No.
Only me.’
She swallowed.
‘I was in a dinghy — the kind you can use with an outboard engine.’
‘Go on,’ he said gently.
Her breathing quickened, her eyes dilating as they stared into his.
‘The sea was very rough.
I was soaked to the skin, my hands so cold I could hardly keep hold of the tiller.
The wind rose and the dinghy was bucketing about like mad, then — then —’
Penry caught both her hands in his.
‘Steady.
What happened next?’
‘The engine stopped.
The dinghy spun like a top, a huge wave came at me, sweeping me overboard, and — and then I woke up.’
She swallowed a sob of pure terror at the memory and Penry jumped up to sit beside her on the bed.
He took her in his arms, holding her close in silence, the sheer size and warmth of him calming her very quickly.
‘Sorry,’ she muttered, pulling away.
‘I didn't mean to fall apart like that.’
Penry stacked the pillows more comfortably behind her.
‘You'll probably feel all the better for it.
Drink up.’
He returned to the chair, looking thoughtful.
‘I think you're right.
It's too relevant to be merely a dream.
I think your subconscious decided to provide you with a sort of extract from the main story.
It would certainly explain how you came to be washed up in Seal Haven.’
He looked up.
‘A good thing you were near Gullholm when the engine failed or you'd never have survived.’
Leonora nodded, shivering.
‘I can't have been making for Gullholm, though, can I?’
‘True.
Only a fool would try to get here in a dinghy.
I've got a chunky old fishing-boat myself, the type locals use for crabbing.’
She pulled the covers higher, feeling drained but oddly relaxed, as though the dream had relieved some of the pressure on her brain.
‘If the dream is accurate —’ She pulled a face.
‘Something so realistic just has to be accurate!
Anyway, it's a hint as to how I got here, if nothing else.’
She eyed him apprehensively.
‘Do you suppose I'll have a nightmare like that every night?’
‘I've no idea.
Try not to think about it,’ he ordered, then added casually, ‘Can you swim, Leonora?’
‘Yes,’ she said without thinking, then stared at him, shaking her head.
‘I don't know how I know.
But I do.’
He nodded.
‘It probably saved your life.’
He got up, stretching, his head endangering the overhead light.
‘Right, Leonora.
Do you think you can sleep now?’
She nodded, secretly doubting it very much.
‘Yes, Dr Vaughan.
Thank you.
I'm sorry to be so much trouble.’
He smiled wryly.
‘It relieves the monotony of my own company, if nothing else.’
He paused in the doorway.
‘By the way, was it daylight in your dream?’
Leonora thought for a moment.
‘Yes.
Yes, it was.’
She looked at him questioningly.
‘Why do you ask?’
‘It means you couldn't have arrived in Seal Haven all that long before I found you.
If you'd been there overnight it's unlikely you'd be alive to tell the tale.’
He gave her a kindly nod.
‘Now for heaven's sake get some sleep — and let me do the same!’
Leonora stared at the closed door forlornly, certain she'd lie awake for what was left of the night.
After what seemed like only a doze she woke to daylight, the wind driving hail against the window with a force which threatened to break it.
She reached over and turned out the light, sick with disappointment to find she was no wiser about her identity than the night before.
She climbed wearily out of bed, consoling herself that her physical injuries, at least, were healing fast.
She pulled on the red wool dressing-gown hastily, glad of its warmth as she tiptoed to the bathroom, doing her best not to wake Penry.
The confrontation with her reflection was encouraging.
Both eyes were now wide open and reasonably bright.
One, it was true, still sported a bruise which gave her a rather raffish air, but it was already fading.
She was no raving beauty, she thought wryly, but at least she now looked human.
Back in the bedroom, she brushed her hair gently, then got back into bed, uncertain what else to do until she knew Penry was up and about.
She turned on the transistor very quietly, found a local radio station, and discovered, surprised, that it was nearly nine.
Outside it looked more like twilight than early morning.
She waited until the news summary at nine o'clock, but, when there was no mention of a missing female person, eyes dark, hair mouse, she returned to Jane Austen's Emma for consolation.
Shortly afterwards there was a perfunctory tap on the door heralding Penry's practised juggling act with a laden tray as he ducked into the room.
He eyed her closely as he set the tray down.
‘Good morning, Leonora.
I heard you up and about.
How do you feel?’
‘Better.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘At least my body does.
My memory, wretched thing, is still playing truant.
After my dream last night I had such hopes, too.’
Penry handed her a plate of steaming porridge.
‘It'll come.
Try not to worry.
In the meantime eat that while it's hot.
I've put a sprinkling of brown sugar and a dash of milk on it.
OK?’
‘Wonderful,’ she said, tasting it.
‘It's years since I had porridge — I think.
I'd forgotten how good it is —’ She stopped, grimacing.
‘I wish that was all I'd forgotten!’
‘Now then!’
He checked the contents of the tray.
‘Toast, butter, tea, milk.
Anything else you'd like?’
‘Absolutely not!’
She smiled shyly.
‘It's very good of you to bring me breakfast, Dr Vaughan —’
‘Penry.’
‘All right.
Penry.
But you shouldn't be waiting on me like this.’
‘From now on I won't,’ he assured her, on his way to the door.
‘I'll bring your clothes up in a minute, then you can come downstairs.
Not,’ he added, with a wave at the rain-lashed window, ‘that either of us is going anywhere in this.
The shipping forecast said it should moderate later, so with luck I'll get you X-rayed tomorrow.
We'll see.’
Leonora settled down to her breakfast in a better frame of mind than she would have believed possible the day before.
Breakfast in bed was a luxury, that much was certain.
In fact, she thought, crunching on a piece of toast, she was pretty sure breakfast didn't feature much at all in this unknown life of hers.
She frowned as she remembered her dream.
It had been so vivid it seemed real, yet had she really been idiot enough to set out on a rough sea in a mere dinghy?
‘That's a very black frown,’ commented Penry.
He deposited a small pile of clothes on the end of the bed, then took her empty plate.
‘Shall I pour some tea for you while you take a look through your things?’
‘Yes, please.’
Leonora examined the clothes eagerly.
There were two pairs of jeans, one newish, one elderly, two chambray shirts, one pink and checked, the other plain light blue, plus a heavy navy wool sweater from the same chain store as the pretty cotton underwear.
There was also, she saw with a slight flush, a peach silk camisole and French knickers.
Three pairs of navy wool socks and a white-spotted red cotton scarf made up the total.
‘Your shoes are downstairs, stuffed with paper — navy leather moccasin type.
And you were wearing a ski-jacket, puffy navy thing.
Probably supported you for a bit once you were in the water.’
Penry handed her a cup of tea.
‘Any of it ring a bell?’
‘All of it.’
She shrugged helplessly.
‘I'm not sure about the silk things but the rest of it is mine, I know.
But that's all I know.
It's so frustrating!’
Penry collected the tray, looking thoughtful.
‘In this dream of yours, did the dinghy have a name, by any chance?’
She shook her head, and winced sharply.
‘I must remember not to do that!’
She thought hard.
‘It's all a bit blurred now anyway, but I was inside the boat during the dream.
The name would be on the outside.’
‘Merely a thought before I contact the coastguard and the police again.’
Leonora eyed him over her cup.
‘Are you really going to tell them about the dream?’
‘Yes.
Any lead is worth following up.’
The moment Penry was through the door Leonora got out of bed, eager to see if the familiarity of the clothes would jog her memory.
The cotton bra and briefs were a perfect fit, as were the pink shirt and the rather worn jeans, but there was no blinding flash of enlightenment once she had them on.
Sighing, she pulled on socks and sweater, then knotted the scarf at her throat and secured one of the ends to her sweater with the silver lioness brooch so automatically that she paused, eyeing herself in the mirror.
The little routine was second nature to her, evidently.
She went on looking at herself, willing her reflection to start up some reaction in her brain, but with no success.
She sighed as she tidied her hair, which hung to her shoulder-blades, curling tightly.
Surely she didn't wear it loose like this?
Leonora made her bed then collected her cup and started downstairs, deeply thankful that she felt so much better than the day before.
As she reached the foot of the narrow stair Penry emerged from the kitchen, his black eyebrows knitting together in a daunting frown at the sight of her.
‘Hello.’
She smiled at him warily.
‘Have you got an old shoelace?’
His eyes dropped to the socks on her feet.
‘Why do you need one?’ he asked shortly.
She gestured at her hair.
‘To tie this lot back.
Whoever I am I'm in crying need of a haircut.’
‘I'll see what I can do.’
Leonora stared at him blankly as he went into the kitchen, wondering what she'd done to incur his displeasure again.
Dr Penry Vaughan's brooding Celtic moods were a bit hard to take at times, to say the least.
Scowling at his broad, white-sweatered back, she followed him into a room as neat and orderly as an operating theatre.
Cupboards, surfaces, refrigerator, cooker, everything shone with pristine cleanliness, no clutter of any kind in sight beyond an electric kettle, a large cast-iron cookpot on the back of the wood-burning Aga.
The only blots on the landscape were a pair of small shoes beside the Aga and a nylon ski-jacket airing on the back of a chair.
Wondering if she dared risk sullying the gleaming sink, Leonora rinsed out her cup, then eyed the cupboards, wondering where to put it.
‘In the cupboard on the right,’ said Penry curtly as he searched through a drawer.
Leonora opened the cupboard and added the cup to a row of others, rather awed by the perfect symmetry of plates in orderly stacks according to size and function.
When she turned round Penry was holding out a pair of unused white shoelaces.
‘Will these do?’
‘Perfectly.
Thank you.’
Leonora gave him a polite smile as she tied her hair securely at the nape of her neck.
‘I don't suppose you were able to go for a run this morning in this weather?’
‘No.
I wasn't.’
She gestured to a half-open door beyond him.
‘Is that a pantry?’
‘It used to be.
I've converted it into a study.
The radio telephone's in there.
And,’ he added brusquely, ‘I want it understood from the start that the study's off-limits to visitors.’
Leonora's chin lifted.
‘Certainly, Dr Vaughan.’
‘I should explain that I've got a deadline for the series of articles I'm writing.
I fondly hoped the isolation of Gullholm would give me the requisite peace and quiet to meet it.’
‘Instead of which you're landed with a nuisance like me!’
Penry Vaughan made no attempt to deny it.
‘Since the situation is unavoidable I suggest that now you're better you make yourself as useful as possible, preparing meals and so on while I get on with my work.
The moment the weather improves I'll take you over to the mainland and get that X-ray done.
The sooner you recover your memory the better.’
Her mouth tightened.
Anyone would think the loss was due to her own carelessness!
‘I live for the moment,’ she assured him coldly.
‘In the meantime I'll earn my keep, don't worry.’
‘Can you cook?’
‘I believe so.’
He nodded briskly.
‘Right.
For lunch use the soup left in that pot.
With a sandwich of some kind, that will do.
While I go up for a bath you can take stock of the supplies I brought.’
‘If I weren't here what would you have had for dinner?’
‘Something easy.
You needn't put yourself out too much.’
He paused.
‘But if you feel ill in any way, please say so.
It's not my intention to jeopardise your recovery in any way.’
Leonora felt utterly flattened as he left her to go upstairs.
What on earth was wrong?
When he'd appeared with her breakfast Penry Vaughan had been reasonably friendly — and in the middle of the night he'd been kindness itself after her nightmare.
But from the moment she'd come downstairs he'd been a different man.
She cast a malevolent eye at the window as a squall of rain battered the glass, then began an inspection of supplies.
It was no surprise to find enough food for a siege.
The cupboards held tins and packages of every kind, even a box of fresh vegetables.
The fridge was stocked with salad greens, several kinds of cheese, bacon, eggs, the remains of a cooked ham.
A large porcelain crock contained several loaves of bread.
Whether she could cook or not, thought Leonora drily, they were unlikely to starve.
Abandoning the kitchen, she wandered across the large living-room to the windows.
A driving curtain of rain blotted out everything other than the sodden turf nearest the house, the view so depressing that she turned away with a shiver, drawn like a magnet to the books on the shelves.
Penry Vaughan's family had diverse tastes, she found.
There was something to suit everyone; Tolstoy, Hemingway and Hardy, thrillers and spy stories, historical novels, light romances.
All tastes were catered for admirably.
Leonora chose a brightly coloured paperback novel about the Crusades, and went over to the fireplace to curl up on the sofa.
By the time Penry Vaughan came downstairs again she was deep in the adventures of a lady who had decided to dress as a boy to search for her lost crusading husband.
She looked up with an absent smile.
‘Shall I make some coffee?’
He nodded.
‘Thank you.
There's only instant, I'm afraid.
I'll take it in when I make a start.
I'll top up the stove here while you're in the kitchen.’
Couldn't he bear to stay in the same room?
Huffily Leonora filled the kettle, made coffee, then took hers into the other room.
‘I've left yours in the kitchen,’ she said quietly, resuming her seat.
Penry straightened from his inspection of the stove.
‘Thank you.
This should be all right for hours now.’
She looked up at him diffidently.
‘I don't suppose you've had time to ring the police for any news yet?’
‘Of course.
I'm just as eager as you to establish your identity,’ he assured her with irony.
‘I rang them first thing, but no one fitting your description has been reported missing anywhere in the entire country as yet.
There were no reports of a dinghy washed up anywhere, either.’
Leonora turned away, her lips tight.
‘I see.
Thank you.’
From the corner of her eye she saw him walk away, pause for a moment, then give an indifferent shrug as he went through the kitchen to his study.
The door slammed shut behind him with a ‘keep out’ message she received with resentment.
Penry Vaughan's irritation at being saddled with an unwelcome guest was understandable enough, but surely he could have let her know he'd spoken to the police!
Her animosity did her throbbing head no good at all.
She laid her head back against a cushion, breathing in deeply and regularly to relax the tension in the back of her neck, but it was no use.
Her mind kept wrestling with the problem of her identity, her imagination running riot as she pictured loved ones mad with anxiety about her.
A particularly ferocious gust brought Leonora to her feet to roam about the room wishing passionately that the weather would improve.
Not even her fear of setting foot in a boat again would keep her from making the crossing to the mainland the moment the trip to Brides Haven was feasible.
Someone, somewhere out there just had to be searching for her.
Leonora pulled herself together after a while.
This just wouldn't do, she told herself sternly.
Then she paused, her attention caught by a canvas bag of knitting on one of the armchairs.
The bag contained wool, needles and a pattern for a sweater obviously intended for Penry, by the measurements ringed in red.
The design was complicated, with a serpentine pattern of dark blue and white with touches of black, and whoever was knitting it had completed only a few inches of ribbed welt.
I can knit, thought Leonora with a sudden flash of self-knowledge.
One look at the intricate pattern was enough to tell her she could follow it with no trouble at all.
She looked at the clock, frustrated to find it was only a little after eleven.
Bearding the lion in his den just to ask about some knitting was a bad idea.
She'd have to be patient until lunchtime, then soften up Penry Vaughan with a snack before she made her request.
Ten minutes before midday Leonora retired to the kitchen, tiptoeing past the closed study door.
At first she tried to be as quiet as possible as she began preparations for lunch, but after a few minutes gave up and worked normally, deciding to impress the moody Dr Vaughan by making dumplings to top the soup.
While they were steaming on top of the savoury liquid she whipped up a small quantity of French dressing, sprinkled it on shredded lettuce and tomato slices, then added grated cheese and made some sandwiches.
When two trays were ready she tapped on the study door.
‘Yes?’ barked her host.
‘Your lunch, Dr Vaughan.
Shall I bring it in?’
‘I'll fetch it.’
He emerged, closing the door firmly behind him as he looked from Leonora to the kitchen counter.
‘Thank you.
I'll eat mine at my desk.’
Leonora bristled as she marched into the other room, realising she'd expected murmurs of appreciation to greet her offering.
She had no objection to working for her keep, but if Penry Vaughan went on treating her as if she were some kind of serf she'd stick to plain, basic cooking from now on, she thought resentfully.
As she began on her soup she tried to think of what possible sin she could have committed to change his attitude towards her.
He hadn't been exactly jumping for joy to have her here in the first place, as she knew very well.
But he'd shown definite signs of resigning himself to the situation — until her arrival downstairs after breakfast.
She shrugged.
There was nothing she could do about it, other than keep a low profile and stay well out of his way.
Leonora took her time over her lunch.
When she went back to the kitchen Penry's tray stood on the counter, the plates satisfactorily empty.
She cleared away, made coffee, then tapped on Penry's door, opening it warily as he called her in.
He sat at a large desk covered with papers, journals, medical books, a portable typewriter pushed to one end.
The radio transmitter, a surprisingly small, modern affair, occupied its own bracket on one wall, which was foot-thick whitewashed stone like the others, the chill only a little alleviated by the portable bottled-gas heater alongside the desk.
Penry thrust his black hair back from his forehead, frowning as he looked up.
‘Well?’
‘Your coffee.
Shall I bring it in?’
‘Yes — please.’
Leonora collected the steaming mug and went into the study, placing it carefully on the only unoccupied space on the desk.
‘Thank you,’ muttered her host, leafing impatiently through some notes.
Leonora braced herself.
‘Dr Vaughan, would it disturb you if I listened to the transistor this afternoon?’
He looked up.
‘No.
If you keep the doors closed it won't make any difference to me.’
He leaned back in his chair, looking at her.
‘How's your head?
Does reading make it ache?’
‘A little.
It would be easier to listen to a story for a while.
But I feel much better today.’
As she met the clinical look in Penry Vaughan's eyes she stiffened, the reason for his change of mood suddenly, mortifyingly, obvious.
She drew herself up to her full height.
‘Tell me the truth, please, Dr Vaughan.
Do you by any chance think I'm faking?’
One eyebrow rose.
‘Faking?’
‘The amnesia.
Ever since I came downstairs this morning you've been different, hostile.
I've been racking my brains for what I could have done, then it struck me.
You think my loss of memory is put on!’
‘It had better not be,’ he said cuttingly, then shrugged.
‘I suppose you merit an explanation.’
He swallowed some of the coffee, then eyed her moodily.
‘I had no choice when it came to rescuing the helpless victim of an unknown accident.
When I found you all my energies were directed towards mending, healing, reviving.
You were the patient, I was the doctor.
But today things are different.
You look much better, less of a victim.
To put it in basic terms, Leonora, you're no longer merely a patient in my eyes.
You're a woman.
Young and over-thin, it's true, but a woman just the same.’
Leonora stepped back involuntarily, her cheeks burning.
‘I can't help that, Dr Vaughan!’
‘True.
But the fact remains that I retreated to Gullholm because it's the one place in my world free of the entire sex.’
His eyes gleamed suddenly.
‘Not that I'm a misogynist, Leonora.
Far from it.
Given time I'll no doubt revert to normal.
But for the moment,’ he added significantly, ‘the fact remains that you're female, I'm male, and we're marooned here alone together — a dangerous situation, though none of my seeking.’
‘Nor,’ she said passionately, ‘of mine!
Oddly enough I didn't set out from wherever I come from to trespass on your island, or to lose my wretched memory.
If I could leave right now I would!’
Then she remembered her request, and forced herself to calm down.
‘Dr Vaughan, who does the knitting belong to?’
He stared at her blankly.
‘Knitting?’
‘I found a bag with wool and a pattern for a sweater,’ she explained.
‘My mother must have left it here.’
‘Do you think she'd mind if I went on with it?’
Penry Vaughan gave her a smile of genuine amusement.
‘On the contrary, she'd probably be delighted.
The pattern infuriated her, now I come to think of it.
She abandoned it in disgust.’
Leonora made no attempt at an answering smile.
‘Then may I carry on, please?
I can knit while I listen.’
‘If you're certain your head is up to it.’
‘If it starts protesting I'll stop.’
As she went through the door he called her back, eyeing her speculatively.
‘You know you can knit, then, Leonora?’
‘Yes.
It's utterly maddening.
Some things are crystal-clear, yet the rest keep lurking in the fog.
By the way,’ she added, ‘what time would you like dinner?’
Penry Vaughan turned back to his work dismissively.
‘I generally work until six-thirty.
Give me an hour or so to unwind.’
‘As you wish.’
He looked up.
‘I forgot.
It may cheer you up to learn that the weather forecast is promising.
Tomorrow we should be able to get over to the mainland.
Make a list of any supplies we need.’
Despite the disquieting exchange with her host Leonora felt rather more cheerful when she settled down with her knitting.
Less apprehensive of the weather now she knew it was due to improve, she was glad of permission to use the transistor.
Concentrating on Emma would help to keep her worries at bay for a little while.
Then, just as she was about to press the switch to ‘Play’, it occurred to Leonora that Penry Vaughan's eyes weren't dark like her own, after all.
At close quarters, meeting them across his desk just now, she'd discovered they were blue.
A dark, smoky sort of colour, it was true, but very definitely blue.
CHAPTER FOUR
Leonora found no difficulty in following the pattern which had defeated Mrs Vaughan.
The design, the cover informed her, was inspired by ancient Viking jewellery, which explained the serpentine interweaving of the colours, and her brain and fingers co-ordinated over the task with such dexterity that Leonora had no doubt this was something she'd done often before.
It proved soothing.
With her fingers busy and her mind occupied with the story it was late afternoon before the end of a tape brought Leonora back to earth with a start.
Several inches of intricately patterned knitting hung from her needles, she saw with satisfaction, almost as if her fingers had worked independently while she listened.
She went quietly into the kitchen to make tea, then knocked on the study door.
‘Come in,’ said Penry absently, looking up, yawning, as Leonora popped her head round the door.
‘I thought you might like some tea, and a slice of the fruit-cake I found in a tin.’
He eased his shoulders.
‘Sounds good.’
She deposited the tray on the desk, then took her own tea and a small piece of cake back to her former post, slotted a new tape into the machine for the next instalment of the story and settled down to enjoy the rest of the afternoon in peace.
‘Isn't it time you had a rest?’ enquired Penry Vaughan, startling her.
At some stage Leonora had switched on the lamp beside her to see her knitting, but otherwise the room was in darkness.
Leonora stopped the tape.
‘What time is it?’
‘After six.’
He went round the room drawing curtains and turning on lamps.
‘Time you called it a day.’
He stooped to replenish the stove then came to look at what she was doing as she finished off a row.
‘Have you done all that this afternoon?’ he asked, astonished.
‘Oh, no.
Your mother did the ribbing.
I've only done the patterned bit.’
‘Only!’
As she finished he took the needle from her.
‘This is extremely well done.
You're obviously an expert.’
‘I think I must be,’ she agreed.
‘The pattern seemed easy to me, anyway.’
He shook his head in surprise.
‘My mother's knitted for all of us as far back as I can remember, but she acknowledged defeat on this one.’
Leonora stowed the knitting away carefully, then got up.
‘Right.
I'll go and make the sauce, then I'll have a bath while it's simmering if the generator's up to it.’
‘Are you sure you're up to it?’ he asked sharply.
‘You look very pale.’
‘My head's aching a bit, now you come to mention it, but I expect that's all the concentration,’ she said cheerfully.
‘I'll be fine after a bath.’
‘Hang on a moment!
I'll take a look at you first.’
He went off to fetch his medical bag.
Once again Leonora was obliged to submit to light directed in her eyes, after which Penry Vaughan took her pulse and her blood-pressure before he was satisfied.
‘I suppose you'll do,’ he said grudgingly.
‘But don't attempt anything too complicated for the meal.
Bacon and eggs will do.’
‘You can have that for breakfast.
It's tagliatelle for supper.
You've got some in the cupboard so I assume you like it,’ she said, making for the kitchen.
Penry came to lean in the doorway, his eyes following her about as she took packets and tins from the cupboard, making her decidedly uneasy.
Leonora frowned over her shoulder.
‘Your kitchen's small and so am I, Dr Vaughan, whereas you most definitely are not.
I'll get on faster on my own.’
His eyes lit with an unsettling gleam as he brushed past her.
‘I'll get some wood in for the stove, then.
But once you've made this sauce of yours I suggest you have a bath and a rest before we eat.
I want you fit and well as quickly as possible.’
‘So do I!’
Leonora snapped, then set to work at top speed while Penry was out chopping driftwood.
In minutes she had garlic, onions, carrots and celery cooking together gently in olive oil.
As she sieved the contents of two cans of tomatoes, Penry returned, sniffing the air.
‘Great smell,’ he said, pausing, the basket balanced easily on one hip.
‘I forgot to ask if you like garlic, but there was some in with the vegetables so I took a chance,’ she said, adding the tomato purée to the pot with care.
‘I'm very fond of it, but until recently had to forgo the pleasure.
My former wife disliked not only the taste of it herself but refused to come near me if I succumbed to its temptation.’
Penry raised an eyebrow.
‘The smell of your sauce is a two-fold comfort, Leonora.
It points out advantages to my divorced state I hadn't thought of before.’
Leonora made no comment, determined to avoid personalities at all cost after his remarks earlier on.
‘Dinner will be ready in an hour,’ she informed him, and went up to run a bath.
She let herself down gingerly into the hot water, gritting her teeth as various bruises stung as they came in contact with the heat.
The water cooled too quickly for her to stay long in the bath, but afterwards she lay fully dressed on the bed for a while, listening, her spirits rising as she realised that the wind had dropped at last.
She could still hear the pounding of the waves on the rocks below, but felt lulled rather than threatened by the muffled boom, accepting it as an inescapable sound on an island surrounded by the Atlantic ocean.
When Leonora went downstairs she found Penry lounging in front of the fireplace listening to a newcast on the transistor.
He jumped up as she joined him.
‘I've rung the police, but nothing yet, I'm afraid.
I don't know who you belong to, Leonora, but no one 's anxious about you yet, obviously, so you'll just have to be patient.’
The sharp pang of disappointment seared her like a physical pain.
‘I must belong to someone,’ she said tartly to hide it.
‘You'd think someone would have made enquiries about me by now.’
The smoky-blue eyes softened slightly.
‘Probably you haven't been missed yet.’
‘I suppose so.
Thank you for ringing.’
Leonora blinked hard as she forced a smile.
‘I suppose I'll come to terms eventually with the blank in my mind.
They say you get used to anything in time.
Perhaps I won't like it when I find out who I am.’
‘Of course you will,’ he assured her, then looked down at himself in distaste.
‘Sit down and listen to the radio for a bit while I go up and wash.
I'll make up a bed in one of the other rooms tonight.
This sofa wasn't designed for someone like me.’
She frowned.
‘I wish you'd let me sleep in another bed.
I don't need a big bed, and you do.’
He shook his head.
‘I prefer not to risk further disorientation for you, Leonora.
You stay where you are.
The bed in the room next to you is perfectly adequate for me, I promise.’
Leonora wasn't at all sure she fancied the idea of Penry in the next room in the night.
Now he'd brought the subject up it was very hard to forget that they were a man and woman isolated together miles from anywhere.
Even harder to ignore the fact that her reluctant, brooding host was all male, with an attraction rendered more rather than less dangerous by his current attitude towards the female sex.
Dr Penry Vaughan, she realised with deep misgiving, was pro tem the only other person in her entire world, and, like it or not, he was doomed to play Adam to her Eve until her memory deigned to function again.
But what if it never did?
Leonora fought down a sudden rush of panic.
It was only thirty-six hours since she'd been washed up on the island like a piece of flotsam, she reminded herself; early days to start bewailing her fate.
She could hear Penry moving about upstairs as he made up the other bed.
She jumped to her feet, suddenly in need of occupation, and went into the kitchen.
She put a big pan of water to boil, ready for the pasta, then added canned mushrooms to the tomato sauce, which was giving off such a heavenly aroma that she felt hungry despite her inner turmoil.
Delivering a brief lecture on self-control, Leonora began frying bacon, cutting hunks of crusty bread, grating cheese, determined to keep so occupied that there was no attention to spare for the worries which seemed to be multiplying by the minute.
‘Is it nearly ready?’ said Penry, startling her.
Leonora whirled round, flushing as she found him watching her from the doorway.
‘More or less.
Shall I put the pasta on now?’
‘Please do!’
He leaned against the door-jamb, his hair brushing the lintel.
‘I could eat a horse, Madame Chef.’
‘No horse.
You'll have to make do with bacon.’
Cross to find her fingers transformed into thumbs by the watchful blue eyes, she added a spoonful of olive oil to the boiling water, then threw in the coils of pasta.
‘Don't wander off, please,’ she said, stirring busily.
‘Once this is ready it must get to the plates quickly while it's hot.’
‘I'm not going anywhere,’ he said lazily.
‘I'm perfectly happy where I am.
Watching you.’
As a cure for clumsiness his statement was a failure.
With such a disturbing audience of one, Leonora took far longer than intended to serve the meal.
She was heartily glad when they were installed at last in front of the fire, trays on knees.
Silence reigned for some time as they attacked the meal.
Penry's plate was half empty before he said a word, other than grunts of pure appreciation.
‘This is first-class, Leonora,’ he said at last.
‘It deserves some wine as an accompaniment, but I advise keeping off alcohol for a bit.’
‘I don't drink very much, anyway,’ she began, then paused, fork in hand.
‘Ah.
Another piece of the puzzle.
Oh, Penry, I just wish the rest of it would fall into place!’
‘It will.’
His eyes gleamed.
‘In the meantime I see you've reverted to addressing me as Penry.
This morning I was Dr Vaughan.’
‘Mr Hyde, you mean,’ she said tartly, twirling her fork round in the pasta.
‘You were so horrible all of a sudden that formality seemed the order of the day.’
‘I explained that.’
She flushed, her eyes falling.
‘Let's forget all that — unless —’
‘Unless what?’
‘Unless you change back to Mr Hyde overnight and lump me in again with the rest of the female sex you're running away from.’
The moment the words were out of her mouth Leonora could have kicked herself.
His face took on the forbidding, sombre look which made her so uneasy.
‘In actual fact I imagine it was myself I was trying to escape.’
He shrugged violently, shaking off the thought as a dog shook water from its coat.
‘But enough of that.
I promise faithfully not to talk about it again.
I'm normally quite an equable sort of guy, you know.’
She eyed him with scepticism.
‘I'll take your word for it.’
‘And when it comes to females I'd have a problem trying to escape them anyway,’ he said, determinedly light.
‘I've got far too many in my own family for starters.
My father's no longer with us, unfortunately.
He was a doctor too, a GP, and a damn good one.
I miss him badly.
But I still have my mother, three sisters, a sort of sister-in-law, and four nieces.
Luckily the girls also managed to provide me with some nephews to balance it up a bit.’
Leonora sighed despondently.
‘It's not fair!
You're knee-deep in relatives, while I haven't a clue whether I possess any at all.’
‘You'll soon find out.’
Penry got up to take the trays.
‘You look tired.
I'll make coffee.
I think I'll have some cheese to round the meal off.
How about you?
Would you like some cake, or a biscuit or something?’
‘No, thanks.
No room.’
‘You should eat more.
You could do with filling out a bit.’
‘Ah, but would I fill out in the right places?’ she said rashly, then bit her lip as Penry eyed the places in question with a deliberation which brought colour to her face.
He went off to the kitchen, leaving Leonora apprehensive about the rest of the evening.
To her surprise she enjoyed it very much, despite the fact that the only entertainment came from her host, who seemed bent on atoning for his earlier hostility by keeping her amused.
Some of his anecdotes from his student days were hilariously funny, featuring enough females in them to convince his listener that he'd been the object of female adulation all his life until very recently.
This Melanie of his must have been a right madam, thought Leonora when Penry went off to get himself a glass of whisky.
Penry Meredith Vaughan was a man of potent physical attraction, an attraction made doubly powerful by the formidable intellect behind it.
He had to be brilliant, she thought, to be so well up in his profession at his age.
His one big mistake seemed to have been his choice of wife.
‘Would you like a soft drink?’ he asked when he returned.
Leonora shook her head.
‘I'll take a glass of water to bed later, but that's all.’
‘An early night would do no harm.
Not,’ he added swiftly at her frown, ‘that I'm anxious for my own company, I assure you.’
‘I only wish I had some anecdotes of my own to compete with yours.’
‘I've probably bored you rigid!’
‘Far from it — I could listen all night!’
She hesitated.
‘I'd like to stay down a little while — hear more about your family, too.
At the moment it helps to console me for my lack in that direction.’
‘All right— but not for long .’
He slid down in the chair comfortably, his long legs stretched out in front of him.
‘I saw my mother only last week.
She stayed with me for a couple of days before going on to Spain to my sister.
Charity runs a couple of hotels there with her husband Luiz Santana.
Mother generally visits them in March before the season hots up so she can see something of Charity and spoil her grandchildren unmercifully.’
‘Lovely,’ said Leonora wistfully.
Penry's eyes softened as he went on to describe the rest of his family; Katharine, married to a merchant banker and mother of two teenage sons, and Clemency, Charity's twin, married to a writer and broadcaster and mother of twin girls and a son.
‘Are your sisters identical twins?’ asked Leonora.
‘Unfortunately, yes.’
‘Unfortunately?’
‘You try walking down the street with two identical, sexy-looking blondes!’
He pulled a face.
‘Don't get me wrong — I'm very fond of them both, but I prefer them one at a time.’
‘What about your other sister?
Is she blonde too?’
Penry smiled warmly.
‘No.
Kit's the same colouring as me.
Not as tall as the other two, and a different personality altogether from the heavenly twins.’
‘She's your favourite!’
‘I suppose she is.
The other two are a set, so to speak — a unit — so I suppose it's only natural I've always gravitated towards Kit.’
He paused, eyeing her in the clinical way she'd come to recognise.
‘You look very tired, Leonora.
Enough chat for tonight.
If it's fine tomorrow I'd like to be up to catch the tide.
When you're in bed I'll bring up a hot drink.’
Leonora felt a deep reluctance to go upstairs, to face the night alone.
She longed to stay where she was, listening to Penry talk in the resonant voice with the attractive trace of Welsh lilt, but she got up promptly, conscious that he probably wanted to get off to bed himself.
‘Thank you.
You're very kind.’
She put the knitting away carefully.
‘I feel I should say that if I had to get washed up on a beach minus my memory I was lucky the beach was yours, Dr Vaughan.’
His mouth tightened.
‘Your luck was in surviving at all, Leonora.
You escaped death by a hair's breadth.’
A shiver ran through her.
‘Don't I know it!
Instead of whining about my memory I should be thanking my lucky stars I'm alive at all.’
‘And since you are, you'll feel a lot better if you get a good night's rest,’ he said briskly.
‘Don't hang about in the bathroom; it's cold up there.’
Leonora did as she was bidden, shivering as she brushed her teeth.
A look in the mirror confirmed that the bruise round her eye was fading rapidly.
If she could buy some make-up after the X-ray expedition the discolouration would be hardly noticeable — only she'd have to borrow some money from Penry, she realised, frowning.
Which seemed like colossal cheek on top of everything else.
When Penry arrived with the promised drink he also brought a hot-water bottle.
Leonora received it with rapture.
‘Wonderful,’ she said, snuggling her feet against the warmth.
‘It seems colder than last night.’
‘It is.
But it's not freezing.
We rarely get frost here.’
Penry stood over her while she drank the milk, then put a hand to the lamp, but she smiled at him coaxingly.
‘Will the generator object if I keep it on?
Sorry to be a coward, but I don't want to be left in the dark.’
‘Not surprising, under the circumstances.
And if the generator gives up the ghost in the night you've got a torch on the table, and a candle.
Or you can holler for me.
I won't mind.’
Penry Vaughan smiled down at her, then yawned hugely.
‘Sorry!
Goodnight, Leonora.
Sleep well.’
‘Goodnight.’
Her answering smile was thoughtful as she watched him duck gracefully through the doorway.
With a sigh she slid down further into the blissfully warm bed, realising she was no longer in the least uneasy at the thought of Penry only feet away beyond the bedroom wall.
Disturbingly attractive male though he might be, Dr Penry Vaughan was nevertheless a match for any peril which might threaten in the small hours.
The dream came again in the night.
Once again Leonora found herself fighting with the tiller in a dinghy threatening to stand on its head in a mountainous sea, but this time when the engine cut out she was plucked from the boat before she could hit the water.
‘All right, all right , Leonora,’ said Penry, holding her close.
‘It was only a dream.
You're safe now.’
She clung to him convulsively, gasping as the wound on her temple struck his collar-bone.
She pulled away a little, opening her eyes to find herself cradled on Penry's lap like a child.
‘It was the same dream,’ she said hoarsely.
‘I'm sorry I woke you.
What time is it?’
‘Just after three.’
He set her on her feet, then tidied the bed.
‘In you get.’
She climbed into bed, leaning back against the pillows he'd stacked so expertly.
‘Three in the morning,’ she said sombrely, ‘when life's at its lowest ebb.’
‘Yours isn't,’ he said sternly.
‘Enough of the self-pity.’
She sniffed hard.
‘Right.
Sorry.’
She tried to smile.
‘Thank you.’
‘Nothing to thank me for,’ he said on his way to the door.
‘I merely shut you up so I could get some sleep!’
She lay rigid and wide-eyed once he'd gone, afraid to sleep in case the nightmare returned, then to her relief Penry came back into the room.
‘I thought you'd gone to bed!’
Feeling unutterably guilty, she saw he'd brought her another drink and a fresh hot-water bottle.
‘Coals of fire,’ she said ruefully, as he slid the bottle in the bed.
‘No, just a glass of hot milk — half a glass, actually, so we can have some breakfast.’
He smiled.
‘I wasn't expecting visitors.
We'll buy more tomorrow.’
Leonora sipped the milk, frowning, then looked up at him.
‘When I thanked you just now, by the way, it was because you got me out of the boat before I hit the water this time.’
Her eyes held his.
‘And I know the name of it, I think — or part of it.
Do the letters SEREN mean anything?
Part of serenade , perhaps?’
He shrugged, then sat down on the edge of the bed and took her hand.
‘I'll ask the coastguard and the police tomorrow before we set out.
It's certainly a lead.
Take heart, Leonora.
It's another piece of the puzzle.
Soon you'll have the complete picture.’
She nodded despondently.
‘I suppose so.’
‘In the meantime stop fretting yourself to fiddlestrings!’
He leaned closer, his smile teasing, but as their eyes met the smile faded slowly.
Leonora lay hypnotised, unable to look away.
She forgot her dream as she saw the blue eyes darken almost to black.
She ran the tip of her tongue over her lips, heard the sharp hiss of Penry's intake of breath, then his head blotted out the light as his mouth met hers in a kiss which shot a jolt of electricity through every vein in her body.
She tore her mouth away, averting her burning face as Penry got unhurriedly to his feet.
‘A mere kiss goodnight,’ he said softly.
‘It can't have been your first.’
Leonora forced herself to look at him.
‘I — I don't know.
I don't remember.’
She blinked back tears fiercely.
‘You may not believe me, but I honestly don't remember.
Anything.
Lord knows I wish I did.
This blankness terrifies me!’
Penry sat down again on the edge of the bed.
He put a hand under her chin to raise her face to his, so much the physician again that Leonora wondered if she'd dreamed the kiss.
‘You will remember,’ he said with emphasis.
‘Sooner or later something will trigger off your memory and everything will come flooding back.’
CHAPTER FIVE
But when morning came, bright and clear with only a slight breeze, it arrived alone.
Leonora woke up to find her mind as stubbornly blank as before.
‘I feel much better otherwise,’ she told Penry, trying hard to be cheerful.
She held up her face.
‘Look, my bruise is fading.’
‘You'll soon be good as new,’ he agreed.
‘I've phoned in the news about the boat, by the way.
There's no report of a missing dinghy, but I mentioned the name you saw in your dream and both police and coastguard promise to look into it.’
‘They must think you've got a right lunatic on your hands,’ she said, grimacing, then brightened.
‘But at least I can go outside today.
Can we explore the island when we get back?
If you're not too busy, of course,’ she added guiltily as she put on her jacket.
‘We'll see how you feel.’
Penry took the paper from her shoes, which felt stiff and hard as she slid her feet into them.
He pulled on a bright yellow weatherproof jacket over his thick jersey and moleskin trousers, slid his long feet into rubber boots and collected some keys from the study.
‘Right, then.
Ready to face the great outdoors?’
Leonora emerged from the house into a bright spring day which belonged to a different world from the gales and rain of before.
She held up her face to the pale sunshine, sniffing ecstatically at the salt air.
As she followed Penry as quickly as she could she looked about her at the island with interest, curious to see what had lain behind a veil of sea mist and rain since her dramatic arrival.
The house itself, she found, had been erected in a shallow depression in the mound surmounting the central part of the island.
‘Old Joshua decided to use the site of an Iron-Age settlement when he built his new home,’ said Penry, and pointed out an unhewn standing stone at the edge of the cliff.
‘That was probably some cult object for the prehistoric island dwellers.’
‘Creepy!
Do you make offerings in front of it on Midsummer's Eve?’ asked Leonora, impressed.
‘Absolutely.
We tie a maiden to the stone and dance round it by firelight!’
He laughed, taking her hand to hurry her along.
‘The maiden arrived a bit early, this year.’
‘How do you know I qualify?’ she said without thinking, then flushed as he halted in front of her, his eyes mocking and very definitely blue in the bright morning light.
‘Informed guess.
Now watch your step; the path gets a bit steep further down.’
She had no time to spare for embarrassment, due to shoes totally unsuitable for climbing down a cliff path.
With Penry in front of her to see she didn't slip, their progress was slow down the steep path towards the strip of land which formed the waist of the figure-of-eight.
She tugged on Penry's hand as the path levelled out.
‘This must be the Neck.
Show me where you found me, please.’
He looked at her searchingly, then stopped and led the way across the rabbit-nibbled turf to a point where she could look down on the inlet he called Seal Haven.
She stared down at water foaming round a row of rocks which looked horribly like jagged teeth in some monster's half-open mouth.
Penry pointed.
‘See that small, needle-like rock at the mouth of the inlet?
You were very lucky.
You got caught on that.
If you'd been tossed around in the eddies down there I wouldn't have given much for your chances.’
He looked at her colourless face.
‘Come on — we'll be late.’
Leonora felt very subdued as she followed him down to the relatively peaceful little beach of Lee Haven, where years before Joshua Probert had built a safe anchorage for his boats.
The Angharad , a sturdy fishing-boat with a fair-sized cabin, had weathered the storm safely, well out of harm's way.
Penry lifted her aboard, then untied the moorings and leapt on deck after her.
She eyed the distant shoreline with misgiving.
‘Is it far?’
‘You'll be there before you know it.’
He smiled reassuringly as he started up the engine, which obliged first time.
‘Good girl!’
He patted the bulkhead affectionately, then gave all his attention to manoeuvring the Angharad out of Lee Haven and into the fast-flowing sound which separated Gullholm from the Welsh coast.
Leonora gripped a rail with white-knuckled hands when the boat bucked as it met the wilder waters of the sound.
Teeth clenched, she held on like grim death, determined not to embarrass Penry Vaughan with a fit of hysterics just because she was in a boat again.
Besides, she told herself firmly, this time the sea was merely a bit choppy.
The wind was brisk, but it was only a wind, not a gale.
And the sun was shining.
Bracing her feet against the Angharad 's deck, she fixed her eyes on the grey smudge of land in the distance, willing it to come nearer.
‘Are you OK?’ shouted Penry above the cabin noise.
‘Fine,’ she assured him loudly.
She'd be even better, too, she thought prayerfully, once she was on dry land.
But Penry was right.
The trip was mercifully short.
All at once the shore was suddenly very close indeed, the grey smudge resolving into green fields and a sandy beach with houses in a grey and white arc behind it.
And then they were over the bar into a small, natural harbour and the deck steadied beneath her feet as Penry piloted the boat skilfully into a mooring where the Angharad would wait for their return.
As a boy raced to take the ropes Penry flung out, Leonora began to breathe more easily again, her pulse-rate calming as she felt the usual shamed reaction to terror once safety was assured.
‘You can let go now,’ said Penry quietly.
Leonora flushed as he prised her stiff hands from the rail.
‘Sorry.
I was a bit tense.’
‘You were very brave, my lovely.’
He smiled down at her with warm approval.
‘After your nightmares a boat trip must have been an ordeal.’
Her knees rattled together like castanets as he helped her down on to the jetty.
‘I suppose it was like getting straight back on a horse after being thrown.’
She breathed in deeply and smiled.
‘I'll be fine on the trip back, I promise.’
‘Good girl.
Come on, then.
We've a lot to do before then.’
Penry hurried her off to a row of garages on one side of the road leading from the beach into the village.
As they walked along there were smiles on all sides as they passed.
Dr Penry Vaughan, Leonora noted, was popular with everyone in Brides Haven.
Halfway along he unlocked a garage and let the door slide up to reveal a newish Range Rover.
He lifted Leonora into the passenger-seat then leapt up to back the vehicle out into the narrow street, waving his thanks as a weather-beaten old man slammed the garage door shut with a wide smile before waving them on their way.
Brides Haven was small.
The Range Rover left it behind quickly on a steep road which wound up in hairpin bends for a mile before levelling out on the road to Haverfordwest.
‘I know how you felt in my boat,’ said Penry, glancing sideways at her.
‘How are you in a car?’
‘Great,’ said Leonora, relaxing.
‘How far is it to St Mary's?’
‘Sixty miles or so.’
‘Goodness — that far!’
She bit her lip.
‘You'll be glad to see the back of me, Dr Vaughan.’
‘Nonsense.
If it's any consolation to you I needed to check up on a patient anyway.
I'll kill two birds with one stone.’
‘Not the happiest of metaphors for a man of healing!’
He laughed, then gestured at the surrounding farmland, which stretched away to the purple rise of the Preseli hills in the distance.
‘Any of this ring a bell?’
‘No.’
She sighed.
‘I was hoping Brides Haven would, I must confess, but it didn't.
None of this looks remotely familiar.
Have you got a comb, by the way?’ she added.
‘I feel a bit wind-blown — among other things.’
‘If you reach over in the back you'll see a suede jacket.
There might be a comb in the pocket.’
To Leonora's relief there was.
She untied the shoelace and did what she could to tame the unruly curls, then took off her red scarf and used it to tie her hair back firmly at the nape of her neck.
‘I don't want to disgrace you in front of the nuns.’
‘I've already had a word with Sister Concepta.
I gave her the bare outline of your problem, Leonora — it was necessary to explain why I wanted an X-ray in a hurry.
There'll be a radiologist waiting for us.’
‘Won't that cost a lot?’
‘Don't worry about that,’ he said dismissively, and focused his attention on the traffic of Haverfordwest as he skirted the town to make for the road to Carmarthen.
St Mary's was a modern, purpose-built nursing home erected in the grounds of an older house, once the property of a Member of Parliament in Gladstone's government.
The nuns were kindness itself to Leonora.
They fussed over her as though she were a sick child, then, once the X-rays were completed, returned her to Penry, who was chatting over coffee with Sister Concepta in her office.
‘Take Leonora into the gardens for a stroll round in the sunshine while you wait for the results, Doctor,’ advised the serene, smiling nun.
‘She's a bit pale, poor child; she could do with some fresh air.’
Penry, who had changed his rubber boots and yellow waterproof for heavy shoes and suede jacket before entering the hospital, ushered Leonora outside, agreeing with Sister Concepta that his charge looked a bit peaky.
‘Are you all right, Leonora?’ he asked as they strolled along the gravelled paths.
‘Yes.
I don't think I'm ever the rosy-cheeked type.’
She smiled cheerfully as they passed beds massed with daffodils.
‘I can tell we're in Wales.
Is there a kitchen garden full of leeks, too?’
He chuckled.
‘Probably.’
‘How was your patient?’
‘I've sent her home.
Her tests confirmed my diagnosis, so I prescribed some mild medication, a strict diet and bullied her into taking more exercise.’
‘Will she do as you say?’
Penry smiled with supreme confidence.
‘Of course.
People always do as I say — in the end.’
The X-rays confirmed that Leonora's skull had come off surprisingly scot-free from her adventure.
‘Not that I had any doubts on the score,’ Penry assured her as they set off towards Haverfordwest.
‘But I wanted confirmation.’
Leonora was silent, frowning at the passing countryside in deep preoccupation.
‘What's bothering you now?’ he asked.
‘I'm trying to screw up enough courage to ask you a favour,’ she muttered, flushing.
‘Ask away.’
‘Could I possibly borrow some money?’ she asked, turing in her seat to look at him.
‘I hate to ask, after all you've done, but there are one or two things I need.’
‘How much do you want?’
‘A few pounds?’ she asked hopefully.
‘Once I — I get back to normal I'll repay it immediately, I promise.
And I won't spend more than I can help.
I just want some shampoo and so on.’
‘Of course, child.
Buy what you want.
We'll get some food, too.’
He shook his finger at her.
‘Was that so very hard to ask, Leonora?
Am I such an ogre?’
‘Today no,’ she said bluntly.
‘Yesterday very much so.’
‘Let's draw a veil over yesterday,’ he suggested.
‘It won't happen again.
And to make up for it I'll treat you to a slap-up lunch in Haverfordwest.’
Leonora stared at him in dismay.
‘Not the way I look at the moment!
I'd much rather go home, please.’
Penry made no answer for a moment as he edged past a cattle-truck on a straight stretch of road.
After a while he gave her a sidelong glance under his enviable black lashes.
‘Was that a slip of the tongue, Leonora?
Do you really think of my island as home?’
She bit hard into her lower lip.
‘For the moment I don't have much choice.
It's the only home I know.’
Tears trickled from the corners of her eyes, and she knuckled them away fiercely.
‘Sorry to be so feeble.’
‘Don't be.
It's bound to get you down.’
He put a large hand on her knee, then withdrew it swiftly as she cringed away.
‘Hey!’
He eyed her askance.
‘I was trying to comfort you, not grope you, girl.’
Leonora flushed bright red.
‘Sorry,’ she muttered.
‘You need food,’ he said decisively, and began to slow down.
‘There's a nice little pub along here.
Very quiet; no one will stare at your black eye.
Which isn't black now, anyway,’ he added.
‘It's barely noticeable.’
‘I'm not hungry,’ she said mutinously.
‘Too bad — I am!’
Minutes later they were installed in the bar of the White Lion, where the dish of the day, to Leonora's astonishment, proved to be roast beef and Yorkshire pudding with vegetables from mine host's own garden.
‘I thought it would be chips with everything,’ she whispered.
‘Oh ye of little faith!
People come from miles around for Myra's Yorkshire pudding — not to mention the gravy!’
The substantial lunch sent Leonora to sleep in the car on the next stage of the journey.
When she came to with a start she found they were in the car park below the ruins of the castle in Haverfordwest.
‘Come on, sleepyhead.
Time to get out.’
Penry took out his wallet and handed her some notes.
‘There's your pocket-money.
Where do you want to spend it?’
She rubbed her eyes, frowning when she saw how much he'd given her.
‘I don't need all this.’
‘You might.
You can always give me change!’
Penry was tactful enough to leave her to her own devices once he'd directed her to a chemist.
‘I'll be outside in twenty minutes.
Will that do?’
Leonora darted into the shop, eager to utilise her time to the full.
Determined not to hold Penry up, she made her purchases at such speed that she was outside, waiting, when he came striding down the narrow street to collect her.
He walked head and shoulders above the crowd in every way, she thought, with such a sudden, overwhelming rush of pleasure at the sight of him that she was tongue-tied.
‘We'll call at the supermarket en route,’ he announced on the way back to the car.
‘Did you bring a list?’
‘Just basics — I wasn't sure what else you'd want.’
The Range Rover was crammed with so much food as they finally set off for Brides Haven that Leonora expressed doubt that the boat would carry it all.
‘Nonsense.
The Angharad can cope with a lot more than this!
How do you think I get my oil to the island for the generator and the Aga?’
Leonora confessed she hadn't really given it much thought, all her attention on the weather as Penry loaded the boat.
The sun had disappeared behind swollen grey clouds which threatened a rougher crossing back to the island than the trip earlier on.
She was right.
But when they cast off Penry seemed reassuringly unconcerned, and sang under his breath as the Angharad headed for the turbulent stretch of sea separating Gullholm from the coast.
‘OK?’ he asked, as the Angharad bucked over the harbour bar into the open sea.
Her stiff lips tried to smile.
‘Fine,’ she gasped.
‘Come here.’
Penry reached out a long arm and drew her in front of him so that she stood in the shelter of his arms as he held the wheel.
‘You're quite safe.
The wind won't strengthen until after dark.’
Leonora, aware of Penry's warmth in every fibre, found the security of his arms an effective antidote for her fear as the Angharad butted her way across the choppy waters of the sound.
By the time Gullholm was in full view she was sorry the crossing was over.
‘There,’ said Penry, putting her aside gently as he prepared to pilot the Angharad into her anchorage.
‘That was pretty painless after all, wasn't it?’
He killed the engine, then leapt out to secure the boat.
He held up his arms to swing Leonora to the jetty.
‘Can you manage to get up to the house under your own steam while I bring up the food?’
‘Of course.’
She became very busy with the packages he was stacking on the jetty.
‘I can carry some myself as well.
You don't know how grateful I am!
Thank you for being so kind.
I won't be frightened again.’
His lips twitched as he patted her cheek carelessly.
‘My dear girl, it was no hardship to hold you in my arms for a while, I assure you!’
She flushed scarlet, hastily collected as much as she could carry and started off up the cliff path.
‘Will I hold you up?’ she called over her shoulder as Penry came behind her.
‘A bit, but I'd rather you went first.
I can catch you if you fall.
Stop immediately if you feel giddy.’
‘I won't!’
She toiled up the path with her packages, sheer will-power keeping her going until the four-square shape of the house came into view.
‘I'm out of condition,’ she panted, as Penry opened the door and pushed her inside the kitchen.
‘You're not even breathing fast!’
‘I'm used to it.
Go and collapse on the sofa in there.
I'll light the stove as soon as I've stowed everything away.’
Leonora nodded obediently, but the moment he'd gone she drew the kettle over the heat on the Aga before going upstairs with her little hoard of shopping.
She hurried back down to put away the food already in the kitchen, and by the time Penry returned with the last couple of boxes she had a tea-tray waiting, complete with a plate of tempting cakes from the small bakery in Brides Haven.
‘I thought I told you to rest,’ he accused, dumping the boxes on the kitchen counter.
‘I fancied some tea.’
‘Right.’
He stripped off his yellow waterproof.
‘I'll take it in there, and you can drink it while you watch me light the stove.
I cleared it out and relaid it this morning, fortunately.
I thought you might be cold when we got back.’
‘After that scramble up the cliff?
You're joking!’
She followed him into the other room and sat down on the sofa to pour out while Penry put a match to the kindling in the stove.
One cup of tea and half a custard tart later it dawned on her that she felt a remarkable glow of well-being, for someone in her particular dilemma.
She looked down on Penry's wind-blown dark head as he knelt in front of the stove to make sure the fire was established.
‘Shall I pour a cup for you now?’
‘Yes, please.’
He got to his feet in one sinuous movement, stretching hugely, his arms above his head, before he sank down in the chair opposite.
‘I hope you haven't eaten both those tarts.’
‘No.
I forced myself to leave one for you.’
He surveyed her at length as he demolished the cake.
‘All in all you don't look too bad at all, Leonora, considering the exertions of the day.
How's the head?’
‘The stitches tweak now and then, but otherwise it's not aching much.’
She smiled cheerfully.
‘Basically I fancy I'm fairly tough.’
‘You've got guts, I grant you that.
You faced your ordeal pretty well today, young lady.’
She frowned thoughtfully as she refilled her cup.
‘I was frightened, I admit.
But only because of the dream.
Somehow I don't think I'm nervous of boats and water normally.
Otherwise,’ she added, looking across at him, ‘I would never have been in a boat alone, would I?
Unless all that was just a dream, after all, and nothing to do with what really happened.’
‘I think it happened, right enough.’
His blue eyes held a hint of warning.
‘It's quite possible you'll dream again tonight, Leonora.’
She shrugged.
‘I know.
But if that's what it takes to find out what happened — and who I am — I'll just have to put up with it every night until the last piece of the puzzle falls in place.
I'm only sorry you have to put up with it too.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘You'll be thankful to see the back of me, one way and another.’
‘Not at all— I'll lose my cook!’
‘Ah, but you've only sampled my pasta.
I can't make Yorkshire pudding like Myra's, you know.’
‘We all have our crosses to bear,’ he said piously.
‘And because you were so brave today, Leonora, I bought you a present in Haverfordwest.’
She jumped up, frowning in dismay.
‘But you can't give me presents as well.
I'll never be out of your debt at this rate.’
‘Hey — steady on.’
He took her by the elbows, his frown mock-severe.
‘I shall not only be deeply wounded if you spurn my offerings, I shan't know what to do with the things.
All my womenfolk are at least six inches taller and a few sizes bigger than you.’
He went off to the kitchen and returned with a carrier-bag.
‘Nothing exciting — just a couple of things to make life easier, since you can't fly away home just yet, ladybird.’
The ‘things’ were a pair of rubber-soled navy canvas deck-shoes, a miniature version of Penry's rubber boots, and a strawberry-pink lambswool sweater.
Leonora looked at the haul, wide-eyed, a lump in her throat.
‘Well?’ demanded Penry.
‘Will they do?’
She cleared her throat noisily.
‘Of course they will.
Exactly what I need — except for the sweater, which was sheer extravagance!’
She blinked hard.
‘How will I ever repay you for all you've done for me?’
On impulse she stood on tiptoe and kissed his cheek.
‘Thank you very much indeed.’
Without warning Penry's arms shot out to pull her on tiptoe against his broad chest, returning the brief little caress with a kiss which left them both shaken when he finally set her square on her feet again.
‘Do you require an apology?’ he demanded roughly.
‘I warned you this type of thing might arise from our particular situation, Miss Castaway.’
Leonora's chin went up.
‘Please don't apologise.
I'm to blame.
I was stupid to kiss you first.
I'll take care never to do it again.
Now,’ she added, deliberately matter-of-fact, ‘what time do you want supper?’
‘Later!’ he snapped, his face like thunder.
‘I've wasted too much bloody time today as it is.
I need to put in a couple of hours’ work before I can think of eating.’
He flung away to his study, slamming the door behind him.
CHAPTER SIX
It was almost eight that evening before Penry emerged from the study.
Leonora eyed him warily as she switched off the transistor.
‘Are you ready to eat now?’
He stared at her, sudden heat in his eyes for an instant before the shuttering lashes came down to hide it.
‘What the blazes have you done to yourself?’ he demanded.
Leonora glared back, incensed.
Her motives unclear, even to herself, she'd taken enormous trouble with her face after her bath, disguising the bruise with a cover-up stick, accenting her eyes with a hint of shadow.
She'd lavished the new moisturiser on her face, outlined her mouth with a muted pink lipstick, and for the finishing touch gathered her hair into a loose knot on top of her head with a length of black velvet purchased along with the cosmetics.
And until now she'd been naïvely pleased with the result.
Penry's derision acted like a red-hot needle, pricking the fragile balloon of her vanity.
‘I thought it was time I began looking like a human being,’ she snapped.
‘Exactly like every other female, you mean!’
Leonora gave him a look of active dislike.
‘Ah!
Return of Heathcliff, I see.’
‘You've got your casting wrong.
Not Heathcliff.
Pygmalion, perhaps, or Dr Frankenstein.’
Her eyes flashed angrily.
‘And I'm the monster, I suppose!’
‘Don't be childish.’
He looked mortifyingly bored.
‘Since you've gone to so much trouble I suppose I'd better change into something more in keeping with your splendour.’
‘Don't be so damn patronising!
I'm wearing jeans and a jumper and a spot of make-up — big deal!’
She turned back to the salad, chopping herbs for the dressing as if she had Penry Vaughan's neck under the blade.
‘You're angry.
I'm sorry, Leonora.’
He reached out to touch a hand to the elaborate topknot, but she dodged away, retreating in haste along the counter, her face flaming at the scathing glitter in his eyes.
‘My dear young woman,’ he drawled, ‘must you shy away like a startled horse every time I get within yards of you?
It's bad for my nerves —and unnecessary.
I'm sorry I kissed you earlier, but I swear on the Bible I've no intention of ravishing you on the kitchen floor before supper — or any other time.’
She hugged her arms across her chest, hot all over.
‘I know that!
It's just that I — well, I don't seem to like being touched.’
‘I'll remember that next time you start screaming in the night!’
Her chin lifted.
‘That's different.
Then you're just a doctor, not a man.’
‘The two are not incompatible!’
Penry eyed her flushed face with rancour for a moment, then shrugged.
‘Come on — pax!
Put the knife away, you're making me nervous.’
The rest of the evening passed without further reference to Leonora's attempt to gild the lily.
After the meal she went on knitting the complicated sweater while Penry immersed himself in the newspapers he'd bought earlier in the day.
At first there was an uneasy silence, but after a while he thawed enough to read odd items of news aloud to her.
When he put down the papers at last he looked abstracted.
‘I didn't expect anything in the nationals, of course,’ he said, frowning, ‘but I thought one of the local rags might have had something about a missing boat.’
‘Or even a missing person.
Would you stand up, please?’ she added.
‘Are you sure that's meant for me?’ he asked, as she went on tiptoe to measure her knitting against his back.
‘Don't you like it?’
‘Yes.
It's very striking, but not my usual sort of thing.
I'm not convinced Mother intended it for me.’
‘From the measurements she must have,’ she assured him, as her needles resumed their swift, effortless rhythm.
‘Surely no one else in your family is built to the same scale?’
‘No,’ he admitted.
‘Something for which, I imagine, the girls are profoundly grateful.
I'm a throw-back to old Josh Probert, according to my lady mother.
Only he was six and a half feet in his socks, apparently, which tops me by an inch or two.’
‘I pity his wife if she knitted much for him!’
Penry laughed as he went over to the stereo to put on a compact disc.
‘They ran sheep here in those days, so I imagine she did, if only to keep him in socks.’
As the ethereal strains of Ravel stole through the room, Penry let himself down on the sofa, eyes closed.
Leonora looked at him, unobserved, as she worked.
His mood seemed to have lightened now, she noted with some relief, and pondered, frowning, over his unexpected reaction to what must certainly be her normal other-life guise.
Unaware of her scrutiny, Penry lay full length, guernsey and shoes discarded, his long, bare feet crossed at the ankles as they hung over the arm of the sofa.
He was, thought Leonora with detachment, well worth looking at.
His face, less hollowed and drawn already than her first impression of it, possessed a quality in repose she could only describe as beauty, of a very virile, masculine variety.
Where the skin stretched taut along his cheekbones it held a faint flush of colour after the day out, the disfiguring bitterness in the blue eyes hidden for the moment behind closed, black-fringed lids.
Leonora counted stitches for a moment, then let her eyes stray over Penry Vaughan's magnificent physique.
He was all muscle and sinew, with no spare flesh as far as she could tell, the aura of strength very marked even in repose as he lay relaxed, his hands clasped behind his head, his face shuttered and dreaming as he listened to the music.
‘You like Ravel?’ he asked without opening his eyes.
Leonora applied herself to her knitting hastily.
‘Not the piano music, nor the hackneyed old Bolero , but Ravel in this mood I find irresistible.’
‘Know the piece?’ he asked idly.
‘Daphnis and Chloe …’
She turned to find him watching her.
‘Ah!
There I go again.’
He smiled.
‘So you do.’
‘But why is my memory so selective?’ she demanded, and thrust the knitting in its bag, suddenly tired of it.
‘For the moment it's simply refusing to remember anything other than the pleasant things, Leonora.’
He sat up, thrusting his feet into his shoes.
‘Mind you, I'm a mere physician, not a psychiatrist —’
‘You could never be a ‘mere’ anything!’
‘Ah, but you don't know me very well, Leonora.’
His face set in harsh, familiar lines.
‘I'm as subject to the frailties of human nature as the next man — or woman.’
She looked at him consideringly.
‘It's hard to be believe.
You seem like a man who gives frailties of any kind short shrift.’
‘I said I was subject to them, not that I let them rule me!’
He stood up, holding out his hand.
‘Come on, young lady.
Time for bed.’
Leonora contemplated argument, abandoned it, and, without taking the hand, got up and started for the stairs on leaden feet, full of foreboding about the night ahead.
‘Don't worry, child,’ he said kindly.
‘If you dream, I'll come running, I promise.’
She gave him a melancholy little smile.
‘At the risk of sounding ungrateful, I sincerely hope you won't have to.’
Penry stood at the foot of the stairs, looking up at her.
‘Get some sleep.
You look exhausted.’
‘The constant battle to remember's a bit draining.’
‘Then stop it.
Make your mind a complete blank.’
‘You mean more of a blank that it is!’
He frowned impatiently.
‘Look, Leonora, trying to force yourself to remember will do a lot more harm than good.
Things could be a hell of a sight worse for you, remember.
You've got shelter, food, and although I'm not the easiest of companions at least you're not facing your problem alone.’
Leonora felt a sharp pang of remorse.
‘I know, and I'm sorry to sound ungrateful.
Goodnight.’
She prepared for bed in haste, then got into bed without turning off the bedside lamp, willing the friendly glow to hold off the dreams which came with the night.
It was something of an anticlimax to wake next morning to pale dawn light after a night of sleep unbroken by nightmares or dreams of any kind.
Leonora sat up, rubbing her eyes as she switched off the lamp, so exhilarated to find she'd slept the night through that she was less cast down than expected to find her identity was still a mystery.
Today, she decided, she would forget that she couldn't remember.
Her body was healing rapidly.
No doubt her mind would do the same if she stopped chivvying it.
She snuggled back down under the covers, deciding it was too early to get up yet.
If she kept quiet Penry might sleep longer, and wake in a better mood.
When Leonora surfaced next she found Penry, fully dressed, standing at the edge of the bed.
She sat bolt upright, pushing her hair back from her face guiltily.
‘Goodness, what time is it?’
‘Only a little after eight.’
He smiled.
‘How did you sleep, Leonora?
If you had any nightmares there was no soundtrack last night.’
She smiled radiantly.
‘There weren't any!
Just wonderful, wonderful sleep — twice, too!
I woke earlier on, but I thought I'd disturb you if I got up so I had another nap.’
‘You look very much better.’
He took her wrist between impersonal fingers and consulted his watch.
‘Good.
Pulse normal.’
He bent slightly to examine her face.
‘The swelling's down, and the bruise almost gone, but I'd better change the dressing on your wound after you come downstairs.’
‘Right.
I'll only be a few minutes, then I'll cook you some breakfast,’ she said briskly.
Penry smiled faintly as he made for the door.
‘When you finally go back to wherever you belong, Leonora, what shall I do without you?’
She looked sceptical.
‘Enjoy the solitude you came here for, I imagine.
And in any case,’ she added, ‘if you are lonely I'm sure there must be any number of — of people you can ask here to keep you company.’
‘You mean women,’ he said swiftly, his eyes icing over.
‘For the past three years I've been a respectable married man, young lady.
I never had enough time to spare for my wife, let alone other women — even if I'd been so inclined, which I was not.’
‘Oh, come on!
In your position you must know a gorgeous nurse or two, or a pretty lady medico, Dr Vaughan.’
His black brows flew together forbiddingly.
‘If I do,’ he said cuttingly, ‘that's my business.’
As he ducked through the door Leonora stared at him in astonishment, then stuck out her tongue irreverently as she slid out of bed, refusing to let Penry's snub spoil her new well-being.
She washed hurriedly, then pulled on her old jeans and jersey and tied her hair back with the shoelace.
If Dr Penry Vaughan preferred scruffy, she thought resentfully, scruffy was what he'd get.
When she went downstairs Penry was feeding wood into the stove in the living-room.
She went past him without speaking on her way to the kitchen, and soon had breakfast under way.
She began frying bacon and eggs, then filled the kettle and sliced bread for toast.
She put cutlery and napkins on two trays, then went to the door.
‘It's nearly ready.’
He got up, dusting off his hands.
‘Thank you.
It smells marvellous.
Have I time to wash?’
Leonora nodded silently then returned to her labours.
While Penry went upstairs she took his tray into the study, then went into the other room with her own.
When he reappeared she gestured through the open door.
‘Yours is on your desk.’
Penry stood at the foot of the stairs, frowning as she plugged in the transistor to listen to Radio Four while she ate.
‘Are diplomatic relations severed?’ he enquired drily.
Leonora buttered toast with a steady hand.
‘I don't know how much longer you'll be forced to put up with me, but until the happy day I can bid you farewell I'll try to keep out of your hair as much as I can.
To be honest,’ she added, ‘I find your swings of mood rather a pain.
Just when I think you're the kindest man in the world you suddenly get the glooms again.
Since I'm obviously the cause of them I'll do my best to keep out of your way.’
Penry looked as though he was about to burst into speech for a moment, then his face set in the familiar harsh lines, and without another word he turned on his heel and made for his sanctum, slamming the door behind him.
Leonora lost interest in her breakfast.
Penry's displeasure gave her a sudden, desperate longing to get back to wherever — and more importantly whoever — she belonged.
Swallowing her tears, she went back to the kitchen to clear up.
She knocked on the study door and put her head round it.
‘May I take the tray?’
Penry looked up.
‘I'll look at your forehead first.’
Leonora sat in the kitchen chair alongside the desk while Penry removed the old dressing.
She sat very still, eyes closed, as he examined the wound, willing herself to remain immune to his nearness, to think of him only as a doctor.
‘There,’ he said at last, standing back.
‘That should do now until I take out the stitches.’
Leonora got up.
‘Thank you.
How long will that be?’
‘A day or two.’
He picked up the tray and followed her from the room.
‘I'm sorry, Leonora.
You happened to hit on a sore subject.’
‘As you said, it's none of my business,’ she said flatly, and began washing up, her back to him.
‘Unlike you I couldn't sleep.
Which is an explanation for my bloody-mindedness, I know, but no excuse.’
He leaned against the counter, eyeing her withdrawn face.
‘Being a Celt, I'm prone to moods.
A broken marriage hasn't done much to lighten them, either.’
She maintained a stony silence until she'd finished, then turned briskly.
‘Right.
Since it's such a lovely day I think I'll go exploring.’
‘Not on your own!’ he said quickly.
Leonora thrust out a foot clad in one of the new rubber-soled shoes he'd bought her.
‘I'll be fine in these.
I'll keep to the paths, I promise.
I shan't climb down cliffs, or do anything stupid.’
Her eyes flashed.
‘I may be missing in the memory department, but I do have a brain.
Of sorts.’
He eyed the small foot, unimpressed.
‘Brain or no brain, I'd rather you didn't go out alone, at least not the first time, please.’
Their eyes clashed for a moment, then Leonora shrugged.
‘Oh, very well.
Will the generator expire if I use the vacuum cleaner, then?’
‘There's no need —’
‘I must do something, or I'll go mad!’
Grudgingly Penry agreed to a little housework, after which, he said firmly, she must rest.
Leonora set to with a will.
An hour later every room was spick and span except for the bedroom Penry was using.
A large suitcase lay on the bed, still full of the clothes he'd taken from the other room.
Leonora took out sweaters and shirts and underwear, putting them away with a vague feeling of trespass which failed to keep her from peeping into a folding leather picture frame lying at the bottom of the suitcase.
One half was crammed with snapshots of various adults and children, presumably all members of the Vaughan clan.
But it was the single large photograph in the other half of the frame that caught Leonora's attention.
Melanie was dark and very lovely, with an aura of warmth and tenderness which filled Leonora with unexpected dismay.
But then, Leonora reminded herself sternly, what little she knew was Penry Vaughan's side of the story.
Melanie might have a different tale to tell.
Suddenly Leonora felt restless, penned in.
She leaned on the wide sill, looking out with longing at the part of Gullholm visible from the window.
A path wound away from the house, leading through the ridges and furrows of fields long left to nature.
There wasn't a tree in sight, but nearer the cliff edge she could make out carpets of thrift and sea-campion, and yearned to explore.
She turned away, frustrated, and went downstairs to make lunch.
After handing over a tray to the absorbed, absent man behind the desk, Leonora ate her own sandwich at the kitchen counter, staring mutinously at the sunshine pouring through the window.
The booming surf far below called to her like the beat of a jungle drum.
With sudden resolve she began to prepare a beef goulash for dinner.
When it was simmering slowly in the Aga she went into Penry, who was searching distractedly through piles of medical tomes.
‘If you don't need anything else,’ she said distinctly, ‘I thought I might take the transistor up to my room for company and have a rest on my bed.’
‘Sensible girl.
I'm fine — run along.’
He plunged back into his work, forgetting about her before she was through the door.
Leonora hurried upstairs gleefully, inserted a new set of batteries in the transistor, turned up the volume and left her bedroom door open a crack.
She collected her jacket then crept downstairs on noiseless, rubber-soled feet, taking extra care as she skirted the study on her way out.
Exulting in her escape, she closed the outer door behind her and made for the great outdoors like a child let out of school.
Leonora restricted herself to the main tableland of the island, knowing perfectly well that Penry had her safety in mind in his veto of exploration on her own.
She kept well away from the edge of the cliffs, perfectly happy to stay in the fields which displayed such fascinating evidence of Iron Age occupation.
Excited to find she could just make out traces of narrow fields with dividing banks and walls, she ventured further towards a rounded mound which could well have been an Iron Age barrow, and just beyond it she found the standing stone, where she shivered pleasurably, her imagination running riot about the monolith's precise function in the days when the settlement had been a live, thriving community.
Leonora turned her back on the past, bracing herself against the wind as she walked briskly towards the spot where the cliff path began its decent to Seal Haven.
Shading her eyes with a hand against the bright sunlight, she paused to watch the acrobatics of a troupe of black-backed screaming gulls, but the wind blew suddenly colder, tearing at her hair.
Reluctantly she made her way back to the house, then gave a gasp of dismay as Penry erupted from it like a rocket.
He tore towards her, menace in every line of him as he caught up with her and grabbed her by the shoulders, his eyes blazing.
‘What the hell do you think you're doing?’ he shouted.
‘I came out for a walk,’ she said, shrugging off his hands.
‘I'm coming back now.’
‘You bet your life you are!’
He glared at her as he dragged her along by the hand at top speed.
‘When I went up to your room I found Goldilocks wasn't sleeping in my bed after all.
The transistor was a nice touch!
Planned your escape well, didn't you?’
‘Let me go,’ she said breathlessly, trying to break free.
‘I can't — run as — fast as — you.’
Penry slowed down, his eyes on her face.
‘Are you giddy?’ he demanded.
‘No.
Not that it's any thanks to you!’
‘Sorry.’
Penry ushered her into the kitchen, unzipping her jacket as though she were a child.
He lifted her up and perched her on one of the kitchen stools, then filled the kettle.
‘Stay there,’ he ordered.
‘I'll make you some tea.’
Leonora kept her temper with difficulty, feeling ridiculous with her legs dangling from the high stool.
‘Dr Vaughan, I crept from the house like a thief to avoid the very fuss you're making right now.
I am perfectly all right !
A gentle stroll in the spring sunshine is hardly a capital offence.’
As a blast of hail hit the window she shrugged.
‘It was sunny when I went out.’
Penry handed her a mug of tea.
‘I know.’
He thrust a hand through his hair.
‘Sorry I blew my top, but I had visions of finding you down there on the rocks like the first time.’
‘I wasn't anywhere near the edge!’
‘How was I to know that?
I imagined you getting vertigo, even falling!’
‘I never dreamed you'd look in my room,’ she muttered.
‘My sole reason for invading your maiden privacy,’ he said with sarcasm, ‘was because I'd heard from the police.
I assumed you'd want to know that wreckage of a dinghy was washed up a few miles north of here on the Welsh coast last night.
There was enough of it to identify her as the Seren …
Mor ‘star’ to you barbarians across Offa's Dyke.’
CHAPTER SEVEN
The police had traced the dinghy to Londoners who owned a weekend cottage a few miles away up the Welsh coast.
Because several locals had permission to borrow the boat for a spot of fishing, its absence had gone unremarked.
Penry took Leonora by the shoulders.
‘Does any of it ring a bell?
Could you be one of the owners of this cottage they're talking about?’
She shook her head wildly.
‘I don't know, I don't know.’
Tears of frustration and disappointment welled up in her eyes.
‘I wish I did.
I just want to go home, wherever it is.’
Penry put his arms around her very carefully.
When she leaned against him without flinching away he stroked her hair as she buried her face against his chest, and at the delicate caress she sobbed into the thick navy wool without inhibition.
It was a long time before she drew away, knuckling the tears away from her reddened eyes.
‘Hey — come on,’ he said softly, and smiled at her as he reached over to tear off a sheet of kitchen-towel.
Leonora mopped herself up drearily.
‘Sorry.
Only I was happy out there for a while.
For a few minutes I was free of this terrible worry about who I am, about my family.
I can't stop thinking about them.
They must be going out of their minds with worry.’
She blew her nose forcibly.
‘Not only that, you could be sheltering a criminal of some kind.
What was I doing with someone else's boat, for a start?’
‘Stop worrying — that's an order!’
He patted her good cheek lightly.
‘Now, off you go.
Have your bath.
By the wonderful smell I assume dinner is already under way, so just tell me what else you intend us to eat and I'll see to it.’
‘No, I'll do it,’ she insisted, and slithered down off the stool.
She bent to transfer the casserole from the oven to the top of the Aga, too depressed to note the lack of protest from her head.
Penry sniffed appreciatively.
‘Frankly, if you can cook like this I don't care if you're the greatest lady criminal of all time.’
She gave him a wry smile as she added seasoning to the pot.
‘It obviously takes food to keep you in a good mood, Dr Vaughan.’
‘I'm sorry if I was a bear this morning.
I haven't had much chance to run in the mornings since you arrived.
Makes me introspective about certain things missing from my life these days.’
Leonora frowned.
‘You mean women, and — and so on?
I find it hard to believe that an attractive man like you lacks feminine company.’
‘Why, thank you, Madame X.’ He gave her a mocking bow.
‘And of course your former remarks about lady doctors were quite right.
I know several.
The trouble was that Melanie believed I was in bed with one of them every time I was half an hour late.’
‘Were you?’
‘No, I damn well wasn't!
I'm a consultant,’ he added.
‘Part of my function is to supervise and instruct those junior to me, male or female.
After a hard day it wasn't unusual to gather for coffee with a bunch of registrars of both sexes, and sometimes I was late home.’
His mouth tightened.
‘Melanie refused to believe the truth.
I wish now her suspicions had been correct.
I might as well have had the game as well as the name.’
Leonora restored the pot to the oven and straightened.
‘There.
I'll leave the rest until after my bath.’
She eyed him diffidently.
‘I tidied the bedrooms today.
When I did yours I couldn't help looking at the photographs in the leather frame.’
‘My rogues’ gallery!
Handsome lot on the whole, we Vaughans, don't you think?’ he said smugly.
‘Very.’
Leonora felt a sudden pang to learn he still thought of the fair Melanie as a Vaughan.
‘Your wife — your ex-wife, I mean, is very lovely.’
Penry frowned.
‘How do you know?’
‘Isn't she the dark lady in the studio portrait?’
His face cleared.
‘No, that's Kit, my sister — taken years ago when she got engaged.
She's been Mrs Reid Livesey for a fair time now.
The demon sailing duo opposite her are Rick and Harry, her sons.’
Leonora went off for her bath, feeling oddly pleased by this information, but otherwise very depressed.
The news of the Seren had ignited a bright flame of hope which left her cold and utterly despondent when it shed no light at all on the mystery of her identity.
To warm herself up she lay in hot water up to her chin, her hair tied up on top of her head, consoling herself with the fact that physically she was almost back to normal.
She could, she told herself stringently, be a lot worse off.
After dinner Leonora returned to her knitting, glad of its soothing monotony, when Penry began musing about her background.
‘I wonder what you do for a living?’ he asked thoughtfully.
‘Maybe you haven't started working yet — you could be a student.’
She shook her head.
‘I'm sure I'm not, somehow.’
‘Well, don't fret about it.’
Leonora, doing her best to obey, changed the subject firmly.
‘What do you do?’ she asked.
‘Apart from treating patients, I mean.
Do you play golf?’
He sat back in his chair, staring into his glass.
‘No.
When I was young rugby was the love of my life, but these days I just manage a game of squash now and then.
Lately these blasted articles have taken up all my spare time.
I've just got to get them out of the way before I get back to work.’
‘Where are you based?’
‘In a hospital which serves a large area of Wales.
I also have a fairly flourishing private practice.’
He raised his eyebrows.
‘You look surprised.’
She nodded.
‘Only about the location.
Somehow I just took it for granted you worked in London.’
‘I did until last year.
I'd spent all my post-Oxford life in London hospitals.
I decided it was time for a change.’
‘To get away from painful memories?’
He smiled mirthlessly.
‘What a romantic you are!
Actually it was the change of job which finally decided Melanie to divorce me.
She was appalled at the idea of living in the ‘wilds’, as she put it.
To expect her to bury herself in the back of beyond, away from all her friends with just Penry Vaughan for company, constituted adequate grounds for divorce in her view.’
‘How on earth did you come to marry her?’ asked Leonora before she could stop herself, then pulled a face.
‘Sorry!’
‘Don't be.
Lord knows it's a question I've asked myself often enough.
Melanie's beautiful, wilful, and she's been spoiled rotten all her life.’
He smiled wryly.
‘I was a challenge to her.
When I was a young houseman I — well, enjoyed a hectic love-life.
Lord knows how I managed it.
A working week of over a hundred hours should have been ruinous for the libido, looking back.
But I was young, then.
And I came in contact with a lot of pretty nurses.
Melanie already knew I was popular with the fair sex, but when she discovered I was tipped for the top in my career as well she decided it might be a good idea to marry me.’
‘Yet after all that she wanted a divorce.
Did you agree to it?’
‘Gladly.
By that stage I was as keen on it as she was.
What I wasn't prepared for was my reaction to her rejection.
My ego suffered.
To be honest I'm still smarting from the various wounds she inflicted.
But there'd been precious little joy in our marriage for some time.
Besides,’ he added grimly, ‘by then Melanie had found husband number two.
Pots of money and willing at first to squire her to the latest ‘in’ restaurants and nightspots, charity balls, Henley, Ascot, the whole shebang.’
He jumped up, looking restless.
‘Right.
Enough soul-baring for tonight, Leonora.
Time you went to bed.’
To Leonora's relief there was no nightmare that night, nor in the nights that followed.
Life on Gullholm settled into an uneasy, hard-won routine.
After Leonora's stitches were removed, painlessly, to her relief, Penry pronounced her well enough to help with his articles, since typing proved to be another of her accomplishments.
Her help proved less of a boon than expected.
Once the work was finished, much sooner than he'd ever dared hope, Penry was left without occupation.
While the weather was fine he worked off his surplus energies by a twice-daily run, sandwiching an outing of exploration with Leonora in between.
But when the gales returned and rain swept the island, penning them both indoors, Penry's mood worsened, darkening, it seemed to Leonora, like the weather.
His restlessness permeated the entire house, and she felt guilty, certain that her presence was tying him to Gullholm, that if it weren't for her he would go home, or visit one or other of his sisters or his mother, all of whom made regular telephone calls.
‘Do they know about me?’ asked Leonora, after a day of sheeting rain.
‘No,’ said Penry shortly.
‘Why not?’
‘If they knew they'd never leave me in peace.
One or the other of them would insist on having you to stay.
But in my opinion the best way to recover your memory is to stay close to the place where you lost it.’
She stared at him, resentment flaring suddenly.
‘And you, of course, Dr Vaughan, are never wrong!’
Suddenly the atmosphere in the comfortable room thickened with hostility.
‘Of course I can be wrong,’ said Penry, a pulse throbbing at the corner of his mouth.
‘And the moment I feel you need proper psychiatric help I shall enlist it for you, believe me.
But for the time being I happen to think it best to wait a little, in the hope that something triggers your memory into returning of its own accord.’
He looked at his watch.
‘It's time you went to bed.’
‘I suppose I might as well,’ she said bitterly.
‘Goodness knows you're not much company.
In fact you've been downright unbearable ever since we finished your articles for the journal.’
She stabbed her needles through her knitting, and stuffed it into its bag.
‘May I have some more batteries for the transistor, please?’
‘I'd rather you tried to get to sleep,’ he said dismissively.
She jumped to her feet and stood over him, her eyes flashing.
‘And of course I must obey your slightest wish as if you were God.
I'd heard that consultants suffered from delusions about their own deity — you're the living proof of it.’
Penry got to his feet very slowly, standing over her in a way which made Leonora long to back away, but she stood her ground, refusing to let him intimidate her.
‘What's the matter with you these days?’ she damanded.
‘Is it me?
Are you regretting that you ever brought me back to life, Pygmalion?
Would you rather Galatea had remained a cold block of marble after all?’
‘What a lot of questions,’ he said coldly, and put her out of his path rather less gently than he intended.
Leonora jumped away, rubbing her forearms resentfully.
‘All right, I'm going — no need to use force.’
Penry closed his eyes tightly as though praying for patience.
When he opened them again they fastened on hers, blue and cold as tempered steel.
‘If you must know, Leonora, I am irritable these days for a very simple reason.’
‘You mean you're itching to be rid of me so you can get off this island!’
‘Not quite.
Something more basic than that.’
She frowned.
‘What do you mean?’
‘To put it in words of one syllable,’ he said, each word encased in ice, ‘we are a man and a woman shut up together alone in a house, separated from all other humans by a stretch of Atlantic.
Ah,’ he added as she backed away.
‘Comprehension at last.’
‘I'd better go to bed,’ said Leonora hastily, moving further away, but he held up his hand.
‘Not yet.
You started this.
You can stay to hear me out.’
She stayed where she was.
Penry Vaughan in this mood looked too dangerous to cross.
‘Sensible girl,’ he said silkily.
‘To proceed with the lecture, I'm aware that my somewhat variable moods disturb you.
But surely you're not so naïve that you can't understand that for any normal man to be in close contact with a girl for days on end without wanting her is damned impossible?’
His eyes lit with a gleam which frightened her badly.
‘And this man, Leonora, has been celibate for a long time.
Not from choice, you understand, but because Melanie withdrew her favours as a punishment when I wouldn't relent about the move to Wales.
Bloody fool that I am, my pride wouldn't let me accept other consolation, even when offered, neither before the divorce, nor since.’
Leonora gazed at him in silence, her heart beating against the blue chambray shirt like a tom-tom.
‘Don't be nervous,’ he said lightly.
‘I've no taste for rape.
And I assume that's what it would amount to, since you flinch at the slightest touch of my hand.’
Abruptly his face set in bitter, angry lines.
‘Oh, go to bed, child.
You're in no danger.
If it makes you feel better I'll sleep down here tonight.’
It was an effort for Leonora to wish him goodnight, an even greater effort to walk upstairs slowly, instead of running headlong to her room, where she lay sleepless for hours, unable to get Penry Vaughan's handsome, cynical face out of her mind.
She slept at last, but in the small hours the nightmare returned.
This time it spared her nothing.
She relived the agony of trying to control the boat, the moment of horror when the engine cut out, the desperate struggle to keep the dinghy from capsizing, and the ultimate horror as a giant wave swept her into the sea.
For a while she managed to swim, but eventually she grew tired and her mouth filled with water, and she sank choking beneath the waves…
CHAPTER EIGHT
‘All right,all right , Leonora, I've got you.’
She opened desperate eyes on Penry's face and collapsed against his bare chest in relief, shuddering.
‘I was drowning,’ she gasped.
‘I was drowning.’
He held her tightly as violent tremors ran through her slender body.
‘It was only a dream, child.
It's all over.
You're safe.’
Leonora clutched at him, terrified he'd leave her.
As she quietened Penry heaved himself upright against the head of the bed, taking her with him as he pulled the bright quilt up over her shoulders.
She clung to him as he smoothed her hair in wordless comfort, reassured by the sheer size and solidity of him, but at last Penry stirred, and she panicked.
‘Don't go!’
‘I'm going to tuck you in, then go downstairs and make you a hot drink.’
Leonora scrambled inelegantly to the floor, barring his way.
‘I'll come with you.
I don't want to be alone.’
Penry slid to his feet, the hollows and planes of his face in sharp relief in the shadows above the lamplight.
‘You'll get cold.’
‘Then stay with me.
I don't want a drink.’
He frowned, then swiftly remade the bed, shaking up the pillows.
‘In you get.’
‘Bathroom first,’ she muttered.
‘Right.
While you're in the bathroom I insist on making that drink.
Two drinks.
Then I'll come back with them and stay with you until you fall asleep.
Agreed?’
Leonora nodded, eyeing the dark hall nervously.
‘Will you put the light on for me, please?’
‘Afraid of the dark?’ he said gently, as he shepherded her to the door.
‘Right now I'm afraid of everything.’
‘Not me included, I hope!’
Leonora gave him a wavering smile as he switched on the hall light.
‘No, not you.
There's a black, uncharted place at the back of my mind labelled ‘here be dragons’.
You're my only defence against them, Dr Vaughan!’
‘Fanciful child!’
His smile was wry as he turned away.
‘Go on, get a move on.
I want you tucked up in bed, stat.’
Leonora flew to do his bidding, feeling better once she was back in bed, her face sponged and the tangles brushed from her hair.
When Penry returned he smiled in approval to find her propped tidily against the pillows, covers drawn up to her chin.
‘Good girl.’
He smiled as he poured hot chocolate from a vacuum flask for her, then drew a chair up near the bed.
‘Now then, Leonora.
I know it's harrowing for you, but think hard.
Was there anything different in the dream this time?
Some other clue we can go on?’
Leonora forced herself to go back over the dream sequence in every terrifying detail.
‘It went on longer, that's all.
This time I — I began to drown.’
‘Since we know perfectly well you didn't, let's forget that bit,’ he said crisply.
‘Now think.
Did you see the name of the dinghy again?’
Leonora nodded.
‘Yes.
I did.
And I had to struggle to start the engine.
It took several pulls of the cord before it caught.
There was a strong smell of fuel, and the water was like ice round my feet as I pushed the boat out before jumping in…’
She stared at him, breathing faster.
‘Penry!
That part wasn't in the dream.’
He leapt up to take the mug from her shaking hand.
‘All right, my lovely.
Gently now.’
He sat on the bed and slid his arm round her shoulders.
She twisted round to look up at him.
‘I was actually remembering the first part!
Clearly, too.
But from then on it's all mixed up.
I can't tell where the real bits and the dream overlap.’
Penry's arms tightened.
‘Don't worry about it.
It's probably an indication that your memory's about to return.’
Leonora tried to smile back, shocked to find herself suddenly unsure about wanting her memory to return.
Gullholm had been her entire world for almost a fortnight, except for the trip to the nursing home.
Suddenly she was deeply afraid of what awaited her in the other world beyond it.
Penry put a finger under her chin to raise her face to his.
‘What is it?’ he asked softly.
‘Got cold feet about meeting yourself face to face?’
She nodded dumbly.
As their eyes held Penry's changed, narrowing to a sudden glitter between his lashes.
‘I'd better go,’ he said huskily, and removed his arm, but Leonora shook her head violently, catching his hand.
‘Don't leave me.
Please!’
‘Leonora, stop that!
You know I can't stay.’
She took her hand away, turning her back to him.
‘Go, then.’
She buried her face against the pillows, biting hard into her lower lip to keep from begging.
At the touch of his hand on her hair she twisted round, her eyes alight with hope, and Penry breathed in deeply, his face set.
‘All right,’ he said grimly.
‘You win!’
He threw himself down in the chair, like a man beset by demons.
‘Now for pity's sake go to sleep.’
Leonora turned to face him.
‘I'm afraid to go to sleep.
Couldn't we just talk?’
‘No, we could not,’ he snapped, and drew his chair nearer the lamp.
Ignoring her, he looked through a small pile of paperbacks on the bedside table then settled down with the latest Ken Follett.
‘You'll get cold sitting there,’ ventured Leonora.
‘That's the least of my problems!’
Afraid to be alone, Leonora nevertheless found it impossible to sleep with the large figure of Penry Vaughan beside her bed.
She lay watching his face as he tried to concentrate on the complexities of the novel.
It was no hardship to look at him, she thought dreamily.
This Melanie of his had to be a complete idiot to prefer someone else.
‘If you keep looking at me,’ said Penry, without raising his eyes from the page, ‘I shall go back to my room.’
‘Sorry.’
Leonora turned on her back and stared at the ceiling.
The wind was rising again, mocking the arrival of spring as it lashed rain against the windows.
‘You must be tired.
I'll be fine on my own now.’
Penry shot to his feet with unflattering alacrity.
He stood at the edge of the bed, looking down at her.
‘Are you sure, Leonora?’
‘Quite sure.’
She smiled up at him valiantly, the smile fading as his eyes began to darken in a way she recognised.
Afraid to move, even to breathe, she stared, mesmerised, as Pentry leaned down slowly until his lips met her cheek.
Leonora tensed, colour rushing to the spot he kissed.
Her mouth turned blindly to meet his, and Penry's breath caught in his throat, his arms closing round her like steel bands.
She reached up to lock her hands behind his neck, her mouth parting beneath his.
As Penry's breathing quickened she pushed herself closer without shame, desperate to keep him with her, fired with triumph at getting her own way rather than with sexual response when he laid her flat on the bed.
He let himself down beside her and took her in his arms, and Leonora yielded to him without a qualm.
If letting him make love to her was the price for keeping him with her all night she would pay it gladly.
Not that Penry Vaughan's lovemaking was a hardship.
For a while she even forgot why she was letting him make love to her in her surprise at the pleasure of it.
But inevitably the quality of kisses changed, his hands became urgent, and she tensed as with sudden impatience he pulled her nightshirt over her head.
The moment his body covered hers she felt a great tide of revulsion and panic surge upwards until it threatened to choke her, and she threshed her head from side to side in blind, unreasoning panic, thrusting him away with frantic hands.
Penry shot upright and Leonora slid from beneath him, scrambling from the bed towards the door.
Hands at her mouth, she bolted to the bathroom, slamming the door behind her to shut out the sounds of her vomiting as her stomach relieved itself of its contents with such violence that she was left retching drily long afterwards until the spasms died away.
She dragged herself to her feet as Penry came into the room, wearing a dressing-gown.
His face set grimly, he wrapped her in a warm, dry bathsheet, then sat her on a stool and sponged her face, smoothing the tangled curls from her pallid face.
‘Did my lovemaking revolt you so much, then?’ he demanded roughly at last.
She shook her head, her teeth chattering.
‘No.
I'm sorry.
It wasn't my intention to — to tease.’
She shut her eyes tightly, a dry sob catching in her throat.
Penry bent to hold her wrist between his fingers, his mouth tightening as he took her pulse.
‘Don't say any more for a moment.
Back to bed for you, young lady.’
He swung her up in his arms, tense for a moment before she burrowed her face into his neck like a tired child.
Back in the bedroom, he handed her the discarded nightshirt, his face carefully blank as Leonora scrambled into it, so unsteady on her feet that it was a relief to get back beneath the covers.
Penry's face wore a forbidding look as he propped the pillows behind her.
‘Will you be all right now?’
‘No!
Don't leave me alone,’ she said hoarsely.
He raised an eyebrow.
‘I thought you'd want me to get out of your sight — and stay out.’
She shook her head violently.
‘No, no!
That's the last thing I want.’
His eyes searched her face, impersonal and assessing now, the man replaced by the physician.
‘You've regained your memory, I assume.’
She shuddered.
‘Yes.
Totally.’
His mouth took on a sardonic twist.
‘I've had varying success with the women I've made love to in the past, but I've never made one throw up before!’
‘You didn't make me sick, Penry!
You see, when you —’ She halted, swallowing hard, then started again.
‘When we came together like that, at the last, it all came back, complete in every nauseating detail.’
She tried to smile.
‘Perhaps you could write an article on it — new shock treatment for amnesia.’
Penry took her hand in his and squeezed it.
‘A fascinating thought!
But before you tell me about it, frankly I'm in need of a stiff drink.
How about you?’
‘Just a glass of mineral water, please.’
She eyed him remorsefully.
‘I'm desperately sorry, Penry.’
‘I'll survive.
Shan't be long.’
Left alone, Leonora found her newly restored memory an unwelcome bedfellow.
Clenching her teeth in disgust, she burrowed her face into the pillow to shut it out until Penry returned.
‘Right,’ he said as he settled himself in the chair.
‘Get it off your chest.
I'm sitting comfortably, so begin.’
Leonora sipped some water to easy her dry throat, at a loss to know how to start.
Penry leaned forward.
‘Look, if you don't want to tell me who you are, or what gave you the horrors, then don't.
My role in life is to alleviate pain, not cause it.’
‘I want to tell you.
It's just that I wish I'd got my wretched memory back some other way.’
She flushed painfully.
‘Frankly, so do I!’
Penry shrugged, then swallowed some of his whisky.
‘But this is the point where you stop thinking of me as a frustrated lover, or even as just a man.
For the moment I'm a doctor, one you can talk to in complete confidence.
So relax, Leonora.
By the way, before you get to the bad part, was I right about your name?’
‘Yes.
I'm Leonora right enough, just as you worked out,’ she said, feeling rather better.
‘The brooch gave us the right clue — in fact it gave us two.
My other name is Fox.
I live in a town called Chastlecombe, where I create expensive hand-knitted sweaters to sell to tourists.
No wonder I can cope with the pattern which beat your mother.
It's the way I earn my bread and butter.’
‘And is Leonora Miss or Mrs Fox?’ asked Penry quietly.
She smiled shyly.
‘Miss Fox, Dr Vaughan.’
‘And are you attached in any way?’
Leonora turned away, a shadow crossing her face.
‘I thought I was.
Which turned out to be a rather spectacular mistake.
It's a silly story, really.’
Leonora Fox was the youngest of three children born rather late to parents who had died when their last-born was still a child.
Left in the care of Jonathan and Elise —
‘Your father was a Beethoven fan!’ interrupted Penry.
‘Not my father, my mother.
First-born Fox sons are always named Jonathan, but my mother, who was quite a gifted pianist, insisted on her own choice for Elise and me.’
Jonathan Fox, the eldest, was a highly successful systems analyst in the City, and, though newly married, exerted himself constantly with professional advice for his sisters, who ran a shop in an arcade recently built to blend with the architecture of the Cotswold town of their birth.
‘We sell my hand-knitted sweaters — at a very steep price — some very high-class clothes of the classic, tailored type, and pieces of silver and jewellery and wood carvings made by local craftsmen,’ said Leonora.
‘Hence the brooch,’ remarked Penry.
‘Right.
Want to guess the name of our shop?’
‘Surprise me.’
‘Elise insisted we call it ‘Fox's Lair’.
Eye-catching, she said, and Jon agreed.
I loathe it.’
Penry eyed her speculatively.
‘If you live and work with your sister, why on earth hasn't she missed you?’
‘I'm coming to that.’
Elise, ten years older than her sister, was the brains of the business.
It was Elise who saw to the accounts and the buying, who had a flair for salesmanship.
Leonora, the creative one, was perfectly happy to get on with her knitting in her little nook in the shop, help with the customers when trade was brisk, type what correspondence was necessary and otherwise leave Elise to the hard sell.
Leonora also did the cooking when the two of them were at home, but Elise was often out dining with someone, or in Stratford at the theatre with someone else.
Elise Fox, happily unmarried at thirty-two, was rarely without an escort, but never showed the least sign of tying herself to one man for good.
The love of Leonora's life was sailing, and during the summer months she spent her Sundays on the water at the local reservoir, weeknights at the tennis club or the cinema, and in the winter she took part in as many activities as possible in the small town where she'd lived all her life.
‘Sounds horribly humdrum, doesn't it?’
She smiled ruefully.
‘My parents left enough money to make sure I went to the same school as Elise, but I was never the academic type — too fond of games.
My career was shaped, I suppose, when I sold my first sweater to a smart shop in Stratford at the tender age of sixteen.
When I left school I automatically went into the shop with Elise, and began to knit full time.’
Penry eyed her searchingly.
‘Have you never wanted wider horizons than that?’
Leonora shrugged.
‘Of course, now and then.
But never enough to desert Elise.
She was only twenty when she was saddled with me, yet she never made me feel I was a drag, and heaven knows a kid sister must have been at times.’
Penry waited patiently as Leonora paused.
When she resumed her story her voice was different, flat and uninflected, as she told him that one day a journalist and a photographer had come to Chastlecombe to do a feature on the shopping arcade for the colour magazine of one of the Sunday papers.
Much was made of the sympathetic architecture, and the fact that the arcade brought trade to both new and old shops from the tourists who thronged the town summer and winter.
The Fox sisters attracted a lot of attention.
Despite competition from shops offering antiques and locally crafted furniture, Fox's Lair came in for the bulk of the publicity.
Elise, tall, red-haired and elegant, occupied pole position on the centre-page shot, wearing one of Leonora's sweaters, a silver fox-head brooch pinned to the scarf thrown carelessly over one shoulder, the interior of the shop in the background.
‘Where were you?’ asked Penry.
‘Hiding.
I'm hideously unphotogenic.
My hair comes out like a bird's nest and my eyes look slitty.
Guy…’
She faltered for a moment.
‘Guy Ferris, the photographer, gave up trying to get a good shot of me in the end.
Whereas you can't take a bad picture of my sister.
Her bones are so good.’
Penry's eyes lit with a deliberate gleam.
‘So are yours — you could do with a trifle more meat on them, but otherwise they compare very favourably with other bone-structures I've met.’
Leonora chuckled.
‘Why, thank you, Doctor.’
‘So what happened next?’
‘I fell in love.’
‘With Guy?’
‘With Guy.’
Guy Ferris, already making a name for himself in the right circles, made a surprisingly determined play for the younger Miss Fox.
Elise, oddly unenamoured of him, became worried when he took to coming down from London quite often at weekends.
But Leonora was in seventh heaven.
And to crown her joy Guy Ferris was an expert sailor.
He would collect her in his Morgan two-seater with the original strap round the bonnet, then take her off to the sailing club to commandeer the helm of her Enterprise dinghy, dressed in the latest sailing gear.
Leonora, bedazzled, crewing for him with devotion, was the envy of her friends.
‘What a dope,’ said Leonora bitterly.
Penry frowned.
‘Didn't he want more than just sailing?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Don't play the innocent, my child.
You know perfectly well our enforced intimacy was a great strain on me after only a day or so.’
Leonora looked sceptical.
‘Even though I looked as though I'd gone ten rounds with Mike Tyson?’
‘You improved at a very disturbing rate,cariad !’
He smiled encouragingly.
‘Go on with the story.
I want to know what caused the amnesia.’
Leonora took a deep breath and informed Penry that Guy had, indeed, made love to her to a certain extent.
Lots of kissing and stroking, but nothing more.
She'd been convinced he respected her so much that he had intentions of a more permanent nature.
‘I read too many fairy-tales when I was young,’ she said bitterly.
The romance continued through the autumn and over Christmas, with intimate dinners and spins in the glamorous car in place of sailing once the season was over.
Then Guy told Leonora he was going away for three weeks to Wales, to take photographs for a travel book, and suggested she went with him.
It would do her good, he said persuasively.
Elise, however, opposed the idea with surprising violence.
And, because Elise hardly ever came the heavy older sister, Leonora, with infinite regret, told Guy she couldn't go.
He made quite a fuss about it, saying it was time she left the nest, stood up to the forceful Elise and lived her own life.
One day, he hinted, he would insist she did, and for more than just a holiday.
‘I was so sure he meant marriage,’ said Leonora quietly.
‘I pined after he'd gone.
I was such a misery that by the end of the first week Elise asked a friend to help out in the shop, and packed me off to join him.’
There'd been no word from Guy after he went away, but, knowing his friend's house was isolated, with no telephone, Leonora was unconcerned.
Full of excited anticipation, she caught an overnight train, managed to get a taxi to turn out at the crack of dawn to take her to Morfa, then set out along the causeway to Brynteg.
‘Brynteg!’
Penry turned her face up to his.
‘Was Ferris staying in the house of that artist chap there?’
She nodded.
‘You know him?’
‘Of him — and the company he keeps.
Go on.’
It had been a wonderful, exciting adventure to Leonora that morning.
Undaunted by the rain, she set out along the causeway, feeling like a princess in a fairy-tale about to join her prince.
Not even the rising wind had any power to damp her ardour as she flew along the causeway.
The house stood at the summit of a rocky mound at the end of it, like a miniature St Michael's Mount, but to Leonora it was Mecca to a believer as she began the steep climb from the beach towards journey's end, and Guy.
‘The house is a bungalow, with a studio built on the back of it, facing out to sea.
I knocked on the front door, but there was no answer.’
Leonora paused for a moment, then steeled herself to go on.
‘I was cold and wet by this time, but after a tour of inspection I found the house was deserted.
So I went round the back to the studio and looked through one of the windows.
There was a raised dais at one end underneath a skylight, with a sort of bed on it.
Guy was in the bed —’ Her voice cracked, and Penry got up to take her in his arms.
‘With a woman?’ he said harshly.
‘No.
With another man.’
CHAPTER NINE
Penry held her in a loose, impersonal embrace as her tears fell thick and fast, bitter and scalding enough to cauterise the wound in her memory.
At first Leonora's body convulsed with shudders as she wept, but little by little she grew quieter.
In the warmth of Penry's arms she came face to face with the truth, survived it, and after a while she detached herself from the comforting embrace, accepting the box of tissues Penry passed to her before resuming his chair.
She mopped herself up, then eyed him uncertainly as she saw the set, cold expression on his face.
‘You're disgusted,’ she said.
His eyes glittered like steel.
‘I wish I had this Guy of yours here in my hands.
I'd like to wring his bloody neck.’
‘Thank you.
Oddly enough that's rather comforting.’
She blinked her swollen eyes, and tried to smile.
‘Not, of course, that Guy can help being — being what he is.
And he wasn't expecting me.
He didn't know I'd changed my mind about joining him.’
‘Making excuses for him?’
‘No,’ she said wearily.
‘Just facing the truth.’
Penry looked grim.
‘Did he see you?’
Leonora shuddered.
‘No!’
With every nerve straining to turn tail and run, she'd backed away as quietly as possible and once she was out of earshot raced back down to the beach to find the tide had turned.
‘Picture my feelings when I found the causeway was under water!
I tore along the beach like a maniac, looking for some kind of boat I could borrow to get away.
I was lucky.
There was an old Heron dinghy drawn up on the beach, with an outboard motor ready attached.
I commandeered it without a second thought.’
‘Ah.
Enter the Seren .’
‘Yes.
I dragged it down to the water on the launching trailer, and pushed off.
For a few horrible moments I thought the motor wouldn't fire, but after several pulls it caught, then I just hooked my overnight bag over one shoulder, took the tiller and made for the shore, which looked so close that I felt I could have swum across.’
‘At which point, I assume, the engine cut out and the notorious cross-currents of the sound hurled you all over the place until you were swept overboard.’
Penry shook his head.
‘Miraculously they swept you round to Gullholm, where I must have found you minutes after you got caught in that inlet.’
His eyes met hers.
‘Have you any idea how lucky you were?’
She nodded dumbly, the reality of her escape hitting her suddenly like a body-blow.
Penry frowned.
‘When are you expected back, by the way?’
Leonora's eyes opened wide in horror.
‘Oh, good heavens, what date is it?’
‘The fourteenth.’
She sagged with relief.
‘I'm due back tomorrow, then.
And I've got to get there on time, too, or Elise will go up the wall.’
He nodded briskly as he jumped up.
‘I'll drive you.’
‘But I'll be spoiling your holiday.
And it's miles out of your way.
If you could just get me to the nearest station —’
‘Don't be silly.
Like you, it's high time I returned to the real world.’
He paused on his way to the door, smiling.
‘Besides, without my castaway life on Gullholm will lose its charm.’
Leonora barely heard him, suddenly stricken with dread at the thought of long night hours ahead alone.
After a pause she said in a stifled voice, ‘Must you go back to your room?
Couldn't you stay with me tonight?
Please?’
Penry's face darkened.
‘No, Leonora.
We've been through this once.
You know perfectly well I can't.
You'll be fine now.
You've slain the dragons.
They can't hurt you any more.’
He turned, their eyes met and held for a long, tense moment, then suddenly Penry flung away, so precipitate in his hurry to leave that he forgot to duck.
Leonora flinched as his head cracked painfully against the lintel.
She leapt out of bed as he rubbed his head, cursing.
She caught him by the hand.
‘Does it hurt?’
‘Of course it bloody well hurts!’
Penry glared down at her, trying to yank his hand away, but Leonora hung on to it in desperation.
‘Please stay.
Please .
Penry, listen to me.
I want you to make love to me.
I need you to!’
Colour flared in her cheeks as she met his blazing eyes head on.
‘You don't know what you're saying,’ he said through clenched teeth.
‘On the contrary.
I know exactly what I'm saying.
Look on it from a medical angle if you like, as a cure for an ailment.’
She moved closer.
‘Penry, don't you understand?
What I saw that morning could spoil me for a sexual relationship forever.
I need another picture in place of it.
If you make love to me I'll have something to look back on with pleasure and gratitude for the rest of my life.’
‘That's blackmail!’ he said harshly.
‘No — just a cry for help.’
Leonora flushed painfully.
‘Unless the last time put you off completely, of course.’
He stood very still.
‘In as much as I cringe at the thought of making you sick a second time, yes.
It does.
I may be a doctor, but I'm also a man with the usual vanity.
I won't deny I find you damn near irresistible when you plead like that, but I don't think my ego could take a repeat of last time.’
Her dark eyes lit with sudden hope.
‘There's no danger of that.
I just want you to blot out everything about that morning.
Just by making love to me.
Is it so much to ask?’
Suddenly she dropped his hand and slid her arms about his waist, knowing she'd won when she felt the thunder of his heart against her cheek as she burrowed her face against his chest.
She wriggled closer, and suddenly Penry's arms crushed her cruelly tight against him.
‘Leonora,’ he said harshly, his voice muffled against her hair, ‘have you any idea what you're doing to me?’
She tipped back her head, exulting as she met the blaze in his eyes.
‘No.
Not really.
I was hoping you'd show me.’
She stood back and peeled off the shirt with a nonchalance only a trifle marred when a button caught in her hair.
The air left Penry's lungs with an audible hiss as he helped disentangle her, his square white teeth biting into his lower lip when she stood naked in front of him, hands behind her back as she eyed him diffidently.
‘I suppose bodies are pretty everyday things to a doctor —’
He caught her in his arms, swinging her high against his chest, his mouth seeking hers.
‘But this isn't every day,’ he muttered against her parted lips.
‘It's night.
And you've won.
I know I'll regret this in the morning, but I want you so badly it's a risk I'll just have to take.
Are you sure about this?’
He set her on her feet suddenly, his eyes like blue flames in his taut face.
‘Because this time,cariad , I warn you, I shan't let you go.’
‘Of course I'm sure,’ she said crossly.
‘Do you want me or not?’
For answer Penry picked her up and tossed her into the bed, stripped off his dressing-gown and turned out the light.
Then his warm, naked body was against hers beneath the covers and this time everything was magically different.
Leonora forgot Guy and everything else in her rediscovered world as Penry's presence transformed the darkness into an exciting, intimate microcosm inhabited by two people oblivious of everything but the sheer physical pleasure of being together.
Leonora, expecting to be taken by storm after she'd flung down the gauntlet, found Penry in no hurry at all.
She felt a warm rush of gratitude for his sensitivity as he kissed and played with her in a teasing, light-hearted way which both excited and disarmed her at first.
But gradually the tempo of Penry's caresses changed, became more urgent.
Skilfully he tuned every nerve in her narrow body to such a concert pitch of response that she began to initiate caresses of her own, delighting in her power as rippling muscles tightened beneath her questing hands.
His mouth crushed and coaxed in turns, his tongue subtle and importunate, before he moved lower, sliding his mouth down her throat until it reached her breasts.
Leonora quivered, her teeth caught in her lower lip as he kissed each breast in turn, his lips lingering over their slight curves.
Then abruptly he took one pointing nipple between his lips, pulling on it, and she gasped as a streak of fire ran through her, and his hands grew urgent, the thrusting caresses of his long fingers so expert that fulfilment soon came flooding in shock-waves which surged through her entire body.
Leonora lay gasping, arms outflung, eyes closed, her hair a tangled mass of damp curls against the pillow.
Penry reached over her to turn on the lamp, and she opened her eyes to find him looking down into her face, a triumphant, indulgent smile curving his mouth as he slid his arms around her, throwing one long leg over hers in careless intimacy.
Colour rushed into her face and she moved restlessly, her eyes sliding away from the gleam in his.
‘What — what happens now?’
‘What would you like to happen?’
‘I don't know.
But surely what — what just happened to me couldn't have done much for you, could it?’
He laughed softly.
‘On the contrary, my lovely, it did a great deal for me.
Would you care to find out just how much?’
He slid her hand lower until it rested on the irrefutable proof of his desire for her.
Leonora blinked, her hand closing over him involuntarily, and she smiled in triumph as he groaned, his eyes dilating as they stared down into hers.
‘How do you feel?’ he asked raggedly, astonishing her.
‘You know exactly how I feel!’
Penry bent his head and kissed her deeply, and Leonora slid her arms round his neck, responding with a fervour which answered his question without words.
A long time later he raised his head and said huskily, ‘Are you sure?’
‘Yes.
Oh, yes — now.
Please !’
Yet even now he took his time to stroke and caress her until she was drugged and dazed with longing.
He parted her knees, bending his dark head to kiss both in turn, sliding his mouth in a series of kisses along each smooth inner thigh until Leonora began to plead hoarsely.
At last, slowly, victoriously, his eyes never leaving hers, he granted her wish.
Leonora clenched her teeth for an instant as her body yielded to his with a fleeting moment of pain, then she relaxed as they lay still for an instant in the very eye of the storm.
‘Did I hurt you much?’ he said against her lips.
‘Not much.
And not now, which is strange.
Why aren't you crushing the life out of me?’
‘Because I'm very, very clever.’
‘And practised!’
‘Not lately.’
‘I'd never have known.’
‘It's like riding a bike — you never forget.’
‘I can ride a bike.
But I've never done this before.’
‘Ah,cariad , I know, I know!
Let me teach you how it's done.’
And he began to move, slowly at first, his forbearance rewarded by the wonder in her eyes as they stared, delighted, into his.
With every move she gave a little gasp, as her body, previous experience or not, proved an apt pupil.
Without consulting her it began to move faster, inciting her lover to a rhythm which he responded to triumphantly, accelerating in time with their heartbeats, taking her with him towards the culmination she'd been given a foretaste of, which paled in comparison to the flooding rapture which overtook her seconds before Penry gasped, stiffened, then crushed her in his arms as their breathing slowed in the shared diminuendo of the aftermath.
When Leonora opened her eyes again it was morning and she was alone.
She stretched experimentally, wincing as various parts of her ached in a way which brought the experiences of the night flooding back in full force.
Heat swept over her as she remembered every little detail of Penry's lovemaking, and she closed her eyes, breathless at the memory.
But at last, as a tongue probed an aching tooth, she forced herself to think back to the scene at Brynteg, and found the exercise distasteful and painful, but reassuring.
It was possible to think of the episode in a detached sort of way, she found with relief, as though it had happened in another time and place to someone else.
From now on, she realised, her life would be forever divided into two separate halves — the time before her loss of memory and whatever was to come after recovering it.
This interlude with Penry Vaughan on Gullholm would be something to remember with gratitude as a sort of enchanted no man's land in between.
At the thought of Penry she stretched, cat-like, her mouth curving in a dreamy smile.
As an experience to blot out the horror of her discovery on Brynteg it had been blissfully successful.
Penry's wonderful, gratifying desire for her had been a healing fire which had cured her forever of the wounds dealt by Guy.
Then she shivered, as though someone had walked over her grave.
Ah, but who, she asked herself with sudden foreboding, is going to cure you of Penry Meredith Vaughan?
Leonora got up quickly, and took a speedy bath, then dressed at top speed in jeans and jersey, securing the red scarf at her throat with the silver brooch.
As she brushed her hair she examined her face in the mirror, amazed when no trace of the experience of the night showed on it.
She turned away to strip the rumpled bed, then straightened the room and packed her few belongings in her bag, feeling more reluctant by the minute to face Penry in the cold light of day.
At last, unable to delay confrontation any longer , she went downstairs to find Penry emerging from the study as she reached the kitchen.
‘Good morning,’ he said, no trace of a smile on his face.
‘I've informed the police about your recovery.’
‘Thank you.’
Leonora filled the kettle, utterly shattered to find no trace of last night's lover in the Penry Vaughan of this morning.
‘I'd forgotten that.
Shouldn't I be compensating someone for the loss of the Seren ?’
‘If you want the episode kept quiet I don't advise it.
The owners will claim on the insurance.’
Leonora began frying bacon and eggs, slicing bread for toast, spooning coffee in the pot to cover her secret dismay.
‘What will you do with the food in the fridge?’ she asked, not looking at him.
‘Bryn Pritchard can collect it after I leave the keys with him.’
Penry leaned against the counter, his eyes on her face.
‘How are you this morning, Leonora?’
‘Fine,’ she said brightly, flipping the eggs over.
‘It feels rather strange now I've got my other world back again, I admit.
But it's good to be all in one piece again.’
‘Not quite,’ he said deliberately, and caught her chin in his hand so she was forced to look at him.
‘Memory or no memory, I wouldn't describe you as all in one piece, exactly, after last night.’
Leonora flushed scarlet as she jerked her head away.
‘If I'm not it was entirely my own idea, so I can hardly complain.’
She handed him a plate.
‘Where do you want to eat this?
Here or in the other room?’
Penry looked at the food without enthusiasm.
‘I don't know that I want it anywhere.’
‘Then throw it in the bin,’ said Leonora, incensed.
‘All right, all right , I'll eat it.’
He put the plate down on the counter in front of him then lifted her on to a stool.
‘How about eating something yourself while we talk?’
‘Talk?’
She eyed him askance as she buttered a slice of toast.
Penry ate some of the meal in thoughtful silence, then laid down his fork.
‘We need to talk, Leonora.
After last night —’
‘Let's forget last night.’
‘How can we?’
His eyebrows shot together in a black bar.
‘It may be something you can dismiss easily.
I can't.’
Leonora abandoned any pretence of eating.
‘Look, Penry.
Last night I asked — begged — you to make love to me.
You supplied a deep-seated need in me to blot out what I'd seen.
You showed me how beautiful love between a man and woman can be, and afterwards I felt healed and whole and normal again.’
Penry refilled their cups with a steady hand.
‘Which puts me on a par with a dose of medicine.
Thank you.’
‘You know that's not what I meant,’ she said impatiently.
‘What I'm trying to say is how grateful I am, and how miraculous it was, but that's it.
I'm off your hands.
You needn't feel responsible for me from now on in the slightest.’
‘How extraordinarily civil of you,’ he said cuttingly, ‘but aren't you missing a rather important point?’
She frowned.
‘What point?’
‘Think, Leonora!
Surely you don't need a lecture on the birds and bees?’
She stared at him for a moment, then flushed.
‘Oh.
I never thought —’
‘I did — fleetingly.’
His jaw set.
‘But by then it was too late.
The basic urge for gratification blotted everything else from my mind.’
‘Gratification!’
Leonora eyed him with dislike as she slid from the stool and began clearing away.
‘What a ghastly word.’
‘What else would you call it?’ he demanded.
‘A service?
You provided it.
I'm grateful.
Now forget about it.
It's entirely my own fault if there are consequences.’
Penry grabbed her by the shoulders and turned her to face him.
‘Forget about it?
What kind of monster do you think I am?’
‘I don't think you're a monster at all.’
She looked up at him defiantly.
‘But one way and another I've been quite enough trouble to you already.
If there should be a — a problem, I'll deal with it myself.’
Penry's fingers bit into her flesh cruelly for a moment, then his face drained of expression as he released her.
‘As you wish.’
Leonora stared after him, stricken, as he went upstairs to pack his belongings.
Her fine words had been so much whistling in the dark.
She had fully expected Penry to dismiss them as nonsense, and felt so shattered that he hadn't that it took her longer than usual to clear away and leave the kitchen immaculate.
While Penry was outside seeing to the generator she fetched her belongings, then collected the knitting, stuffing it inside her bag guiltily.
‘Are you ready?’ asked Penry a little later.
‘Yes.’
She took a last look round the room which had been her world, then hurried quickly out of the house.
Their progress down to the Angharad was slow.
There was a fair wind spattering them with rain as they made their descent to the beach.
As they reached the little anchorage she looked at the sea with resignation.
It would be a rough crossing.
Once the luggage was stowed away on board Penry lifted her on the deck of the Angharad and cast off.
At once the crabber began to bounce about on the waves, as though the Angharad was dancing a jig over the water in her pleasure at taking a trip.
Leonora watched the grey smudge of shoreline growing closer, knowing that once she was there this part of her life would be over, and she might never see Penry Vaughan again.
Her eyes flew to him, trying to imprint his tall, commanding figure on her memory as he stood with legs braced, his hands on the wheel.
‘Are you frightened?’ he asked.
‘No need to be — it's just a stiffish breeze.’
He extended an arm.
‘Come here.’
Leonora, depressed rather than frightened, moved to the shelter of his arms for the remainder of the journey.
It was a bitter-sweet experience.
Through the layers of their clothing she could feel Penry's heart beating steadily against her back, and dreaded the moment of parting which would come all too soon when they reached journey's end in Chastlecombe.
‘You're very quiet,’ he said into the back of her neck.
She kept her eyes on the heaving sea.
‘I was busy composing a graceful speech of thanks for all you've done for me.’
‘Unnecessary.
You typed the articles, relieved me of the household chores and fed me royally.
The debt is on my side.’
She felt glad her face was hidden from him.
‘Ah, but you saved my life, remember!’
He moved closer as Brides Haven came into focus in the distance.
‘In some cultures that has great significance.
Is it the Chinese who would now consider you my responsibility?’
‘It's a good thing we're British, then,’ she said lightly, and ducked from under his arm.
‘We're nearly there.’
The process of visiting Bryn Pritchard to leave keys and instructions took longer than anticipated, since Mrs Pritchard insisted on making coffee and feeding them newly baked scones before they went on their way.
‘Is your sister expecting you at a specific time?’ asked Penry when they were on the way to Haverfordwest at last.
‘I think I said I'd be back this evening some time.
Could I ring her en route to say I'm on my way?’
‘Of course.
We'll stop off somewhere for lunch.’
Leonora thanked him quietly, not quite sure how she felt about this idea.
Half of her wanted to get the journey and the parting over, to make a quick, clean break.
But the other half wanted the day to go on forever, for Penry to drive at a snail's pace on the way back to prolong their time together to the last possible minute.
as if he'd read her mind Penry took a cross-country route instead of the motorway, driving her through Carmarthen and Llandeilo, then on past Brecon to head for Leominster.
When he turned into the car park of an attractive roadside pub Leonora went off to ring her sister while Penry gave their orders.
‘Is all well?’ he asked when she joined him at a small table in a corner of the crowded bar.
Leonora pulled a face.
‘Elise was delighted I rang, but gave me a terrible dressing down for not ringing before or sending a postcard.
I told her there were extenuating circumstances and would tell all when I got home.’
She gulped down some orange juice hastily.
‘What's the matter, Leonora?’ asked Penry, his voice so unusually gentle that it brought a sheen of tears to her eyes.
‘It suddenly struck me how difficult it's going to be to explain everything to Elise.’
‘Surely she'll understand?’
‘Of course she will.
I just loathe the thought of telling my nasty little tale a second time.’
‘It probably won't be as bad as you think,’ said Penry briskly, and launched into a description of the house he'd bought on the banks of the River Wye near Builth Wells.
Leonora listened wistfully as she toyed with her sandwich, thinking it sounded idyllic, and a great waste for one man on his own.
She said appropriate things in the right places, and hardly knew whether she was glad or sorry when it was time to go.
After a leisurely drive through the spring sunshine they arrived in the broad main street of Chastlecombe just after four.
Penry parked the Range Rover in the open space behind the arches of the ancient market hall, then reached over into the back for Leonora's bag.
She smiled at him brightly.
‘Thank you for the lift.
I'll be fine now.
Don't get out.’
Penry's brows drew together.
‘Don't be silly.
I'll see you home,’ he said shortly and got out of the car, striding round to lift her down.
Leonora's heart sank, but she knew better by this time than to argue with Penry Vaughan.
She led the way along the pavement of the wide main street typical of most Cotswold towns, smiling at familiar faces as they passed.
The new arcade looked very attractive in the spring sunshine.
Tubs of daffodils stood outside every shop, except for Fox's Lair, where a pair of bay trees flourished in ceramic pots.
‘We live in a flat over the shop,’ said Leonora, her feet dragging now they were nearly there.
‘Come on,’ said Penry firmly.
‘Let's get it over with.’
And right on cue there was Elise at the door of the shop, elegant as always in slim skirt and silk shirt, her face alight with welcome which changed quickly to surprise as she realised the man with her sister was a stranger.
‘Hello, love,’ said Leonora, hugging her.
‘This is Dr Penry Vaughan.
He was kind enough to give me a lift home.’
Penry held out his hand, smiling courteously.
‘How do you do, Miss Fox?
Could you possibly spare me a few moments in private?
Leonora's had rather a disturbing adventure.
Don't be alarmed.
I just want to make certain she tells you exactly what happened.’
CHAPTER TEN
Elise Fox was a woman who prided herself on her ability to deal with crisis, but at eleven o'clock that Saturday night she still lay limp on the sofa in the flat, looking utterly shattered when her young sister came in from the kitchen with yet another pot of strong black coffee.
‘I'm sorry, Elise,’ said Leonora for the hundredth time.
‘None of it would have happened if I hadn't gone chasing after Guy.’
‘You mean if Guy hadn't come chasing after you!’ said Elise hotly.
‘I was against it from the first.
I couldn't put my finger on what it was I disliked about him, yet now it seems plain as the nose on your face.
What a ghastly thing to happen to you.
I could kill him!’
‘Penry felt like that, too.’
Elise looked across at her searchingly.
‘Ah, yes.
The impressive Dr Vaughan.
Full marks to him, anyway.’
Her eyes narrowed.
‘Was I imagining things, or was there a definite hint of electricity in the air between you and the dashing doctor?’
‘Certainly not.’
‘Liar!’
Leonora shook back her hair, looking fierce.
‘If you don't mind I'd like to drop the subject now.
As far as I'm concerned I'd like to forget that the last couple of weeks ever happened.’
Elise jumped up, looking contrite.
‘Poor darling, you've had such a time and I keep rabbiting on and on about it.
I'm sorry.
I should be the one dispensing coffee and condolences, not you.’
Glad to be alone in her familiar little room later, Leonora forced herself to face the indigestible truth.
Forgetting Guy Ferris would be child's play compared to her other problem.
Two weeks ago she had never heard of Penry Meredith Vaughan.
Now she couldn't imagine life without him.
The conclusion kept her tossing and turning in despair for hours, the sound of traffic in the High Street a poor substitute for the lulling boom of the sea round Gullholm.
She had never imagined she would miss Penry so much.
The memory of their night together haunted her so relentlessly that it was daylight before she fell into an uneasy, exhausted sleep.
Leonora found the next day very long.
Normally she loved Sundays.
In the summer it was her sailing day, but in the winter she spent it at home, cooking lunch, reading the papers, and generally lazing around.
Sometimes Elise was at home all day, sometimes not.
This particular Sunday she had an invitation to a dinner party, and was all for cancelling, but Leonora wouldn't hear of it.
‘I ruined your Saturday night, so please go off and enjoy yourself.
I'll be fine.
Besides, Priscilla's probably got some man lined up for you as dinner partner.’
Leonora summoned up a grin.
‘Think of her anguish if you upset her seating plan!’
Secretly Leonora was relieved to be on her own.
Overnight the full force of what might have happened had finally come home to Elise, and she'd spent most of the day clucking round her young sister like a hen with one chick.
Leonora was heartily glad to wave her off to her party.
But once she was alone with her knitting depression crept up on Leonora like an incoming tide.
Only a short time before she'd had Penry for company while she knitted.
Now her sole companion was the television, which was intrusive after two weeks without it.
When the telephone rang Leonora got up listlessly, so certain it would be one of Elise's friends that she slid down on the floor in a heap, heart thumping, at the sound of Penry's voice.
‘Leonora?
Are you there?’
‘Yes.
I'm here.’
She breathed in deeply.
‘Did you get home safely?’
‘I did.
How are you today?’
‘I'm fine.’
‘Are you?
Honestly?’
There was silence for a moment, then he said huskily, ‘Leonora — look, there's no easy way to say this, but I hope you're not full of some quixotic notion about keeping it from me if you find out you're pregnant.’
Leonora's hackles rose.
‘Why?
So you can arrange for an abortion as soon as possible?’ she blurted.
‘It must be easy enough for someone like you.’
She heard a sharp intake of breath, then an ear-splitting crack as Penry Vaughan slammed down his receiver without another word.
Leonora had a good cry, made herself some tea, then settled down to knit furiously.
Before long the sweater was finished and the various parts stitched together with her usual professional finish, ready to post off to Penry next day to make certain he had a keepsake to remind him of his castaway.
The following evening Penry rang again, but this time he spoke to Elise, who was rather mystified when he politely declined to speak to Leonora.
‘He just asked how you were, made me promise to keep an eye on you, then rang off,’ she said, frowning.
‘He rang last night.
I was a teensy bit rude,’ said Leonora, trying to look unconcerned.
‘Oh, I see.’
Elise eyed her thoughtfully.
‘Never mind.
Perhaps he'll look on that amazing jersey you sent off as an olive branch.’
Instead of ringing again Penry sent Leonora a very formal letter of thanks for the sweater.
The sight of his indecipherable scrawl gave her a sharp pang of nostalgia for the strange, lost time spent on his island, underlining her dissatisfaction with life in Chastlecombe very heavily now her adventure was over.
When Leonora learned there would be no sequel to her adventure after all, she was totally unprepared for the desolation which swamped her.
She hid it away behind a bright, brittle insouciance which plainly worried Elise to death, but for several nights wept silently into her pillow, utterly shattered to find she'd wanted Penry's child quite desperately without even realising it.
Now there would be no reason for further contact between them of any kind, a prospect which painted dark shadows beneath Leonora's eyes, and bleached the colour from her face to the point where Elise began muttering darkly about anaemia.
Leonora pooh-poohed this.
Her problem had been amnesia, not anaemia, she told Elise flippantly.
Nevertheless she agreed to the luxury of a lie-in the following Sunday morning, even allowing her sister to fuss over her a little.
‘I should stay there for a while,’ said Elise, when she brought in a breakfast tray.
‘You look like something the cat's dragged in.’
But after an hour Leonora grew bored and irritable with herself and went off to have a bath.
Afterwards she spent more time than usual on her appearance, determined that from now on she would stop behaving like some Victorian miss with the vapours.
She even put on sheer stockings and a brief pleated skirt instead of her usual jeans, then, as final proof of her new outlook on life, she put on the new pink sweater and danced out into the sitting-room, calling.
‘How do I look —’ She stopped dead, her heart flipping over under the sweater as Penry Vaughan leapt to his feet at the sight of her, the height and breadth of him overpowering the entire room.
‘Good enough to eat,cariad !’
He held out his hand, and Leonora took it, dumbfounded.
‘Well?’ he demanded, ‘aren't you even going to say hello?’
She pulled herself together.
‘Hello, indeed.
What a surprise.
Where's Elise?’
‘She had to go out for a moment.’
Storing up a ticking-off for her sister, Leonora managed a rather stiff smile to hide the joy bubbling inside her.
‘Do sit down.’
Incensed at being taken by surprise despite her pleasure at seeing him, Leonora was somewhat mollified to see that Penry was wearing the sweater she'd knitted.
The complex, serpentine weaving of colours emphasised his impressive shoulders, and in faded old Levis and scuffed desert boots he looked so wonderful as he lounged on the sofa that she could have thrown herself in his arms there and then.
Instead she blurted the first thing that came into her head.
‘You've had a wasted journey.
I'm not pregnant after all.’
He nodded.
‘I see.
I wondered.’
‘About what?’
‘Elise rang me to say you were crying your eyes out every night.’
Leonora eyed him in horror.
‘She heard me?’
‘Yes.’
Penry leaned forward peremptorily.
‘And I want to know why you cried, please.’
Her eyes flickered.
‘You're a doctor.
You know perfectly well that women get depressed at — at certain times.
I'm no exception.’
‘Is that the real reason?’
His eyes held hers inexorably.
‘Or is it just possible you wanted to be pregnant?’
But Leonora had herself well in hand by this time.
She gave him a scornful little smile.
‘Oh, come on — I'm not a complete idiot!’
He looked unconvinced.
‘No, just unhappy.
Elise can't have been mistaken about the tears.’
‘I can't say I care for the idea of you two discussing me behind my back, but if you must know I was suffering from reaction,’ said Leonora with dignity.
‘After my recent adventures it's not really surprising, is it?’
Penry's eyes held a sceptical gleam.
‘All right, Leonora, if that's the way you want it.
Let's talk about why I'm here instead.’
He paused deliberately.
‘To come straight to the point, I drove down here to make a suggestion.
Are you prepared to listen?’
‘Since you came so far I can hardly say no.’
‘Very well, then.
I propose we carry on where we left off, unless you never want to lay eyes on me again, of course.’
Leonora sat very still, her eyes locked with his.
‘I'm — sorry —what did you say?’
‘You know exactly what I said.
Now that the spectre of pregnancy is out of the way, is there any reason why we can't just continue with the relationship begun on Gullholm?’
She stared at him uncertainly.
‘Are you serious?’
‘Why not?’
Penry leaned forward to take her hands.
‘I'm not asking to be your lover, Leonora.
Yet.
Ravishing experience though that was, we came to it too precipitately, and for all the wrong reasons.
But is there any reason why we can't be friends?’
He smiled, a gleam in his eyes she recognised with a sharp pang.
‘I've missed my castaway rather a lot, you know.’
She frowned.
‘You were pretty fed up with me the other night — on the phone.’
‘Are you surprised?
It was a bloody awful thing to say.
I thought you knew me better than that.’
She shrugged.
‘My recent brush with the seamier side of life has made me cynical.
Tell me,’ she added, determined to put things straight between them, ‘purely as a matter of interest, what would you have done if I had been pregnant?’
‘I'd have asked you to marry me.’
He raised an eyebrow.
‘Old-fashioned, I suppose, but none of the other options seemed remotely possible for you — or for me.’
Leonora withdrew her hands and got up.
‘I see.’
She looked down at him consideringly for some time.
At last she nodded.
‘All right.
In that case I don't see why not.’
Penry rose slowly, his eyes narrowed.
‘Why do I have the feeling I've passed some kind of test?’
‘Because you have.’
She smiled at him, feeling very much better.
‘I wonder what's happened to Elise.’
‘She said something about tidying the shop.’
‘Poor darling, I'd better go and put her out of her misery.’
Penry reached for her, barring her way to the door.
‘Wait a moment.
Convince me that all's well between us now — one friendly little kiss would do.’
Leonora hesitated, then held up her mouth.
At the first touch of his lips she trembled, and Penry took her in his arms, his kiss suddenly fierce until a tactful little cough from the doorway brought an untimely end to the embrace.
‘Can I come in now?’ asked Elise apologetically.
‘I can't think of another thing to do down there.’
Penry relinquished Leonora without embarrassment, smiling at the relief on Elise's face.
‘I gather diplomatic relations have now been resumed,’ she remarked with satisfaction.
‘I suppose they have.’
Leonora smiled happily at Penry.
‘Are you in a hurry to be off, or would you like some lunch?’
That Sunday marked the beginning of a new phase in Leonora's life.
The mere fact that Penry Vaughan wished to go on seeing her, however few and far between their meetings, did wonders for her self-esteem.
It also compensated very thoroughly for the disaster of her relationship with Guy, who received short shrift when he telephoned on his return to London from Wales.
She made no mention of her disastrous trip to Brynteg, told him she'd met someone else, and wished him good luck with deliberate finality when she said goodbye.
At first Leonora wasn't sure precisely what Penry had in mind regarding their relationship, and lived in a state of tension between his phone calls.
But after a while he augmented the phone calls with occasional visits, and as the summer wore on came to see her with increasing regularity, eventually as often as his professional commitments allowed.
On free weekends he drove to Chastlecombe on a Saturday afternoon, took Leonora out for a meal somewhere, stayed the night at the Kings Arms in the town, and spent most of Sunday with Leonora before driving home to face his Monday morning clinic next day.
To her delight he even took to discussing his work with her, and Leonora listened, rapt, utterly fascinated by glimpses of the other, professional Penry Vaughan she secretly found so impressive.
Their relationship was an oddly comfortable one, with nothing more demonstrative about it than a swift goodnight kiss, or hands joined on a walk in the beautiful countryside around Chastlecombe.
At first Leonora felt strangely happy.
It was enough for a while just to have this clever, charming man as a friend, flattering to have him travel so far when he could just for the pleasure of her company.
As the weeks passed she finally began to believe that Penry Vaughan meant what he said, that their relationship was important enough to him to nurture with delicacy and care.
But after a while the chaste quality of their relationship grew irksome.
Leonora dreamed of the fierce rapture they'd shared on the island and began to long for Penry to want her violently, to stop treating her like a younger sister, and sometimes after he'd gone she'd stare in the mirror in discontent, wishing she were tall, or voluptuous, or blonde.
Anything other than dark-eyed and boyishly slender.
‘What's up?’ asked Elise one night, as Leonora was trying to find some new, madly attractive way to arrange her hair.
‘Mirror, mirror, on the wall, who's the fairest one of all, and so on?’
Leonora turned away, sighing, to slump down on the side of her bed.
‘No need to ask that,’ she said despondently.
‘You are, Elise Fox.’
Elise gave her a hug.
‘Darling, what nonsense!’
She grinned mischievously.
‘It's not me Penry Vaughan drives all this way to see, remember.’
Leonora refused to be consoled.
‘Possibly not.
Which doesn't stop me wishing I were less unspectacular.’
‘The ex-Mrs Vaughan being very spectacular, I take it.’
‘Very, from what little he's said about her.
So are his sisters.
I saw photographs of them.’
‘Perhaps it's the contrast Penry finds so appealing —’
‘Thank you very much!’
‘You know what I mean!’ said Elise impatiently.
‘Perhaps Dr Penry Vaughan is surfeited with so much glamour and finds your subtler style more to his taste.’
Leonora gave her sister a scornful look.
‘Then why doesn't he —’ She stopped dead, blushing to the roots of her hair.
‘Ah!’
Elise nodded sagaciously.
‘I see.
Dr Vaughan is a shade too platonic for your taste, little sister!’
Leonora shied a pillow at her sister, her face scarlet as she remembered how she'd once pleaded with Penry to make love to her.
Next time, she vowed secretly, Penry Vaughan would do the begging.
If there was a next time.
Penry did use persuasion on Leonora next time they met, but it had nothing to do with becoming her lover.
They had just returned to the flat after a long, lazy picnic in the September sunshine, to find Elise out.
A note left taped to the fridge informed Leonora that her sister would be back in time for supper.
‘Elise goes out a lot on Sundays,’ remarked Penry.
‘I hope we're not driving her out.’
‘No, of course not.
It's the only regular free day she has to visit friends.
When you're not here I go sailing on Sundays, remember.’
He settled himself on the sofa as he always did, looking fit and rested as he eyed her speculatively.
The dark, brooding look about him, so daunting at their first meeting, was missing these days, replaced by a zest and animation she knew must have been the norm for Penry Vaughan before his marriage — or before his divorce, she corrected herself.
It was the parting from his wife, unquestionably, which had etched the lines of disillusion on his handsome face.
‘Why are you looking at me like that?’ asked Leonora.
Penry patted the cushion beside him.
‘Come and sit beside me,cariad , and I'll tell you.’
Leonora needed no second bidding.
These days she was glad of any invitation to proximity, and curled up beside him so promptly that he gave her an amused sidelong glance as he took her hand in his.
‘I was just thinking what guts you had to start sailing again after what happened on Brynteg,’ he said, surprising her.
Brynteg was a subject they never discussed.
She nodded soberly.
‘The first time afterwards was terrifying.
When the wind got up, Julian Parker had to get the Enterprise back almost single-handed I was so rigid with fear.’
Penry's eyes narrowed.
‘Who the devil's Julian Parker?’
Leonora, deeply pleased at his tone, shrugged airily.
‘Just a friend.
He crews for me — or I crew for him.
But we haven't raced competitively this season because I'm not there regularly enough.’
‘Is this where I make the noble suggestion of keeping away at weekends to leave you free to sail as much as you want?’ he demanded.
‘If you like,’ she said cheerfully.
‘Are you going to?’
‘No, Leonora.
I am not.’
He paused, then slid his free arm round her shoulders.
‘Unless,’ he said silkily, ‘you specifically request me to do so, of course.’
‘The season's almost over now,’ she said obliquely, not looking at him, and suddenly the arm descended to pull her against him.
Penry released her hand to turn her face up to his.
‘I take it that means you're still agreeable to my company when I can make it?’
Leonora longed for his company in much larger doses than he was able to spare, but had no intention of telling him so.
She nodded slightly, and he bent his head to give her a kiss which was meant to be fleeting, but which went on and on until they were breathless and shaken when he put her away from him at last.
‘Why did you stop?’ she whispered.
Penry breathed in deeply.
‘You know why!’
He smiled at her crookedly, changing the subject with determination.
‘Leonora, am I allowed to ask how you feel these days about the ambivalent Mr Ferris?
Any hang-ups, or regrets?’
Leonora swung her feet to the ground, disinclined to discuss Guy Ferris.
‘No, none.’
He put out a hand to smooth her untidy hair.
‘Has he been in touch?’
‘Yes.’
Leonora sat very still, every nerve-end alight at his touch.
‘Did you tell him about me?’ demanded Penry.
‘No,’ lied Leonora shamelessly.
‘Should I have?’
Penry frowned, then kissed her again, hard, but Leonora dodged away, scowling.
‘What's the matter?’ he demanded.
‘I've been so unnaturally virtuous lately that you can surely grant me two kisses in one day!’
‘I would appreciate it more if this one hadn't been prompted by resentment of another man.’
‘If you can call Ferris a man!’
Leonora got to her feet, suddenly and unreasonably furious.
She folded her arms across her chest, careless of her untidy hair and sunburned, shiny face.
‘I suppose that what you're really saying is that Guy was attracted to me because he could pretend I was a boy!’
‘I'm saying nothing of the kind,’ snapped Penry, leaping to his feet.
Refusing to be intimidated by the sheer size of him, Leonora glared up into his face.
‘Except for that one, never-referred-to night on your island, Dr Vaughan, you're no different.
I might just as well be a boy for all the interest you take in me as — as a woman!’
Penry glared at her in sudden fury.
‘What the hell do you mean?
Are you inferring that my sexual preferences have any remote resemblance to your fancy photographer's?’
‘I could be forgiven for thinking so lately,’ Leonora muttered unwisely, then backed away in a hurry from the blaze in his eyes.
‘Don't be nervous,’ said Penry with dangerous calm.
‘I shan't hit you.’
He seized her by the shoulders, his fingers biting into her flesh.
‘But I'd like to put you over my knee and paddle your behind, young lady.
Dammit, Leonora, I thought you understood I was bending over backwards not to rush you.’
Leonora shrugged off his hands with sudden violence.
‘Did you have to take a whole summer?’ she demanded angrily.
‘All you've done, Dr Vaughan, should you be interested, is wreck my self-confidence and give me an inferiority complex about my looks.’
Penry stared at her in silence, visibly pulling himself together.
‘How did I manage that?’ he asked at last, in a flat, uninflected tone very different from the passionate outburst of a moment earlier.
Leonora let out an unsteady, shuddering sigh.
‘It doesn't matter,’ she muttered, and turned away, but Penry seized her by the waist and turned her to face him.
‘Of course it matters!’
He shook her slightly.
‘Are you saying that all my bloody unnatural restraint has achieved is to convince you I don't find you attractive?’
She nodded.
‘All the women you know are so good-looking.
I assumed I was just too ordinary to interest you — in that way.’
‘Then why the hell do you think I keep coming to see you?’
Penry pulled her down on the sofa forcibly.
‘Now sit still, shut up, and listen!
Before I got married I led a pretty lively existence where women were concerned, and enjoyed it to the full.
I married Melanie, if I'm honest, because she was the only one who'd held out for a wedding-ring.’
‘Why are you telling me all this?’ asked Leonora, trying to move away.
‘Because we need to clear the air, I think, if we're to go on seeing each other.’
His eyes narrowed with sudden hostility.
‘Unless, of course, you don't want that.’
Leonora shook her head, flushing.
‘You know very well that I do.
Very much.’
‘I'm relieved to hear it.
And I took you in my confidence — something, incidentally, I don't do lightly — because I couldn't face another relationship based on misunderstanding.
Melanie was like an empty chocolate-box, tempting on the outside, nothing inside — to be blunt, frigid.
Yet she was determined to marry me.
Beats me why!’
‘It's perfectly obvious why!’ said Leonora, astonished.
Penry smiled slowly, his eyes lighting up with the gleam she found so irresistible.
‘Thank you,cariad .
You're very good for my ego.’
But Leonora was still thinking over what he'd said.
‘Penry,’ she said, frowning, ‘are you saying you — well, that you wouldn't want a relationship with me if I were frigid, like Melanie?’
Penry shook his head.
‘No.
I'm not saying that at all.
I married Melanie in a rush, for reasons which embarrass me to remember.
With you I just wanted to savour the initial stages, step by step, to enjoy just being with you, whatever we were doing Besides,’ he added very softly, his fingers stroking the back of her hand, ‘you're not frigid, my lovely.
I know that beyond all doubt.’
‘So you're not sorry you made love to me that night?’
‘How could I be?
It was a uniquely beautiful experience — for me at least, if not you.’
A weight rolled off Leonora's shoulders.
‘It was for me, too.
I'll always be grateful to you for that night.’
He picked up her hand and kissed it, then replaced it on her bare brown knee.
‘I don't need gratitude for something which gave me such infinite pleasure.
On the other hand, if you really feel indebted, Miss Fox, there is a small favour you could do for me in return.’
‘Oh, yes?’
Leonora eyed him warily.
‘What kind of favour?’
‘I've been invited to a party next weekend.
Will you go with me?’
‘Where?’
‘That's the snag.’
Penry smiled wryly.
‘The party's in London.
It's to celebrate my sister Clem's tenth wedding anniversary — and my family will be there en masse , including my mother, who commands my presence.’
Leonora eyed him in alarm.
‘And you want me to go with you?
No way!’
He smiled coaxingly.
‘Please don't say no,cariad .
I told my mother I was bringing you.
Otherwise one of my sisters will have some unattached female ready to pounce on me.
I need you for protection!’
She thought it over uneasily.
‘Won't they mind if you bring a stranger to a family party?’
‘Not in the least.
Nick and Clem will have invited half the world and his wife, anyway.
Besides,’ added Penry with cunning strategy, ‘if you turn me down we shan't see each other for quite a while.
I'm tied up at the hospital the weekend after.’
Leonora's heart sank at the prospect of a whole fortnight without him, and as if scenting victory Penry moved closer, his long forefinger caressing her drooping lower lip.
‘Is there no way I can persuade you?’ he whispered.
Leonora nodded, her eyes bright with mischief.
Very deliberately she closed her teeth gently on his fingertip, her eyes holding his, and with a smothered sound Penry jerked his hand away and seized her in his arms, his kiss igniting a response which set them both alight.
Leonora shivered with pleasure as Penry's long fingers caressed the length of brown thigh below her brief denim shorts.
Her mouth parting ardently beneath his, she began to unbutton his shirt with unsteady fingers, then slithered lower to kiss his bare brown chest, exulting in the thunder of his heart for a moment before she found herself flat on the sofa as Penry slid her jersey over her head, then dispensed with the scrap of satin beneath.
His dark hair brushing her skin, he bent his mouth to each breast in turn, paying such delicately agonising attention to each one that Leonora gasped and thrust her hips hard against him.
With a groan Pentry thrust her away then crushed her against his chest, his cheek on her hair.
‘This is torture!’ he said hoarsely.
She nodded violently, and turned up her face, her eyes sloe-black in her flushed brown face.
‘But you're not going to make love to me.’
He let out an unsteady breath, his blue eyes almost as dark as hers.
‘No.
You must know how much I want to make love to you, Leonora, but not here, not like this.
I want much, much more than a few snatched moments.
Next time we make love I want it perfect, with all the time in the world for each other.
Can you understand that,cariad ?’
Leonora drew in a deep, unsteady breath and nodded.
‘Yes.’
She glanced at the clock and leapt to her feet, her colour deepening at the look in Penry's eyes as she pulled her jersey over her head.
‘Just as well your particular brand of persuasion came to a halt when it did Dr Vaughan.
Elise will be home soon.’
He smiled wryly as he fastened his shirt.
‘I know.
Otherwise…’
He sighed with wry regret as he took her into his arms, tipping her face up to his.
‘Tell me, Miss Fox, was my persuasion powerful enough?
Will you come to Clem's party with me?’
‘Yes.’
She stood on tiptoe to kiss him.
‘Otherwise I'd spend the evening wondering if you were using that particular form of persuasion on someone else.’
‘Would you mind?’
‘You bet I would!’
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Leonora was suffering serious doubts about her sanity by the time the train drew in to Paddington Station the following Saturday evening.
She sighed as she folded Elise's cream linen jacket over her arm before making her way along the compartment.
An evening spent in the bosom of Penry Vaughan's relatives had all the appeal of Daniel's soirée in the lion's den.
Not even the sight of Penry's dark head, clearly visible above the crowds on the platform, had the power to raise her spirits as he forged his way towards her, looking spectacularly attractive in a lightweight grey suit with a white silk shirt striped in Cambridge blue, open at the throat.
‘Hello,cariad !’
He lifted her down from the train, kissed her swiftly, then began to lead her towards the taxi rank.
‘I left the car in Parson's Green and came in by Underground so I could hold your hand all the way back.’
Leonora hung back.
‘Hello, Penry — hold on.
I need to change my clothes first.’
Penry looked at her violet cotton shirt and cream denims in surprise.
‘Aren't you wearing that to the party?’
‘Of course I'm not,’ she snapped.
He eyed her searchingly, then stood still, holding her by the shoulders, oblivious of the crowds which parted to avoid them.
‘What's the matter?
Sorry you came?’
She nodded vigorously, and he grinned.
‘Don't worry, my lovely.
I'll protect you.
Not that you'll need it.
My family are a nice lot by and large.’
‘I'm sure they are.
How much do they know about me?’
‘No details.
Your presence tonight won't cause comment, I promise.’
He kissed the tip of her nose.
‘At one time they'd have thought it odd if I didn't have a girl in tow.
It was different when I was married, of course, but I'm not married any more.’
‘True.
Otherwise my presence wouldn't be necessary!’
‘But, since it's not only necessary, but vital, get a move on,cariad .
If I'm to drive you home afterwards we'll have to leave as soon as we arrive at this rate.’
A few moments later Leonora rejoined Penry, who was prowling around the central bookstall impatiently, looking at his watch.
When she tapped him on the arm he turned swiftly, his eyes suddenly narrowed at the sight of her.
‘Is this all right?’ asked Leonora anxiously.
‘Elise said I couldn't go wrong with a little black dress.’
‘Little's the word,’ he said gruffly, looking her up and down.
‘I don't know that I approve of quite so much black silk leg on view, but otherwise you look wonderful.’
She smiled happily.
‘Why, thank you, Doctor, you say the nicest things.
I wanted to wear my hair up in a knot but Elise said you'd prefer it loose like this.’
‘She's right!’
Penry put his arm round her to shepherd her towards the moving row of taxis.
‘Now get a move on, there's a good girl.’
Leonora felt better once she was in the taxi, particularly since Penry not only held her hand, but kept his arm round her for the entire journey, taking her mind very successfully off the evening ahead by the sheer joy of just being with him after a week apart.
She gazed into his face raptly as he described his clinic the day before at St Mary's and passed on good wishes from Sister Concepta.
‘What's the matter?’ he said at last, as he realised she wasn't paying quite the attention he would have wished.
‘I was just thinking how glad I am to see you,’ she said candidly.
His arm tightened as he bent to kiss her cheek.
‘Why, thank you, Miss Fox.
I'm very happy to hear it.’
The moment they arrived in Parson's Green Penry rushed Leonora to the Range Rover, gave her a moment to fish out a gift-wrapped package from the bag containing her change of clothes, then stowed the latter in the car.
He fairly hauled her along the street afterwards, giving her no time for nerves as they reached a white-painted door with a large brass dragon for a knocker.
Almost at once it swung open to let out a surge of laughter and music as a tall dark man with a scar on one cheek clapped Penry on the back and introduced himself to Leonora as Nick Wood, then beckoned to a tall, beautiful woman with a mane of ash-blonde hair, who excused herself from a group of people to come running to throw her arms round Penry's neck.
‘Hello, you finally made it.’
She turned to Leonora with a radiant smile.
‘Welcome to the Wood ménage, I'm so glad you could come.’
Leonora wished her hosts happy anniversary as she presented her gift rather shyly.
‘I looked up the tenth anniversary and it said tin, which was a bit limiting.
It's not very original, I'm afraid.’
Her gift was an oblong tin containing a bottle of venerable malt whisky, received with much pleasure by both recipients before Clem swept Leonora away on a round of introductions.
At last a man with silvery smiling eyes in a brown face introduced himself as Luiz Santana, husband of Clem's twin, Charity, and took Leonora into the dining-room when Clem was called away to great more arrivals.
‘Queridas ,’ he announced, ‘this is Penry's guest, Señorita Leonora Fox.’
The two women putting finishing touches to the buffet supper turned as one, surprise in the smiles they gave the slender figure standing alone in the doorway.
Luiz introduced his mother-in-law and his wife, then excused himself to go off to help distribute drinks.
Leonora smiled diffidently, blinking with surprise at the sight of Charity, who was such a mirror image of her twin that the effect was electrifying.
But her real interest lay with the older woman, whose smoke-blue eyes and distinctive bone-structure proclaimed her Penry's mother in a way which made an introduction unnecessary.
‘How do you do?’ she said shyly, since both women seemed momentarily at a loss for words.
‘It was kind of Mrs Wood to invite me.’
‘My dear child,’ said Mrs Vaughan, a look on her face Leonora could have sworn was relief.
She stretched out her hands in welcome.
‘How very nice to meet you.’
‘Why didn't Pen bring you straight to us?’ demanded Charity, adding her own dazzling smile to the warmth of her mother's greeting.
‘Honestly, he is the end.’
‘Oh, it wasn't his fault!’ said Leonora instantly, flying to Penry's defence.
‘Your sister took me off to introduce me to everyone.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘Not that it was much use, I'm afraid; I met so many people the faces were just a blur.’
Charity exchanged a few pleasantries, then, at a look from her mother, excused herself to go off to the kitchen, leaving Leonora alone with Mrs Vaughan.
‘Penry was rather mysterious about you, my dear,’ said the latter, and patted one of the dining chairs ranged along the wall.
‘Come and sit here and tell me about yourself.
Penry has already given me, and only me I would stress, a brief account of your adventure on Gullholm.
Dear heaven, child, you were so lucky to survive!’
‘I know, Mrs Vaughan,’ agreed Leonora soberly.
‘Your son saved my life.’
‘Thank God he was on hand.
The island's usually left to the gulls at that time of year.’
Mrs Vaughan shuddered slightly, and touched Leonora's hand.
‘Fate was kind to arrange for Penry to be there just when he was needed most.’
‘Someone taking my name in vain?’ asked Penry, coming into the room.
‘There you are, Leonora.
I see you've met my mother.’
‘No thanks to you,’ said Mrs Vaughan in dry reproof.
‘Clem spirited her off before I could even get her a drink.’
He handed a glass of wine to Leonora.
‘Would you care for something, Mother?’
‘No, thank you, darling,’ said Mrs Vaughan, then met her son's eyes, stiffening, as feminine laughter rose above the general hubbub in the hall.
Penry turned, his face set, as the door flew open and a tall woman in a clinging white dress paused theatrically on the threshold.
She moved across the room with an indolent, hip-swaying saunter, tossing back her shining black hair as she smiled at Penry.
‘Hello, Pen.
Long time no see.’
She turned to Mrs Vaughan.
‘Hello, Mrs V, don't look so stern.
I couldn't keep away from my darling brother's anniversary party, now, could I?
How are you — and who's this?’
‘Good evening, Melanie,’ said Mrs Vaughan shortly.
‘What a surprise.
Where is — what's his name?’
‘Oh, Nigel — on some beastly business trip on the Continent.’
She looked at Penry challengingly.
‘Haven't you got a friendly little greeting for me, Pen, darling?’
‘Good evening,’ he said expressionlessly, pulling Leonora to her feet.
‘Allow me to introduce you.
Leonora, this is Melanie, my ex-wife.
Melanie this is Leonora Fox — my fiancée.’
The cruel grip of Penry's fingers conveyed an appeal which Leonora responded to without batting an eyelid at the word ‘fiancée’.
She smiled serenely.
‘How do you do?’
The other woman swept hostile green eyes from the crown of Leonora's curly head down the brief black silk dress and long, slender legs.
‘Hello !
Well, well, this is a surprise.
I'd no idea you were contemplating matrimony again, Penry.’
‘He thought Clem's wedding anniversary an appropriate time to announce the glad news,’ said Mrs Vaughan smoothly, and rose to her feet rather stiffly to take Leonora's free arm.
‘Come on, Penry.
I think Katharine's arrived.
She's eager to meet Leonora.’
And with a cool, excluding smile for her former daughter-in-law she accompanied her large son and his slender young companion from the room, leaving Melanie staring after them in umbrage.
Leonora was never alone with Penry for a moment.
She met Penry's favourite sister Kit and her husband, Reid Livesey, ate some supper, laughed and chatted with more of Penry's friends, and all the time she burned with the need to ask Penry what he was playing at, why he'd thrown down his unexpected announcement like a gauntlet in front of his voluptuous ex-wife.
As the evening wore on, with plenty of opportunity to study Melanie as the latter flitted from group to group, Leonora grew more and more furious with Penry.
If his real reason for inviting her was a kind of face-saving operation in front of his former ex-wife, he might at least have had the honesty to say so.
He, after all, was the one so determined to do away with sham and misunderstanding.
After a couple of hours she was seized with a longing to go home, but Penry, she realised with misgiving, was suddenly nowhere to be seen.
Pressed by Clem and Mrs Vaughan to stay the night, Leonora declined with grateful thanks, hoping her longing to escape wasn't visible to Penry's family, all of whom she would have liked to know better under other circumstances.
She went off on a determined search for Penry, but he was still nowhere to be seen.
Leonora found a bathroom instead, and spent a few quiet minutes tidying herself up in peace.
As she went back along the landing she paused, frowning.
The sound of Penry's unmistakable resonance removed any scruples Leonora might have had about eavesdropping.
Through a half-open door she saw a glimmer of white and stiffened, nauseated, as she saw Melanie over Penry's shoulder, her face held up to his in impassioned invitation.
‘Please, Pen,’ Melanie pleaded, her husky whisper carrying all too clearly to the girl outside in the hall.
‘Just this once.
For old times’ sake.’
‘It's out of the question,’ he responded harshly, but Melanie threw herself against him.
Red-tipped fingers slid up to encircle Penry's neck and Leonora turned away in blind haste, running downstairs to plunge into the crowd below.
When Penry rejoined her some time later Leonora was the centre of a group discussing the rival merits of various sailing craft.
Reid Livesey turned to him with a smile.
‘Your lady's a sailor, then, Pen.
You must take her over to Rico's place in Portugal.’
‘Good idea,’ said Penry absently, eyeing Leonora's brittle gaiety with a frown.
‘But now I'm afraid it's time we were off.
Leonora's determined to make me drive her all the way home tonight.’
There was a flurry of farewells, repeated invitations to Leonora to come again soon, then at last they were in the car and heading out of London.
‘What's the matter?’ asked Penry at last, breaking a silence which threatened to last all the way to Chastlecombe.
‘Didn't you enjoy the party?’
‘Not as much as I might have.’
‘Didn't you like my family?
They certainly took to you!’
‘I liked your family very much, but you deliberately gave them the wrong impression about me,’ she said angrily.
‘Particularly your ex-wife!’
There was a pause.
‘Is that what this is all about?
Because I embroidered a little and introduced you as my fiancée, or because Melanie was there?’
‘I assume the two are interconnected,’ said Lenora stonily.
‘You conveniently forgot to tell me she was Nick Wood's sister.
You knew she'd be there tonight, which is why you needed me as protective cover.
Not that it worked very well, ultimately!’
‘What are you getting at?’
‘When you were missing I went to look for you.
I didn't find you at first, so I went to the bathroom.
On my way back downstairs I saw you in one of the bedrooms with Melanie.’
Her voice was bitter.
‘So absorbed you even forgot to close the door!’
Penry swore under his breath.
‘Damn it, Leonora, it wasn't what you thought —’
‘I didn't hang about long, but I saw enough to convince me that all that rubbish about Melanie's frigidity was pure invention on your part.’
‘Leonora,’ began Penry, sounding weary, ‘Melanie didn't want me to make love to her.
She needed a favour from me, which is why she came tonight.’
‘Straight into your ever-open arms.’
Leonora stared angrily through the windscreen.
‘I'm sure she wasn't taken in for a moment about — about me.’
‘You're wrong, as it happens.
One look at you convinced Melanie of my intentions beyond all doubt.’
‘Oh, really.
Why?’
Penry hesitated.
‘To be blunt, you're the exact opposite of all the other women in my life.
Like Melanie they invariably ran to small IQ's and big bust measurements.’
‘And one look at my flat chest convinced her I was the love of your life, I suppose!’
‘Don't be so childish!’ he snapped unforgivably.
As an end to the argument this remark was a great success.
To avoid further childishness Leonora took refuge in stony, obdurate silence.
Penry made several attempts to break it, but gave up at last, his face like thunder as he drove at a speed which frightened Leonora to death.
By the time they finally arrived in the deserted car park behind the arcade she was trembling from head to foot, racked by every emotion from fear to rage.
She yanked her seatbelt free then gave a squeak of protest as Penry pulled her into his arms to kiss her with a ferocity she fought against at first.
But the upheaval of the night proved too much for emotions which see-sawed from anger to white-hot response with mortifying speed.
She could hear Penry's heart pounding against hers, as her kisses matched his in utter frenzy.
He tore his mouth away at last to rub his cheek against her untidy hair as he crushed her against his chest.
‘You're hurting me,’ gasped Leonora at last.
Penry held her away a little, his eyes glittering into hers.
‘You deserve it,’ he said, breathing hard, ‘for harbouring such bloody awful suspicions about me.
Listen, Miss Doubting Thomas — and listen well.
I can't tell you what Melanie was asking me because I don't betray other people's confidences.
But one thing I want to make clear once and for all.
Even if she had been asking me to make love to her — which she wasn't — the answer would very definitely have been no.
For one thing she happens to be another man's wife these days.
But there's a much better reason than that,’ he added, and paused tantalisingly.
‘What is it?’ asked Leonora hoarsely.
‘These days,’ he said, looking at her in a way which took away what little breath she had left, ‘I have this picture etched in my brain.
Of a certain unforgettable night on my island.
The experience seems to have rendered all women's attractions null and void.
Except yours, Leonora Fox.
Do I make myself clear?’
She nodded rapturously, and suddenly the night was beautiful and the moon shone brighter than it ever had before.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said, hiding her face against him.
‘But Melanie's so gorgeous to look at.
I was jealous.
Horribly.’
Penry crowed softly in triumph then began kissing her again, and she responded ardently, all her anger and hurt melting away in the warmth of his embrace.
At last he drew away, his smile rueful.
‘I can think of better places to make love,cariad .’
‘So can I,’ she agreed fervently, rubbing her elbow.
‘Bits of me keep coming into contact with bits of your car.’
‘I'd better let you go in.’
She sighed.
‘I don't want to go.’
‘Nevertheless, if you have any respect for my blood-pressure, lady, I think you'd better retire to your lonely bed, while I continue my journey to Wales.’
Penry kissed her again, lingeringly.
‘I wish you were coming with me.’
‘So do I.’
They gazed at each other in silence, then Penry touched a finger to her lower lip.
‘Leonora, will you come to Wales next weekend?
See my house — try it on for size, as it were?
I'm tied up at the hospital for a while each day, but we could be together most of the time.
Will you come?’
She nodded, her eyes like stars, her pulse racing at the implication in his words.
‘I'd love to.’
‘Bring Elise, too, if you like.’
‘Do you want me to?’
‘In a word, no.’
He smiled, stroking her cheek.
‘But if you're afraid I'll lose my head once we're alone together, by all means bring a chaperon.’
‘I'll think about it,’ she said demurely.
Leonora went round in a dream the following week.
Fortunately she had an order for a full-length wool coat and dress, and worked in happy isolation in the small room at the back of the shop, her mind lingering on the implication of Penry's invitation as her fingers flew independently to finish the order for a customer due to return to the States a few days later.
Penry rang each night, to remind her about the weekend, he said, in case she'd forgotten.
Fat chance, thought Leonora, unable to resist keeping him in the dark about whether Elise was going with her.
‘as if I would,’ said Elise, laughing.
‘I've no taste for playing gooseberry to a couple of lovebirds, I assure you.
Off you go alone, with my blessing, love, since it seems pretty obvious Penry intends to pop the question.’
‘Nonsense,’ said Leonora, who had given her sister a very much edited version of Saturday night.
‘He's just keen to show me his house.’
‘In that case, why not surprise him?
Drive to Wales on Friday evening instead of waiting for Saturday.
Sue Parker will help in the shop.’
Leonora assented rapturously, keeping her change of plan gleefully secret from Penry.
She started out on the Friday evening with suppressed excitement, timing her arrival long before he was likely to make the now nightly telephone call.
She sang along with the radio as she drove up through Gloucestershire and crossed into Wales by way of Abergavenny and Brecon, then took the road north towards Builth Wells, to the wooded hills south of the town where Penry's house occupied a vantage point above the River Wye.
His instructions had been so clear, and so often repeated, that Leonora felt she could have found her way blindfolded in the dark.
She had no problem in finding the turning which led her along an unadopted road for half a mile before she drove through open gates up a steeply ascending drive past lawns on several different levels until she finally reached a gravelled circle in front of Penry's house.
She gazed up at it with a deep sigh of pleasure.
Built, as Penry had told her, almost a century before, its mellow brick and gleaming windows blended into the picturesque hillside, welcome in every line of it to the girl who gazed at it in bliss as she turned off the engine.
Leonora jumped out, stood looking up at the house for a few moments more, then ran up the steps to ring the doorbell, laughter bubbling up inside as she anticipated Penry's surprise at the sight of her.
She waited a few moments then rang the bell again, and this time the door opened with maddening slowness.
All her joy drained away like water spilled on sand as instead of Penry Vaughan's tall, broad-shouldered figure she came face to face with the woman who'd once been his wife.
Melanie smiled lazily, smoothing back her hair, the opulent curves of her body outlined by the satin dressing-gown which was very blatantly the only garment she had on.
‘Well, well, fancy meeting you.
Leonie, isn't it?
Surprise, surprise.’
‘My name is Leonora.’
Sick and numb with shock, Leonora felt vaguely surprised to hear her voice functioning normally.
Melanie took her by the hand and drew her inside.
‘Do come in.
Pen won't be long.
I've been paying him a little visit.’
Leonora snatched her hand away, her eyes hunted as they scanned the large, square hall.
‘Is Penry here?
He's due back today, from a medical conference.’
Melanie's eyes gleamed.
‘Is that what he told you?
Naughty Pen.
In actual fact we spent last night together, here.
We've not long got up.
He's just popped out for supplies.
Sex does make one so hungry, doesn't it?
Or perhaps you don't know about that — goodness, dear, you've gone a very funny colour!’
Leonora gulped, a hand to her mouth, and with an exclamation Melanie hauled her upstairs and through a large bedroom into a bathroom, then left her alone to part with her lunch.
It was a pity, Leonora thought with bleak detachment afterwards, that shock always had such an inconvenient effect on her digestive system.
After a moment or two to pull herself together and wash her face, she went back through the bedroom, her stomach heaving again when she saw the crumpled disorder of the bed.
She shuddered, and ran like the wind down the stairs to escape, but as she reached the hall the door flew open and Penry burst into the house, his face alight at the sight of her.
‘Leonora!
You came tonight!’ he said, pulling her into his arms.
She leapt away.
‘Don't dare touch me!’
Her eyes flashed coldly as they met the blank astonishment in his.
‘I never learn do I?
Like a fool I came to surprise you, just like I did once before on Brynteg.
Needless to say, the surprise backfired on me.
Again.’
Penry stood rigid, his eyes incredulous.
‘Can you please tell me what you're talking about?’
‘She's talking about me,’ said Melanie, emerging from one of the rooms off the hall, fully dressed now, every shining hair in place.
‘Melanie ?
Why the hell are you still here?’ demanded Penry wrathfully.
Still?
Leonora could take no more.
She brushed past Penry, eluding the hand he put out to detain her as she ran outside to the car, deaf to his entreaties as she jumped in the car and started it up with a violent rev of the engine.
She reversed in a reckless sweep, scraping the Range Rover with a hideous scream of metal, then tore off down the hairpin bends of the drive, blinking away tears furiously to see where she was going.
After a mile or two of expecting the Range Rover in pursuit it finally came home to her that Penry had no intention of following her.
The discovery started her crying in earnest, which meant a stop in a lay-by for a while before she was in a fit condition to resume her journey home.
When Leonora finally arrived home, red-eyed and white-faced after a nightmare journey, she found Elise in a terrible state.
‘Leonora, what on earth's going on?
I've been worried to death!
Penry's been on the phone every few minutes to see if you've arrived.
He's out of his mind in case you've had an accident or something, but he couldn't come after you because he was due back at the hospital for a clinic.’
Leonora huddled in a little heap on the sofa, pleading for coffee before she'd say a word.
Once she'd downed some of the extra-strong brew she gave her sister the bare bones of the story, then turned dull eyes on Elise's horrified face.
‘Did Penry say anything about Melanie?’
‘No.
He just said there'd been a terrible misunderstanding, and you wouldn't listen when he tried to explain.’
Elise hugged her sister close.
‘What explanation could there be?’
Leonora gave a dreary little laugh.
‘I saw the evidence with my own eyes, Melanie wearing only a dressing-gown, her hair all over the place.
I even saw the bed —’ She swallowed hard.
‘No, I am not going to be sick again,’ she added fiercely as Elise eyed her in alarm.
When the telephone rang, right on cue, Leonora started up, wild-eyed.
‘If that's Penry tell him I don't want to speak to him or see him again.
Ever.’
The following Monday afternoon, shortly after lunch, two customers poring over the jewellery in Fox's Lair looked up in surprise as a tall man came into the shop like a whirlwind and gave Elise a brief, unsmiling greeting.
‘Where is she?’ he demanded.
‘In the office, working.
Do go through,’ said Elise, unnecessarily, since Penry was already on his way.
He wrenched open the office door then slammed it behind him and stood against it, glaring into Leonora's frozen face.
‘What are you doing here?’ she said icily.
‘I want a word with you.
I've come straight from the hospital, and now I'm on my way to St Mary's, where I'm due at five.
It was not part of my plan to make a detour via Chastlecombe, but since you won't talk to me on the phone I didn't have much choice.
You knew perfectly well I had to stay within reach of the hospital over the weekend.
I couldn't get here until now.’
Penry, hostile and intimidating, was too large a presence for the small office.
Leonora felt claustrophobic as he loomed over her.
She folded her work carefully and stood up, backing away.
‘Elise passed on my message, I know,’ she said crisply.
‘Perhaps it lost something in translation.
I don't want to talk to you.
Ever again.’
Penry grabbed her hands.
‘Just give me the chance to explain, you obstinate little fool —’
Leonora snatched her hand away, eyes blazing.
‘I saw with my own eyes.
You don't need to explain.
You lied to me about Melanie —’
‘I have never lied to you,’ he broke in, white about the mouth.
‘She was bent on making mischief because I wouldn't do her the favour she wanted, and she bloody well succeeded, didn't she?’
Leonora clenched her teeth.
‘Ah, yes, the celebrated favour again.
Tell me what it is and just possibly I might believe you.’
The dark blue eyes iced over.
‘How extraordinarily good of you, Leonora.
Nevertheless I can't do that.
Melanie or not, it was still in confidence.
All I can say is that I didn't even know Melanie was still there that night.
I thought she'd gone.
She'd come to persuade me —’
‘And succeeded, by the look of the bed!’
Leonora turned away blindly, and Penry caught her by the shoulders, forcing her round to face him.
‘I did not make love to her, Leonora,’ he said forcibly.
‘Can't you believe me?’
She stared up at him despairingly.
‘I want to believe you — but she's so beautiful —’
With a smothered curse he pulled her into his arms and began to kiss her, using a more powerful argument than words as the first touch of his mouth on hers sent everything out of Leonora's head other than the fact that she loved and wanted this man to the point where she was almost ready to believe that she'd been mistaken.
Somehow she found the strength to pull away.
‘Tell me why Melanie was there at your house?’ she pleaded.
Penry stood back, looking grim and formidable.
‘I can't, Leonora.
All I can say is that there was an innocent explanation for what you saw.
If you can't accept that, and trust me, then there's nothing more I can say.’
Leonora straightened her shoulders, pale and vulnerable in the plain black sweater and skirt she wore in the shop.
She saw Penry's eyes on the silver brooch on her shoulder, knew he was remembering their time together on the island, and for a moment she was tempted to throw herself into his arms, to assure him that nothing mattered as long as he loved her, Leonora Fox, not Melanie.
Then her resolve hardened.
‘I saw what I saw, Penry, and I don't blame you.
It's crystal-clear that whatever defects your former wife possesses you're still attracted to her.
Who can blame you?
When I gatecrashed your life I suppose you thought I might come in useful as some kind of antidote — but it didn't work.’
She smiled frostily.
‘It was a case of ‘physician, help thyself’.
It's not your fault you couldn't, Dr Vaughan.’
Penry heard her out in silence.
‘I've had a wasted journey,’ he said at last.
‘You weren't prepared to listen to a word I had to say, were you?’
Leonora shrugged.
‘What was the point?’
‘What, indeed?’
He gave her a chilling little bow.
‘Then I'll say goodbye, Leonora.
I hope I didn't shock your customers by barging in so unceremoniously.
‘I imagine it made their day.’
She felt quite proud of her composure as she escorted him through the shop, relieved, for once, to see it empty.
‘Goodbye,’ she said as they reached the door.
‘Give my love to Sister Concepta.’
Penry put out a hand, then dropped it, and with a strangled curse turned away to stride off over the cobbles of the arcade, an arresting figure in the autumn sunlight as he went out into the street without a backward glance for the girl watching him go.
CHAPTER TWELVE
The winds of late October were lashing Haverfordwest as Leonora left the train.
She smiled wearily as Bryn Pritchard came to take her case, blessing his tact when he made no comment on the reason for her visit.
He installed her in his battered van, chatting volubly on every subject under the sun other than Dr Penry Vaughan on the journey, but Leonora was hard pressed to make suitable rejoinders, every nerve in her body stretched to breaking-point at the thought of what lay ahead.
When they arrived in Brides Haven Rachel Pritchard welcomed Leonora with a cup of hot, strong tea, but Bryn soon cut across his wife's chatter, pointing out that they must set out at once if he was to make the return trip before dark.
His wife packed a box with various goodies for Leonora to take to Penry, then walked with them to the jetty, and waved them off on the Sea-Fret , a sturdy fishing-boat a lot newer than Penry's.
As the boat crossed the bar into the open sea with a stomach-clenching lurch, Bryn gave his passenger an encouraging smile.
‘A bit rough, but nothing to worry about, Miss Fox.’
Leonora, too wrapped up in her thoughts to be afraid, smiled back, unconcerned.
‘I'm only sorry I had to bring you out in it.’
Bryn shook his head good-naturedly.
‘No trouble at all.
The wind's increasing to gale force later, according to the shipping forecast, but I'll be home safe and sound long before then.’
‘You didn't phone Dr Vaughan to say I was coming?’ asked Leonora anxiously, as Gullholm loomed nearer on the horizon.
‘No.
Not a word.
He said he wanted peace and quiet, mind,’ Bryn warned.
Leonora scanned the turbulent stretch of sea anxiously.
‘I only intend to stay a few minutes.
I hope Dr Vaughan will run me back in the Angharad .’
Bryn looked doubtful.
‘You'd better not hang about, then.’
Soon the Sea-Fret was alongside the jetty at Gullholm and Leonora leapt out nimbly.
She received her overnight bag and Rachel's box from Bryn and thanked him warmly.
As he headed back across the sound she began to toil up the cliff path, pausing for breath now and then as the wind battered her and tore at her hair, which soon broke free of its restraining scarf and whipped into her eyes, slowing her progress up the wet, slippery path towards the house.
Halfway up she paused, fighting for breath, suddenly struck by the enormity of what she was doing.
What if Penry took one look at her and threw her out, bag and baggage?
She resumed her climb doggedly.
He could hardly throw her off the island.
The worst he could do was take her back to Brides Haven.
Then a fiercer gust of wind almost blew her from the path and she hung on to bag and box like grim death.
Bryn was right.
The wind was increasing to gale force, and fast.
She turned to look towards the shore, relieved when she saw the Sea-Fret making good headway back to Brides Haven, then a flock of screaming gulls startled her into resuming her climb, and soon she was on the Neck and starting the last, steep push towards the plateau.
As the path flattened out to lead across the close turf to the house Leonora's feet slowed.
At the sight of windows lit against the gathering gloom she had a sudden desire to turn tail and run, to take refuge below in the Angharad .
Which, she told herself trenchantly, was nonsense.
She'd come this far to say her piece and say it she would, come hell or high water.
She smiled at this last.
If the weather went on deteriorating at this rate there'd be plenty of the latter around Gullholm.
Sodden by the now driving rain, breathing hard from the climb, Leonora crept round the house to the cluster of outbuildings at the back, where the familiar throb of the generator welcomed her like a friend.
Which, she thought drily, was probably the only welcome she'd get.
Penry was unlikely to look kindly on someone who landed on his island uninvited twice in a row.
Uncertain whether to knock politely on the kitchen door, or just thrust it open and make a dramatic entry, Leonora dumped her bag on the flagstones and pushed wet rat's-tails of hair back from her face.
Somehow it seemed silly to knock.
Taking her courage in both hands, she left her bag where it was and turned the knob, pushing open the door into the kitchen which smelled so warm and inviting and blessedly familiar that a lump rose in her throat.
She closed the door softly, then advanced cautiously across the room to deposit the box on the counter.
The door to the study was half open but the room itself was in darkness.
No Penry there.
Slipping off her muddy shoes, Leonora went on into the big living-room, every nerve on edge as she crept silently across the familiar worn carpet towards the seductive warmth from the stove, but there was still no sign of Penry.
In deference to the generator, presumably, only one of the table lamps was lit, giving the room a shadowy, ghostly look.
Steam rose from her clothes as she hesitated, wondering what to do next.
Somehow she'd imagined Penry leaping up from the sofa at the sight of her, angry at her intrusion.
Or even smiling in welcome, in some of her wilder dreams.
The silence of the deserted room was eerie.
There was an open book on the sofa, a basket of ready-chopped wood near the stove, even a half-full glass on a table.
Leonora shivered and held out her hands to the stove, then stood motionless as she realised she was being watched.
She turned slowly to face the forbidding figure standing in semi-darkness halfway up the stairs.
‘They say an Englishman's home is his castle,’ said Penry tonelessly, his face invisible in the shadows.
‘I'm Welsh, but the principle's the same.
I should have fortified myself better against invaders.’
Leonora, wishing with all her heart she'd listened to Elise and telephoned, instead of rushing to the island uninvited, squared her shoulders.
‘I've come to say I'm sorry,’ she blurted.
‘It seemed like the only thing to do before I set out.
Now I'm actually here I realise I'm intruding.
I'm sorry.
It was stupid to barge in here like this.’
Penry walked slowly down the remaining stairs and crossed the room towards her, stumbling over a rug en route.
He wore a navy guernsey and salt-stained Levis, and he needed a shave.
He needed a haircut, too, noted Leonora with misgiving, and from the look in his eyes he was in a foul mood.
‘Are you ill?’ she asked sharply.
‘I was; but no longer.
I've had a drink or two.
And if this were any other place I'd tell you to get the hell out of here and out of my life.’
He reached over for the glass and swallowed down the rest of its contents, eyeing her malevolently.
‘As it is we're on an island and the bloody weather's deteriorating fast.
If I were completely sober I might just manage to get you back to Brides Haven, but I doubt it.
In any case, as you can see, I am not sober.
So I'm stuck with you, Miss Castaway, yet again.
How the hell did you get here?’
‘Mr Pritchard brought me.’
‘Why the devil didn't he ring me to say you were coming?’
‘I asked him not to.’
Leonora stuck her chin out.
‘I thought you wouldn't let me come.’
‘You thought right!’
‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have come.’
She looked away.
‘I'll ring Mr Pritchard to fetch me in the morning if you'll just let me stay the night.’
‘What choice do I have?’ he demanded irritably.
‘I'm hardly likely to throw you out in this weather.’
‘Thank you.’
She eyed him cautiously.
‘Perhaps you'll let me cook dinner in return for your hospitality.’
‘My hospitality!’
He eyed her with derision.
‘All right, Leonora, let's keep it civilised, by all means.
I'd planned a liquid dinner for myself —’
‘A square meal would do no harm, by the look of you,’ she retorted.
‘May I take my jacket off, please?’
‘Do what you like,’ he said without interest, and stretched out on the sofa.
‘I think I'll have a nap.’
In sudden fury Leonora caught hold of his legs and swung them to the floor.
‘No, you won't.
You'll go upstairs and have a hot bath and a shave.
I'll have some black coffee waiting when you get down.
It's a good thing your patients can't see you now, Dr Vaughan!’
He staggered to his feet, swaying a little, his eyes like chips of blue ice.
‘I happen to be here on holiday, Goody Two-Shoes.
A few hard-earned days of R and R, as the Americans put it, away from everything and everyone — or so I thought.
I had a bad dose of influenza, if you must know.
My mother wanted to fuss over me in Lanhowell, but somehow I couldn't take that.
I needed solitude — so where better to find it than my island?
Or so I thought,’ he added morosely.
‘I see,’ she said, unzipping her jacket.
‘You obviously haven't been eating properly —’
‘And I've had a couple of glasses of Scotch to celebrate finishing a course of antibiotics for a chest infection,’ he finished wearily.
‘Not exactly a punishable offence.
But then, I forgot.
Your opinion of my integrity is not exactly high, is it, Miss Fox?’
‘I came a long way to say I'm sorry,’ Leonora reminded him.
‘Go on.
Go up and have a bath — even a nap, if you like.’
Penry eyed her broodingly, then shrugged.
‘Why not?’ he said carelessly, and made for the stairs with the care of someone not absolutely steady on his feet.
Leonora watched him go, frowning, then went to fetch her bag.
Alone in the kitchen, she towelled her hair dry and stripped off her wet jeans and socks, draping them on the rack of the Aga with her jacket.
In dry denims with a heavy black jersey over her scarlet wool shirt, she looked through the refrigerator and cupboards and began to concoct a dinner likely to appeal to a newly recovered — and fractious — invalid.
Once a pan of vegetable soup was simmering fragrantly on the stove she put potatoes to bake in the oven then sprinkled rosemary and garlic slivers over some lamb chops, ready to grill when her dinner companion chose to put in an appearance.
Refusing to let herself think beyond the tasks she was performing, Leonora listened to the radio as she worked, and when the meal was well advanced she went quietly upstairs to find the bathroom empty, and Penry, fully dressed in fresh clothes, fast asleep on his bed.
She washed swiftly, brushed her drying hair into softer curls, then flicked on some mascara and gave her lips a touch of colour before bearding the lion in his den.
Standing at the foot of the bed, Leonora touched one of Penry's bare brown feet.
‘Dinner's almost ready.
Shall I bring you up a tray, or will you come down?’
Penry shot upright, yawning mightily as he rubbed eyes which focused on her with a noticeable lack of warmth.
‘So you weren't a dream.’
‘No.’
She smiled cheerfully.
‘Do you feel well enough to come down?’
He slid to his feet, stretching.
‘Of course I do.’
He frowned, surprised.
‘In fact I feel very much better.’
‘Good.
Put something on your feet before you come downstairs,’ she ordered as she went out.
‘You sound like my mother,’ he called after her.
‘Thank you,’ she shouted as she went downstairs.
‘Having met your charming mother I'll take that as a compliment.’
Without anything said a truce seemed to have been tacitly agreed.
Penry, obviously very much better after his sleep, admitted that the meal was a great improvement on the one he'd planned.
‘I haven't felt much like cooking.’
‘I can tell,’ said Leonora, removing their soup bowls.
‘The fridge is full — so are the cupboards.’
When she returned with the main meal, Penry sniffed ecstatically.
‘If this is an apology, Leonora, I accept whole-heartedly.’
‘Good.
There's some apple tart afterwards, if you like.’
He regarded her with awe.
‘Don't tell me you made that, too, while I was sleeping off my drunken stupor?’
‘It wasn't a drunken stupor, nor did I make the tart.’
She grinned.
‘Mrs Pritchard sent it over, along with a pile of Welsh cakes and something she called bara brith .’
He nodded, mouth full.
‘A sort of tea-bread with currants and so on.
She's a great cook.
So are you,’ he added, then smiled wryly as the wind howled in the chimney like a lost soul.
‘This is where we came in first time round, Leonora.
Just you and me and a force-ten gale.’
There was a sudden, charged silence which Leonora broke hastily, pressing him to apple tart, but Penry shook his head.
‘I'll leave the tart for tomorrow — sinful to cancel the flavour of that lamb.’
He stretched luxuriously.
‘Coffee would be nice.’
Leonora gave a little bob.
‘Certainly sir.
Coming up.’
When the meal was cleared away and they were settled before the fire, Penry looked across at Leonora thoughtfully.
‘Strange, really.
It seems like only yesterday we were here like this before, as if the months in between had never been.’
His mouth twisted.
‘Which would be a good thing in some ways.’
‘Penry,’ said Leonora, bracing herself.
‘I think that's my cue to explain why I'm here.’
Penry shrugged.
‘It isn't necessary.’
‘I think it is.’
‘You mean you came because you're ready to listen to me now?’
He said with sarcasm.
Leonora flushed.
‘I wish I could say yes.
But I can't.’
‘Then what in hell's name made you come all this way in weather like this?’
‘Your sister wrote to me.’
Penry stretched out his long legs to glower at his battered espadrilles.
‘Which one?’
‘Clemency.’
‘Ah!’
‘She told me Melanie was expecting a baby soon after Christmas.’
He shot a hostile look at her.
‘And you assumed I was the father, no doubt!’
Leonora met the look squarely.
‘At first reading I did.
The word ‘baby’ came off the page like a fist.
But as I went on reading I found that wasn't what Clem was telling me at all.’
She cleared her throat.
‘The favour Melanie wanted was an abortion, wasn't it?
And as a doctor it was against your ethics to tell me.’
‘Something like that,’ said Penry bitterly.
‘Melanie always had hysterics at the mere mention of motherhood.
Nigel wasn't as forbearing as me.
He made very sure she got pregnant.
Melanie was furious, and desperate enough to go to any lengths to terminate the pregnancy.
She couldn't pay for an abortion herself because Nigel won't let her have a cheque book or a credit card, let alone any cash.
She's forced to ask him for everything, loaded as he is.
Nigel is by no means the fool she took him for.
So Melanie actually had the gall to ask her brother Nick for the money for an abortion that night.
At a party to celebrate ten years of marriage to Clem, would you believe?
He wiped the floor with her.
Nick's a straight arrow.
He wouldn't have anything to do with it.’
‘Was she asking you for money?’
Penry's lips curled with distaste.
‘No.
What you witnessed that night was Melanie trying to persuade me to perform the operation for her — or, failing that, to get someone else to do it as a favour.’
He looked Leonora in the eye.
‘I gave her short shrift.
As you know, I'm sensitive on that particular subject.’
She flushed, her eyes falling.
‘Yes.
I do.
But to continue with Clem's letter — she told me Melanie went to Wales after you to try more persuasion.’
‘She did.
Melanie was determined to get her own way.
She rang up to make an appointment with my receptionist, using a false name.
When I found her the other side of my desk I told her in no uncertain terms I wasn't having anything to do with it.
I spiked her guns by the simple expedient of ringing Nigel right away, told him the truth, and instructed him to fetch her home and keep her there.
I was called away to the hospital so I left her at the house waiting for Nigel to turn up to collect her.’
Penry smiled morosely.
‘Unfortunately fate delivered you into Melanie's hands before Nigel arrived.
She saw you coming up the drive, and hit on the ideal way to take her revenge.
She tore off her clothes, made a mess of the bed and — you know the rest.’
Leonora stared at him in horror.
‘Why would she do something so horrible?
Does she hate you, Penry?’
‘No.’
Penry shrugged.
‘She's terminally immature, that's all.
She was furious because I wouldn't do what she wanted and paid me back as spitefully as she knew how.
Her punishment is having to bow to the inevitable.
Motherhood has overtaken her whether she wants it or not.’
Penry got up to put more logs on the stove.
When he sat down again there was a long, tense silence.
Leonora knew perfectly well it was time for her to grovel, but found it difficult to make a start.
‘I'm so sorry I wouldn't listen to you,’ she said at last.
‘I'm sorry, too.’
He looked at her curiously.
‘Why did Clem take it into her head to write to you?’
Leonora looked down at her hands.
‘Your family was worried about your — your frame of mind.
Clem seemed to think it was something to do with me.’
‘She knew damn well it was something to do with you.
I told her that her precious sister-in-law had made a mess of my life yet again, so I suppose she felt obliged to make amends.’
‘It wasn't like that at all!’ flared Leonora.
‘Clem was deeply concerned because you were unhappy, and because she loves you she decided to interfere.
Her word, not mine, by the way.
I'm glad she did.’
‘But if she hadn't you'd never have got in touch.’
‘I wanted to, but after the way we parted last time I didn't dare.’
She looked at him squarely.
‘Do you accept my apology, Penry?’
‘Yes.
Of course I do.’
He held out his hand to help her up.
‘But that's enough emoting for tonight.
Right now I think it's time you went to bed.
You look tired.
I've put hot-water bottles in the room next to the bathroom.’
‘Thank you.’
Leonora eyed him uncertainly.
‘Goodnight, then.’
‘Goodnight.’
Penry's eyes were inscrutable as she turned away.
‘I'll just collect my bag from the kitchen,’ she murmured.
‘Shall I carry it up for you?’
‘Oh, no.
There's not much in it.
Just enough for one night.’
‘So you definitely expected to stay, then!’
Leonora looked at him levelly.
‘Yes, but not here.
Mrs Pritchard was going to put me up.’
Leonora felt horribly depressed as she prepared for bed.
On the way in the train earlier she had pictured her meeting with Penry over and over again, but none of her imaginings had been remotely like the reality.
She'd been a fool to think one polite little apology would be enough to put everything right between them.
Penry was a mature, proud man who obviously no longer thought it worth the trouble to cultivate a relationship with someone as jealous and unreasonable as Leonora Fox, spinster of the parish of Chastlecombe.
Perhaps, thought Leonora, turning out the light, she would never have learned the truth if Clem hadn't written.
Penry's ethics would never have allowed him to reveal the reason for Melanie's visit to his home.
A home, she thought in sudden pain, which I'll never share with him now.
Penry had quite plainly lost interest in her.
And who could blame him?
Leonora lay hugging a hot-water bottle in the noisy darkness, grateful for the warmth as she listened to the wind howling in counterpoint to the boom of the sea on the rocks below.
Her mouth twisted at the thought that this time, at least, there was no danger of a nightmare.
Those had vanished since the return of her memory.
She tensed, struck by a sudden brainwave.
She lay thinking about it for some time, then decided she had nothing to lose.
Not daring to put on the light, she sat up and felt for the glass of water on the bedside table.
For a moment she hesitated, then, her mouth set in a determined line Elise would have recognised with misgiving, set about dampening her cotton nightshirt and then her hair and face to simulate perspiration.
Replacing the glass with care, she slid back down in the bed and deliberately conjured up the scene in the Seren at the moment the engine cut out and she was about to capsize.
The horror of the memory made it all too easy to choke and scream, but to her relief her performance was cut short in seconds as the door burst open, the light snapped on and she was in Penry's arms, held close to his chest, and so glad to be there that not even her guilt could mar the joy of the moment.
‘It's all right, it's all right ,’ said Penry hoarsely, as her tears, hot and flooding in relief, streamed down his bare chest.
‘I've got you, my darling, I've got you.’
Leonora held up her face blindly and he crushed her even closer, kissing her until neither could breathe.
‘You're wet,’ he said at last, and picked her up and carried her into his bedroom.
‘I'll find you something dry.’
But when they reached his room Leonora wriggled out of his arms and stood on the bedside rug, hands behind her back, guilt flooding her now in full force at the look in his eyes.
‘I didn't have a nightmare,’ she blurted, her small breasts rising and falling convulsively under the clinging, damp cotton.
‘I doused myself with my glass of water and then I screamed, hoping to bring you running.’
Penry stared at her incredulously, then to her relief the tension drained from his face before her eyes as his muscular, beautiful torso began to vibrate with laughter.
‘You little witch!
I came running, too, didn't I?’
‘Are you angry with me?’ she muttered, blushing furiously.
‘Only for courting pneumonia,’ he said softly and closed the gap between them to lift her face to his.
‘Since this nightshirt's damp the sensible course, Miss Fox, would be to remove it, don't you agree?’
And slowly and carefully he peeled the garment over her head, his hands unsteady as he completed the task.
‘You should dry your hair —’ he began, but Leonora shook her head violently and brushed past him to leap into his bed.
She held up her arms in entreaty, her eyes glittering darkly in her flushed face.
‘Just make love to me, Penry,please .
If you don't I think I'll die —’
The rest of her sentence died on her lips as Penry took her in his arms with a sound somewhere between a sigh and a groan as their lips met and their bodies flowed together in a deep, primeval need which united them almost at once in a storm of love and need as fierce as the one which raged, unheard, outside.
‘Damn,’ said Leonora a long time afterwards.
Penry raised his handsome head in enquiry.
‘You spoke?’
She gave him a rueful, slumbrous look.
‘I made a sort of vow.’
He turned over on his back and drew her up so that her head lay on his shoulder.
‘Of chastity?
If so, it wasn't much of a success.’
He yelped as she bit him, but Leonora grinned up at him, unrepentant.
‘You may remember that I begged you to make love to me the first time, Penry Vaughan!
So I made a vow that the next time you'd beg me.’
‘And I will.
Promise.’
He detached a hand to look at his watch.
‘But not for half an hour or so — what's the matter?’ as Leonora stared at him, wide-eyed.
‘I didn't mean tonight,’ she muttered, burying her face against his shoulder.
Penry stretched luxuriously, moulding her closely against him.
‘Ah, but I did.
Unless you object?’
She shook her head emphatically.
He laughed softly.
‘I love you so much, you know, my little vixen.
You were blazingly angry with me that day at the house.’
‘I was jealous.
Horribly, mortifyingly jealous of your beautiful wife.’
‘Ex.’
Penry rubbed his cheek over her hair.
‘Leonora, does the fact that I've been married before put you off the thought of becoming my wife?’
‘No,’ she said decisively, raising her head so that he could see her eyes.
‘Nothing could.
Are you proposing, Dr Vaughan?’
‘Oh, my darling, I am, I am!’
‘Then I accept.
With great pleasure.’
‘I was going to propose to you properly that weekend,’ he went on after a long, blissful interval.
‘I had champagne chilling ready for a romantic dinner à deux .
And when you were in suitably softened mood I was going to tell you how this time I'd found what I'd really been looking for all my life.’
‘And only an hour or so ago,’ said Leonora wonderingly, ‘I was thinking you'd lost interest in me completely.’
‘Then I must be a bloody good actor!’
He turned her face up to his.
‘What's going to happen about Elise and Fox's Lair once we're married?’
‘Elise has it all cut and dried already.
Sue Parker — mother of Julian, who's only eighteen, by the way,’ added Leonora with a wicked little grin, ‘is keen to go into partnership with her, and I can do what I do just as easily after I'm married as before.’
Penry gave her a smile which brought the blood to her cheeks.
‘Yes, definitely,’ he said softly, brushing her hair back from her forehead.
‘I meant knitting!’
Leonora giggled, then bit her lip, eyeing him anxiously.
‘You must think I was taking a lot for granted, sorting all this out before — well, before I even knew you'd let me on the island, let alone still want me.’
‘You knew damn well I wanted you!’
‘I didn't!
But Elise was absolutely sure you did.
She said that if I came here to the island and said I was sorry you'd welcome me with open arms.’
She eyed him accusingly.
‘You didn't, though.
You weren't very welcoming at all.’
Penry opened his arms wide, then closed them about her.
‘I couldn't believe my eyes, Leonora, when I saw you standing in the middle of the room down there.
I'd been lying on my bed, thinking of you, and suddenly I couldn't bear it a moment longer and jumped off the bed intending to phone you — and there you were, looking half drowned and so nervous I was afraid to put a foot wrong.’
‘All you had to do was kiss me, Dr Vaughan!’
‘With a day's growth of beard and reeking of Scotch?
I could have smacked your bottom for taking me by surprise.
If you'd just rung from Bryn's place I could have at least made myself presentable,cariad !’
‘You looked quite wonderful to me,’ she said matter-of-factly, and resisted when he'd have hugged the life out of her.
‘Besides, I was afraid you wouldn't let me come if I phoned.’
‘Are you joking?
I'd have cast off in the Angharad to fetch you the minute I knew you were there!’
‘Would you?
Really?’
Reading the confirmation in his eye, she sighed happily, then detached herself.
‘I'm going to tidy myself up.
I must look a wreck.’
‘Don't go!’
Penry drew her back into his arms slowly.
‘You look utterly ravishing to me.
So much so that I want very much to make love to you again.
Are you going to make me beg?’
Leonora shook her head in revulsion.
‘No.
Not now.
Not ever!
I love you too much —’
‘At last!’ said Penry gruffly.
‘At last what?’
‘You've told me you love me.’
She frowned.
‘Of course I love you.
I have right from the first.
Didn't you know that?’
He shook his head, his eyes blazing with a light which sent everything out of her head.
‘Go on,’ he prompted after an interval spent in convincing her that her sentiments were returned in full.
‘What do you mean?’ she asked breathlessly.
‘You said you loved me too much — and then stopped.’
Her face cleared.
‘Oh.
I merely meant that I love you too much to refuse you anything — only I'm probably an idiot to admit it!’
Much later that night, when the storm had died down and they lay at rest in each other 's arms, on the verge of sleep at last, Leonora said very quietly, ‘Penry.’
‘Mm.’
‘Will you be offended if I ask you a question?’
He chuckled.
‘I won't know until you ask it.
Besides, the way I feel now nothing could offend me.’
‘Don't count on it.
I want to know whether you and Melanie slept in this bed together.’
Penry laughed, cuddling her close.
‘No, we didn't.
In fact, my little castaway, she never set foot on the island at all— wouldn't come near the place.’
‘Great!’ said Leonora with satisfaction.
‘I'm glad.
This is something of yours that belongs just to me, then.’
Penry shook her slightly.
‘Correction.
Everything I have and am and ever will be belongs to you, Leonora.
All of me.
Satisfactory?’
‘Very.’
She gave an ecstatic little wriggle.
‘Are you sorry now that I invaded your castle?’
‘Haven't I shown you how delighted I am that you did?
If you're not sure I'm perfectly happy to convince you again,’ he whispered, kissing her.
‘It was a lucky day for me when the storm washed you up on my island, my darling.’
‘Neither of us had a clue who I was, then!’
‘I knew who you were,cariad .
I'm a Celt, remember.
I knew I'd met my fate right from the start!’