

do you find the, I mean do you find the management alright, do you get on okay with them and everything?
Mm, aye.
Nobody really crabby?
No, there isn't really.
Cos in my office there's quite a lot of bosses in my office,
Mhm.
cos it's the production control so 
Mhm.
just talk to them like anybody else does .
What do, what do you actually do in your office, is it like telephone duties or typing or what?
A bit of everything.
 
Just do everything really.
Mhm.
Do you get to know all the different people that ph ring up, all the different clients and that?
Well we don't speak to clients, it's just salesmen and  
Aha.
people I  speak to.
Mhm.
Talking to quite a lot of different people.
Mhm  do you get to know basically everything  work.
So how did you get erm the job in the office?
Was it just a, within the factory,out about it?
No it was  been here for six weeks and I was just expecting to leave
Mhm.
and I was gonna go and apply for  but then Neil  he sent for me and just asked me, just told me there was a job come up in the office and if I wanted it
Mhm.
I was to go.
So it was just luck really?
Were you relieved?
I don't know, I didn't really want to work in an office.
No.
I'd prefer to work in a factory.
Mhm.
That's right, if I didn't work in the office I didn't work in the factory.
Oh I see, aha.


So you didn't have a great deal of choice?


Oh well   Anything else?
I don't think most of these questions apply to you actually because they're mostly like for the kind of older women, I was gonna ask them about how they er coped with the, you know, running a house and
 
 
I'm not gonna insult you by asking are you really that old.
You're not planning to get married in the future then?
Yes 
Would you recommend this job to er other folk your age or
I didn't have very good qualifications
Aha.
here, good qualifications
Excuse me.
Aha.
Have you ever thought about like maybe going to college or ?
No.
No?
I'm just not, I'm not interested in it, no.
You're not academic, you don't like it?
No.
So what kind of hobbies have you got?
Do you do anything like, do you have any friends from work that you see outside of work?
's boyfriend, he works here.
Oh well, you met him, did you meet him here, aha?
Well it hasn't been a complete loss.
Well I don't know.
Do you do anything, I mean do they do, do any trips, like to the lights of Blackpool or anything now?
Well occasionally somebody runs something but not very often.
Aha.
Do they have a football team now?
They used to, but  don't think, they haven't got one now.
No, cos  
They've just got a snooker team and a golf club and
Aha.
things like that.
Aye, and are a lot of people involved in that that work in the factory?
Just the men.
Mhm, the women don't have any clubs then?


Och no, we can't have that, you'll 
 
have to start some.
No just the men.
Just the men, what's the kind of proportion of women to men in the factory?
I'd say it was about half and half in the factory but higher up it's all men.
All men aha.
Does that bug you?
Not really, it doesn't annoy me but I know there are some  like women older than me in  in my office that know they're not gonna get anywhere because it's all men.
Mhm.
Mhm.
a wee bit of resentment?
Aye, cos about six month ago there was a job come up in our office for like a trainee assistant manager type, well an assistant to an assistant manager  kind of thing  so I applied for it and another woman in the office applied for it cos she's been here for like sixteen years or whatever.
Mhm.
So, and she knew about the office, and I knew about the office and knew everything they were wanting me to know but a man got it from outside so
Oh right.
It was a bit 
Aha.
Do you ever feel like changing at all?
No, not really,
No it's all men.
Do they ever send you on training courses or anything like that?
No.
Do you feel your job's secure?
As long as the factory's here I'll be here I would .
Mhm.
It's a job that they need somebody to do, they couldn't just
Mhm.
pay you off and things 
Aha.
would just pile up and , you'd always need somebody.
Aha, so
somebody.
Okay?
Mhm.
Smashing.