

PART I
Family and Abysssinia 1910–33
Arrival in Addis Ababa
In the summer of 1924, during my first year at Eton, Ras Tafari, later to be Emperor Haile Selassie but at that time Regent, paid a State Visit to England and invited my mother and me to call on him in London.
I had seen him on a number of occasions during my childhood in Abyssinia where my father had been British Minister at Addis Ababa, but this was the first time I spoke to him.
Wearing a black, gold-embroidered silk cloak over a finely woven shamma, he came across the room to greet us, shook hands and with a smile and a gesture invited us to be seated.
He was very small but even then to my mind his slight body and lack of height emphasized his distinction drawing attention to the sensitive and finely moulded face.
My first and lasting impression was of dignity, a dignity entirely unassumed; then I was conscious of his kindness.
In years to come I was to appreciate his inflexible will, his intense patience, his courage, his horror of cruelty, his dedication to his country and his deep religious faith.
We spoke in French, the foreign language in which he was fluent.
He expressed at once his sorrow for my father's death.
 "I shall never forget" , he said,"the support and help he gave me during the critical months of the revolution in 1917.
He was a friend on whose advice I could always count.
Such friends are few."
My mother enquired after Ras Tafari's wife and family, especially after his eldest son, Asfa Wossen, who as a baby at the time of the battle of Sagale had sheltered with us in the Legation; then they spoke of mutual friends, and recalled events that had occurred while we were in Abyssinia.
Meanwhile tea and cakes were brought in.
Later, as we took our leave, I told Ras Tafari how I longed above all to return to his country.
"You will always be very welcome.
One day you must come as my guest."
When my father arrived in Abyssinia in mid-December 1909 to take up his post as British Minister in charge of the Legation, the  Emperor Menelik, the greatest ruler the country had known for centuries, was reported to be still alive; but no one knew for certain, and all men asked what would happen when he died.
For a year or more Menelik had lain in the palace, a living corpse, paralysed and speechless.
He lived for another four years while his empire lapsed into chaos.
He is said to have rallied before he died and to have whispered, "My poor people" , as the tears ran down his face.
A few years earlier he had been the undisputed master of the empire: two hundred thousand of his warriors had paraded before him while a hundred thousand others guarded the marches of the north or fought the Somalis in the deserts to the east.
He had founded Addis Ababa, "the New Flower" , below the Entoto mountains.
Before his reign the site would have been on the southernmost borders of the empire; when he died it was at the empire's heart.
My father and mother had travelled by train from Jibuti, on the coast of French Somaliland, to Dire Dawa, the railhead in Abyssinia.
There they were met by Wakeman, the Anglo-Indian doctor from the Legation whom Lord Herbert Hervey, the Consul, had sent to help them organize their onward journey.
They had brought all that they would require in Abyssinia: provisions, clothes, books, pictures, furniture, tents, saddlery.
There were scores of boxes and crates, all to be checked and loaded before they left Dire Dawa.
My mother had been married only a few months, and had never previously been further abroad than Italy.
She was now faced with an arduous journey into a remote country where there might well be anarchy when Menelik died.
It was enough to daunt most people, but she once told me that the only thing that dismayed her was sorting out their incredible mass of luggage, making sure that the right things went by the right route and that nothing was left behind.
The heavier loads were being sent to Addis Ababa on camels by the desert route, where the Danakil, always dangerous, were said to be giving more trouble than usual.
My parents, using mule transport, travelled to Addis Ababa through the Chercher mountains, by way of Harar, that ancient walled city which Burton had reached fifty-four years earlier.
There my father was anxious to meet Dedjazmatch Balcha, Governor of the Muslim city of Harar and one of the most powerful men in Abyssinia.
Balcha was a Gurage by origin; as a boy he had been wounded and castrated in one of the many battles which Menelik had fought while subduing the southern tribes.
When the fighting  was over Menelik noticed the boy and told his servants to tend him.
Balcha recovered, grew up as a page in Menelik's household and later fought with distinction at Adua, where in 1896 the Abyssinians destroyed an Italian army.
As Governor of Harar he had a well-merited reputation for ruthlessness, brutality and avarice, and was hated and feared by his subjects.
Two days after leaving Dire Dawa my parents camped in the highlands beside Haramaya Lake, a small stretch of water teeming with wildfowl, not far from Harar.
Next day Balcha sent a force to escort my father to the town: my mother, who was pregnant and tired, remained in camp — and would regret it all her life.
Now, for the first time, my father saw the barbaric splendour of the Abyssinian Empire He described it in a letter to his mother:
The Chiefs and notables were gorgeous in mantles of crimson, blue or green velvet, richly embroidered with gold thread, worn over silken shirts; some had lion- or leopard-skin capes draped about their shoulders.
Many wore jewelled, gilded coronets fringed with lions' manes.
Their shields were embossed with gold or silver; their long, curved swords were in richly decorated scabbards.
The splendour of their robes was emphasized by the plain white clothes of their retainers.
The long, winding column of armed men, on horses, on mules and on foot, was an unforgettable sight as it moved across the plain in a haze of dust under a blazing sky.
I wish my father had left a description of his encounter with Balcha but I can find none in his letters or despatches.
That remarkable man was to play an important part in forthcoming events and twenty-six years later was killed fighting against the Italians once more.
A month later my parents were met on the open plain outside Addis Ababa by Lord Herbert Hervey and a deputation of Abyssinian notables who escorted them to the Legation, at some distance to the east of the town, in an extensive compound at the foot of the Entoto hills.
The Legation consisted of connecting wattle-and-daub tukuls, each circular and thatched with grass.
These buildings were comfortable and spacious, and had great charm.
I was born in one of them in June 1910, the first British child born in Abyssinia.
Not until the following year was the stone-built Legation completed, which houses the Embassy today.
In those days Great Britain was represented by an Ambassador in  Paris, Berlin, St Petersburg, Rome, Constantinople and Washington, but in most other countries by a Minister Plenipotentiary in a Legation.
When he arrived at the Legation my father's staff comprised the Consul, the doctor and an Abyssinian interpreter; there was also a Legation escort of five Sikhs from the Indian Army.
Lord Herbert Hervey was transferred shortly afterwards and was replaced some months later by Colonel Doughty-Wylie.
This outstanding man had been seconded from the Royal Welch Fusiliers to serve as Consul at Adana in Turkey, where he behaved with courage and firmness during the Armenian massacres, rescuing several hundred people before he himself was wounded as he rode round the town.
He soon became a close friend of my parents and was later godfather to my brother Brian.
In 1915 at Gallipoli Doughty-Wylie won a posthumous VC: at a critical moment in the landing he went ashore from the River Clyde, rallied the remnants of a battalion of the Hampshires, captured the heights above the beach, and there he was killed.
I was too young to remember him, but later at intervals a number of remarkable men, among them Arnold Hodson, Hugh Dodds and Arthur Bentinck, served on my father's staff and were to remain our friends over the years.
A few days after his arrival my father was received in audience.
In full diplomatic uniform he rode to the palace on a richly caparisoned mule sent to him by Menelik: in Abyssinia mules were more highly esteemed than horses.
With him was my mother, the Consul and the mounted escort of Sikhs, and a small army even more colourful and far more numerous than the escort provided by Dedjazmatch Balcha.
The palace was several miles from the Legation and every time they topped a rise my parents saw the whole procession spread out in front and behind.
By now Menelik was totally incapacitated and my father never met him.
Instead he was greeted by Ras Tasamma, the Regent, and by Lij Yasu, the Emperor's fifteen-year-old grandson and heir.
In another letter to his mother he described the day's events:
At the main gate of the palace officials drove back the unauthorized with the unsparing use of long bamboos to clear a passageway.
Inside the large first court musicians blew on long, straight trumpets and negroes with long flutes added to the din which was very thrilling and appropriate.
They rode through another crowded court and came to the inner court lined only by chiefs.
There they dismounted and entered
an enormous building, very dimly lit, with pillars of wood on either side; the floor was strewn with green rushes and a long carpet lay down the centre.
Against the walls sat row behind row of chiefs, in all the glory of full dress.
Lij Yasu sat on a dais in front of the throne.
At that first meeting my father can have had no idea of the troubles this boy would bring upon his country.
Such was my father's introduction to Abyssinia where, except for three periods of leave, he was to remain for the next ten years.
Already my father had had an interesting and varied career.
Born in 1870, he had served during 1897 as honorary Vice-Consul at Van in Asia Minor, and was there during the Armenian massacres.
Van in those days was remote from Constantinople and had been visited by few Europeans.
Among the mountains around the lake, Kurdish tribes, in their distinctive and spectacular garb, lived as their ancestors had lived for centuries.
My father made a number of water-colour sketches of them that fascinated me as a boy but have since disappeared.
At Van he was very conscious of a past greatness, when kings of Assyria ruled, fought and fell among these mountains; he could visualize the palaces in which they lived and the queens who shared their beds, and he wrote:
Where are they now, with all their joys and cares?
Scattered to dust and all their beauty fled.
Only some grassy mounds and rock-hewn stairs
Bear silent witness to the silent dead.
And over these mounds the Kurdish shepherd strays,
Watching the flocks that feed along the vale.
What are to him these tales of ancient days
Who never heard of Ashtaroth or Baal?
(Van, 1896) On his return to England my father was appointed to the Consular Service and posted to Taranto in southern Italy, where he served for two years.
During the Boer War he joined the Imperial Yeomanry as  a trooper, but was soon commissioned and later promoted to captain.
He fought in South Africa from March 1900 until October 1901 and was awarded the DSO.
After the war he contemplated becoming a District Officer in Rhodesia but decided to rejoin the Consular Service.
In 1902 he was sent as Vice-Consul to Belgrade, and was left in charge of the Legation, with the acting rank of Second Secretary, when the Minister was withdrawn in protest after King Alexander and Queen Draga had been butchered by members of the Black Hand.
Among his papers I found a newspaper cutting, but with no indication of its source:
Mr Thesiger held his post for three years in circumstances both irksome and perilous.
During this period of voluntary ostracism from social contact with those around him, Mr Thesiger's fondness for out-of-doors sports and predilection for the simple life stood him in good stead.
Horses, gun-dogs and books filled his day, and many a regicide glanced wrathfully at the nonchalant figure of the tall Englishman strolling unconcernedly in the highways and byways of Belgrade.
They felt their power was being undermined…
From Belgrade he was posted in 1906 to St Petersburg, and in 1907 to Boma in the Belgian Congo, soon after the Casement investigations into the Belgian atrocities.
In 1909 he was appointed Minister in Addis Ababa.
My father was thirty-eight, my mother twenty-nine when they married; a few months later they set off for Addis Ababa.
A photograph of my mother at that time shows a beautiful, resolute face under waves of soft brown hair.
There in the Legation, remote from family involvements and interference, she devoted herself to my father.
His devotion to her is evident in the letters he wrote whenever they were separated.
Years later she told me she could never remember an angry word between them.
My father was the grandson of Lord Chelmsford, the Lord Chancellor, and was the third son of General Lord Chelmsford.
The latter, my grandfather, had served in the Crimea, in the Indian Mutiny, and in Abyssinia as Deputy Adjutant-General during the Magdala campaign; he then commanded the troops in South Africa during the Kaffir and Zulu wars.
On retirement he was appointed ADC to Queen Victoria and Lieutenant of the Tower of London.
He died at the age of eighty-one while playing billiards in the United Services Club.
My father was intensely and justifiably proud of his family, which in his own generation produced a viceroy, a general, an admiral, a Lord of Appeal, a High Court judge and a famous actor.
Intelligent, sensitive and artistic, with a certain diffidence which added to his charm, he was above all a man of absolute integrity.
He enjoyed sketching, writing verse and playing music.
The faint sound of his cello, as I lay tucked up in bed, is woven into my childhood memories.
He had an abiding love of the English countryside, and wrote of Beanley Moor:
Golden lights on the Cheviots, that flicker and change and fade
As the soft white clinging mist rack swirls down corry and glade,
Stretching down chilly fingers to the depths where the snow drifts lie
Or flinging on high its smoke rings to fade in the pale blue sky.
Pine trees, swayed by the north wind, whisper; the bracken sighs;
Like arras by fairies woven, dew-gemmed the gossamer lies
Outspread on the gorse beneath us, where the wild black moors begin.
And there from saddle we worship the goddess of moorland and whin.
18 May 1902 He loved horses and greatly enjoyed fox-hunting, the theme of several of his poems.
With the Yeomanry in South Africa he had acquired much experience in horse management.
In Addis Ababa he kept a large stable, trained the horses carefully, played polo with enthusiasm and won many races against the other legations.
He was a natural games player; he had been a notable cricketer like several of his family, and had captained the school XI at Cheltenham.
He had always been drawn to the sea, as is also evinced by his poems; at Taranto he became a keen yachtsman.
In the Congo he had hunted big game for the first time and in Abyssinia he took every opportunity to do so, and conveyed his enthusiasm to me when I was only a small boy.
I was known as Billy, and was three when he wrote to his mother:
Billy goes out shooting every day but does not get much as his only weapons are a tennis bat and empty cartridge case which he hits at the birds.
He says he can't get them flying but if they would only sit for him he is sure he could kill one.
His sporting instincts are very strongly developed.
Kathleen Mary, my mother, was a Vigors from County Carlow  where her family had long been established at Burgage, their ancestral home.
She was the second of four children, two boys and two girls.
When she was seven her parents separated and her mother took the children to England.
My maternal grandmother was an undemonstrative and rather prudish woman, whereas my grandfather was rather a rake, a confirmed gambler and obviously excellent company.
My mother remembered him with affection all her life.
As she grew up she often visited relations in Ireland and she developed a lifelong romantic passion for that country, originating in her childhood adoration of Burgage.
Naturally adventurous, she loved the life in Abyssinia, where nothing daunted her.
She shared my father's love of horses and enjoyed to the full the constant riding.
Like him, she was an enthusiastic and skilful gardener: from a bare hillside they created the garden which is today such a delightful feature of the British Embassy in Addis Ababa.
Since she was utterly devoted to my father, her children inevitably took second place.
In consequence in my childhood memories she does not feature as much as my father; only later did I fully appreciate her forceful yet lovable character.
The ten years my parents spent in Abyssinia were undoubtedly the happiest of their lives.
Abyssinia
My Grandfather must have recounted to his children his own role in some of the exciting events of the Magdala campaign, when a British army set out to rescue their Consul imprisoned by the Emperor Theodore.
Such stories would have made a lasting impression on my father and given him an early interest in Abyssinia.
Going there in 1909, he took with him a number of books on the country, its inhabitants and history.
Only with some knowledge of their history could he hope to deal with these singular people, who believed implicitly that their emperors were descended from Solomon and Sheba.
The Abyssinians could claim an uninterrupted succession going back more than two thousand years; in Africa, only Egypt had a more ancient civilization.
From the sixth century to the third century BC, some of the Habashat, the Agazan and other tribes in South Arabia migrated across the Red Sea and settled in the northern highlands of present-day Abyssinia.
There these Semites imposed their language, their customs and their institutions on the indigenous Hamitic population, with whom they interbred to produce the ancestors of modern Tigreans and Amhara.
Only archaeological traces survive of their original civilization, which emerged in what became the unique Aksumite kingdom that lasted until the end of the tenth century AD.
Little is left today to bear witness to the past greatness of Aksum, other than some revealing inscriptions, the stone-wrought thrones of the kings and judges, and the giant monoliths.
Elaborately and exactly carved to represent towers with as many as thirteen storeys, these monoliths were probably erected in the third and fourth centuries AD.
One that is seventy feet high still stands; another, more than a hundred feet long, larger than any Egyptian obelisk, lies broken on the ground.
Here, on one of these thrones, the emperors of Abyssinia were crowned, until the coronation of Menelik in Shoa at the end of the nineteenth century.
The earliest recorded mention of Aksum is in the Periplus of the  Erythrean Sea probably written in the second century AD.
It states that Aksum was eight days' journey inland from Adulis, a port on the Red Sea established by Greek traders sent by the Ptolemys to bring back elephants to be trained for war.
The Periplus also describes Zoscales, King of Aksum, as "a covetous and grasping man but otherwise noble, and imbued with Greek learning" .
In the third century AD Afilas recorded in a Greek inscription how, among other conquests, he had subdued the tribes as far as the Egyptian frontier.
He ended his inscription: "When I had established peace in the lands subject to me, I came to Adulis and sacrificed to Zeus, Ares and Poseidon, on behalf of those who voyage on the sea." 
In the middle of the fourth century Ezana, son of Ella Amida, recorded that he was "King of Aksum and of Himyar, Raidan and Saba in Arabia" .
One of his inscriptions bears witness to his conversion to Christianity.
This all-important event was confirmed by Rufinus, a contemporary Roman historian.
He gives the traditional account of how a merchant ship was pillaged in the Red Sea and its crew and passengers massacred except for two boys who were brought to Ella Amida in Aksum.
There the boys grew up in the King's court.
One of them, Frumentius, was appointed Regent during Ezana's childhood.
A devout Christian, Frumentius visited Alexandria, where in about AD 330 he was consecrated Bishop by the Patriarch Athanasius.
Returning to Abyssinia he converted Ezana and his people to Christianity.
The Roman Emperor Constantine had only been converted in 312, and not till 433 did St Patrick go to Ireland.
In the sixth century the Emperor Justinian despatched an embassy to Aksum.
The envoy was received by the King standing in a four-wheeled chariot overlaid with gold and drawn by four elephants.
The King wore a great collar of gold, was robed in a linen garment embroidered with gold thread and decorated with pearls, and was armed with two gilded spears and a gilded shield.
The rise of Islam in the middle of the seventh century isolated Abyssinia from the rest of the Christian world.
After Abyssinian pirates sacked Jidda in 702, the Caliph, in revenge, seized the ports from which they operated.
Thereafter, in Gibbon's memorable phrase, "encompassed on all sides by the enemies of their religion, the Aethiopians slept near a thousand years, forgetful of the world by whom they were forgotten" .
The death blow to the Aksumite kingdom came in the tenth century from unassimilated Agaw in the south.
The Agaw were Hamites and had inhabited the highlands since time immemorial.
In he north they had merged with the Semitic colonists from Arabia to produce the civilization of Aksum.
In the south they were either pagan or more probably belonged to that archaic South Arabian form of Judaism which is still held by the Falashas.
Under a formidable Queen, known to tradition as Judith, they ravaged the Aksunite kingdom, burnt the churches, overthrew the last King of Aksum and massacred the princes of the royal line whom they found, confined as custom decreed, on a mountain-top.
Aksum had outlasted Jerusalem and Rome, going down in ruin only eighty years before the Norman conquest of Britain.
Despite their initial ferocity the victorious Agaw were eventually assimilated into the civilization they had sought to destroy, and were converted to Christianity.
After a period of chaos a sequence of Agaw monarchs, known as the Zagwe dynasty, established themselves.
One of them constructed the astounding rock-hewn churches at Lalibela.
In the later years of the dynasty there was a growing belief that the Queen of Sheba had visited Solomon in Jerusalem, had been seduced by him and borne him a son named Henelik, who founded the Abyssinian royal line.
It was also believed that Menelik visited his father Solomon, and on his departure contrived to substitute a copy of the Ark of the Covenant that his father had given him for the original, which he then carried off to Aksum.
In 1270 this usurping Agaw dynasty was overthrown by Yekuno Amlak, whose claim to be descended from the Aksumite princes Has accepted.
Thirty years later it was universally believed in Abyssinia that the Solomonic line had been re-established, a belief which endured until the overthrow of Haile Selassie and the establishment of the present Marxist republic.
Another tradition which grew up about Abyssinia was the European belief in the country's legendary priest-king, Prester John.
At the time of the Crusades, Europe took comfort in the expectation that somewhere in the East there ruled a mighty Christian monarch, Known as Prester John, who in due time would march on Jerusalem, destroy the infidel and liberate the Holy Places.
The Prester was  believed to have written to the Byzantine Emperor Manuel Comnenus, enumerating the wonders of his kingdom, and affirming that he ruled over the three Indies and over seventy kings, and that twenty bishops, twelve archbishops and a patriarch acknowledged his authority.
As early as 1177 Pope Alexander III wrote to "John, the illustrious and magnificent King of the Indies" a letter he almost certainly despatched to the King of Abyssinia, who was already being identified as the Prester John.
In 1487 King John of Portugal sent Pedro da Covilham to search for the kingdom of Prester John.
He arrived in Abyssinia and was cordially received by the Emperor, but was never allowed to leave the country.
Some thirty years later, after Vasco da Gama had opened the sea route to India, a Portuguese mission under Rodrigo de Lima arrived at Massawa and travelled inland to the court of Lebna Dengel, the Negusa Nagast, King of Kings, or Emperor.
Lebna Dengel proved friendly to the Portuguese, although dissatisfied with the presents they had brought him and exasperated by their quarrels among themselves.
Covilham was still alive, and his profound knowledge of the customs and languages of the country proved invaluable.
The mission remained for six years in Abyssinia and after its return to Portugal the chaplain, Francisco Alvares, wrote his famous account of the country, A true relation of the lands of the Prester John.
Throughout his narrative he refers to Lebna Dengel as the Prester or Prester John.
He describes Lebna Dengel's capital as being the size of a town but consisting entirely of tents.
The Emperor's five tents were invariably pitched on a rise in the centre of the camp and the royal enclosure was surrounded by a wall of curtains with five entrances.
All other tents were pitched in their allotted place.
Nearby were the two churches of St Mary and the Holy Cross, and two other tents containing the royal treasure.
Also close at hand were the Queen's camp, the camp of the pages and the royal kitchens with, not far off, the great tent used for the court of justice, and the quarters of the two commanders-in-chief, of the Abuna or archbishop, of the state officials and the nobility.
Lebna Dengel conducted state business inside his great white tent, sitting on a platform, dressed in rich robes and with his face partly veiled with blue taffeta.
Similar formality was observed when  the court was on the move.
The Emperor rode on a finely bedecked mule led by six pages, and was concealed behind red curtains carried on poles.
Ahead of him marched twenty other pages following six saddled mules and six saddled horses, each led by four men.
Four lions, held on strong chains, always went before him.
He was very preoccupied with religion and at any hour of day or night might summon Alvares for a religious discussion.
The Abysinian Church was Monophysite, believing in the "single divine" nature of Christ.
This was a fundamental difference from the Catholic belief, which regards Christ as having both human and divine natures.
Alvares also found fault with many of the Abyssinian Church's customs, such as the observance of a Sabbath as well as a Sunday, and the universal practice of circumcision.
He was, however, immensely impressed by the great number of monasteries and churches.
Among many other observations, Alvares recorded the age-old custom of secluding all members of the royal line, other than the King's children, on an almost sheer-sided mountain.
This effectively prevented them from interfering in matters of state, or fomenting rebellion.
On one occasion while he was in Abyssinia, a letter from them was smuggled down but was intercepted, whereupon the guards responsible were flogged for days.
After the Portuguese mission left Abyssinia, Lebna Dengel found himself increasingly faced by the threat from the Muslim states of Ifat and of Adal, which included Harar, with which ever since the fourteenth century the Emperors of Abyssinia had been intermittently at war; these states were forever encroaching on the eastern borders of the empire in a war of raid and counter-raid.
This Muslim threat had become more pronounced in the fifteenth century after Sultan Salim of Istanbul had conquered Egypt and received the submission of the Hejaz.
The arrival of the Turks in the Red Sea in 1517 proved disastrous for the Abyssinians.
The Portuguese mission had barely left when Ahmad Ibrahim, the Adal leader, best known as Ahmad Granj or "the left-handed" , invaded the country.
Armed with matchlocks supplied by the Turks, and supported by some two hundred Turkish soldiers, he scattered the armies opposed to him, overran the and, carried off its treasure, burnt every church he could locate, and massacred the royal princes on their mountain-top.
The effect of relatively few firearms had been devastating against a warrior race with no previous experience of them.
Lebna Dengel, undaunted, found refuge among the mountains of the interior and there, with a small but faithful following, he fought on.
He appealed to the Portuguese for help, but died and was succeeded by his only surviving son, Claudius, before a Portuguese force under Christopher, son of the famous Vasco da Gama, arrived.
Heavily outnumbered, but with a superiority in firearms, Christopher da Gama fought an inconclusive battle near Lake Ashangi.
Before the next battle Ahmad Granj was strongly reinforced, especially with firearms; Christopher da Gama was killed and his force was routed.
Claudius, despite the defeat of his allies, proved as resolute in adversity as his father.
In 1542 he rallied the Abyssinian forces, reassembled the remaining Portuguese and surprised the Muslim army near Lake Tana.
Ahmad Granj was killed early in the battle and his demoralized army broke and fled, to be remorselessly hunted down by the vengeful Abyssinians.
Few of them got back to their own country.
For the first time for more than two thousand years Abyssinia had been invaded, though not conquered, by an alien race.
The inhabitants of the country had been decimated, their land ravaged, much of their unique ecclesiastical heritage destroyed; but as a race they had not been mongrelized.
The Abyssinians of today in Tigre, Begemder Gojjam and in such areas as Manz in Shoa are the lineal descendants of a race that antedated the Roman Empire.
The incursion of pagan Galla tribes, who now seized the chance to profit from the chaos and disruption of the Muslim war, did, however, have a lasting effect on large areas.
A Hamitic people, they established themselves over a great part of Shoa and even pushed northwards along the escarpment for some hundred and fifty miles beyond Dessie.
From now on there was almost continuous warfare between them and the kings of Shoa.
Some Galla became Christian and were assimilated by the Amhara; others, notably in Wollo, became Muslim; but many remained pagan.
The Church in Abyssinia had been rescued from extinction with the help of the Portuguese: without their intervention the Abyssinians might well have been absorbed into the adjacent Muslim world.
But these Portuguese lived in an age when Christian burnt Christian to save souls, and their Jesuit missionaries now  condemned the doctrine and ritual of the Church which the Portuguese troops had helped to save.
The Abyssinians, as Monophysites, owed allegiance to the Patriarch of Alexandria; he alone could appoint the Abuna who was head of their Church.
The Jesuit missionaries were men dedicated to the reform of the native Church, but their very zeal and intolerance defeated their aim and permanently alienated a people justifiably proud of their own Christian tradition.
The Jesuits did convert one king, whereupon the Abuna absolved his subjects from their allegiance; and in the subsequent rebellion the king was killed.
Susenyos, his nephew, succeeded him; he too became a Catholic and the immediate result was further insurrection.
Eventually, horrified at the unending slaughter, he capitulated:
Hear Ye!
Hear Ye!
We gave you this faith believing it was good, but innumerable people have been slain — Julius, Gabriel, Takla Giorgis, Sarsa Kristos, and now these peasants.
For which reason we restore to you the faith of your fathers…and do ye rejoice.
Susenyos died shortly afterwards and was succeeded by his son Fasiladas, who drove the Jesuits from the country and banished every recalcitrant native Catholic.
A hundred years of missionary effort had failed utterly; its only effect had been to confirm the Abyssinians in their attachment to their ancient faith and to sow in them the seeds of xenophobia.
Fasiladas established his capital at Gondar, just north of Lake Tana, and there the hitherto peripatetic court remained for two hundred years.
At Gondar, Fasiladas built the first of the remarkable stone palaces which still stand today.
Yasu, his grandson, succeeded in 1680 and reigned for twenty years, the last effective Emperor at Gondar.
His successors eventually lost all authority, even in the town, and survived merely as puppets in the hands of ruthless, ambitious nobles who fought to overthrow their rivals and to gain control of the disintegrating kingdom.
At one moment six Emperors were said to be alive, each as impotent as the others.
These chaotic times lasted for a hundred and fifty years.
James Bruce of Kinnaird arrived in Abyssinia in 1769, determined to discover the source of the Blue Nile.
Though he was fortunate to secure the friendship of the ruthless Ras Mikael of Tigre, who at that  time dominated Abyssinia, it was three and a half years before he could leave the country.
Bruce published in five volumes an account of his travels and described in horrifying detail the endless warfare, the wholesale slaughter, the torture and the executions when the streets of Gondar were littered with corpses bereft of hand and foot.
He wrote: "I at last scarce ever went out and nothing occupied my thought but how to escape from this bloody country." 
Tragically, the monumental work written by this great traveller, the first from the British Isles to visit Abyssinia, was initially derided and discredited.
Bruce died in 1794, an embittered man.
I bought his Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile for ten shillings when I was a Lower boy at Eton; engrossed, I read through all five volumes.
Order was temporarily imposed on this chaos by the Emperor Theodore.
Born in about 1819, the son of a minor chieftain in the district of Kwara in western Abyssinia, this outstanding man started his career as an outlaw with a small but devoted following; by 1854 he had subjugated Gondar and Gojjam and the following year, having defeated at Derasge in Simien his most formidable rival, the ruler of Tigre, he proclaimed himself Emperor and took the name of Theodore.
Shoa submitted to him in 1858 and Menelik, the young Prince of Shoa, became a captive at his court.
Theodore was determined to break the power of the provincial Rases and unite the country under his sole control, administered by governors appointed by himself.
He was also resolved to impose a number of reforms, including the abolition of slavery.
At first he was assisted by two remarkable Englishmen.
Walter Plowden, before Theodore's rise to power, had been sent to Abyssinia as Consul to negotiate a commercial treaty with the most powerful of the several Rases.
He failed to achieve this but remained in the country with his friend John Bell.
They became Theodore's trusted advisers.
It was his misfortune that Plowden and Bell were killed by rebels and their restraining influence was removed.
Theodore was a fanatical Christian, convinced that he was "The Awaited One" destined to lead his armies against the infidel and deliver Jerusalem.
In 1862 he sent a letter to Queen Victoria, requesting her assistance against the Turks and offering to send her an envoy with presents.
He received no reply; seldom can a mislaid letter have had so costly a sequel.
Infuriated by this apparently deliberate slight, Theodore imprisoned Charles Cameron, the British  Consul at Massawa, and a number of missionaries of various nationalities.
The British Government despatched Hormuzd Rassam, an official of Armenian descent at the Residency at Aden, to negotiate their release; he too was imprisoned.
Finally in 1868 the British Government, at an eventual cost of ten million pounds, sent General Sir Robert Napier from India, with an army of sixteen thousand men including elephants to carry the guns, to release the captives.
My grandfather was Napier's Deputy Adjutant-General.
This formidable operation was well planned and ably conducted, but it was helped to a large extent by the widespread resentment which Theodore's policy had engendered.
His attempts to subject the traditional rulers of the provinces to his authority had resulted in constant warfare, and the extortions of his army, forever in the field, caused much discontent.
Despite the terror which as a result of his ruthlessness, cruelty and ungovernable rages his name evoked, he had by the time of the British invasion lost effective control of his country except around his mountain fortress of Magdala.
Napier advanced methodically on Magdala, and below the mountain Theodore's army gave battle.
The Abyssinians fought with outstanding courage but inflicted pathetically few casualties.
After the battle Theodore absolved from their allegiance any of his followers who so desired, and despatched Cameron and the other European prisoners to Napier's camp.
Napier sent Theodore a letter demanding his surrender.
Theodore's reply included the following passage: "I had intended, if God so decreed, to conquer the world, and it was my desire to die if my purpose could not be fulfilled.
Since the day of my birth no man dared to lay hands on me."
Then, almost alone, he awaited his fate, and as the British troops stormed through the gateway of his stronghold he shot himself with a pistol sent to him in happier days by Queen Victoria.
Napier fired the buildings and, his mission accomplished, withdrew to the coast.
He took with him to England Theodore's son Alamayahu, who was sent to Rugby School and then to the Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst, where he fell ill and died, aged nineteen.
Queen Victoria had a brass plaque put up in his memory in St George's Chapel at Windsor, where I searched for it and found it while I was at Eton.
The Ras of Tigre, who had greatly facilitated Napier's advance on Magdala, was suitably rewarded with firearms and cannon, with which during the troubled years that followed Theodore's death he was able to overcome his rivals.
In 1872 he was crowned at Aksum as John IV.
Like Theodore he was a brave and skilful general; unlike him he was patient, self-controlled and temperate in his habits.
Throughout his reign of seventeen years, John's empire was constantly threatened from beyond its borders.
The Egyptians, who had succeeded the enfeebled Turkish presence in the Red Sea, invaded his country and in 1875 and 1876 were decisively defeated.
Their withdrawal was followed in 1885 by Italy's occupation of the hot humid seaport of Massawa, from which the Italians cast covetous eyes on the cool uplands.
One force that probed towards the plateau was destroyed, but the Italian threat remained.
Meanwhile John was menaced by the Dervish armies from the Sudan, who were massing on his frontier.
He summoned his subject kings and princes to his assistance and they marched to join him, eating up the land as they came, for they numbered two hundred thousand men.
But they too posed a threat, for there were few of his vassals whom he could trust.
Menelik was now King of Shoa.
After nine years' captivity at Theodore's court he had escaped from Magdala and returned to his homeland.
There he had been rapturously received by its inhabitants, over whom his house had ruled for generations.
Profiting from the troubles in the north, he had extended his kingdom to the south and east but had temporarily forfeited his chance of becoming Emperor.
His ambition, however, was unabated, and his intrigues against John were unceasing.
He had already received thousands of rifles from the Italians in return for promises of assistance, a fact of which John was fully aware.
Takla Haymanot of Gojjam, another of John's powerful and ambitious subjects, was also motivated solely by self-interest.
However his army, though estimated at a hundred thousand, was decisively defeated in 1888 by the Dervishes under the formidable ex-slave Abu Anga.
They followed up their victory by sacking Gondar, burning numerous churches.
When they eventually withdrew they took with them four thousand slaves and great herds of cattle.
The following year John advanced to the Sudanese frontier and  attacked the Dervish position at Galabat.
He was killed just when his victory seemed assured, and as news of his death spread his army disintegrated.
The Dervishes did not follow up their victory, content to send John's body to the Khalifa at Omdurman, where the head was cut off, stuck on a pole, and paraded round the northern Sudan.
Menelik now achieved his ambition: in 1889, at Entoto just outside Addis Ababa, he was crowned Emperor.
Meanwhile the Italians had taken advantage of John's death to occupy Asmara and Keren.
Menelik accepted this and signed with them the Treaty of Uccialli.
The Italians claimed that by this treaty Menelik had granted them a protectorate over Abyssinia.
They based their claim on the Italian translation, but the Amharic version which Menelik had signed did not confirm this, and no agreement was reached.
Menelik finally repudiated the treaty: war followed in 1895.
The Italians won an easy initial victory over a Tigrean force.
After the battle a prisoner warned them: "For the present you have been victorious because God willed it; but wait a month or two and you will see Menelik's soldiers.
They are as many in number as locusts."
Over-confident, the Italians occupied parts of Tigre and pushed as far south as Amba Alagi.
Then, outmanoeuvred and defeated in a number of engagements by Ras Makonnen, Menelik's cousin and ablest general, they were driven back beyond Makalle.
General Baratieri, hearing he was to be superseded in command of the Italian forces, advanced by night with three columns through the rocky hills and gorges near Adua to give battle to Menelik's army, which numbered a hundred thousand men.
His columns lost touch and on 1 March 1896 were overwhelmed in turn.
Out of a force of 17,700, of whom 10,600 were Italian and the rest native troops, over 6000 were killed, nearly 1500 were wounded and between 3000 and 4000 were taken prisoner.
Abyssinian losses amounted to some 7000 killed and 10,000 wounded.
They pursued the fugitives for about nine miles and then lit bonfires on the hill-tops to alert the local peasantry.
Everywhere that night, over the battlefield and among the bivouacs, rose the victory chant:
Mow, mow down the tender grass Ebalgume!
Ebalgume!
The corn of Italy that was sown in Tigre has been reaped by Abba-Dagnaw and given to the birds.
The reference was to Menelik who rode his famous horse Dagnaw into battle.
Some 1500 native prisoners had their right hand and left foot cut off, the traditional punishment for fighting against their country: most of them died.
Some were castrated, although this was against Menelik's express orders.
Most of the Amhara had abandoned the custom of castrating their victims, traditionally based on David's treatment of the Philistines; but among the Galla tribes it was still customary to castrate the dead and dying, and that day there were many Galla in Menelik's army.
It is futile to judge by modern standards the Abyssinians' treatment of their prisoners: theirs were still the standards of the Middle Ages.
They had just overwhelmingly repulsed an unprovoked attack by a European power, and their past history gave them little cause to regard Europeans with favour.
After his victory Menelik showed marked restraint: he tacitly recognized the Italian claim to Eritrea, stipulating only that the frontier should be on the Mareb river.
Forty years later the Italians, in another unprovoked attack, used poison gas to ensure victory and shot many of their prisoners out of hand.
Revolution, 1917
When my father arrived there, Addis Ababa consisted of a series of scattered villages grouped on hillsides with open, uncultivated spaces in between.
Menelik's palace crowned the largest hill; nearby a jumble of thatched huts and some corrugated-iron-roofed shacks clustered round the large open market.
Nowhere were there any proper roads.
My father once wrote after he had been to the French Legation to dine: "A forty-minute ride across two ravines and a swamp, then a shocking road up to the house on a moonless night is really no fun." 
Abyssinians of any standing travelled everywhere on muleback, followed by an armed mob of slaves and retainers, varying in number according to the importance of their master.
Galla, Somali, Gurage, people from the subject kingdom of Kaffa, negroes from the west, mingled on the streets with their Amhara and Tigrean overlords; but it was these latter who dominated the scene, imposed their stamp upon the town and gave it its unique character.
Wrapped in white toga-like shammas worn over long white shirts and jodhpurs, they set a fashion which over the years was copied by an increasing number of their subjects.
The clothes, the buildings, the pitch and intonation of voices speaking Amharic; the smell of rancid butter, of red peppers and burning cow dung that permeated the town; the packs of savage dogs that roamed the streets and whose howling rose and fell through the night; an occasional corpse hanging on the gallows-tree; beggars who had lost a hand or foot for theft; debtors and creditors wandering round chained together; strings of donkeys bringing in firewood; caravans of mules; the crowded market where men and women squatted on the ground, selling earthen pots, lengths of cloths, skins, cartridges, bars of salt, silver ornaments, heaps of grain, vegetables, beer — all this combined to create a scene and an atmosphere unlike any other in the world.
The Amharas and Tigreans, as opposed to the Galla and the other tribes they had incorporated into their empire, resembled no other  race in appearance or character.
They regarded themselves, however fallaciously, as light-skinned; in their paintings they were invariably shown full face and almost white, whereas their enemies were always depicted in profile and black, unless they were Europeans.
Encircled by British, French and Italian territories, they were intensely proud of their age-old independence and very conscious that their forefathers had been among the earliest converts to Christianity.
Consequently they were both arrogant and reactionary, while the past three hundred years had made them suspicious and obstructive in dealing with Europeans.
As a race they had an inborn love of litigation and suffered from inherent avarice.
Yet they were naturally courteous, often extremely intelligent and always courageous and enduring.
Conditions in Addis Ababa and in the country as a whole were already chaotic when my father arrived.
They were soon to become very much worse.
In and around Addis Ababa murder, brigandage and highway robbery increased alarmingly; in restoring order, public hangings, floggings and mutilations had little effect.
The town was filled with disbanded soldiery from Menelik's army, and on the hills outside were camped the armies of the various contenders for power.
Before he was incapacitated, Menelik had won recognition for his conquests and acceptance of his new frontiers.
He had incorporated into his empire the Ogaden, the town of Harar, the lands of the Galla tribes, the Gurage country, the ancient kingdom of Kaffa, and the Anuak and other tribes on the borders of the Sudan.
By the rulers of the ancient provinces of Abyssinia and by the nobility as a whole he was universally accepted as Emperor.
In 1908, however, he suffered his first stroke.
His last effective act was to proclaim his thirteen-year-old grandson, Lij Yasu, as his heir, with Ras Tasamma as Regent.
Lij Yasu's father was the ruler of Wollo, Ras Mikael, who had been converted from Islam to Christianity during the reign of the Emperor John, and had later married Menelik's elder daughter, Shoaragad.
A great man, one of the most formidable of his age, he was to be crowned Negus, or King, only to be destroyed by his loyalty to his worthless son.
Inside the palace the Empress Taitu, Menelik's wife, once a woman of outstanding beauty but now an obese hulk, schemed and intrigued to retain power.
Menelik was her fifth husband; they had  no children, though Menelik had had a son and two daughters by previous marriages.
His son had died young; the elder daughter, Shoaragad, was the mother of Lij Yasu.
Since the younger daughter, Zauditu, had married Taitu's nephew, Ras Gugsa Wale of Begemder, Taitu was determined to put Zauditu instead of Lij Yasu on the throne when Menelik died, confident that she would then retain effective authority.
However, the council of ministers, divided on every other issue, combined to thwart her.
In the north, old rivalries had broken out afresh: powerful Rases intrigued and fought for supremacy, struggled to suppress rebellion among their vassals, or marched on Addis Ababa.
In the subject provinces of the south, governors and their armies of occupation pillaged the land and sold the inhabitants into slavery.
 "The soldiers that leave a province sweep up all they can and those that enter take the rest," was how my father described the situation.
Meanwhile, the country was being flooded with rifles run in through French Somaliland with the connivance of French officials.
On 10 April 1911 Ras Tasamma, the Regent, died of a stroke.
My father had judged him "to stand for everything that was most corrupt in officialdom" .
He had, however, possessed authority.
As soon as the Rases heard of his death they congregated in Addis Ababa, which soon resembled an armed camp.
All normal business came to a standstill.
At this critical moment my father had to escort an Abyssinian Mission, headed by Ras Kassa, to England to attend King George V's coronation.
Leaving Colonel Doughty-Wylie in charge of the Legation, he set off for Dire Dawa by caravan on 4 May and arrived in England on 15 June.
The five Abyssinian notables, in their full regalia, created a stir in the Abbey.
In order to avoid the hot weather my mother had preceded my father to England, escorted as far as Jibuti by an official from the Sudan who was temporarily serving at the Legation.
My father was due four months' leave and this they spent at Beachley, his attractive house near Chepstow at the mouth of the Severn.
In the family album are some photographs of me on the lawn with Susannah, my Indian ayah, to whom I was devoted.
I was then a year old and she was with us till I was nearly four.
With her I could do no wrong.
When my mother remonstrated she would answer, "He one handsome Rajah — why for he no do what he want?" 
I apparently walked at an unusually early age but was slow learning to speak.
My mother always maintained that the first words I said were "Go yay," which  meant "Go away" and showed an independent spirit.
My brother Brian was born in October 1911, and my parents engaged Mary Buckle to look after us.
She was eighteen and had never been out of England, yet she unhesitatingly set off for a remote and savage country in Africa.
She gave us unfailing devotion and became an essential part of our family.
As children we called her Minna, and she has been known to us and to our friends as Minna ever since.
Now, after more than seventy years, she is still my cherished friend and confidante, the one person left with shared memories of those far-off days.
While my father was on his way to England, Lij Yasu, with the support of the Fitaurari Habta Giorgis, Menelik's commander-in-chief, seized the palace and assumed control of the country.
He schemed to be proclaimed Emperor, but as long as Menelik was known to be alive this was impossible.
Even after Menelik's death Lij Yasu was never crowned, possibly because he believed a prophecy that if he was crowned he would die.
This omission certainly weakened his position during the struggle that lay ahead.
The situation in Abyssinia was becoming increasingly chaotic when my father returned there in January 1912.
This was due in large part to the character of Lij Yasu.
From the day he seized power in 1911 he thought of nothing but his own amusement and he was frequently absent from Addis Ababa, which he detested, for months on end.
During his absence all government business, even the most trivial, came to a stop, since no minister was willing to make a decision while Lij Yasu was away.
On one occasion my father sent a runner to him in the Danakil country with an important letter.
The man returned with the letter, having failed to deliver it.
In a despatch to the Foreign Office my father wrote:
Lij Yasu is camped out in the bush with only five Abyssinians in his retinue; while in the neighbouring villages are various messengers from the government and from provincial chiefs who dare not approach to deliver their letters for fear of the flogging with which anyone who disturbs him is threatened.
Lij Yasu has his head shaved in the Danakil fashion and is living with the Danakil; what food or milk he requires he seizes from the nearest villages, and he is doing nothing but hunt occasionally.
Cruelty and arrogance predominated in his nature.
He would watch an execution or a flogging with evident enjoyment.
A story  was even current to prove his manhood he had killed and castrated a boy belonging to the palace.
Soon after he came to power he personally led an expedition against the Shanqalla negroes on the Sudan border, and my father affirmed that the slaughter there must have satisfied for a time even his craving for blood.
In 1913, the year of Menelik's death, Lij Yasu wantonly attacked some Danakil encampments and massacred three hundred men, women and children.
My father's explanation was that "It was simply because he liked the sight of blood" .
He had apparently adopted the Danakil custom of castrating the dead and dying.
Count Colli, the Italian Minister, quoted one of Lij Yasu's officers as saying on his return from this expedition that Lij Yasu cut the breasts off a girl who had refused his advances, after he had watched her being raped by his soldiers.
By 1913 conditions on the boundary between Abyssinia and the British East Africa Protectorate, later known as Kenya, had become worse than usual, with frequent incursions by well-armed gangs of Abyssinians raiding for slaves and ivory.
My father was therefore anxious to travel to Nairobi and discuss with the Governor measures to prevent these raids, as well as the possibility of delimiting the frontier and finding an answer to the demand by the Abyssinian Government for the return of the Boran and Gabbra tribesmen who had migrated in large numbers into East Africa after Menelik's conquest of their homelands.
In November 1913 he accompanied his family on their way to England as far as the railhead, which had now reached the Awash river, and then returned to Addis Ababa.
From there he set off with a caravan of mules on a journey of some eight hundred miles to Nairobi.
His letters evince the excitement he felt at undertaking this journey, one which few Europeans had as yet made, and his anticipation of getting plenty of big game hunting on the way.
My father travelled to Nairobi by way of Mega, Moyale, Marsabit, Laisamis and Nyeri, all places with which I was to be familiar some fifty-five years later.
After several days in Nairobi he took the train to Mombasa where he caught a ship to England; there, soon after my brother Dermot was born, he rejoined my mother.
He was still on leave in England when war was declared on 4 August 1914.
An accomplished linguist, fluent in German and French, he was accepted by the Army, given an appointment as a captain in the Intelligence Branch, and sent to France, where he arrived on 23  September.
This posting was a remarkable achievement, considering the number of regular officers trying desperately to get to the front, dreading that the war would be over before they could take part.
He was attached to the 3rd Army Corps, and while serving in France he earned a mention in despatches.
The Foreign Office had only given him permission to join the Army on the understanding that he would return to Abyssinia when his leave expired.
He returned to Addis Ababa with his family in January 1915.
Susannah had gone back to India in 1913 when we sailed from Jibuti to England.
I suspect that in the excitement of going on board I hardly realized she was leaving me for good.
In England my parents engaged an elderly trained nurse to look after Dermot.
We all called her Nanny; I never knew her name.
She had charge of Dermot, and of Roderic, born a year later in the Legation.
As far as I was concerned, she remained a vague figure in the background.
On his return to Addis Ababa my father was increasingly concerned by an evident predilection for Islam on the part of Lij Yasu, who was consorting more and more with the Muslims of his empire, and frequenting mosques.
He was reputed to wear a turban, and to eat meat slaughtered according to Islamic observance.
Many Abyssinians were convinced that the Central Powers would win the war, a conviction strengthened by the British defeats by the Turks at Kut and the Dardanelles; they felt in consequence that it was prudent to keep on good terms with the Germans and Turks.
But Lij Yasu's partiality for Islam was apparently more than a question of convenience.
He had married the daughters of several important Muslim chiefs and was in frequent communication with the "Mad Mullah" in Somaliland, supplying him with rifles and ammunition to help in his long drawn out war against the British.
He evidently hoped to secure the Mullah's daughter as a bride; it was believed that he even aspired to marry the Caliph of Islam's daughter.
In June 1915 my father commented: "I am coming to the conclusion that the heir to the throne of Solomon is at heart a Moslem and is entertaining dreams of one day putting himself at the head of the Mohammadan Abyssinians, and of producing a Moslem kingdom that will stretch far beyond the frontiers of his present Empire." 
In May 1916 on the anniversary of the Sultan's accession, Lij Yasu  presented an Abyssinian flag to the Turkish Consul in Addis Ababa on which was embroidered the Turkish crescent and the Islamic declaration of faith.
This created consternation in the town.
In July he slipped away by train to Dire Dawa and my father wrote despondently to the Foreign Office: "Lij Yasu, during his three months' stay in Addis Ababa, has succeeded in destroying even the semblance of central government and is dragging down the prestige of individual ministers so that there is no authority to whom the Legation can appeal." 
In Dire Dawa Lij Yasu attended the Islamic festival of the Eid of Bairam, prayed publicly in the mosque and presented three camels and five bullocks to the Muslim community for the feast.
He then went to Jig Jigga, where at a mass meeting of Somalis he swore on the Koran that he was a Muslim.
He had circulated a document which professed to trace his descent, through his father, from the Prophet.
In August, as the first step to setting up an Islamic government in Harar, he peremptorily recalled its Governor, Dedjazmatch Tafari.
This was Tafari Makonnen, the future Emperor Haile Selassie, who had replaced the detested Dedjazmatch Balcha as Governor of Harar in 1911.
As Ras Makonnen's son, he had been rapturously received by its inhabitants, and by his justice and humanity he soon merited this acclaim.
Menelik had occupied Harar in 1887 after a ferocious battle and had appointed Ras Makonnen, the ablest of his generals and his devoted friend and cousin, as Governor.
Ras Makonnen governed Harar until his death in 1906 and there his son Tafari was born and grew up under the enlightened administration of his eminent father; he was thirteen when his father died.
Had Ras Makonnen lived he would have assumed control of the country when Menelik was incapacitated, and as his cousin would undoubtedly have succeeded him.
His son was now to take charge and lead the opposition to Lij Yasu.
In Addis Ababa Tafari did his best to unite the frightened and divided chiefs and to persuade them to take effective action.
An attempted coup in August was frustrated by the timorous behaviour of the Abuna, who stayed away from a crucial meeting.
At a later meeting of all the chiefs, in the palace, a proclamation was read out detailing the acts which had convinced the ministers that Lij Yasu had become a Muslim.
The irresolute Abuna got to his feet and began,"If these things are true…
"
He was shouted down.
My father wrote:
A scene of indescribable confusion followed: a shot was fired and immediately the excited crowd of soldiers began to fire their rifles in all directions, without knowing why or wherefor.
In the congested space few bullets could have missed their mark and the slaughter would probably have continued but for the presence of mind of the officer in charge of the war drums, who ordered them to beat the signal for silence, when the madness ceased as soon as it had arisen.
Many were found to be dead and the total casualties were reported to be about a hundred.
In the silence that followed most of the chiefs were seen to be in tears and the council was dissolved until the afternoon.
At a second meeting it was decided that Waizero Zauditu, daughter of Emperor Menelik, should be proclaimed Empress, and Dedjazmatch Tafari be made Ras and heir to the throne.
The town remained absolutely quiet, the population receiving the news with satisfaction and relief.
Now that the Abuna had absolved the inhabitants of the empire from their allegiance to Lij Yasu, Ras Tafari was the obvious choice for Emperor.
He was resolute, outstandingly able, just, patient and merciful.
He was of royal blood, the great grandson of King Sahle Selassie, a second cousin to Menelik and son of the famous Ras Makonnen.
Yet he was mistrusted by many.
It was suspected that he wished to abolish slavery, to found schools, to build roads and to modernize the country.
His peers, indeed the country as a whole, wanted none of these innovations.
In consequence, instead of being proclaimed Emperor he was appointed Regent.
For the next fourteen frustrating and hazardous years he survived, far-sighted and unembittered, until he finally achieved his ambition.
Lij Yasu remained for a while round Harar.
His apostasy had cost him his empire.
The Somali tribes, with whom he had identified himself, might well have rallied to his cause had he in this decisive hour shown himself a leader.
Instead he thought only of his personal safety, and as the army from Addis Ababa under the formidable Dedjazmatch Balcha drew near he fled into the Danakil desert.
Balcha entered Harar and his troops massacred such Muslims as they could find within the walls.
Hugh Dodds, then Consul in Harar, reported that the smell of corpses pervaded the town for days.
Negus Mikael, Lij Yasu's father, being now a devout Christian, had condemned his son's affiliation to Islam, but when he heard  that Lij Yasu had been deposed family pride was outraged.
He gathered his troops and prepared to march on Addis Ababa.
His entire force of some eighty thousand men could be mobilized within fifty miles of his capital, Dessie, whereas Ras Tafari's forces were very dispersed, some being stationed more than two hundred miles from Addis Ababa.
My father reported that the Shoan leaders estimated their troops at a hundred and twelve thousand, but he warned the Foreign Office that they tended to count the number at a chief's disposal rather than how many he could effectively assemble.
These were anxious days for my father.
Lij Yasu's restoration would at the least constitute a considerable propaganda success for Turkey; it might even bring Abyssinia into the war on the side of our enemies, at a time when we were fighting the Germans in East Africa, the Turks in Sinai, Mesopotamia and the Aden Protectorate, and the Dervishes in Somaliland.
On 10 October 1916 he wrote in a despatch:
Previous to the Revolution Ras Tafari expected daily that he would be imprisoned which, in his opinion, would have been the equivalent of a death sentence; and accordingly he confided his will and all his available money to me in order that I should arrange for its transmission to the Bank of England in trust for his children.
He has now given me a further, and most embarrassing proof of his confidence by asking me to take charge of his son and heir, aged two-and-a-half months, for a short time.
Both the Ras and his wife appear to have been very anxious and nervous about the child, and I feel that it would be impossible for me to refuse without risking his friendship which will be of the utmost importance to us in the future.
I watched Tafari's son, Asfa Wossen, being carried up the Legation steps in a red cradle hung round the neck of his servant, while a large escort of armed retainers dispersed down the drive.
My mother's only stipulation had been that not more than two servants should remain with the child.
She did not want a small army camping indefinitely among her flowerbeds and rose bushes.
I remember the names of the two servants were Abatahun and Astakakalij, the wet nurse.
My father made arrangements for three hundred Europeans, Indians and Arabs to take refuge in the Legation grounds if Negus Mikael defeated the Shoan armies.
He believed in that case the main  danger would come from Wollo soldiery pursuing the Shoans into the town, and passing close to the Legation.
He was determined to disarm any refugees who came into the grounds, and so prevent anyone from starting trouble there.
He managed to buy enough flour, grain, cattle and sheep to feed these potential refugees, despite the fact that the market in Addis Ababa was closed.
He also collected sandbags and wood to barricade the Legation buildings.
I watched with interest as rifles were brought up from the cellar and sandbags were filled.
Many of the Legation servants wanted to go off and fight, but it was essential that they should stay and help.
A few, however, did leave and at least one was killed in the war.
As late as 13 October the Shoan leaders continued to believe that Negus Mikael was still at Dessie.
They were dismayed when news came that he was as close as Manz, less than a hundred miles from Addis Ababa, harrying the district with a vast army.
They immediately ordered Ras Lul Seged, who had eight thousand men, to fall back and join Fitaurari Gelli, stationed with a further six thousand at Ankober.
As yet Fitaurari Habta Giorgis, who commanded the Shoan armies, had with him only twenty thousand men, and Ras Kassa a further ten thousand.
It remained to be seen whether these four armies could be united before Negus Mikael could blockade Ras Lul Seged and Fitaurari Gelli in Ankober and advance into the plain of Debra Berhan where the first battle was expected to take place.
My father wrote, "The roads from Addis Ababa to the north are crowded with bands of soldiers moving up to join their various commands, and every day's delay thus adds strength to the Fitaurari's forces." 
My brother Brian and I watched the Shoan armies as they went north to give battle to Negus Mikael and his Wollo hordes.
For days they passed across the plain below the Legation.
Sometimes there was a dense mass of men, sometimes only a trickle hurrying to catch up with the main body.
Barefoot men jogged past, close-packed about their leaders on their colourfully bedecked, trippling mules; groups of horsemen, mostly Galla, cantered past or were engulfed among yet more men on foot.
All were armed — some with rifles, others with spears, while nearly all wore swords and carried shields.
Scattered among them were the camp followers: women and young boys driving loaded mules and donkeys.
This was the chivalry of Abyssinia going forth to war, unchanged as yet from the  armies of the past.
It was an enthralling, unforgettable sight for a small, romantically minded boy.
Time, however, for the Shoans was running out.
Negus Mikael surprised Fitaurari Gelli before Ras Lul Seged could reinforce him, and on 19 October wiped out his force and-took Ankober.
He then surrounded and annihilated Ras Lul Seged's army, and the Ras was among those killed.
When news of this double disaster reached Addis Ababa the town was panic stricken with the German and the Turkish Legations spreading rumours and adding to the confusion.
Such chiefs as had yet arrived from the south were accompanied only by their bodyguards, the rest of their troops being still on the road.
Ras Tafari left next day for the front; he had with him barely four thousand men.
By the evening of 21 October, however, all the Shoan forces were assembled, with the ruthless Dedjazmatch Balcha left in charge of Addis Ababa.
Brian and I were out riding one morning when we suddenly heard heavy firing ahead of us.
We turned our ponies and galloped back to the Legation, where we learnt that news had just come in of a great victory for the Shoan army.
The firing in the town was in celebration.
On 27 October 1916 the armies of the north and south had joined battle on the plain of Sagale, sixty miles north of Addis Ababa, and there they fought hand-to-hand throughout the day.
Finally Negus Mikael was captured, and his army was routed and largely destroyed.
Forty-four years later I visited the battlefield and saw skulls and bones in crevices on the rocky hillock where Negus Mikael had made his final stand.
My father reported:
It is difficult to get a consecutive account of the battle.
All agree that it was fought with the greatest bravery on both sides and that the victory was by no means an easy one for Shoa.
The slaughter appears to have been very great and the Shoan losses are estimated at twelve thousand killed, to which must he added twelve to fourteen thousand killed in the two previous fights when Fitaurari Gelli's and Ras Lul Seged's forces were annihilated.
From this it is evident that if Negus Mikael had advanced immediately after seizing Ankober, when the army of Fitaurari Habta Giorgis was still far from complete he would have stood a very good chance of entering Addis Ababa, in which case the whole  course of events would have been altered.
As it is, however, his army has been annihilated and the fugitives will probably be slaughtered by peasants before they can reach a place of safety.
A few days later the victorious army entered Addis Ababa and paraded before the Empress Zauditu on Jan Meda, that great open space where Menelik had reviewed his troops.
Early that morning my father and mother, with Brian and me, preceded by the Legation escort with their red and white pennoned lances, rode down the wide lane between Balcha's troops to the royal pavilion.
The war drums throbbed, a muffled, far-carrying, never-ceasing sound that thrilled me to the core; the five-foot trumpets brayed.
Above the lines of waiting troops a host of banners fluttered in the breeze.
My father described this scene in a letter to his mother:
Huge tents, open-fronted, had been put up and the Empress came in state with all her ladies, veiled to the eyes, and took her place on the throne.
We were presented and Billy and Brian shook hands.
All the local army was ranged up on either side and in front, the chiefs a mass of colour, with their gold-embroidered robes and jewelled crowns and shields, the lesser chiefs in lion- or leopard-skins or sheep-skins dyed in brilliant colours.
About 10.30 a.m. the army began to march past.
First came the minstrels, yelling war songs, and when they had finished they tore off their mantles and threw them down before the Empress, saying now that they had fought for her such clothes were no longer worthy of them and would she give them new ones?
On these occasions every freedom of speech is allowed.
The advance guard of men on mules and horses came up in regular lines but as soon as they got near they dashed up at full gallop, shouting and brandishing their weapons, each man shrieking out how many men he had killed; and then they wheeled round to make room for others.
Men and horses were decorated with green, yellow and red silks and shields covered with gold and silverwork; and round the horses' necks were hung the bloodstained cloaks and trophies of the men each rider had killed.
It was a wonderful sight.
The foot soldiers came up in rows, yelling and dancing and it was a marvel they were not ridden down, as the cavalry seemed to dash right into them.
Each big chief was preceded by some twenty slaves on mules banging away on kettle drums, with war horns and huge flutes blaring away all the time.
The chiefs of each detachment galloped up to the tent, dismounted  and bowed to the ground before taking their places in the Empress's circle, which grew larger every moment, a brilliant mass of gold and colour.
Perhaps the most impressive sight was the remainder of Ras Lul Seged's army, which had been almost annihilated in a furious battle and the Ras himself killed.
Only a hundred and fifty marched past out of the original six or eight thousand, headed by the Ras's son, who had escaped.
They still wore the clothes they had fought in, with no decorations or marks of triumph, and filed past in dead silence, the Ras's son coming in to sit in his stained clothes among all the gloriously dressed chiefs, a very silent but dignified figure.
Ras Tafari's army came in and he received a great ovation; in his army were the captured guns and chiefs.
The Abuna, Petros, the head of the church, rode on a mule with his throne carried before him.
He dismounted and was received into the royal tent.
After him came more chiefs and then banners and icons of the two principal churches which had sent their Arks to be present at the battle.
When they had passed by they wheeled and formed a huge square lined by all the officers and flags, and then Negus Mikael was brought in.
He came on foot and in chains, an old, fine-looking man dressed in the usual black silk cloak with a white cloth wound round his head, stem and very dignified, to bow before the Empress before being led away.
One felt sorry, for him; he had fought like a man, leading the charge of his troops, for a worthless son who had not even the courage to risk death in supporting the father who had thrown away everything for his sake.
Only a month before Mikael had been the proudest chief in Abyssinia and it must have been a bitter moment for him to be led in triumph before the hated Shoans.
More cavalry came by and then his three principal generals, in chains and dressed like the Negus, but each carrying on his shoulder a large stone as a mark of servitude.
They came before the tent and prostrated themselves on the ground before following their chief to prison.
We then went to say goodbye to the Empress and to shake hands and congratulate Ras Tafari and his chiefs; and the review was over.
It was the most wonderful sight I have ever seen, wild and barbaric to the last degree and the whole thing so wonderfully staged and orderly.
Billy and Brian were thrilled and should never forget it.
They have been in the middle of war and think nothing of hearing  shooting all round them.
We had an alarm the other day…
We have been living in exciting times and it has needed a strong hand to keep order in the town, where all the disorderly elements tried to take advantage of the situation.
Now each of the main bridges and principal crossroads is decorated with a gallows and the dangling body of such robbers as have been caught red-handed.
James Bruce had no doubt witnessed similar scenes in the 1760s when victorious armies returned in triumph to Gondar.
Few other Europeans have seen the like; certainly never before had two small English boys watched such a spectacle in Abyssinia.
Even now, nearly seventy years later, I can recall almost every detail: the embroidered caps of the drummers decorated with cowries; a man falling off his horse as he charged by; a small boy carried past in triumph — he had killed two men though he seemed little older than myself; the face of Ras Lul Seged's young son, and the sheepskin over his shoulder.
I had been reading Tales from the Iliad.
Now, in boyish fancy, I watched the likes of Achilles, Ajax and Ulysses pass in triumph with aged Priam, proud even in defeat.
I believe that day implanted in me a life-long craving for barbaric splendour, for savagery and colour and the throb of drums, and that it gave me a lasting veneration for long-established custom and ritual, from which would derive later a deep-seated resentment of Western innovations in other lands, and a distaste for the drab uniformity of the modern world.
The Aftermath
With Lij Yasu a fugitive and his father a captive, Empress Taitu, Menelik's widow, emerged from seclusion.
She and Zauditu and Ras Gugsa Wale, Zauditu's husband, plotted to eliminate Ras Tafari, but they underestimated his intelligence and resolution, a mistake many were to make in the years to come.
In the event, Zauditu was crowned on 11 February 1917, but only after she had divorced Ras Gugsa.
Taitu was banished.
The country remained in a disturbed state.
My father reported that Zauditu's coronation ceremonies were barely over when the provinces of Simien, Walkait, Wojju and Wogara revolted.
The Wollo Muslims, who were being persecuted by the Shoan army, had attacked Dessie and, though defeated, were still raiding at large.
The Arussi, and Muslim and pagan tribes from Ginir to Dolo, had risen and a revolution in Tigre was generally expected.
Since the soldiery could only live by looting, the peasantry were rising out of sheer desperation.
The council of ministers were intriguing for their own gains.
Meanwhile Ras Tafari stood alone, shouldering full responsibility without real power, and uncertain whom he could trust.
Lij Yasu, after observing his father's defeat at Sagale from a safe distance, had fled back into the Danakil desert.
He now emerged and joined Ras Yemer, whose lands had been pillaged by the Shoan forces.
Ras Yemer had been renowned as one of Negus Mikael's foremost captains.
Together he and Lij Yasu now raised an army and occupied Magdala, where they were besieged on the almost impregnable mountain-top.
The Shoan leaders had little inclination to assault it, but when the redoubtable Fitaurari Habta Giorgis arrived from Addis Ababa with reinforcements, Ras Yemer, accompanied by Lij Yasu and several thousand men, escaped through the Shoan lines.
The surrounding country then rallied to him, and he wiped out a detachment of Ras Kassa's troops; three hundred prisoners were mutilated and died.
Then, on 27 August 1917, between Dessie and Ankober, he gave battle to Fitaurari Habta Giorgis.
My father wrote:
Lij Yasu's forces were defeated with tremendous losses.
Ras Yemer was killed.
Fitaurari Sera Bezu (his second-in-command) was seriously wounded.
The casualties were great.
I am told that there are ten thousand dead and wounded on the battlefield.
Most of the prisoners have been mutilated, with the loss of a hand or foot, for having fought again after having been pardoned for fighting with Negus Mikael.
Lij Yasu escaped once more into the Danakil country.
Meanwhile Ras Tafari thwarted another plot hatched by the banished Empress Taitu and designed to coincide with Lij Yasu's attack from the north.
Four months later Taitu, mischievous to the end, died of a heart attack.
By December 1917 my father badly needed leave.
The altitude of Addis Ababa, at eight thousand feet, was affecting his heart.
He had been short-handed, overworked and under considerable strain as a result of the events leading to the Revolution, well aware of the importance of its success to the Allied cause, and the danger to his family if the Revolution failed.
On being granted leave, he decided to take us to India and visit his brother, Lord Chelmsford, the Viceroy.
By now the railway had reached Addis Ababa so we were able to travel all the way to Jibuti by train.
From Jibuti my father crossed to Aden and then went to Cairo to confer with Sir Reginald Wingate, the High Commissioner, while we went to Berbera to stay with Geoffrey Archer, the Commissioner in British Somaliland; he and his wife had stayed with us at the Legation for Zauditu's coronation in February.
Although my father was six foot two, Geoffrey Archer seemed a real giant; he must have been six foot four and broad in proportion, but he was a kind giant, having an instinctive sympathy with small boys.
He was an authority on the birds of Somaliland and seeing I was interested he showed me his collection.
Several times he lent Brian and me a 410 shotgun and took us shooting along the shore, and when we got back told his skinner to stuff the birds we had shot; I was thrilled by these expeditions.
He also sent us out to a dhow in the harbour to fish; we had never before been on a vessel that rode so close to the water.
Everything at Berbera was unfamiliar and exciting: the barren, burnt-up countryside, so very different from the highlands of Abyssinia; the camel herds at the wells; the gaunt, half-naked Somalis with great mops of hair, leaning on their spears and talking a harsh incomprehensible language; the bugle calls; the uniformed troops drilling on their parade ground, and especially an evening when they staged for us a realistic attack with blank ammunition on a position "held" by tribesmen.
I frequently heard reference to the "Mad Mullah" , whose forces still occupied half the country; and I listened enthralled to descriptions by officers in the Somali Camel Corps of fights against his Dervishes.
My father arrived back from Cairo in time to spend Christmas with us.
On his way there the frigate taking him to Suez had called at Jidda to enable him to meet Sharif Husain, the father of Amir Faisal who was leading the Arab Revolt.
My father described the Sharif as "a delightful old man with a decided sense of humour" .
We sailed together from Berbera to Aden in HMS Minto.
It was an appalling journey; the sea was very rough and the frigate pitched and rolled throughout the night.
We were all desperately seasick.
At Aden we stayed in the Residency as guests of General Stewart.
The Turks had invaded the Aden Protectorate from the Yemen and were fighting the British forces not far away at Lahej.
The general took my father on a visit to the trenches: Brian and I went with him and there we watched British shellfire on the Turkish lines.
On our way back to Aden we attended a gathering of Arab sheikhs, who presented my father with a magnificent dagger.
I would have liked to wear it thirty years later when I travelled in the deserts of southern Arabia, but by then it had been lost.
For me, the highlight of these-memorable months was our time in India.
At Viceregal Lodge we were housed in palatial tents luxuriously carpeted and furnished, and were looked after by a host of servants.
There were rows of similar tents on the lawns, for the accommodation in the Lodge itself was limited.
The Government of India had only moved to Delhi from Calcutta in 1911, and the magnificent Lutyens buildings which today dominate New Delhi were still being built.
From the moment I arrived I was immensely impressed by the pomp and the ceremony which surrounded my uncle as Viceroy, fascinated by the splendour of the bodyguard, and the varied liveries and elaborate turbans of the doorkeepers, messengers, coachmen, household servants and other functionaries.
Edwin Montagu, Secretary of State for India, had arrived in Delhi for the discussions which resulted in the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, the first concession to Indian nationalism.
The Princes, the Governors of the Provinces, their staffs and many other officials were in Delhi; in consequence my uncle was very busy.
I had never met him before.
I saw him once in his State robes; then, to his highly impressionable nephew, he seemed more than human.
On another occasion Brian and I were invited to have tea with him and our aunt Francie.
I felt overawed.
They both tried, no doubt, to put us at our ease, but I do not think either had much understanding of small children.
It was ten years before Uncle Fred really took an interest in me.
I had grown up in Addis Ababa where there were few permanent buildings other than the Legations.
I had only the vaguest recollections of England.
I therefore associated towns with tin roofs and thatched huts; in Jibuti, Berbera and Aden I had seen no memorable buildings.
I was totally unprepared for Delhi, yet old enough to understand what I saw.
The Moghul tombs, the Red Fort, the towering minarets of the Jami Masjid, made me aware for the first time of the significance of civilization, and the meaning of history.
One afternoon we were taken to the Kidge above Delhi where British troops had held out against constant attacks during the Mutiny.
We were shown a bullet-ridden orb, lying on the ground, that had once decorated the church spire.
My father described to me how the Guides had arrived and gone straight into action after marching day and night from the Punjab; how Nicholson had been killed leading the troops as they stormed the ramparts of Delhi.
He told me that my grandfather had fought in the Mutiny, and that Mrs Inglis, daughter of my great-grandfather Chelmsford, had been in Lucknow through the siege, where her husband commanded the troops.
My parents went to visit the Rajput States while we boys continued to go for rides in the mornings and picnics in the afternoons.
Perhaps a fortnight later Brian and I were sent with Minna to join them at Jaipur, where they were guests of the Maharajah.
We travelled there by train; I remember herds of blackbuck grazing near the line and bullock-carts lumbering along in clouds of dust.
When we arrived at Jaipur my father told us that he had sent for us so that we could go with him tiger-shooting.
I could hardly believe  what I heard.
I do not remember how long we stayed at Jaipur but every day was packed with excitement.
From the backs of elephants we watched pig-sticking, and went out after blackbuck in a bullock-cart; my father shot two, each with a good head.
Then the great day dawned.
Soon after breakfast we set off into the jungle.
We saw some wild boar which paid little attention to our passing elephants, and we saw several magnificent peacock and a number of monkeys; to me the monkeys were bandar log, straight out of Kipling's Jungle Book.
It must have taken a couple of hours or more to reach the machan, a platform raised on poles.
We climbed up on to it; someone blew a horn and the beat started.
After a time I could hear distant shouts.
I sat very still, hardly daring to move my head.
A peacock flew past.
Then my father slowly raised his rifle and there was the tiger, padding towards us along a narrow game trail, his head moving from side to side.
I still remember him as I saw him then.
He was magnificent, larger even than I had expected, looking almost red against the pale dry grass.
My father fired.
I saw the tiger stagger.
He roared, bounded off and disappeared into the jungle.
He was never found, though they searched for him on elephants while we returned to the palace.
I was very conscious of my father's intense disappointment.
Two days later we went on another beat, this time for panther, but the panther broke back and we never saw it.
However, a great sambhur stag did gallop past the machan.
Scenes such as this remained most vividly in my memory.
As guests of a Maharajah in one of the great Indian Native States, we were surrounded by an opulence and splendour little changed since the time of Akbar.
At the time I accepted it as a marvellous background for the all-important hunting, though too young really to appreciate this privileged glimpse of Indian court life.
I do remember my first sight of the Palace of the Winds, a seemingly immense building, reddish in colour, its front pierced by row above row of latticed windows.
Otherwise I have only confused memories of large rooms, the marbled walls ornately inlaid, of men in gorgeous robes, of others more humbly dressed, of rows of shackled elephants, and of wild animals fighting in an amphitheatre for our entertainment.
At the end of March we left Bombay in a P and O liner to Aden, and from there crossed to Jibuti in HMS Juno, flagship of the East  Indies Squadron.
This was a very different crossing from our nightmare voyage in the Minto: the sea was calm and the great ship was steady as the land.
The officers made much of us children: the Marine band played on deck and the captain fired off one of the guns, after we had been given cotton wool to stuff in our ears.
At the Legation we were welcomed back by the servants and reverted happily to our accustomed way of life.
We had learnt to ride by the time we were four, and we rode everywhere; no one went for walks in those days.
Our ponies with Habta Wold, the syce who accompanied us, were always waiting for us as we finished breakfast.
Brian and I usually rode up the steep hillside at the back of the house to where, at 8500 feet, there was a grotto, crudely cut out of the rock below ground level.
From here we had immense views, northwards across Ras Kassa's province of Salale towards the Blue Nile gorge, or southwards to the distant Arussi mountains.
Some mornings we galloped over the open plain below the Legation; at that hour the tracks were threaded with groups of villagers on their way to market in Addis Ababa.
In the afternoons we either rode or tried to shoot birds with our air rifles.
For children of our age we were allowed a remarkable degree of freedom; only the town was out of bounds.
Had it not been for the First World War I might have been sent to school in England, separated indefinitely from my parents, as was the fate of so many English children whose fathers served in India or elsewhere in the East.
I must have had some lessons at the Legation, though I have no recollection of them, for I learnt to read and write.
My father read to me in the evening, something I looked forward to enormously.
I grew up on Jock of the Bushveld, that marvellous book by Sir Perry Fitzpatrick about hunting in South Africa.
The other books I remember were Keary and Keary's Heroes of Asgard, Kipling's Jungle Book and Puck of Pook's Hill, and, particularly, A Sporting Trip Through Abyssinia by Powell-Cotton.
Always gentle, patient and understanding, my father gave a young boy, who no doubt was often tiresome and demanding, a happy sense of comradeship.
He always explained things but never talked down to me.
I still have a letter written in pencil from his camp at Laisamis on his way to Nairobi in 1914.
It is illustrated with  drawings of buffalo, giraffe, warthog and camp scenes, and describes a rhino hunt.
It could have been written to a boy of seven; I was only half that age.
Inevitably in Addis Ababa he was busy for most of the day, writing his despatches, interviewing people or visiting his colleagues in the other Legations.
However, during our visit to India he had been constantly with us, and in Jaipur I had experienced a gratifying sense of shared adventure; but it was perhaps in the camp where we went each year from the Legation for an eagerly awaited ten days that I remember him most vividly.
I can picture him now, a tall lean figure in a helmet, smoking his pipe as he watched the horses being saddled or inspected them while they were being fed; 1 can see him cleaning his rifle in the verandah of his tent, or sitting chatting with my mother by the fire in the evening.
Our camp was an enchanted spot, tucked away in the Entoto hills.
A stream tumbled down the cliff opposite our tents, then flowed through a jumble of rocks among a grove of trees.
Here were all sorts of birds: top-heavy hornbills, touracos with crimson wings, brilliant bee-eaters, sun-birds, paradise flycatchers, hoopoes, golden weaver birds and many others.
My father knew them all and taught me their names.
Vultures nested in the cliffs and circled in slow spirals above the camp.
I used to watch them through his field glasses, and the baboons that processed along the cliff tops, the babies clinging to their mothers' backs.
At night we sometimes heard their frenzied barking when a leopard disturbed them.
Several times I went up the valley with my father in the evening and sat with him behind a rock, hoping he would get a shot at the leopard.
I remember once a large white-tailed mongoose scuttled past within a few feet of us.
In August 1918 my father was recalled to London to report to the Foreign Office and he did not get back until mid-December.
In September the epidemic of Spanish influenza that devastated Europe, and killed more people than the war, reached Abyssinia; there it killed three of the five doctors in the country and incapacitated a fourth.
Dermot and I caught it.
My mother was reading to me from A Sporting Trip Through Abyssinia, and I can remember exactly where she had got to in the book when, thinking I looked feverish, she took my temperature and put me to bed.
There were seventy cases among the servants and their dependants in the small village in the Legation grounds.
More than ten thousand people died in the  town.
They were buried in mass graves, the corpses piled one on top of the other under a few inches of soil.
Inevitably the hyenas and pit-dogs dug them up.
Ras Tafari sickened.
His present-day detractors might well ponder what would have happened to the country had he died.
After ten years of duty in Abyssinia my father's spell there had come to an end.
We went to England early in 1919, travelling by train to Jibuti and then by a Union Castle boat to Marseilles.
Until almost the last day I could not believe that we were really leaving Abyssinia for good, that we should not be coming back.
England and School
Children are certainly adaptable, but England was an entirely different world from Abyssinia.
I had once asked my father if there were hyenas in England.
What?
No hyenas, no kudu, no oryx; only a few eagles in a place called Scotland and, unbelievably, hardly any kites.
I thought what a dull place it must be.
My father's house at Beachley had been requisitioned by the Navy during the war, so now we had no home.
We went to Ireland for the summer and our visit there was great fun; Brian and I drove about in a donkey-cart, fished for eels, and shot rabbits with a 410.
I spent much of my time with my father, watching him sketch, or fish for salmon in the Slaney.
It was a happy interlude before Brian and I, dressed conventionally like the other boys in suits and bowler hats, were sent to St Aubyn's, a boarding school at Rottingdean, near Brighton.
In January 1920 at the beginning of our second term at school, my father died.
He was only forty-eight.
He collapsed suddenly while he was shaving, murmured, "It's all right, my dear," and died in my mother's arms.
His death was a devastating shock for her.
They were living in lodgings at Brighton at the time, so as to be near our school.
Now, utterly desolate, my mother was without a home, and, as a result of my father's death, short of money.
When a kind and affluent sister-in-law offered to buy her a house in the suburbs of London, she asked, "What will my boys do there?" 
The reply was, "We'll get them bicycles and they can learn to ride them." 
Instead my mother went to Radnorshire (now Powys), and at first took rooms in a farmhouse at Titley.
The accommodation was cramped and the conditions were primitive.
For transport she used the farmer's pony and trap: the pony was so decrepit that we called it the dead pony.
For my mother it must have been a sad comedown from the Legation, but we boys enjoyed ourselves.
Minna was with us and the local gentry were kind.
A Colonel Drage, for instance, who lived at The Rodd near Presteigne, would sometimes invite  Brian and me over for a night.
He would call us by candlelight and in the dawn take us round his wood after rabbits.
Any time would have done, but he realized the excitement for us of such early awakenings.
We looked forward immensely to these visits.
A year or so later in 1922 my mother leased The Milebrook, a charming house near Knighton, where Radnorshire borders Shropshire.
She had fallen in love with the house as soon as she saw it, and knew that this was where her family should grow up.
Here she gave us a happy home for the next twenty years.
Our landlord was C. C. C. Rogers, Lord Lieutenant of Radnorshire and elderly owner of a large and beautiful estate, Stanage Park.
Charlie Rogers and, later, his son, Guy, were very good to us, allowing us to treat their estate as our own, to ride all over it and to wander where we would with our dogs.
Not far away was the great sweep of the Radnor Forest, and beyond it the Elan valley where peregrines nested, the Towy valley with the last kites in Britain, and Tregaron Bog where wild geese came in winter.
During holidays at The Milebrook I found once again the freedom I had known in Abyssinia, but now for only three months in the year.
Before Brian and I went to school we had hardly met any other English boys; I remember only one, Standish Roche, who lived nearby while we were in Ireland.
Gerald Campbell, Consul in Addis Ababa during our last years there, had two children, a little younger than me, but they were girls and had no part in our lives.
There had been no other English children in Abyssinia, none in Somaliland, none at Aden, and in Delhi I can only remember meeting girls.
Suddenly at St Aubyn's we found ourselves in a crowd of seventy boys, nearly all older.
There was no privacy anywhere; we were always among others, whether in classrooms, dining room or gymnasium, on the playing fields or in the dormitory at night.
Schoolboys are very conventional and quick to gang up on any boy who in behaviour or dress does not conform.
With our extraordinary background, Brian and I lacked the ability to cope with our contemporaries; as English boys who had barely heard of cricket we were natural targets.
Soon after we arrived I was interrogated about my parents and our home life.
At first I was a friendly, forthcoming little boy, very ready to talk, perhaps to boast about journeys I had made and things I had seen.
My stories, however, were greeted with disbelief and derision, and I felt increasingly rejected.
As a result I withdrew into  myself, treated overtures of friendship with mistrust, and was easily provoked.
I made few friends, but once I adapted to this life I do not think I was particularly unhappy.
I could comfort myself, especially at night, by recalling the sights and scenery of Abyssinia, far more real to me than the cold bleak English downs behind the school.
St Aubyn's had a good reputation when my father decided to send us there.
Unfortunately, just before we arrived, a new headmaster, R. C. V. Lang, took over.
He was unmarried; his sister looked after him.
He was a large, imposing man who had been a noted athlete and I am sure he created a favourable impression on my parents.
In fact he was a sadist, and after my father's death both Brian and I were among his victims.
The school motto was "Quit you like men: be strong" , an exhortation not without relevance to some of us boys.
He beat me on a number of occasions, often for some trivial offence.
Sent up early to the dormitory, I had to kneel naked by the side of my bed.
I remember crying out the first time, "It hurts!" and Lang saying grimly, "It's meant to." 
For two or three days after each beating, I was called to his study so that he could see I was healing properly.
Though I had never been hurt like this before, strangely enough I bore him no resentment for these beatings, accepting them as the penalty for what I had done.
It never occurred to me how disproportionate was the punishment to the offence.
After we had been at school for about three years Arnold Hodson, who had been Consul in Southern Abyssinia, was staying with us at the beginning of the holidays.
One evening he said jokingly, "I don't suppose you get beaten at school nowadays, not like we were in my time." 
Neither Brian nor I had told our mother about these beatings but now, incensed, I pulled up my shorts and showed him some half-healed scars.
Years later I learnt that Hodson went down to Sussex and told the headmaster that if he beat either of us again he would have him taken to court.
There was another punishment I dreaded.
Each day the school was drilled by a retired sergeant living in the village, and on special occasions we paraded with the school band.
These parades were taken seriously and in the afternoon, while the rest of the school played games, defaulters had to run endlessly round an asphalt yard.
On a hot summer's day this was a punishment more suited to the Foreign Legion than to an English preparatory school.
Recently I went back to St Aubyn's to give a lecture, and I spent  the night there.
Time seemed to have stood still.
The boys wore the same grey shorts and jerseys; the band was practising, marching and counter-marching on the playing field.
I attended morning chapel, and neither the seating nor the service had altered.
In the dormitories I identified the beds in which I had slept, with the same trays beneath them for dirty clothes and the same chairs beside them.
In the dining room, team photographs were ranged along the wall: I recognized Brian in one of them; I myself had never made the grade.
In sixty years the school had hardly changed in outward appearance; what was profoundly different was the relationship of headmaster and boys.
Between them I sensed affection, confidence and trust.
I had heard that St Aubyn's was now one of the best preparatory schools in the country, with a distinguished academic record.
Having stayed with the headmaster and talked to the boys, I know this to be true.
Several of my family, including my grandfather, had been at Eton; he, however, sent his sons, other than my father, to Winchester.
My father for some reason went to Cheltenham, where he was happy; but he decided to send us to Eton.
When my father died, his brother Perry generously undertook to pay for the education of Brian and myself.
Had he not done so I could not have gone to Eton, and should have been deprived of one of the most formative influences in my life.
I was an unreceptive boy to teach, disinclined to concentrate on any subject that bored me.
I certainly learnt next to nothing at St Aubyn's and when I took the Common Entrance examination for Eton I failed so ignominiously that the authorities wrote to my mother that it would be futile for me to try again.
Undismayed, she sent me to a first-class crammer for two terms, and Brian to another preparatory school.
At my next attempt I passed into Eton a whole form from the bottom of the school.
Early in September 1923 I arrived at Windsor Station with my mother, and from there we drove in a horse-drawn cab past the Castle and across the Thames into Eton.
There were twenty-four houses at Eton, each with about forty-five boys who were known as Oppidans and were distinct from the seventy Scholars who lived apart in College.
Each house was run by a senior master and was known by his name.
My housemaster was A. M. McNeile.
We had tea with him and his wife and met the three other new boys and their parents: Harry Phillimore, small, dark-haired and bespectacled; Ronnie Chance, slim, blond and diffident; and Desmond Parsons, a tall, good-looking boy.
Every boy had his own room from the day he arrived at Eton.
Mine was very small, with hardly space for a fold-up bed, washstand, bureau, padded chest for clothes, and easy chair; but that did not matter.
What mattered was that it was my own, with the inestimable sense of privacy which this conferred.
Before she went back to London my mother and I went into town and bought a carpet, and pictures by Caldwell of African big game to hang on my walls.
In the course of time I moved into other, larger rooms; the last had a splendid view of Windsor Castle.
At Eton the different houses and classrooms were spread over a large area, and in the next day or two I had somehow to find out where and when which masters were teaching me what subjects.
There was also the anxiety of discovering where I was to sit in chapel; then I had to learn the names and whereabouts of the different houses and of the scattered playing fields.
McNeile's house, like the others, was run by four or five boys who were known as "the Library" — the equivalent of house prefects.
Except for the head of the house, who was chosen by the housemaster, the Library elected its own members.
A curious system prevailed whereby the Library could beat offenders but the housemaster could not: he had to refer the matter to his Library or, for really serious offences, to the Headmaster or Lower Master.
Similarly the Eton Society known as Pop, the equivalent of school prefects, elected its own members with the exception of a few who belonged ex officio.
The school was divided into Upper and Lower boys, and the Lower boys in each house fagged for members of the Library: they cooked their tea, ran errands for them, being sent perhaps as far as Windsor to fetch a cake from Fuller's teashop, and they had to come at once when someone in the Library shouted "Boy!" , the last arrival being given the job.
Anyone who failed to answer the summons was liable to be beaten.
New boys were excused fagging for a fortnight until they had found their feet.
I believe that both fagging and beating by the Library have now been done away with.
I accepted them quite cheerfully.
Every evening I had tea with the friend or two with whom I had arranged to mess for the "half" , as a term was known at Eton.
Tea was a substantial meal of eggs, bacon, sausages, even chops, provided by ourselves and cooked over a gas ring in the passage.
At McNeile's we should otherwise have fared ill, since neither breakfast, lunch nor supper was inviting.
I messed at first with Harry Phillimore, who was to become a lifelong friend.
Scholarly and intensely hard-working, his otherwise serious nature was lightened by a streak of mischief.
We were an unruly lot of Lower boys at McNeile's and it was usually Harry Phillimore who instigated the disturbances we caused.
He died in 1974, a Lord Justice of Appeal.
Listening once to him on the Bench I recalled an occasion when the aged and formidable boys' maid who looked after our rooms had stood with arms akimbo accusing him of some peccadillo, and ended her tirade: "Mr Phillimore, don't you stand there lying like Ananias!" 
Our worst enormity was when we flushed Desmond Parsons out of his room with the fire hydrant and, having turned it on, could not turn it off.
Water was soon cascading down the stairs from the top storey.
Eventually McNeile appeared, holding his trousers above his knees, and muttering, "Hooligans, damned hooligans," he turned it off.
That was one of the many occasions when we were sent for after supper and beaten by the Library.
Only once did I bear resentment after being beaten.
I had been selected in my second year at Eton, while I was still a Lower boy, to box against the Eton Mission from Hackney Wick in the East End of London.
I was giving tea to my opponent who, though the same weight, was probably two years older, when I was sent for by Julian Hall, my fag master.
He was head of the house, in the sixth form, captain of the Oppidans and in consequence in Pop.
 "Why have you not turned up to cook my tea?" he demanded.
 "I'm sorry," I replied, "I forgot to tell you I'm boxing against the Eton Mission tonight and am giving tea in my room to the boy I'm boxing." 
"I'll teach you to forget.
Bend over,"he said, and gave me six with his Pop cane, a stiff, knotted bamboo.
I have often wondered what my guest would have thought when I got back if I had told him I had just been beaten.
I never forgave Hall.
Anyone else would have said,"Good luck.
Be sure to beat him."
It was an unfortunate evening for me: I was knocked out in the second round, the only time I was knocked out, either at Eton or at Oxford.
It is winter evenings at Eton that I remember most vividly: talking and arguing about anything and everything with friends in front of a  coal fire; sitting in my armchair with my feet up, reading a story by Buchan, Kipling or Conrad, or something by one of the African big-game hunters whose books I was already collecting.
There was a civilized comfort about these winter evenings that gained by contrast with the hardships of daytime.
Many people assume that Eton is a luxurious school.
When I was there it was one of the most spartan in the country.
The Thames Valley is often bitterly cold and damp.
The classrooms were heated in winter, but in the houses there was no form of heating until we lit fires in our rooms at six in the evening.
We were given a lot of work to prepare in our spare time and I remember trying to keep warm in the daytime in an overcoat and scarf while I wrote an essay or struggled with Latin composition.
After a hard frost the passage walls sweated and water trickled down the corridors.
In McNeile's there were no changing rooms or showers, only foot baths in which we could wash after games, and only two baths and five lavatories for forty-seven of us.
Except for the Library, who could bath at any time, a boy was allocated two baths a week.
It never occurred to us to criticize these conditions, which we accepted as a part of Eton life, like the tailcoats and top hats we wore.
Archie McNeile, as he was known to the boys, was a wiry, upright figure with an alert, intelligent face.
He had not been at Eton himself but when he played for the masters his volleying in the Field Game — the Eton form of football — was long remembered.
At Oxford he had gained a First in Greats, for which, according to a contemporary, he had worked as if he were taking a chartered accountancy exam.
At Eton he taught mathematics.
Years later I discovered that he had been a talented musician, yet he never revealed this, not even to music-loving boys in his house.
Modest, self-contained and abstemious, he kept aloof from the fellowship of other masters, and his dry, sarcastic wit, and inability to unbend, prevented his establishing a warm relationship with the boys in his house.
I accepted this as natural; it never occurred to me at the time that a housemaster could also be a friend.
When a boy arrived at Eton he was allocated to a "classical tutor" who oversaw his work and gave him special tuition.
Many Eton masters, such as C. H. K. Martin, the historian who later tutored Princess Elizabeth and Princess Margaret, and especially George Lyttelton, whose published letters to Rupert Hart-Davis have given pleasure to many, were inspired teachers.
For one rewarding half I  was taught by Lyttelton.
He came into the room once, said, "Put away your books," and read us The Lemnian, Buchan's story about Thermopylae.
Not a boy stirred while he read it.
However, it was my misfortune that McNeile selected C. O. Bevan as my classical tutor.
A stolid, red-faced clergyman without wit or humour, he contrived to make any and every subject dull.
I was interested in history, and enjoyed writing essays, consciously modelling my style on Buchan's.
Cob Bevan made me loathe Latin, and as a result of his tuition Latin verse remained incomprehensible to me.
Bored stiff by him, I paid little attention: he retaliated by having me birched for idleness on three occasions, but these attempts to drive Latin into me from the wrong end proved equally unproductive.
As a Lower boy at the time I came before the Lower Master.
Ramsey, pompous, rubicund and white-haired, put on his mortar-board as he pronounced sentence and then, wrapped in his gown, swept into the adjoining room where the block, dating back some two hundred years, was kept.
As I followed him through the doorway the porter whispered, "Get your braces undone, sir, don't keep him waiting." 
On either side of the block stood a praepostor from the sixth form, there to see that sentence was carried out decently and to order.
The junior praepostor bowed and handed the birch to the senior praepostor, who handed it with a bow to the Lower Master.
The whole proceeding was reminiscent of a beheading on Tower Hill.
After a birching twelve shillings and sixpence for "school medicine" was reputedly put on the school bill — I presume for a new birch, but I never verified this.
Though barely moderate scholastically, I was just good enough at games to become Captain of Games in an athletically undistinguished house.
This meant that I got into the Library.
I was never popular and I had few friends, but such friendships as I made were mostly lasting.
Eton, however, meant far more to me than my relationships with others, or the learning I acquired or the games I played.
I was conscious that here I belonged to a community with roots in the distant past and a distinguished place in British history.
Every day I passed the weathered statue of Henry VI in the middle of School Yard.
He had founded the College during the Middle Ages, even before Columbus discovered the New World.
The arms granted to his chosen foundation were the fleur-de-lis of France and the royal lion of England, above the three lilies of the Virgin  Mary.
They were displayed on the Eton flag and stamped on school documents.
One side of School Yard was dominated by College Chapel.
Henry VI had intended this building to be one of the largest churches in the land.
When he was murdered during the Wars of the Roses only the choir had been built; later the ante-chapel was added and together they formed College Chapel.
Lower School was opposite the Chapel and here, under the dark oaken beams and arches, I was taught in a classroom that had been in continuous use as such since 1443.
In Upper School every inch of the panelling was scored with the names of generations of boys.
Many had become illustrious; some, like Wellington, world-famous, a few notorious: Sir Francis Verney had become a Barbary pirate, Greenhall had been hanged as a highwayman.
Along the colonnade under Upper School were recorded 1157 names of Old Etonians killed in the First World War (748 others, including my brother Dermot's, were added to them after the Second World War).
No wonder that in this setting, during those impressionable years, I acquired lasting respect for tradition and veneration for the past.
Here, too, from masters and boys alike, I learnt responsibility, the decencies of life, and standards of civilized behaviour.
Brian came to McNeile's the year after me: I was glad he was there with me.
When I left in December 1928 he succeeded me in the house as Captain of Games.
He gained his school colours for rugger and was unlucky not to get them for the Field Game and the Wall Game — another game confined to Eton.
Dermot and Roderic also went to McNeile's: we missed by only one half all being there together.
I have many memories of Eton: services in College Chapel, especially in winter when the lights were lit and I listened to the massed singing of a favourite hymn; the Headmaster, Dr Alington, an Olympian figure in scarlet gown, taking "absence" on the chapel steps; the Fourth of June, a festival peculiar to Eton, and fireworks bursting over the river; the Field Game on winter afternoons while mist crept across the grounds; the lamps in the High Street and crowds of boys hurrying back to their houses before "lock-up" .
We spent our holidays at The Milebrook.
I remember my excitement when I had arrived there for the first time from St Aubyn's.
It was an attractive creeper-covered house in a beautiful setting.
From the lawn was a spacious view across the valley of the Teme to Stowe Hill, where in summer the heather up to the skyline showed purple above hanging oak woods.
The house was just the right size for us; downstairs, an entrance hall, four rooms, a kitchen and a servants hall; upstairs, six bedrooms and an attic.
Below my bedroom window lay the garden, made very beautiful by my mother over the years.
Beyond were the orchard, stables, a marshy field where peewits called and snipe drummed in spring, and distant woods.
In the morning the sun came in at the window and woke me.
I always think of The Milebrook as a happy, sunlit house, with butterflies fluttering among the stocks outside the drawing room windows.
Here we grew up in a close-knit, self-sufficient family.
We did not often have other boys to stay, almost never a girl, and we seldom went away on visits.
London we passed through, on our way to and from school, but except during the half-term "long leave" from Eton we rarely spent a night there.
In the immediate neighbourhood of The Milebrook were few families except for the local farmers, and for the first four years there we had no transport other than bicycles and a pony cart.
Then, in 1924, our grandmother, Lady Chelmsford, died and the money my mother inherited made us reasonably well off.
She bought a car, which widened the range of our activities but made little other difference to the lives of us boys.
For years we had no telephone, and the house was lit in our time by acetylene gas which we made each evening in the pigsty.
During the first few winter holidays I went out on our pony with the Teme Valley, the local pack of hounds that hunted the rough hill country on the Welsh border.
In those days the field was small and consisted mostly of farmers.
The pony, though fast and a good jumper, had a mouth of iron and was almost impossible to control.
Despite this I had a lot of fun, until my mother replaced him with another pony that Brian could manage, and I gave up hunting.
I never shared my family's passion for horses.
I was, however, devoted to the three dogs I owned while I was at The Milebrook.
The first was a golden spaniel pup.
He died of distemper while I was away at St Aubyn's; the news overwhelmed me with a child's grief.
The next was a black cocker spaniel, and the third a springer spaniel  which I trained to retrieve and took with me whenever I went away to shoot.
Each of them slept in my room.
When I was fifteen we rented a rough shoot of about a thousand acres on Stowe Hill, part of the Stanage estate; Guy Rogers let us have it for a fiver.
There we shot grouse, partridge, pheasant, occasional duck, snipe and woodcock and innumerable rabbits, more than earning whatever we shot by the amount of exercise we took to get it.
Stanage had one of the country's finest pheasant shoots, renowned for its high birds.
During my last two years at Eton, and my years at Oxford, Guy Rogers invited me to his covert shoots.
I was a good shot and held my own among his guests.
Though my brothers too enjoyed shooting, they preferred hunting, and my mother, who had hunted in Ireland before she went to Abyssinia, now took it up again.
All my brothers rode in point-to-points and Dermot rode his own horse in the National Hunt Cup at Cheltenham: his ambition was to ride in the Grand National.
Thinking back to those days, I realize how different I should be today had I grown up in the suburban house in London, suggested to my mother.
At the time I accepted without question all that The Milebrook offered.
Only later did I appreciate what sacrifices my mother made to give it to us, and how lonely she must often have been when we were all away at school; after our father's death she became almost possessively devoted to us.
She was a sociable person with a remarkable gift for friendship and an immediate understanding of others, especially the young.
In Abyssinia the limited social life had not mattered to her, since she had her husband.
When he died, after their long absences abroad, she was left with few friends in England.
Nor was it easy for her at first to make new ones at The Milebrook, having only a pony and cart and her nearest neighbours being two, four and five miles away.
Though not intellectual, my mother was intelligent, and she now acquired a wide range of new interests.
She loved the countryside round The Milebrook and was never happier than when riding over the hills.
She was generous by nature and had an Irish sense of hospitality, and combined great pride with high standards and absolute loyalty.
She had instinctive good taste, especially in her dress, and whatever the setting she always looked right.
Above all, my mother was fun to be with.
At Eton I had passed School Certificate, but without the credit in  Latin which was indispensable for getting to Oxford.
I therefore went for a term to a crammer, secured the necessary credit and was accepted by Magdalen College.
Before going up to Oxford I spent three months of the summer of 1929 in France to improve my French.
For the first two months I lived with a French family in Fontainebleau and studied with a Commandant Lettaure, who was coaching fifteen other young Englishmen.
I visited Paris and Versailles, and Lettaure took me to a Joan of Arc festival at Orleans.
I enjoyed my time at Fontainebleau, especially wandering in the forest, hoping to see a wild boar.
The third month I spent in Brittany at Sable d'Or; there I made friends with an elderly, bearded fisherman called Pierre.
Like the other Breton fishermen, he had been a pecheur d'Islande.
Every morning, before it was light, I crossed the mile-long sands to the cove where the fishermen kept their boats, while curlew, disturbed by my approach, called around me in the darkness.
It would be getting light as I arrived.
Some men would already be at the boats, others coming down the steep path from the village.
There Pierre and his thirteen-year-old mousse, or assistant, would join me — Pierre in sea-boots, jacket and cap, the mousse bare-headed and barefoot, in a ragged sweater, with his trousers rolled up about his knees.
We would push out the boat, hoist the sail and visit the lobster pots and conger lines.
We hauled up the pots, removed the lobsters and crabs and dropped the pots back in the sea.
The congers were ugly-looking brutes, some of them three feet or more in length; Pierre warned me they could bite through a sea-boot.
We trolled for mackerel, passing up and down the coast.
Sometimes we got into a shoal of them and pulled them in as fast as we could handle the lines; sometimes we failed to find any.
Then we lowered the sail and sat in the sun, and Pierre spoke of the lot he and his fellow villagers had been born to, the weeks at sea, the gales, the great hauls of fish, the hardships and achievements of a Breton fisherman's life, while we ate the food he had brought with him, and drank his rough cider.
Oxford
I went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, in the autumn of 1929 and was there four years.
Most of my Eton contemporaries at Oxford were at Christ Church, Trinity, Balliol or New College, and it was with them I spent much of my time.
Nevertheless, I was always thankful that I was at Magdalen, perhaps the most beautiful of Oxford colleges.
Though small it was spacious, with its deer park and Addison's Walk along the bank of the Cherwell.
My memories of Oxford, unlike my memories of Eton, are summer ones: the tranquil beauty of the High Street in the early morning before the traffic; May morning and the choirboys singing on Magdalen Tower; reading in a punt on the river beneath overhanging willows; the water meadows beyond Parsons' Pleasure, and the sound of corncrakes; sailing with Robin Campbell on Port Meadow and then tea together at the Trout Inn; dinner parties in my rooms, with evening light on the College buildings and the scent of wallflowers from the President's garden.
George Gordon was President of Magdalen; he was a liberal-minded man of distinction and charm, always friendly and interested in my doings.
He died in 1942 and it is my lasting regret that after I left Oxford I did not see him again; I still have the letters he wrote me when I was in the Sudan.
My uncle Fred, whom we had stayed with as Viceroy of India, was a Fellow of All Souls, the only college without undergraduates, and was its Warden for two terms before he died in 1933.
Several times while I was at Magdalen he had me to dine at All Souls with its distinguished Fellows.
He had had a varied and an outstanding career.
He had been a scholar at Winchester and at Magdalen, where he gained a First in Law and got his Blue for cricket.
Later he became President of the MCC.
He had been Governor of Queensland and of New South Wales, Viceroy of India, First Lord of the Admiralty, an Honorary Fellow of Magdalen, Warden of Winchester and, finally, Warden of All Souls.
Uncle Fred was an austere and impressive figure, whom some people found forbidding.
Until I was seventeen, only occasionally and briefly meeting him, I thought of him as the rather alarming head of the family.
Then, unexpectedly, he invited Brian and me to stay in Northumberland where he had taken a grouse moor for the summer; thereafter we went each year until he died, first to Otterburn and then to Wark.
He could not have been kinder nor taken more trouble to see that we enjoyed ourselves.
He was an enthusiastic fisherman, and taught me to fish: I shall never forget his excitement when I caught a salmon.
We had had a long wet day on the moors but in the late afternoon the weather cleared.
He was sixty-four now, and no doubt tired, but as soon as we had finished tea he said, "We'll go down to the river and you can try for a salmon." 
The keeper said resignedly, "Anyway it will be good practice for your casting." 
With a fast-rising river, conditions certainly appeared hopeless.
I had fished for half an hour when I felt the line tighten.
 "Damn," I thought, "I'm caught up." 
Then, unbelievably, I saw the line move up the river.
 "By God, he's into one!" shouted the keeper, and my uncle kept repeating desperately,"Keep your rod point up!
Keep your rod point up!"
It was a fresh-run fifteen-pound salmon, the first caught there that year.
No excitement in my life has ever quite equalled the tense fifteen minutes during which I was connected to that fish.
I always looked forward to the fortnights we spent in Northumberland.
The shooting and fishing I enjoyed, but I soon looked forward even more to being with my uncle.
I had always admired him, ever since as a small boy I had seen him in his State robes in India.
I thought of him as a patrician in the Roman tradition, cultured, erudite, civilized, governed above all by his sense of duty.
Now realizing that he was more approachable and understanding than I had supposed, I felt an affection for him which increased each time I met him.
His elder son had been killed in Mesopotamia in the Great War and with his younger son he had little in common.
I think he hoped I might eventually add distinction to the family name, of which he was intensely proud, and his initial interest in me also developed into affection.
But he demanded high standards and as a classical scholar was exasperated by my inability to cope with Latin.
In Magdalen's communal life I took little part.
I did not drink, and for such festivities as Bump Suppers celebrating success on the river by the College eight I had no taste.
At Eton I had enjoyed the Field Game but loathed cricket, and had not played soccer or rugger since my preparatory school.
As a result I took no part in organized college sport, though despite lack of skill I enjoyed an occasional game of squash.
I did, however, box for Oxford for four years, winning against Cambridge three times, and this gave me a certain standing in the College.
I had been successful as a boxer at Eton and in my first term at Oxford I was selected to box against the Army.
My opponent was Lieutenant Black of the Green Howards.
When I got into the ring I was fortunately unaware that he was a Services champion.
I was not a skilful boxer but I did have a knock-out punch, which connected early in the first round and won me the fight.
Finding it difficult to get down to middleweight, I decided to fight as a light-heavy in the University trials.
I won and was selected for Oxford against Cambridge.
My opponent was much the same height, build and temperament; we stood toe to toe and swapped blow for blow.
I remember thinking, "This can't last." 
I was lucky enough to knock him out in the first round.
Brian, who went to New College the following year, lacked my knock-out punch but was a more skilful boxer.
It was always inspiring to watch him fight; from the first bell, regardless of punishment, he attacked relentlessly.
He was unlucky to have been in the University team only during his last year, when he easily gained a place.
During my last year, when I was captain, we won the Hospitals and Universities Championship, won against the Army and beat Cambridge 4–3.
On that occasion I had the hardest fight of my career and my prominent nose was badly broken before I won on points.
Boxing was the only sport I was any good at, but I often wondered, sitting with gloves on waiting for the fight before mine to end, why on earth I did it.
Yet, once I had started, I felt a savage satisfaction in fighting.
I was never conscious of pain, even with a torn ear, a broken nose and split lips, but I do remember occasions of desperate tiredness, and of effort to keep my hands up or stay on my feet.
Arthur Bentinck, who had been on my father's staff in Addis Ababa, often came to watch me box.
He had been appointed Military Attache to my father in 1917 after being badly wounded in  France.
One day at the Legation he had produced boxing gloves, and instructed Brian and me to put them on.
He always maintained that our later success was due to his initial coaching.
He alarmed us as children: he had a gruff manner, a game leg and a pronounced cast in one eye.
Later he became a close family friend and I envied and admired him, for he got to one remote and interesting place after another — Somaliland, Abyssinia, Kurdistan, Burma and China.
I read history at Oxford and was fortunate to have J. M. Thompson, an authority on the French Revolution, as my history tutor at Magdalen.
His tutorials were always stimulating and ranged over a variety of subjects.
But little of the necessary reading for "Schools" interested me: I had little interest in constitutional development, political theory or economic growth, none at all in the Industrial Revolution and the technical and scientific achievements that ushered in the modern age.
I had a romantic, not an objective, conception of history; Alexander the Great was foremost among my heroes, Montrose was the leader I would most gladly have followed, John Knox was my particular aversion.
As a child I had watched history being made.
I had seen the march of feudal armies, the victors returning in triumph, captive princes led past in chains.
In The Milebrook were assegais and other trophies brought back by my grandfather after he had shattered the Zulu army at Ulundi in 1879 — but I never begrudged those peerless warriors their earlier, annihilating victory over a British force on the slopes of Isandhlwana.
I had been thrilled by Rider Haggard's stories about the Zulus, especially Nada the Lily in which Mbopo, the blind witchdoctor, tells of the rise and death of Chaka whom he helped to murder.
At Eton I had read every book I could lay hands on about the Zulus, about Abyssinia and about the rise and fall of the Dervish empire in the Sudan.
At Oxford I was increasingly interested by the mass movement of peoples who, from the dawn of recorded knowledge, had devastated the world from the Pacific to the Atlantic, with incalculable effects on the history of mankind.
I could visualize the first restless stirring among tribes on the steppes of Central Asia, then the terrifying eruption of hordes of unknown people: lurching, creaking wagons, unkempt women and children, squat, slit-eyed men in padded garments, innumerable horses, felt tents, troops of mounted archers forever on the move.
I saw them as a people honed  by sun and wind to essential flesh and bone, accustomed since childhood to hardship, possessed of extraordinary mobility and genius for war.
Under Attila, and later under Genghis Khan and Timur Leng, armies ruthlessly welded from a variety of warring tribes swept out of Asia in transient conquests of unparalleled scope and ferocity.
At their approach tribe pressed on tribe, nation upon nation, leaving an ever-widening swathe of destruction as each sought to escape from the terror behind; one far-flung ripple had driven the Saxons across the North Sea into Britain.
Other nomads erupted from the deserts of Arabia in the seventh century; within a hundred years their armies had reached the shores of the Atlantic and the borders of China but, in fascinating contrast to the Huns and Mongols, the Arabs created a new and enduring civilization and founded a faith which today numbers six hundred million adherents.
Then, under the banner of Islam, descendants of Turkish shepherd tribes stormed Constantinople, fought under the walls of Vienna, subjugated the Balkans and held sway over the Hejaz, Egypt and Algiers.
All this I found enthralling, but unfortunately it fell outside the scope of Oxford's history school.
I would have liked to take the Crusades as my special subject, but my inadequacy in Latin deterred me.
Instead I read military history, a rewarding experience under C. T. Atkinson.
An untidy man, with frequent egg stains down his waistcoat, he always brought his smelly little dog in with him, and would tolerate no women undergraduates in his class.
The cities I had seen in England and France left me unmoved; their crowds had no interest for me: they lacked the colour and variety for which I craved.
I still had memories of Delhi and Jaipur, of massive forts, Moghul tombs, of streets alive with turbanned figures, crowded with lumbering ox-carts and pungent with the smell of spices.
I remembered the muezzin's call to prayer, heard in the stillness of the dawn.
I had read Eothen and other tales of Eastern travel and my imagination endowed Constantinople with all the magic of the East.
Samarkand, Merv and Bokhara were inaccessible but Constantinople was within my reach.
I went there during my first summer vacation from Oxford, working my passage in a tramp steamer bound for the Black Sea.
On 28 June 1930 in the East India Docks I climbed the gangway of the Sorrento and set foot on her rusty iron deck.
I was thrilled at the prospect ahead of me but diffident and embarrassed at joining a community so totally unfamiliar.
I need not have worried; the officers and men were welcoming and friendly.
The crew consisted of the captain, first, second and third mates, chief and second engineer, wireless operator, bosun, carpenter and eighteen other hands.
On board was a Maltese deck passenger who boasted he had been in nine different prisons in England; after we had sailed a friend of his was discovered stowed away in the chain locker.
I found I had the best of both worlds.
I worked regular hours as an ordinary member of the crew but fed with the officers; the food was substantial and good.
I was given the bosun's cabin to sleep in.
I apologized to him for this but he said,"I'm glad to be out of it.
Wait till you see the cockroaches."
These were the only things on the Sorrento that got me down; at night they sallied from every crack and crevice and nibbled dead skin on the soles of my feet.
I have loathed cockroaches ever since.
Soon after I came on board we finished loading.
Two hours later we weighed anchor, drew out into the dirty, oil-stained river and moved slowly downstream along London's crowded waterfront, passing other ships, docks, warehouses, cranes, wagons and lorries, and all the come and go of men associated with the sea.
We sailed down the reaches of the Thames and, standing in the bows, I saw the river through the eyes of Marlow in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, as a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth crowded with memories of men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or to the battles of the sea".
Next day we passed Beachy Head and the Isle of Wight and in the evening saw a windjammer.
Mr Harper, the mate, watched as she surged past with all her sails drawing, and then turning to me said: "You're damned lucky to have seen her.
There are so few of them left.
She's a fine sight, isn't she?"
To me she represented all that I had imagined of the bygone days of sail.
Two days later in the Bay of Biscay we saw a whale blowing a jet of spray high in the air, and I thought of Moby Dick.
During the next four weeks we steamed from one port to another, unloading and loading a variety of cargoes.
I was doing my four hours on and eight off, and as a supernumerary was given a variety of jobs.
Most of the time I worked in the bunkers, trying to keep the  stoker supplied with enough coal to fire the furnaces; he would rattle his shovel in the hatch if I fell behind.
This was hard, hot, dirty, choking work.
At other times I chipped rust off the deck, painted the boats and, in harbour, helped to repaint the ship's side or check the discharge of cargo.
Sometimes during the mate's watch I took the wheel and learnt to steer.
The first time or two he exclaimed,"For God's sake, man, keep her steady.
It'd break a snake's back to follow your course."
As I grew more proficient he leaned on the rail, sucked at his long clay pipe and reminisced about his days in sail or his experiences in ports from Aden to Hong Kong.
Massive, grizzled and elderly, he had been in ships since he was a boy, and he wanted no other life.
Mr Jackson, the captain, was a small man, sparse, rather finicky and of solitary disposition; he fed alone in his cabin.
In one port, I think Piraeus, where the water was particularly filthy, he forbade the crew to bathe, but the cook's lad slipped over the side.
As he climbed back on deck the skipper was waiting.
He handed the boy a mug filled with "black draught" , a foul-tasting and powerful purgative.
 "Here, lad, drink this up, all of it!" 
And to me he added, "That'll keep him on the run." 
When we were in port he let me off work and allowed me to go ashore for as long as I wanted: "After all, you're here to see these places.
Don't worry, we'll get along without you, but if you're late back we'll have sailed."
I always slept on board.
I enjoyed sitting on the hatch in the twilight with the crew, listening to their talk, a combination of profanity and sense.
They were a decent lot and I was glad that they accepted me despite my anomalous position.
One of them had been blown up four times, minesweeping during the First World War, and in consequence had a chronic twitch.
He had been in trawlers and, when he found I was interested, told me a lot about fishing off Iceland and Spitzbergen.
"If you want to go in a trawler, go in summer, he advised me.
 "Don't go in winter: then it really is hell." 
We called briefly at Gibraltar where I just had time to walk up the Rock and see the apes.
We then sailed along the African coast.
The Rif mountains were clearly"visible: somewhere among them Abd al Karim and his fellow tribesmen had destroyed a Spanish army of sixteen thousand men in 1921.
They had then invaded French Morocco and, after desperate fighting, had threatened Fez.
At Eton I had gone each day to Spottiswoode's bookshop to follow the course  of this war in The Times.
I remember my despondency in 1926 when Abd al Karim was forced to surrender to the French.
At Malta a battle cruiser, an aircraft carrier and three destroyers were anchored in the inner harbour.
We were only there for twenty-four hours, working throughout the night.
Our next port of call was Piraeus, which I thought a dirty, uninteresting place.
In the distance I could see the rock-girl Acropolis crowned by the ruins of the Parthenon.
Without any great enthusiasm I visited Athens.
The weather was hot and I felt little interest in ruins; but the Parthenon proved to have a matchless beauty for which I was quite unprepared.
We were four days in Piraeus and every day I went back to the Acropolis.
At that time few tourists went to Greece during the summer; some goats wandered among the fallen pillars, the goat-herd dozed in the shade, otherwise I had the place to myself.
It.
was utterly peaceful, sitting there in the hot sun with the scent of thyme around me and a view of distant Hymettos over the tiled roofs of Athens.
Only a murmur rose from the town below me.
Two lesser kestrels, the first I had ever seen, flew to and fro above my head.
We left for Salonika on 17 July, arrived next morning, and stayed two days, which gave me time to explore the older part of the town.
From the ramparts I had a view across the bay to green marshes and, far above them, rising above a swathe of cloud, the snow-covered summit of Olympus, infinitely remote.
We sailed across the Aegean to Izmir, which till recently had been called Smyrna; and the captain told me how, a few years earlier, as he entered the port, his ship had nosed her way through the floating corpses of Greeks massacred by the Turks.
The town had been largely burnt and rebuilt; it looked uninteresting and, as there was a lot of work to be done on board, I did not go ashore.
Our next port of call would be Constantinople — or, as it had just been renamed, Istanbul.
We passed Lesbos, Lemnos and other Greek islands floating in the haze on a calm sea, each more beautiful than the last.
Then we sailed through the Dardanelles, past beaches and rocky scrub-covered hills, once the scene of so much unavailing gallantry and sacrifice.
Somewhere there on a hillside was Doughty-Wylie's grave.
On the other side of the straits was Asia and the site of Troy.
The sun was setting as we anchored off Constantinople; in the twilight a  crescent moon hung low above a silhouette of domes and minarets.
I could hardly wait to land.
In the morning I went ashore with the captain in a bumboat, passing a variety of small craft that plied to and fro across the straits.
At the ship's office I was informed that Sir George Clerk, the British Ambassador, had sent a message that as soon as I landed I was to call on him at the Embassy.
I knew he had been a colleague of my father; I wondered how he knew I was on the Sort-to.
I felt embarrassed at the prospect of meeting him.
I am conventional enough to dislike appearing anywhere in unsuitable clothes.
Here I was wearing a shirt and an old pair of grey flannel trousers; they were clean, for I had washed them, but they were certainly not suitable for calling on an ambassador.
However, I had nothing better on board and could not ignore his summons.
I had some difficulty in securing admission to the Embassy, past a kavas in a spectacular scarlet uniform.
A secretary showed me into an ornately furnished drawing room and a few minutes later Sir George came in.
He had a distinguished air, was formally dressed in a tailcoat, and was precisely my idea of an ambassador.
He accepted my apologies for my appearance and quickly put me at ease, saying he had been a close friend of my father and was delighted to meet his son.
I told him that ever since listening to my father's vivid descriptions of Constantinople I had always wanted to visit the city, but that I had been sadly disillusioned by the Turks I had seen on my way to the Embassy; they had looked so incongruous in second-hand European clothes.
Sir George agreed that the place was very different now from my father's time.
The Sultan had since abdicated, the Caliphate had been abolished, the Dervish orders had been suppressed and most traditional ceremonies and pageantry had been done away with.
But in spite of the changes, Sir George insisted that Constantinople was still a fascinating city, superbly sited, full of interest, and worth visiting just to see Hagia Sophia.
The Sorrento remained four days at Constantinople.
In that time I followed the course of the massive city walls which over the centuries had sustained so many assaults before falling at last to the Turkish onslaught.
I wandered among turbanned headstones in the Muslim cemetery, mingled with the crowds on the Galata Bridge over the Golden Horn, and ate Turkish food in unpretentious eating-houses on the waterfront.
I visited the underground cisterns.
spent hours in the covered bazaar and a whole morning among the treasures of the Seraglio.
But most of my time I spent in the many and varied mosques, and each day I went back to Hagia Sophia, sometimes remaining for hours.
Built by Justinian as the centre of Christian worship, this miraculous embodiment of space had been converted by the victorious Turks, with only minor modifications, into their foremost mosque and had been taken as the prototype for others which they built.
None, however, rivalled it.
The Blue Mosque and the Mosque of Suleiman the Magnificent were more impressive from outside; but inside them I was conscious of confinement.
On a Friday I witnessed the midday prayers in Hagia Sophia.
Now that religious observance was officially discouraged only a few hundred worshippers were present.
A few years previously thousands would have attended.
This was the first time I saw an Islamic service and I was impressed by the unhurried, synchronized movements of the worshippers and by the sonorous rhythm of their prayers.
Still, the high expectations I had arrived with had been disappointed.
Constantinople I found depressing, soulless, with drab crowds, deserted mosques, and palaces preserved as showpieces of a dead past.
Six years later, re-visiting Hagia Sophia, I had to buy a ticket to enter.
The superb frescoes, concealed from sight by Muslim prejudice for nearly five hundred years, were again on view, but they did not compensate for a profound sense of desecration.
For fourteen hundred years Hagia Sophia had been a place of worship: it was now debased into an ancient monument, open to the public for a fee.
On 28 July 1930 I disembarked from the Sorrento at Constanza in the Black Sea.
I was touched by the good wishes of the crew when I went ashore.
I had enjoyed every minute of the past month.
No luxury cruise around the Mediterranean could have been half as rewarding; I should have been fed up at sea and embarrassed ashore, always conscious of the intrusion of our party as we were shown the sights.
From Constanza I returned to England, travelling third class across Europe, by train to Bucharest and Budapest, by boat up the Danube to Vienna, and thence by train to Prague, Berlin and Ostend.
Back at The Milebrook I found two letters waiting for me.
One was an invitation from Ras Tafari to attend his coronation as the Emperor Haile Selassie.
The other was a notification from the Foreign Office that I had been appointed Honorary Attache to HRH the Duke of Gloucester who would attend the coronation as the representative of his father, King George V. 
Haile Selassie's Coronation
When Ras Tafari had paid his State Visit to London in 1924 he had brought with him several important chiefs, among them Ras Hailu of Gojjam and Ras Seyum of Tigre, the grandson of the Emperor John, all of whom he suspected might make trouble if he left them behind.
Two years later the aged and uncompromising Fitaurari Habta Giorgis and the Abuna Mattewos both died.
Their deaths removed from the scene two powerful and reactionary figures, but Ras Tafari was still confronted by many others.
In 1928 Ras Tafari instructed Dedjazmatch Balcha, then Governor of Sidamo, to report to him in Addis Ababa.
Balcha ignored the summons.
He received another, more peremptory, order and eventually came to Addis Ababa with ten thousand men.
He camped a few miles outside the town and there remained, determined to outface Ras Tafari, whom he discounted as astute but weak.
Ras Tafari invited him to a banquet at the palace and guaranteed his personal safety.
Balcha only accepted after Tafari suggested he should bring with him as many men as he pleased.
He arrived with six hundred.
When he returned to his camp in the evening he found it deserted: while he had been feasting, Tafari's agents had persuaded his troops to return home.
Balcha now had no alternative but to surrender to Ras Tafari who, with characteristic magnanimity, spared his life; as to whether he ordered Balcha to enter a monastery or banished him to his estates in the Gurage country, accounts differ.
But seven years later in 1935, on the eve of the Italian invasion, while the war drums were beating outside the palace to summon the nation to war, an old man presented himself before the Emperor.
"I am Balcha.
I fought the Italians at Adua.
Now I have come to fight them again."
He was eventually killed, still fighting, after the Italians had occupied Addis Ababa.
In September 1928, at the instigation of the diehards, the Empress was involved in yet another attempt to overthrow Ras Tafari; her soldiers were ordered to arrest him while he was at the palace.
He  overawed them and calmly walked out through the palace gates.
Having rejoined his own troops he insisted that the Empress should proclaim him Negus.
She had to comply and soon afterwards he was crowned: as the crown was placed on his head his retainers, to a man, drew their swords with a rasp of steel and brandished them in the air.
As Negus, Tafari now felt powerful enough to press ahead with the reforms he had set his heart on; but as he did so opposition intensified.
Early in 1930 Ras Gugsa Wale, the former husband of the Empress marched south with his army, calling on the country to rise and overthrow the man who sought to corrupt their religion and, with his modern innovations, destroy their ancient heritage.
It seemed probable that Ras Hailu and Ras Seyum would join him, and that all Tigre, Begemder, Gojjam and Wollo would rise in revolt.
Undismayed, Tafari summoned his armies from Harar, from Sidamo and the other provinces of the south and sent them north under the grim old warrior Ras Mulugeta.
On 31 March at Zebit on the border of Begemder the armies of the north and south once again joined battle.
Ras Gugsa was killed and his army routed.
The Empress, who had been seriously ill, died of diabetes soon afterwards.
On 3 April Tafari was proclaimed Negusa Nagast, and invited Great Britain, France, Italy, Germany, the United States, Japan, Turkey, and a number of other states, to send representatives in November to his coronation as the Emperor Haile Selassie.
The Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of Airlie and the five other members of his staff, including myself, left Victoria by the boat train on 16 October 1930.
Happily in those days there was no air navel to take us in a few hours to Addis Ababa and bring us back a few days later.
We joined the P and 0 Rampura at Marseilles and sailed for Aden.
Accompanying us was the delegation from the Sudan, led by Sir John Maffey, the Governor-General; he was six foot three and impressive in appearance, with natural charm and a spontaneous interest in others.
He had been Private Secretary to my uncle when he was Viceroy, and later Chief Commissioner of the North-West Frontier of India before he went to the Sudan.
I had recently stayed with him in Scotland: knowing him was a help, for I felt out of my milieu.
Lord Airlie also went out of his way to help me find my feet.
Another imposing figure, at the State banquet in Addis Ababa he wore the full dress of a Highland chief and looked magnificent.
But it was the natural kindness of the Duke that helped me most.
He was an enthusiastic but, I suspect, an indifferent bridge player.
When he asked me if I played I admitted that I had done so but insisted that I really was very bad.
"Never mind.
Now we will get a four,"and I was roped in to play each evening.
Harold MacMichael, who was Civil Secretary in the Sudan, was, I am sure, a brilliant player; he was also long-suffering.
Once he did protest, "Why on earth did you trump my ace?" 
Those games certainly helped to break the ice.
From Aden we crossed to Jibuti in HMS Effingham, flagship of the East Indies Squadron, and Admiral Fullerton joined our party with his Flag Lieutenant and another officer.
At Jibuti we were met by Sir Sidney Barton, British Minister from Addis Ababa, by Sir Stewart Symes from Aden and Sir Harold Kittermaster from British Somaliland, and we travelled together in a special train to Addis Ababa.
The journey took only two nights and a day; previously it had always taken three days, since the train stopped for the night at Dire Dawa and the Awash Station.
I felt thrilled to be back in Abyssinia and stared entranced at the arid landscape of the Danakil desert.
I saw occasional Danakil with their camels and flocks of goats.
But it was the vultures that fascinated me.
I had forgotten how large they were; they seemed enormous, and there were so many of them, circling overhead, clustered in a tree or hopping about as they squabbled over carrion.
We arrived at Addis Ababa at midday on 28 October and were received at the railway station by the Emperor.
The Duke of Gloucester and four of his staff were taken to one of the palaces, while the rest of us were accommodated in tents in the spacious Legation grounds.
The town was much as I remembered it in 1919.
The roads had certainly been widened and improved; there were more ramshackle buildings of European design along the main streets and everywhere more corrugated iron roofs; but outside the centre of the town grass-roofed tukuls still predominated, surrounded now by eucalyptus trees.
The great increase in the number and size of these trees was the most striking difference in the town's appearance.
When Menelik founded Addis Ababa in 1889 the countryside had been forested with juniper and wild olive, but these had soon been cut down for  firewood and building material, whereupon Menelik announced that he was going to move his capital for the third time.
The newly established Legations protested and the introduction of the fast-growing eucalyptus obviated the necessity.
By 1930 Addis Ababa was in a vast wood that spread up the slopes of the Entoto hills.
During the ensuing days every Ras and chieftain in the country must have been camped in and around Addis Ababa.
They had travelled, in many cases for weeks, from all parts of the empire, from Tigre and Begemder, Gojjam, Wollo, Harar and Walega, from the furthest provinces of the south and west, on the borders of Kenya and the Sudan, to be present when their Emperor was crowned.
Each vied with others in the number of his retainers, the magnificence of his robes and accoutrements.
This was the last time that the age-old splendour of Abyssinia was to be on view.
Already it was slightly tarnished round the edges by innovations copied from the West: the bodyguard now wore khaki, some of the palace secretaries were in tailcoats and top hats.
There were cars in the streets and brash, noisy journalists crowded round hotel bars competing for sensational stories to wire to their papers.
On ceremonial occasions they thrust themselves forward with their cameras.
However, immensely moved by sights reminiscent of my childhood, I ignored what I had no desire to see.
Each day I listened, enthralled, to the slow steady throb of war drums in the palace, where the gebers were being held.
My parents had attended such feasts when thousands, entering in relays, gorged on raw meat, hacked in turn from the bleeding carcases of oxen carried on poles past rows of squatting men.
Now, out of regard for their susceptibilities, Europeans were no longer invited, indeed were forbidden to attend.
It has always seemed to me a pity that Evelyn Waugh, the one person present with a gift for writing, was blind to the historical significance of the occasion, impercipient of this last manifestation of Abyssinia's traditional pageantry.
He had come to Addis Ababa as correspondent for the Graphic and he later made use of the occasion to parody what he had seen in Black Mischief and other books.
In Remote People he dwelt on "The Great Flea Scandal" , the underwear of the Emperor's European housekeeper and the remarks of an American professor during the coronation service to the exclusion of more significant observations.
He ridiculed the  ceremonies in impeccable prose, and disparaged the British Minister and his family, who had not invited him to lunch.
Previously I had never heard of Waugh, nor of Decline and Fall and Vile Bodies, novels with which he had made his name.
Now I met him at one of the numerous receptions.
I disapproved of his grey suede shoes, his floppy bow tie and the excessive width of his trousers: he struck me as flaccid and petulant and I disliked him on sight.
Later he asked, at second-hand, if he could accompany me into the Danakil country, where I planned to travel.
I refused.
Had he come, I suspect only one of us would have returned.
Haile Selassie was crowned on 2 November in St George's Cathedral.
We left the Legation as the sun rose and our cars were constantly brought to a standstill in the crowded streets.
At least a hundred thousand people surrounded the cathedral where the chiefs in all their finery were massed in serried ranks.
Assembled in the church were a great number of turbanned priests, holding silver crosses, and deacons wearing coloured vestments and silver crowns.
The air was heavy with incense from the many swinging censers.
Inside the sanctuary the Emperor and Empress still kept their all-night vigil to continuous chanting and the beat of the church drums.
Attached to the church was a large canvas annexe to accommodate the Abyssinian notables and the foreign dignitaries, and it was here that the crowning took place.
The Emperor emerged from the cathedral itself at half past seven, escorted by the Abuna, the Patriarch of Alexandria and the Etchege, the senior monk of the realm who ranked second to the Abuna in the hierarchy of the Ethiopian Church.
Haile Selassie seated himself on a crimson throne, and shortly afterwards the Empress took her place on a smaller throne.
Then the lengthy service began, conducted in Ge'ez, the ancient language of the Ethiopian Church, and accompanied by a Coptic choir from Alexandria.
It lasted for three hours or more.
Many complained afterwards of its inordinate length.
I was not conscious of this — it could have lasted twice as long as far as I was concerned.
The Etchege presented the Emperor with the robe, sword, sceptre, ring and two spears, each of which had been blessed by the Abuna.
Then the Abuna approached the throne, anointed Haile Selassie with sacred oil and placed the crown upon his head.
Even as a boy Haile Selassie had believed in his imperial destiny; for nearly twenty years he had survived conspiracies, wars and revolutions, and his resolution had never faltered.
The crown settled on his brow.
This was his supreme moment; yet his delicate face and sombre eyes remained impassive, showed no vestige of emotion.
As the guns thundered their salute, the great Rases and chieftains led by Asfa Wossen, his eldest son, came forward to do him homage: Ras Kassa, his faithful kinsman, Ras Seyum of Tigre, Ras Hailu of Gojjam, Ras Imru, Ras Mulugeta and others.
The Empress was crowned, and then the Emperor and Empress entered the cathedral to take communion.
They came out at last and Haile Selassie went forward under a crimson canopy to show himself to his people.
That night there was a State banquet.
When it ended we moved out on to the palace balcony to watch a display of fireworks, the first to be given in the country; but after two rockets had been fired something went wrong and the rest blew up.
This must have been a bitter moment for Haile Selassie, but once again he gave no indication of his feelings.
He stood for a while, watching the pyrotechnic chaos in the yard below, then moved slowly back into the banqueting hall.
Two days later he granted me a private audience, a remarkable consideration during those eventful days to his youngest and least important guest.
He received me with grave courtesy and enquired after my family.
When I expressed my appreciation of the honour he had done me by inviting me to his coronation, he replied that as the eldest son of his trusted friend, to whom he owed so much, it was proper that I should be present.
I told him how happy I was to be back in his country.
"It is your country.
You were born here.
You have lived here for half of your life.
I hope you will spend many more years with us,"was his answer.
As he spoke I was very conscious of the smile which transformed his usually impassive face.
It was twenty minutes before he terminated the interview.
That evening I received two elephant tusks, a heavy, ornate gold cigarette case, a large, colourful carpet and the third class of the Star of Ethiopia.
I had brought a rifle with me to Abyssinia.
determined to achieve my dream of hunting big game.
I had read and re-read books by Selous, Gordon Cumming, Baldwin, Newman, Powell-Cotton and  many other African hunters.
Whenever I had been in London I had visited the Natural History Museum and Rowland Ward's taxidermist shop in Piccadilly, where there was always a fascinating collection of heads, skins and mounted specimens.
I was well versed in Rowland Ward's Records of Big Game.
I now decided that before going back to Oxford I would spend a month in the Danakil country.
It was easily accessible from the Awash railway station and was one of the few areas in Abyssinia where wild animals survived in any number.
The Danakil did not hunt and the Abyssinians, who had wiped out most of the game elsewhere, were afraid to venture into their country, since among the Danakil a man's standing depended on the number of men he had killed and castrated.
Muslims of Hamitic origin, they were akin to the Somalis, though their language was distinct.
Much of the Danakil country was still unexplored, including the remote Aussa Sultanate where the Awash river was reputed to terminate.
This considerable river rose in the highlands near Addis Ababa, flowed down into the Danakil desert but never reached the sea.
My intention, however, was not to explore but to hunt, and I did not intend to penetrate far into the Danakil country.
Even so, it was a challenging undertaking for a young man of twenty with no previous experience.
Sir Sidney Barton was apprehensive for my safety and suggested I should join him and Lord Airlie on a short hunting trip near the Awash Station.
I explained that I wanted the experience of running my own expedition and, after some discussion, he withdrew his objections but warned me not to go further than Bilen.
I discussed my plans with Colonel Sandford; he had travelled across Abyssinia to the Sudan in 1907 and served under my father in the Legation in 1913, returning to Abyssinia with Christine, his wife, after the First World War in which he had fought with distinction.
Since then he had been farming at Mullu, some fifteen miles outside Addis Ababa.
He gave me every encouragement, lent me camp equipment, provided me with a Somali called Ali as my headman and helped me collect the necessary servants.
The month that followed was decisive in my life.
I was among a savage, good-looking people with a dangerous reputation.
I was travelling with camels in hot, arid country under testing conditions where, if things went wrong, I could get no help and where men's lives depended on my judgement.
I hunted buffalo in the swamps at Bilen; it was exciting following them through the dense reed beds.
With more success I hunted greater and lesser kudu, oryx, waterbuck and gazelle.
My aim was to secure a good head of each species and, in consequence, except when I shot for meat, I shot selectively and seldom.
I followed the Awash as far as Bilen and then turned eastwards across the desert to Afdam on the railway.
The Danakil around Bilen were friendly, but were apprehensive of their formidable neighbours in Bahdu, who had raided them recently and inflicted many casualties.
Near Afdam I hunted greater kudu in the broken bush-covered country round Afdub, a volcanic mountain rising to seven thousand feet.
One day I disturbed three separate males and was feeling thoroughly frustrated and incompetent when I saw a magnificent bull, silhouetted on a ridge against the setting sun, a graceful, powerful body with a great sweep of spiralling horns.
It was an easy shot, but as I heard the bullet strike he bounded away.
I thought despairingly "I've only wounded him and now I'll never find him in the dark." 
I scrambled up the ridge and there he lay dead, a dozen yards away.
It was a superb head, a veritable trophy of trophies, and a marvellous ending to the trip.
During this month I led the life for which I had always yearned hunting big game on my own in the wilds of Africa; but now I realized that this expedition had meant more to me than just the excitement of hunting.
I had been on the borders of a virtually unexplored land inhabited by dangerous, untouched tribes.
Before I had turned back from Bilen I had watched the Awash flowing towards its unknown destination.
I had felt the lure of the unexplored, the compulsion to go where others had not been.
From Afdam I took the train to Dire Dawa and from there rode to Harar, through mountains that were beautiful and green after recent rain, following the route my parents had taken in 1909.
Harar could hardly have changed since my father had visited Dedjazmatch Balcha.
The five gates still guarded the only entrances through the mud walls, inside which, among the warren of alleyways and flat-roofed mud houses, Balcha's soldiers had in 1916 massacred the Muslim population.
I had always wanted to see Harar, which had been Burton's objective in 1855.
I fancied that except for a few corrugated iron roofs it still looked the same as when he had been here.
The town lacked  architectural distinction but the colour of the women's clothes, predominantly red, yellow and orange, was unforgettable, especially when large numbers were assembled at the wells or in the marketplace.
Most of them were light-skinned and many were beautiful.
I stayed with Plowman, the Consul, and his wife: they had been in Addis Ababa for the coronation and had invited me to visit them at Harar.
I was with them a week and they were kind to me.
I explored the town and rode into the surrounding countryside, often towards Kondoro, the flat-topped Mountain of Refuge.
I remember it as I saw it one evening, lit by the setting sun against a background of threatening clouds.
I also remember the hyenas.
They swarmed round the town at night and came close to the tent in which I slept in the consulate compound.
I have never hated hyenas: their occasional maniacal laughter and their eerie whooping cries are among my earliest memories.
More than any other sound, more even than the grunting roar of a lion, their howling evokes for me the African night.
I rode back to Dire Dawa, past Haramaya Lake where my parents had camped, took the train to Jibuti and then a Messageries Maritimes boat to Marseilles, third-class among a draft of the Foreign Legion; an interesting contrast with the Mission's journey to Aden first-class on a P and 0 with a deck reserved to ourselves.
Oxford and The Milebrook
I was back in England in time for the Easter term of 1931 and resumed my university life, but during the next three years I thought incessantly of that slow-flowing muddy river, of the arid, scrub-covered plains and volcanic mountains, the herds of ox and gazelle, the mat-roofed encampments, the slender, graceful figures in loincloths, attractive, armed and unpredictable.
I was determined to return as soon as I had taken my degree, to follow the Awash river into the fabulous Sultanate of Aussa and discover how and where it ended.
The challenge presented by the murderous company of the Danakil and the physical difficulties of the journey was irresistible.
With this in mind, the first thing I did was to join the Oxford Exploration Club.
John Buchan was President and I wrote to him asking for his advice.
For years, I had been reading and re-reading his novels, ever since I had come across Prester John at my prep school.
This story of Laputa, the Zulu leader who died tragically and dramatically while attempting to free his people, made an indelible impression on me.
Buchan was living at Elsfield Manor near Oxford and invited me to come and see him: no one could have been more helpful and encouraging.
I went there several times.
I can still picture him as I knew him, his sensitive, ascetic face etched with lines of pain but lit by his innate kindliness, his lean body in comfortable country tweeds.
Although a man of many and varied accomplishments he remained a countryman at heart, with an abiding love of the Scottish lowlands.
T. E. Lawrence was a friend of Buchan.
I would have given much to meet him at Elsfield during one of his fleeting visits: indeed there was no one I would have been more interested to meet.
I had read Revolt in the Desert while I was at Eton, and I later read Seven Pillars of Wisdom as soon as it was published after his death.
Today it has become fashionable to disparage Lawrence and his achievements but Churchill, Allenby, Wavell, men of action and men of letters and  humble aircraftmen who knew him, paid tribute to him in T. E. Lawrence By His Friends.
On the strength of my boxing I was elected to Vincent's, a club consisting of Blues and other notable athletes.
I seldom went there; instead I frequented the Gridiron, to which most of my friends belonged.
I was getting over the feeling of rejection instilled into me at St Aubyn's, which by making me aggressive had deprived me of so much that Eton had to offer.
At Oxford I discovered that most people were only too willing to be friendly if I gave them a chance.
I was also elected to the Raleigh Club, which met periodically in Rhodes House.
Its interests were imperial and its speakers were always men of distinction: members of the Cabinet, colonial Governors and the like.
Ramsay MacDonald, while he was Prime Minister, spoke at the annual dinner, and Gandhi accepted an invitation while he was in England for the Round Table Conference in 1933.
I went to this meeting feeling prejudiced against him.
Wrapped in his white cotton sheet, perched on a chair and peering at us over his steel-rimmed spectacles, he looked a frail, incongruous figure.
It seemed to me extraordinary that this man should have such immense authority in caste-ridden India; yet no one has questioned his greatness.
I do not remember any of the questions or answers, but I came away captivated by his personality, amazed by the endearing quality he radiated, a humour and charm utterly unexpected.
During my second long vacation from Oxford in the summer of 1931, I joined a Hull trawler which fished off Iceland.
As a boy I had read a lot of sea stories and indulged in fancies of rounding the Horn in a windjammer.
Talking to Pierre as we fished off the coast of Brittany had first given me the idea of working on a trawler.
The crew greeted my arrival on board with facetious comments: "Anyone going trawling for pleasure should go to Hell for a pastime," was one of them.
But I was an extra hand and they were glad to have my help.
I shared the skipper's cabin immediately below the wheelhouse.
A taciturn man of medium height and powerful build, with a square, weather-beaten face, he was reputed to be one of the best skippers sailing out of Hull.
On our way to the fishing grounds off Iceland we passed close to the Faroes.
They were an awe-inspiring sight, with the sea thundering against great black precipices and hurling shattered sheets of spray high up the face of the rock; above this turmoil a host of  wheeling, screeching sea birds showed white against the cliffs.
We fished off the southern coast of Iceland but never in sight of the mainland; all we saw of land was the Hvalsbakur or Whale's Back, a single forbidding rock sixteen feet high, visible from ten miles away in clear weather.
We were divided into watches but this was largely meaningless.
Every three or four hours the trawl was winched alongside and we battled to pass a rope round the "cod end" which held the fish, using the roll of the boat to help us.
The cod end was then winched above deck, the bag was opened and the fish cascaded into the pens that divided the deck.
Then for hours we gutted the living, flapping fish and threw them into baskets to be carried below and put on ice.
It was back-breaking work.
There were cod, haddock, coley and a variety of other fish, some of considerable size.
We chucked their livers into a large barrel fastened to the mast; these were sold for cod-liver oil and the money they fetched was the perquisite of the crew.
Gradually the piles of fish would grow smaller; we had nearly cleared the pens.
I hoped desperately that we should soon have a respite, however short, but the trawl would be alongside once more and the pens filled up again.
So it went on day after day, night after night; we were out for a month.
I remember the brief darkness at midnight when the arc lamps lit the decks; the interminable hours of daylight; the unceasing work with men too tired to talk; the hurried meals; the luxury of sleep when we were moving from one fishing ground to another.
This was summer.
I could hardly conceive what it must be like in winter: the incessant darkness; the piercing cold when the spray froze as it hit the deck and formed great blocks of ice at the bows; howling gales and never-ending work; then a few days in port and out to sea again, week after week, month after month.
Though they seemed very ordinary, with little to talk about except their families, their girlfriends the football teams they supported and the films they had seen, these men represented the incomparable seamen of Britain.
There was fog as we came through the Pentland Firth on our way back to Hull.
I was sitting talking to the skipper in his cabin when we heard the wheel go hard over.
In one bound he had left his seat and was half way up the ladder; I was close behind.
Right alongside were the bows of a ship; they seemed enormous and so close that I  thought the bilge water would splash on our deck.
Someone muttered "Christ" , and then the ship was gone.
"The bloody bastards.
They'd have gone right over us and not even known they'd hit us."
We docked in the evening.
The crew went off to their homes.
I found a large hotel and looked forward to a good dinner.
I was disappointed; I'd eaten better food on board.
I got back to The Milebrook next day.
During 1931 my mother, who was then fifty-one, married Reggie Astley, a widower with no children who was considerably older than her.
They were very attached to each other and I hoped that my mother could now look forward to a happy old age.
I knew how she dreaded a recurrence of loneliness when the four of us eventually left The Milebrook and went our various ways.
Reggie was an endearing, kindly man who had led a leisurely, unadventurous life as a country gentleman.
Too old to fight, he had served as a special constable during the war.
Now, though he was seventy, he was still robust and active, and there was nothing he enjoyed more than a day's shooting.
I remember ow indefatigably he mowed the lawn, even on a hot summer's day.
Though he had few intellectual interests, he was fascinated by the lineage of ancient families, such as his own, even of those that had long lapsed into obscurity.
We thought this rather a joke but his concern was academic, not snobbish.
He was also well versed about historic homes, in many of which he had stayed, an interest he shared with Roddy, who even as a boy had been fascinated by pictures and architecture.
Reggie had owned the Weir House near Alresford, an attractive place where a well-stocked trout stream ran past the cedars on the lawn.
He had some notable furniture and possessions, most of which he sold with the house when he moved into The Milebrook.
We did not appreciate at the time what a wrench leaving the Weir House must have been for him, nor the difficulty he had in adjusting himself to four assertive stepsons he hardly knew.
My brothers and I grew up with very different interests and aspirations and we were to lead very different lives.
I had always longed to get back to Abyssinia.
As a child at the Legation I had met officers from the Sudan, Kenya and Somaliland, who were serving as Consuls in the border areas of Abyssinia.
I had been enthralled by  true stories of savage tribes, frontier raids and lion hunts.
This, I felt, was the life for me.
As a first step to achieving it I made up my mind, even before I went to Eton, to join the Sudan Political Service.
Brian, who had shared my experiences as a child in Abyssinia, had no desire to return there.
More conventional by nature, he always intended to join the Army.
When he went down from Oxford he was commissioned into the Royal Welch Fusiliers, his godfather's regiment, and took the name of Doughty-Wylie.
Mrs Doughty-Wylie had constituted herself his godmother after her husband had been killed in Gallipoli and she induced him to change his name and join this regiment.
During the war he served in the Italian campaign, won an MC at Anzio, and ended the war in Burma.
Dermot joined me at Magdalen for my fourth year at Oxford; Roddy did not go up to Oxford until the year after I had left.
Dermot and I had been together at Eton but then Dermot was one of the Lower boys who came when I shouted "Boy" .
Now we were grown up and the difference in our ages was immaterial.
I could discuss my plans for my proposed exploration of the Danakil country with him, take him to a meeting of the Raleigh Club or to Elsfield to have tea with John Buchan.
Dermot was devoted to England and always maintained that he never went abroad if he could avoid it.
Witty, ambitious and idealistic, his ambition was to be elected to Parliament, his dream to become Prime Minister.
He was called to the Bar when he left Oxford.
While he was there he learnt to fly with the University Air Squadron and was in despair when, on the outbreak of war, the RAF initially turned him down on medical grounds.
Over six feet in height with no spare flesh, he did look gaunt.
After he had been accepted he trained in South Africa, and was then posted as a Flight Sergeant to Coastal Command.
His ineptitude at mathematics delayed his commission, which was finally granted on the day he was killed on an operational flight.
He was, however, happy in the ranks, where his sociable and unassuming character and ability to mix with all sorts made him free of its easy comradeship.
When he was killed Vincent Massey, the High Commissioner for Canada, and Mr Justice Lawrence, the High Court Judge for whom Dermot had marshalled, wrote appreciations of him in The Times, a remarkable tribute in this time of war to an unknown young man.
Reggie owned the Villa Cipressi on Lake Como in Italy and there I spent an unforgettable fortnight during the summer of 1932 with seven Oxford friends, including Harry Phillimore and Robin Campbell.
This charming villa was spacious and comfortably furnished with a well-stocked library; the large garden ran down to the lake where there was both a motor boat and a sailing boat.
We swam in the lake and sunned ourselves on the lawn among the flowering magnolias.
We sailed, we climbed the precipice behind the villa, walked among the chestnut woods on the mountain slopes and came back to eat delicious Italian food cooked by the voluble old peasant woman who looked after the villa.
After dinner we would sit looking out over the three arms of the lake and talk until, drowsy with sun, swimming, food and wine, we went off to bed.
Previously I had never heard a nightingale; here they sang throughout the night beneath our windows.
I thought Italy astoundingly beautiful and liked the Italians I met in Varenna, a quiet, peaceful village just up the road from the Cipressi.
It never occurred to me that within three years I should hate the Italians with an unrelenting hatred.
During my last year at Oxford I had applied to join the Sudan Political Service.
The Anglo-Egyptian Sudan was a vast country, some 1300 miles from north to south and 900 from east to west, inhabited by a great diversity of tribes and races, ranging from camel-owning nomads in the north to naked pagans in the equatorial swamps of the south, and former cannibals in the forests bordering the Congo.
But from my point of view what mattered most was that it bordered Abyssinia, where I hoped one day to be posted.
I had become interested in the Sudan itself after reading Samuel Baker's books, but at first my interest was largely in the wild life and the big-game hunting in the Southern Sudan; then at Eton I chanced on The River War, Winston Churchill's vivid account of Kitchener's campaign to reconquer the Sudan from the Khalifa.
After that I read every book I could find about the rise and fall of the Dervish Empire.
I was interviewed by the Sudan Agent in London who gave me lunch at his club, and told me I would be called before a selection board when I came down from Oxford.
I explained that I was planning, as soon as I left Oxford, to go to Abyssinia for a year, to explore the Danakil country.
He said this would be all right since on my return I should still be within the age limit for joining the Political Service.
Some months earlier I had written to Sir Sidney Barton who, fortunately for me, was still British Minister in Addis Ababa, asking him to obtain the Emperor's permission for me to follow the Awash river through the Danakil country to discover where and how it ended.
I had recently heard from the Foreign Office that the Emperor had agreed to my undertaking this journey.
I immediately wrote to Colonel Sandford asking for his help in collecting my caravan, and he promised to do whatever he could.
I was now busy raising the necessary money.
The Royal Geographical Society approved my plans and made me a grant, as did the Percy Sladen Trust of the Linnean Society.
The Natural History Museum undertook to buy any suitable specimens which I brought back, and most firms I approached agreed to provide rations, ammunition, films, medicine and other requirements for the expedition, either free or at a considerable discount.
I had often discussed my plans with my uncle who, as Warden, now lived in the Warden's Lodge at All Souls, where he and his wife encouraged me to visit them and always made me welcome.
Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, in the spring of 1933 my uncle collapsed lapsed and died while walking in a friend's garden.
His death left me with a sense of desolation.
Some months later his wife told me he had intended to contribute to the cost of my expedition and she insisted on my receiving from his estate the amount he had meant to give me.
I was quite prepared to do this journey alone, but my mother, who had given me every encouragement although well aware of the risks I was running, insisted I should take a companion.
Surprisingly, I had difficulty in finding one until David Haig-Thomas, whom I had known slightly at Eton, offered to come with me.
He had been at Cambridge, where he got his Blue for rowing.
On the last day of term I met the President and dons to say goodbye.
I was aware how much I owed to their unobtrusive help; several of them were my friends.
I had been happy at Magdalen and this was a moving occasion.
The President wished me well on my expedition and then, quite unexpectedly, announced that the College had decided to make a contribution to its cost.
Nearly fifty years later Magdalen did me the signal honour of electing me an Honorary Fellow.
PART II
Among the Danakil 1933–4
The Highlands of Arussi
Haig Thomas and I arrived in Addis Ababa on 8 September 1933 and stayed with Dan and Chris Sandford on their farm at Mullu.
The house overlooked the sheer two-thousand-foot gorge of the Muger river and had a magnificent view down the valley towards the distant canyon of the Blue Nile.
Primitive their house certainly was, with its earthen floor, mud walls, thatched roof and rude furniture; but it was imbued by those two remarkable and lovable people with a warmth that few homes can ever have equalled.
The Sandfords kept open house for anyone who rode the fifteen miles from Addis Ababa, and it was a rewarding experience to stay with them, for their knowledge of the country and of its people was outstanding.
They told us of exciting events that had taken place in the valley below their house the previous year, the result of an attempted coup by Ras Hailu, the hereditary ruler of Gojjam.
Autocratic, powerful and ambitious, he had long been jealous of the Emperor and had aspired to be made a Negus.
This would have conflicted with Haile Selassie's intention of curtailing the power of the feudal Rases and centralizing the administration.
Threatened now by a diminution of his semi-regal status, Ras Hailu decided to rebel and reinstate his son-in-law, Lij Yasu, as Emperor.
For the past fourteen years Lij Yasu had been held by Ras Kassa in comfortable detention at Fiche.
Ras Hailu planned to free him and to raise the north in his name.
For all his faults, Lij Yasu was remembered by many as a more comprehensible ruler than Haile Selassie, who failed to conform to the popular image of an Abyssinian monarch.
The plot, however, miscarried.
Lij Yasu escaped prematurely and Ras Hailu was arrested before he had organized the rebellion.
Almost any ruler other than Haile Selassie would have confirmed the sentence of death passed on him for treason by the high court, but the Emperor was content to fine him heavily and imprison him.
Lij Yasu was arrested four days later near the Sandfords' farm; he  had been wandering in the Muger valley with a few retainers, hungry and terrified.
Missing his women and his comforts, he had been more than ready tO give himself up.
He was imprisoned near Harar and died three years later, a physical wreck at thirty-seven.
Dan Sandford had met us at the railway station in Addis Ababa and had brought with him Omar, our prospective headman, to clear our baggage through customs and deal with the other formalities.
Unlike most Somalis, Omar was large, stout and jovial.
He impressed me at once, for he was obviously authoritative and efficient.
He had been with Sandford since he was a boy and spoke adequate English.
In those days many Europeans, especially in Kenya, relied on Somalis as their headmen; in turn, these Somalis identified themselves with their masters and gave them devoted service.
Omar was in this tradition.
They are all gone now and have no successors.
During the next nine months Omar more than justified Sandford's strong recommendation.
Thanks to him there was never any trouble among my followers, though they included Arnhara, Galla, Gurages, Somalis and Danakils; all of them, whether Christian or Muslim, accepted his authority without question.
Omar was a devout Muslim and like the best Somalis was proud and fearless, though he proved to be remarkably tactful and forbearing whenever I was impatient or angry, and always upheld my authority even when I made a mistake.
It was largely due to him that I managed to negotiate successfully with government officials and tribal chiefs during the months that followed.
Sandford had sent him, before our arrival, to the Awash Station on the edge of the Danakil country to buy us eighteen camels.
These were now waiting there with the six Somalls Omar had engaged as our camel men.
Sandford, however, urged us to defer going down there for at least two months: the rains had only recently ended and after the rains a virulent type of malaria was prevalent in the Awash valley.
He suggested that in the meantime we should visit the Arussi mountains; this would enable us to assess our men and, if necessary, change some before we committed ourselves to the Danakil country.
Omar assured us that the Somalis he had engaged would wait contentedly with the camels until we turned up.
We had undertaken to collect birds and mammals for the Natural History Museum in London and we soon collected several specimens of blue-winged goose near the Sandfords' farm; the museum  authorities had asked us specially to look out for this bird since they only had one specimen, collected in 1868 during Napier's Magdala expedition.
We expected to get a variety of other interesting specimens in the highlands of Arussi, where Ivor Buxton had discovered the mountain nyala in 1910; this large buck, resembling a greater kudu, was known only from the highlands of Arussi and Bale.
My father had shot one, as had the Duke of Gloucester during a hunting safari he made to Chelalo in the Arussi mountains after Haile Selassie's coronation; otherwise, few Europeans had even seen a mountain nyala, soft was a prize that both Haig-Thomas and I were keen to secure.
We also hoped to obtain a specimen of the cuberow, the so-called Abyssinian wolf, an animal like a large fox which was confined to some of the higher mountains in Abyssinia.
The more I thought about it, the more I looked forward to seeing this little known mountainous region, and I had every intention of penetrating at least as far as the Webi Shebeli river.
The first thing was to select the men to go with us.
The Sandfords provided us with an elderly Amhara called Habta Mariam as cook.
I liked him as soon as I met him and came to do so even more over the ensuing months.
At first I was doubtful about taking him, for he did not look strong; but the Sandfords assured us that he had stood up to several long treks with them, invariably producing good meals even under the most unfavourable conditions, that he never interfered with other people, and was always ready to lend a hand at any job.
Omar produced two Somalis as gunbearers.
Abdullahi was a small, slender, restless man with quick, vigilant eyes and an engagingly ugly face.
Said Munge was short, stocky and usually impassive, though like all Somalis he could on occasion get worked up.
Both fully lived up to Omar's recommendation.
We were fortunate to secure as head syce a middle-aged Amhara called Kassimi.
Bearded, with natural dignity and quiet authority, this reserved man soon earned the position of second headman.
Despite their racial and religious divergence, he and Omar worked closely together running the caravan.
We were also lucky enough to find Goutama, whom I remembered as a young syce in the Legation stables when I was a boy; he had accompanied my father on his long trek to Nairobi in 1914.
He was of slave origin, very black, cheerful, indefatigable and good with animals.
Like Kassimi, he was a devout Christian.
We engaged a third syce called Makonnen; he turned out  to be a quarrelsome intriguer and we eventually got rid of him.
As our personal servants we had Birru, a Christian Galla, and Said, known as Said Boy, a Muslim Gurage.
They were in their early twenties, were quietly efficient and worked well together.
Since we needed someone to skin and look after the specimens we collected, we eventually employed a lanky youth called Yusuf German who had worked for a Greek taxidermist in the town.
He spoke a little French and was plausible, but he looked unreliable and indeed proved to be.
Omar had a young servant called Demise, and there was another fifteen-year-old lad called Yusuf Nico, who Omar said would make himself useful doing odd jobs.
We also employed three zabanias or guards.
Haig-Thomas and I each bought a pony and a riding mule, and three more riding mules for Omar, Kassimi and Habta Mariam.
Omar had arranged for Beyyene, a negadi or muleteer, to meet us at Mojjo Station, sixty miles down the line, with his men and twenty pack mules, and we sent Kassimi, Goutama and Makonnen ahead with our own animals to join him there.
The rest of us left Addis Ababa by train on the morning of 1 October 1933, arriving three hours later at Mojjo, which consisted of a few sheds and huts.
We eventually got away from the station and camped two hours later near a marsh, where we shot some duck for dinner, and two lily-trotters for our collection.
As Haig-Thomas and I returned to camp, the summits of the Arussi mountains far in the distance glowed in the last of the setting sun.
The tents were up; the fires were lit; everyone sounded cheerful, happy to be off at last.
The stars came out and several hyenas howled round the camp.
Eventually Birru brought us the ducks that Habta Mariam had cooked.
They tasted delicious, a happy augury for future meals.
I went to bed utterly content; ahead of me were weeks of hunting and travel in remote mountains, and later the excitement of exploring the Danakil desert.
During the next day's march there was a sudden commotion at the back of our straggling caravan.
A shifta or brigand had stepped out of the bush, clubbed one of the men and made off with his rifle.
I went in pursuit with Abdullahi and eventually saw the man on a hillside.
I put a bullet close to his head and he dived for cover.
Very much on the alert, we followed him into thick bush.
Luckily  he had no ammunition for the rifle and gave himself up after Omar, who had caught up with us, put two more shots over his head.
We tied his arms behind his back and handed him over to the next village headman we encountered.
A few days later we passed the desiccated corpse of another brigand hanging on a gibbet beside the track.
Hyenas had torn off his legs.
Three days after leaving Mojjo we crossed the Awash river by a rickety bridge; a large crocodile basked on the river bank and there were tracks of many hippopotamus.
For the rest of the day we skirted a large swamp; that night the mosquitoes were particularly bad.
Beyond the Awash we passed a number of Arussi graves, some with figures crudely incised on upright stones.
We reached Chelalo on the Arussi mountains in the afternoon of 5 October; it was here that we expected to find nyala.
We had made an early start that morning and after a long stiff climb up a bare hillside entered a forest of wild olives and massive juniper trees resembling cedars, many of them festooned with lichen.
I had never been in such a forest and found it fascinating.
We camped on the edge of the moorland among magnificent red-tasselled hagenia trees and clumps of yellow flowering St John's wort; above us the mountain was covered with giant heath ten feet and more in height.
Only the high tops, at thirteen thousand feet, were bare; there, tussocky grass, patches of everlastings and a scattering of giant lobelia were interspersed among crags of weathered rock.
It turned very cold in the evening, with the summit of the mountain periodically hidden in mist, but as the sun set we had a magnificent view.
We could just see Lake Zwai and beyond it a wall of mountains on the far side of the Rift Valley.
Each morning we set off to hunt soon after dawn.
It was always clear but perishingly cold at that early hour; later the mists came down and in the afternoon there were often storms of rain and sometimes hail.
I took Abdullahi with me, while Said Munge accompanied Haig-Thomas.
We both employed local Arussi as trackers, some of whom were very skilful and all of whom were tireless.
Every day on Chelalo Haig-Thomas or I saw nyala, usually in small parties of cows and immature males; I once counted a dozen together.
Several times I saw a big bull, sometimes even two together.
It was easy enough to spot them in the distance if they were in a clearing on the mountainside, but extremely difficult to detect them as Abdullahi and I approached through a tangle of giant  heath that rose far above our heads.
Sometimes I saw nyala on the bare mountain-tops but never in the forest.
Returning to camp in the evenings, I occasionally hunted for bushbuck in the forest.
It was a test of skill to move silently among the trees with every sense alert, trying to spot one before it took fright and vanished.
The males were dark, almost black, in colour, and difficult to make out among the shadows.
On the fourth day we moved our camp a few miles to the east, where our trackers maintained we should find the nyala more numerous; this proved to be the case.
But it was a cold, dank place beside a stream in a shallow valley.
There were no trees here, only heath to burn, and we missed the large fires at our previous camp.
We saw several cuberow, usually in pairs, while hunting for nyala.
They were attractive-looking animals and they often allowed us to get quite close.
Once I heard two calling to each other across a valley, a weird sound, vaguely resembling a baboon's bark.
Judging from their droppings, they were plentiful.
I shot one for the museum.
Klipspringer were numerous on the cliffs at the top of the mountain, and there, above a thousand-foot precipice, I found among a mass of tumbled rocks the fresh tracks of leopard.
Haig-Thomas had shot two nyala, both with disappointingly small horns.
Determined to shoot one with a really fine head, I decided to spend a night near the mountain-top so that I could hunt for them in the early morning before they lay up for the day.
I therefore took with us Ergay, one of our zabanias, selected a place to sleep under an overhanging rock and sent him back to camp to bring Birru in the evening with a mule, blankets and food.
Even with the blankets it was very chilly, and in the morning the ground was white with frost.
Abdullahi soon spotted a cow and three young bulls grazing in the open above the heathline.
A little later we saw another cow and then through my glasses I picked up a bull lying down in the distance.
He stood up while we watched and I realized he had magnificent horns, far longer than any I had yet seen.
He was right out in the open and the wind was blowing towards us.
Crawling on our stomachs, making use of every scrap of cover or depression, however slight, and remaining motionless whenever he looked in our direction, Abdullahi and I eventually reached the shelter of a low ridge.
The rest was easy and I got to within a hundred yards.
He dropped to the shot.
The horns measured  forty-nine inches along the curve, longer than any listed in Rowland Ward's Records of Big Game.
My triumph was enhanced by the hard work of the past week; on occasions even the Arussi trackers had confessed they were exhausted.
I believe that most men have an inborn desire to hunt and kill and that even today this primitive urge has only been eradicated in a small minority of the human race.
Nowadays many people condemn big-game hunting, and rightly so, with the wildlife which they watch on television threatened with extinction.
Fifty years ago this was not the case; there was then no apparent threat to any but a few species.
I grew up as a child with a longing to hunt big game, and from 1930 to 1940 I took every opportunity to do so; for this I have no regrets.
Inevitably I shot many animals to feed myself and my retainers, but the memorable occasions were when I hunted dangerous game or tried to secure a really fine head of a rare or elusive animal, like this mountain nyala.
I have often been asked why I was not content to photograph instead of kill them.
For me, the sound of the bullet striking home and a clean kill, with the animal dropping where it stood, was the climax of the hunt, all the more rewarding if it followed upon days and even weeks of testing and arduous hunting, or a really difficult stalk.
With photography, and the uncertainty of whether the picture would be a success, there could be no such climax.
We struck camp next day and set off down the mountain on our way to the Webi Shebeli.
It was 12 October.
One of our baggage mules had died during the night and several others were sick.
During the next few days we lost my pony, two of our riding mules and five more baggage mules.
They were usually listless for a few days before they collapsed, breathing with evident difficulty and, in a few cases, discharging a white frothy liquid from their nostrils.
We passed a merchant's caravan which was stranded; forty out of their fifty mules were dead.
Though we continued to lose animals, we managed to replace them with ponies bought from the Arussi.
On one occasion we bought two from a toothless ancient, whose family claimed he was a hundred and twenty years old and boasted that he had killed a hundred and forty men in his day.
At intervals while we were negotiating with him, he screeched his battle songs and war cries.
Omar was infinitely patient, humouring the rambling dotard with handfuls of salt, sugar and empty tins.
At first we travelled through magnificent stretches of forest, where we saw occasional bushbuck and many black-and-white colobus monkeys.
Lower down we emerged on to a more open country of grass-covered hills, with delphiniums gladioli and other flowers growing along the banks of the many streams.
During these days there were brief, heavy storms in the afternoons, with more persistent rain at night.
Fuel was difficult to come by after we left the forest, and when we reached the plains that stretched to the Webi Shebeli we had to make do with dry cattle dung.
Despite the lack of firewood, the generally damp conditions and intermittent fever, Habta Mariam, squatting in the open beside his fire with his pots resting on stones, cooked us a good meal every evening.
We now passed great herds of cattle guarded by naked boys, and encountered frequent parties of mounted Arussi, all armed with spears.
Their womenfolk were dressed in tanned skins with beads woven into their hair.
I was impressed by these untamed people.
They had been conquered by Menelik but among them the Abyssinian imprint was as yet barely discernible, for which I was thankful.
I have always resented the imposition of an alien culture, whether European or otherwise, on the indigenous inhabitants.
Once we passed a single telephone line, dangling on rickety poles, connecting Addis Ababa to some government post; I remember resenting even this slender evidence of outside interference.
We forded the Webi Shebeli on 17 October and camped near an Arussi village.
On this side of the Webi, undulating grasslands rose to distant hills, and strips of woodland bordered numerous streams.
We were unaware that having crossed the Webi we were now in Bale.
Our passes were only valid for Arussi; consequently, when we reached Haro, a small administrative post further down the banks of the Webi, we were held up by Abyssinian officials and a mob of their compatriots.
It was a feast day, and they were all drunk, and just as aggressive and unpleasant as drunken Abyssinians can be.
They detained us, refusing even to allow us to re-cross the river and continue our journey on the other side.
I sent Kassimi with a letter to the Governor at Goba, and a few days later we received an apology for our treatment and permission to continue our journey.
Meanwhile we had sent Muhammad Dankali, another of our zabanias, to tell Ahmad, the Somali in charge of our camels, to bring them to the Daro river at the foot of the escarpment.
Omar believed we would do better in this lowland country if we used camels rather than mules.
For the next week we travelled across rolling, well-cultivated country intersected by steep ravines that developed into spectacular gorges at the edge of the plateau.
Bohor reedbuck abounded on these uplands, generally in groups of four to seven; once I saw as many as eighty scattered over a hillside.
Then, on 6 November, we descended the steep and difficult escarpment to the Daro river, where we found a pleasant camp site under some large fig trees.
The river was fast-flowing, crystal-clear and swarming with catfish and barbel; we had plenty of hooks and line and caught sixty in one day.
We were here for six days before the camels arrived, but were reassured by hearing news of them from some of the many pilgrims who passed through our camp on their way to a famous shrine of Sheikh Husain; all carried peeled, forked wands as an emblem of their pilgrimage.
We left the Daro river next day and arrived at the Awash a fortnight later.
Omar's information that the country below the escarpment would be suitable for camels could not have been more misleading.
At first we travelled under the escarpment, which involved crossing a succession of spurs.
In most places the track over these ridges was impassable for loaded camels until we had widened and levelled it.
Omar was splendid, labouring indefatigably with the sweat pouring off him, while Kassimi, Birru, the two Saids, Abdullahi, Habta Mariam and the others worked without a stop.
The weather did not help.
Almost every day there were downpours of rain and it often poured throughout the night, making the ground so slippery that the camels found it difficult to keep on their feet.
I was compensated to some extent by the magnificent scenery.
All around us were mountains; they were often half-smothered in cloud, but in the evenings this lifted and then the crests loomed over us, rain-washed, clear-cut and splendid.
Haig-Thomas had developed an infected throat and several nasty ulcers on his legs.
Four days after we had left the Daro he decided to push on ahead with Kassimi, on our two best mules, in order to catch a train from the Awash Station to Addis Ababa for medical treatment.
Soon after Haig-Thomas had left us we passed a shrine to Sheikh Husain; the white-washed dome with four turrets had been built to commemorate a place where the saint had lived alone for years, praying and fasting.
Just beyond it we struggled over a particularly difficult pass and arrived next day on the Mana river.
All  this lowland country was covered in thick bush, and large trees bordered the river and streams.
We reached the Awash Station on 25 November.
Haig-Thomas was at the railway rest house.
He had returned from Addis Ababa two days before, apparently cured, but his throat had now flared up again and when I arrived he could hardly speak.
He caught the next train back to Addis Ababa and the following day sent me a wire: "Cannot come." 
I was content to be on my own, glad that I should have no need to accommodate myself to a fellow-countryman, that any decisions in the days ahead would be entirely mine.
Haig-Thomas had been cheerful and good-natured, and never once had we quarrelled.
No one, indeed, could have been more easy-going; but we never got on close terms or found much in common during the four months we had been together since leaving England.
He seldom read a book and this limited the range of his interests and the scope of his conversation.
I did not feel I should miss his company, and the fact that I should have no fellow-countryman with me to take charge if I fell sick or was wounded did not worry me, since I had every confidence in Omar.
In any case I have never, during more than fifty years of travel, anticipated falling ill.
I have in fact only once been incapacitated, on that occasion by a severe attack of malaria.
The journey I had just completed in the Arussi had been the first I had undertaken in the highlands of Abyssinia.
I had travelled through remote and spectacular country among exciting, barely administered tribes, and had secured the record head of a much-prized quarry.
I had enjoyed the last two months greatly but the journey, though arduous, had involved no real danger.
I knew conditions would be different once we crossed the railway and entered Danakil country.
Into Danakil Country
The authorities in Addis Ababa had undertaken to provide me with an escort of ten soldiers while I was among the Danakil.
I found fifteen waiting for me when I arrived at the Awash Station, all thoroughly unhappy at the prospect ahead.
I was aware that the risks were considerable: had it been otherwise the Danakil country would already have been thoroughly explored.
I had learnt during my journey in 1930 that the Danakil, or Afar as they called themselves, were divided into the Asaimara or Red Men, who comprised the tribes of noble descent, and the Adoimara or White Men.
I had been told that the Asaimara inhabited Bahdu and Aussa while the Adoimara occupied the rest of the country.
During that journey I had only travelled among the Adoimara, and at Bilen they had given me alarming accounts of the ferocity of the Asaimara in Bahdu.
It had been evident that while both sections of the Danakil were murderously inclined, the Asaimara were the more formidable.
At Bilen I had often asked what happened to the Awash, curious to find out why this large river never reached the sea, and I had been told that it ended in a great lake at the foot of a mighty mountain called Goumarri in Aussa, where apparently there were many lakes, great forests and some cultivation.
My informants stood in great awe of the Sultan, known as the Amoita, who ruled Aussa, and insisted that he hated all Europeans.
Years later, when I was with Sandford in the Second World War, he told me that people in Addis Ababa had been saying that I would not have one chance in ten of survival if I entered Aussa.
I myself felt, however, that we would probably run our greatest risk in Bahdu.
Omar was inclined to agree.
He said the Danakil had killed some Greek traders who had ventured into Bahdu the previous year.
After I had returned to Oxford from Abyssinia at the beginning of 1931, I had read Nesbitt's account of his journey, in the Geographical Journal for October 1930.
From his account Bahdu was where he had been in most danger.
Nesbitt and his two Italian companions had evidently been fortunate to get away from Bahdu; it was here that the first of their servants was murdered; two others were killed in the course of the journey.
The party had been more fortunate than their predecessors.
During my researches in the library of the Royal Geographical Society I learnt that in 1875 an Egyptian army commanded by Munzinger, a Swiss mercenary who had served under Gordon in Equatoria, had set out to invade Abyssinia from Tajura, and been exterminated by the Danakil before they reached Aussa.
Then in 1881 an expedition led by Giulietti, accompanied by thirteen other Italians, had been massacred somewhere to the north of Aussa, as was another expedition under Bianchi three years later in much the same area.
Nesbitt had met the Sultan on the outskirts of Aussa and been given permission to continue northwards across the lava desert to Eritrea, but was forbidden to enter Aussa, which remained unexplored.
He had, however, confirmed that the Awash entered Aussa.
My immediate anxiety was that the authorities might forbid my journey, since the Asaimara of Bahdu had recently renounced their allegiance to the Government and refused to send tribute to Asba Tafari.
On 1 December, as we were preparing to start, an official did telephone from Asba Tafari, headquarters of Chercher Province which nominally included Bahdu.
He said fierce fighting was taking place near Bahdu and insisted I would need at least a hundred soldiers if I went there.
He refused to take the responsibility of letting me go with only fifteen, and intended to recall his men.
I told him I had twenty-two men with me, armed with fourteen rifles, as well as my own three rifles and shotgun.
If, in addition, I were accompanied by his fifteen soldiers I believed we should be too strong a party to invite attack, while not so strong as to alarm and provoke the tribes.
He would not agree.
I therefore reminded him that the Emperor had authorized my journey, and told him that whether his soldiers came with me or not I was leaving that afternoon.
Reluctantly he ordered them to accompany me.
I was now in a fever to be off before someone else, perhaps from Addis Ababa, rang up to forbid my departure.
Omar had bribed the telephone operator to leave his office, but I did not trust him to stay away.
We finally set out in the evening.
My eighteen camels were all heavily  loaded, as we could expect no supplies from the Danakil but meat and milk until we reached Aussa.
The soldiers had four camels, but were hopelessly incompetent at loading them and I had got more and more exasperated at the delay.
Only when the station buildings disappeared from sight did I feel safe from further intervention.
Now, for good or bad, we were on our own.
This was what I wanted.
There was a full moon and we marched until midnight, the camels tied head to tail in groups of three or four.
That night many hyenas howled round our camp.
We arrived next day at the hot springs of Sade Malka; these were surrounded by dom palms, odd-looking forked trees with clusters of hard nuts.
I knew I had camped here with my parents in 1915 on our way back to Addis Ababa, but the place brought back no recollections.
We had with us a Danakil from the Awash Station, not only as guide but also as hostage, and would not be releasing him until he found a replacement from the next tribe.
Each night at intervals he shouted a warning that anyone who approached would be shot.
We now made a practice, as soon as we camped, of building a perimeter round the camp with loads and camel saddles, and, if there were sufficient bushes available, added a thorn fence or zariba.
I always posted two sentries at night, more if the situation warranted it, and Omar or I checked at intervals to make sure they were awake.
Three days later we reached Bilen, after travelling across an extensive plain cut up by dry water-courses and marked by low rocky ridges.
It was sparsely covered with acacia scrub, interspersed with thickets of sansevieria with formidable bayonet-like leaves.
Here I saw several herds of beisa oryx, Soemering's gazelle, and occasional lesser kudu and gerenuk.
I had come across a small herd of Swayne's hartebeeste near Awash Station, the only hartebeeste I saw during the journey.
Intermittent tamarisk jungle grew along the banks of the Awash and in this I saw several herds of waterbuck, many warthog and an occasional bushbuck.
I stayed at Bilen for four days.
I had tried to shoot buffalo there in 1930; now I tried again.
A small herd inhabited a reedbed formed by the overflow from a large pool fed by hot springs, leaving its shelter only after dark and returning to it before light.
Each day I followed their tracks and several times got close before they snorted and crashed off; but the reeds were so dense I never got a glimpse.
Groups of Danakil watered their camels and cattle at the overflow.
Most of them were darkish-brown with fine features under mops of hair in which several had stuck an ostrich feather or a wooden comb.
Many carried Fusil Gras rifles, usually resting on a shoulder and held by the barrel, or horizontally across the back of the neck supporting both arms.
These single-shot service weapons, dating from the mid-nineteenth century and firing a lead bullet which inflicted appalling wounds, had been exported to Abyssinia in great numbers by the French.
Every man wore, strapped across his stomach, a formidable curved dagger known as a jile, with a sixteen-inch blade sharp on each side.
Nearly all these daggers had one or more brass-bound leather thongs dangling from the scabbard, each thong denoting a man killed.
I thought the Danakil an attractive-looking people, and despite their murderous reputation they appeared to manifest a genuine friendliness.
I was prepared to accept the fact that they would kill a man or boy with as little compunction as I would shoot a buck.
Their motive would be much the same as that of an English sportsman who visited Africa to shoot a lion and, like him, they preferred to take their quarry unawares.
The Danakil invariably castrated any man or boy whom they killed or wounded, removing both the penis and the scrotum.
An obvious trophy, it afforded irrefutable proof that the victim was male, and obtaining it gave the additional satisfaction of dishonouring the corpse.
Nesbitt stated in Desert and Forest that"the Danakil wore the testicles of their victims round their wrists…
"
I never came across an instance of this, though I encountered a number of individuals who had just killed someone, including a complacent fourteen-year-old near Bilen.
The boy's hair was plastered with ghee, or clarified butter, as evidence of his achievement.
All that mattered to these people was to kill; how they did so had little significance.
Nesbitt described how one of his servants, accompanied by the Danakil guide, went to bathe in the river.
He put his rifle down and entered the water.
The guide picked up the rifle, shot and castrated him, and made off.
It is impossible to exaggerate the importance that the Danakil attached to this practice, rating as they did a man's prowess by the number of his kills; many raids were undertaken principally for this purpose.
On returning from a raid, any who had never killed were often ragged by their  more competent companions, their clothes dirtied and cow dung, instead of ghee, rubbed in their hair.
If a man had been repeatedly unsuccessful he would go to the river, dive to the bottom and bring up a lump of clay with which he would mark his forehead, taking care to be unobserved, otherwise the spell lost its efficacy.
I noticed that children often marked themselves like this in play.
Most youths and even small boys wore a strip of hide around their wrists or ankles: this had been given them with appropriate blessing to bring them success when they became warriors.
In time I learnt to tell at a glance, from the decorations he wore, how often a man had killed, just as I might tell from his campaign medals where a British soldier had served.
An ostrich feather or comb in the hair, slit ears, a coloured loin-cloth, an iron or ivory bracelet, a dagger and sheath decorated with brass or silver: each of these and other decorations had its special significance.
When a famous warrior died he was commemorated by a monument known as a das in front of which upright stones indicated the number of his victims.
We left Bilen on the morning of 9 December and camped five hours later in thick bush on the edge of a swamp that extended out of sight along the river.
Here we were in a dangerous border area, and our campsite was vitally indefensible, but we could find none better.
The soldiers needed no encouragement to build a thick zariba round the camp.
The mosquitoes here were particularly bad and kept most of us awake.
The following evening, after a slogging nine-hour march over volcanic hills that threw up waves of heat, making me irritable and all of us tired and thirsty, we toiled up yet another rise and suddenly saw Lake Hertale below us.
It was an almost unbelievable sight in this desolate landscape, a long stretch of vivid blue water fringed by green reedbeds.
We camped on a terrace above the lake and had a splendid bathe, swimming and splashing in the fresh clear water.
Swarms of bats appeared over our camp at sunset, and hippos grunted like pigs at intervals throughout the night.
The Danakil guide we had acquired at Bilen had tried to bolt on the march, so I detailed two soldiers to guard him till dawn.
1 knew we should be in trouble if he got away.
In the morning we had difficulty getting the camels down to the lake; we then followed the stream that flowed out of it and after a short march camped not far from an Adoimara village.
The previous day four men from this village had been surprised and killed by Asaimara from Bahdu, less than two hundred yards from where we camped.
We were shown the place; there was dried blood on the rocks and sand.
The funeral feast was under way and we were given a quantity of meat.
These Adoimara Danakil were glad to have us with them, for they were expecting yet another raid by the Asaimara.
Apparently it had been near here, not in Bahdu, that the Greek merchants had been killed the year before.
I had to stay in camp next day as there was strong opposition to my going out shooting.
I noted in my diary: "Incessant talk of the Asaimara.
Extremely difficult to judge how great the danger really is."
That evening I bought two sheep which the Somalis slaughtered; they then gave the blood to some of the camels.
The following day we reached the Asaimara frontier.
The headman of a nearby village had saved the life of one of the Greeks and been rewarded by the Government.
We now demanded that he should escort us into Bahdu.
Obviously unwilling, he asked for an absurd sum for doing so, but eventually Omar settled with him for a reasonable amount.
He then presented me with three sheep, after which all his family and relations asked for presents.
It now remained to be seen whether this headman would be able to hand us over to another in Bahdu.
Two and a half months earlier Dedjazmatch Abashum had come here with a large force to collect the tribute which the Asaimara were withholding, but he had been afraid to enter Bahdu and had withdrawn.
The Asaimara were thereby convinced they could successfully defy the Government.
This, of course, added considerably to the danger before us.
From our camp, Mount Ayelu dominated the countryside.
Its massive cone rose five thousand feet above the Bahdu plain and a chain of foothills stretched south-west parallel with the Awash.
The only track into Bahdu from the south, feasible for loaded camels, skirted a marsh at the foot of these hills.
It took us over an hour the following morning to get through this pass, a notorious place for ambushes.
Some of my men picketed the high ground while we passed underneath, constantly urged by the headman and his followers not to straggle.
When at last we emerged into the open we found ourselves on a  plain, perhaps a mile wide, lying between the hills and the river.
This was by far the most fertile area I had as yet seen in the Danakil country, and it was dotted with small villages of mat-covered huts.
Large herds of cattle, flocks of sheep and goats, and a number of ponies and donkeys grazed on rich grass round patches of shallow water, and clusters of giant fig trees grew along the river bank.
About two hundred warriors were squatting under some of these trees and more were hurrying to join them.
We halted the camels when we drew near and Omar and the Adoimara headman and I went over.
We greeted them but no one returned our salutations; instead, as we approached, they shuffled round and turned their backs on us.
I returned to my men and told them to unload under some fig trees on the steep river bank.
Meanwhile our Adoimara headman was trying to identify his local counterpart.
When at last he succeeded the man was sullen and uncooperative, repeatedly demanding why we had come to Bahdu.
An increasing number of Danakil gathered round our camp.
We had constructed a perimeter and we now tried to keep them outside it without provoking them.
I felt they were looking for any excuse to start a fight.
Some of them, hearing my camelmen speaking Somali, became increasingly threatening, asserting that they were from the Issa, a Somali tribe with whom they were then, as always, at war.
Ergay, who understood their language, warned Omar that they were planning to attack us after dark.
To discourage them, we pretended that my rifle case contained a machine gun a weapon for which they had considerable respect, having occasionally encountered one when fighting Government troops.
The tension, however, eased after Omar managed to get hold of some elders.
Over many cups of tea, he succeeded in convincing some of them that I was an English traveller on my way to visit the Amoita in Aussa.
He persuaded them that I was not employed by the Government, explaining that I was under the Emperor 5 personal protection, which accounted for my escort of soldiers.
Even so, I felt by no means certain that the elders would be able to prevent their refractory warriors from attacking us after dark.
We spent an apprehensive night.
At intervals I wandered round the camp, flashing my powerful torch into the darkness.
I doubt if anyone slept.
Next morning we were taken to a small village nearby, on a patch of dry ground in the middle of a bog, and on this uninviting spot the chief, an aged, autocratic savage called Afleodham, instructed us to  camp.
Having heard that he was much respected and had great influence in these parts, I felt it was as well to do as he told us.
Omar learnt that he was related to the Sultan, and we hoped that we might persuade him to provide us with a guide to Aussa.
Omar and I had a tiring discussion with him, beset by clouds of flies.
Afleodham was rather deaf; every word had to be repeated and every argument gone over time and time again, all this using three languages.
Finally he agreed to provide us with an escort to Aussa.
Triumphant but exhausted, I went and lay down in my tent.
Just before sunset I heard a hubbub outside where a crowd had collected.
A letter had arrived from Asba Tafari addressed to the head of my escort; it had been passed from chief to chief.
It ordered me to return at once and in no circumstances to try to enter Bahdu.
Should I refuse to do so, the soldiers themselves were to return after announcing to the Danakil that the authorities took no further responsibility for my safety.
The soldiers made no attempt to conceal their delight.
I went back to my tent and discussed the situation with Omar.
He said he thought some of my men would follow me if I decided to go on.
I realized, however, that to do so after we had been deprived of half our rifles and whatever security the protection of the Government afforded us would be to invite almost certain massacre.
For four years I had been planning this journey, and the thought of exploring Aussa and discovering what happened to the Awash had seldom been out of my mind.
I had hoped we were now beyond reach of Government interference.
We had managed to enter Bahdu, had been accepted, and the road to Aussa lay open.
Now everything was wrecked.
I decided I must go up to Addis Ababa and try to get permission to start again, but I had little hope of succeeding.
To save time, I determined to cut straight across the desert to Afdam instead of returning by the longer route we had come by.
That evening my men, led by Kassimi, came to my tent and expressed regret that we had been recalled, which I felt was the genuine sentiment of most of them.
Next morning while we were loading, Omar brought a young but responsible-looking man over to me who had just arrived from Asba Tafari.
His name was Ali Wali and he was the nephew and adopted son of Miriam Muhammad, the Hangadaala or spiritual head of Bahdu.
He and his uncle had visited the Governor in Asba Tafari  and there they had been detained as hostages for the good behaviour of the Asaimara; his uncle's refusal to guarantee my safety in Bahdu had led to my recall.
I was impressed by Ali Wali and told him I hoped to get permission to return.
Omar expressed anxiety that we might be attacked as we withdrew from Bahdu, but Ali Wali guaranteed our safety.
Two days later we arrived at a well in the dry water-course of the Mullu river.
During the morning we had passed the remains of an Adoimara village which the Asaimara had obliterated a month earlier, killing sixty-one people, including women and children.
The background was that these Asaimara had sent seven old men to the village to discuss a long-standing pasture dispute.
The Adoimara had feasted the deputation and then, while they slept, had killed them all except one, who escaped with a shattered arm and numerous wounds.
We reached Afdam Station on 19 December, four days after leaving Bahdu, and from there I went up next day by train to Addis Ababa.